NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE U.S. CONSTITUTION AND MONETARY POWERS:
AN ANALYSIS OF THE 1787 CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION
AND HOW A CONSTITUTIONAL TRANSFORMATION
OF THE NATION’S MONETARY SYSTEM EMERGED
Farley Grubb
Working Paper 11783
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11783
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2005

The author is Professor of Economics and NBER Research Associate, University of Delaware, Newark, DE
19716 USA. E-mail: grubbf@lerner.udel.edu. The author thanks an anonymous correspondent on a related
project and discussions with Christine Desan for planting the seeds of the current paper and thanks the editor
and referees for this journal and Howard Bodenhorn for helpful comments on an earlier draft. Financial
support provided by a 2003-2004 American Philosophical Society Sabbatical Fellowship Grant, resource
support provided by Harvard University Department of Economics, research assistance provided by Eric
O’Connor, and editorial assistance provided by Tracy M. Cass and Anne Pfaelzer de Ortiz are gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Farley Grubb. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The U.S. Constitution and Monetary Powers
Farley Grubb
NBER Working Paper No. 11783
November 2005
JEL No. K10, G20, E50, N21, H10
ABSTRACT
The monetary powers embedded in the U.S. Constitution were revolutionary and led to a watershed
transformation in the nation's monetary structure. They included determining what monies could be
legal tender, who could emit fiat paper money, and who could incorporate banks. How the debate
at the 1787 Constitutional Convention over these powers evolved and led the Founding Fathers to
the specific powers adopted is presented and deconstructed. Why they took this path rather than
replicate the successful colonial system and why they codified such powers into supreme law rather
than leaving them to legislative debate and enactment are addressed.
Farley Grubb
University of Delaware
Economics Department
Newark, DE 19716
and NBER
grubbf@lerner.udel.edu

1

The U.S. Constitution and Monetary Powers:
An Analysis of the 1787 Constitutional Convention and
And How a Constitutional Transformation of
The Nation’s Monetary System Emerged*
In 1787, just over three years after the Treaty of Paris recognized U.S.
independence, the founding fathers met from May 25th through September 17th in
Philadelphia to craft a new national constitution to replace the Articles of Confederation.

1

This new U.S. Constitution, ratified by the states and then adopted by Congress in 1789,
profoundly altered the nation’s monetary structure. It was nothing short of revolutionary
(Ferguson 1983, 404-405). Before the U.S. Constitution, the principal “inside” paper
money in circulation was issued directly by government legislatures and backed not by
specie (the “outside” money of the times) but by the issuing government’s future taxes.

2

Very few banks existed—none before 1782 and only three by 1787. After the U.S.
Constitution, governments were prohibited from issuing paper money. Instead,
government chartered, but privately run and largely unregulated, banks proliferated—
numbering 76 by 1805—and filled the inside paper money void by issuing banknotes
backed by fractional reserves in specie. By banning the chief alternative competitor, the
U.S. Constitution established the legal framework that allowed for the ascendance in the
U.S. of the modern bank-based financial system.
The constitutional monetary powers of interest are defined here as 1) the power to
emit bills of credit—paper money, 2) the power to determine what money is legal tender,
and 3) the power to charter banks. These powers focus on restructuring the means of
payment in society by circumscribing the money supply. The Constitution did not
directly or legally force a common monetary unit of account or medium of exchange onto

1

2
the nation. Post-Constitution, a plethora of different private banknotes and specie coins in
different foreign measurement units circulated as currency. The Constitution at best
circumscribed the medium of exchange to being specie and specie-linked paper
substitutes. A common monetary unit of account—the U.S. Dollar—would emerge as a
by-product of the market’s optimal transactions-cost adjustment to the restructured means
3

of payment brought about by the Constitution.

At the Constitutional Convention the founding fathers decided by explicit vote not
to include the power to emit bills of credit and (debatably) not to include the power to
4

charter banks among the powers granted to the national government. They decided to
prohibit individual states absolutely from emitting bills of credit and from having power
to determine what could be legal tender, i.e. Article 1, Section 10 of the U.S. Constitution
states, “No State shall…coin Money; emit Bills of Credit; make any Thing but gold and
silver Coin a Tender in Payment of Debts…” Finally, the founding fathers did not take
away the power to charter banks from the states. These decisions embedded in simple
Constitutional clauses and Convention votes radically transformed the nation’s monetary
structure.
These decisions, however, did not emerge until rather late in the Convention’s
deliberations. What emerged was not an obvious choice before or up through the first half
of the Convention. Thus, these decisions were not only revolutionary in their impact but
arguably were somewhat unexpected. Why mid-Convention did the founding fathers shift
gears and opt for something both new and radically different from what went before?
Colonial America had experienced stable fiat paper money regimes (Ferguson 1969, 249;
1983, 404; Grubb 2003, 2004; Perkins). Why didn’t the founding fathers replicate that

2

3
system? How did they go from a quarter-century experience of stable paper money
regimes before the Revolution to a total Constitutional ban on paper money at all levels
of government after 1787? The evolution of the debates and decisions at the Convention
may be important to our understanding of what emerged. And because of what emerged,
these debates may also be informative of larger political economy issues that are still
studied today regarding the role of money creation in financing wars, the costs and
benefits of public versus private inside money supply systems and, given a private inside
money supply system, what degree of political independence these suppliers should be
granted and whether they should be regulated.
The primary purpose of the analysis that follows is to trace and deconstruct the
“what” and “how” of this dramatic, constitutionally manufactured transformation of
5

governmental monetary powers as they evolved during the Constitutional Convention.

These powers were not a reason why the Convention was called. They were not issues at
the 1785 Mount Vernon Conference or at the 1786 Annapolis Convention, nor were they
issues in the numerous amendments to the Articles of Confederation from 1781 through
1786 (Grubb 2003, 1789; Jensen I, 140-229; Rutland II, 814-822). The primary reasons
given for calling the Convention were to solve trade and navigation disputes between the
states and to secure an independent source of tax revenue for the national government. By
giving the national government independent power to raise tax revenue and regulate trade
between the states, the structural allocation of power among the states within the national
government became a paramount concern and occupied most of the Convention’s time.
However, the issue of monetary powers, like the issues of slavery and curbing the

3

4
excesses of democracy, became one of the prominent subtexts of the Convention
(Ferguson 1969; 1983).
The analysis begins with Section I establishing the monetary and economic
conditions leading into the Convention to determine what economic problems and
monetary conditions the founding fathers faced. The key economic problems were trade
depression, price deflation, and acute specie scarcity, and the key monetary problem was
the extensive use of legal tender laws by the states.
Sections II through VI trace the evolution of monetary powers considered and
arguments offered by the delegates chronologically through the Convention from its
beginning on May 29th to its conclusion on September 17th. Several important theses
emerge here. First, replicating the colonial monetary system appears to be the initial tack
taken at the Convention. The monetary powers actually adopted do not emerge until quite
late at the Convention. Second, a pervasive, escalating, and perhaps intentional conflation
of legal tender problems with emitting paper money per se takes place in Convention
rhetoric. Third, while not in the written Constitution, the Convention voted to disallow
federally issued paper money. Fourth, the Convention appeared also to disallow federally
chartered banks. Fifth, the post-Convention controversy over a federally chartered bank
was not about the application of the Constitution’s implied-powers clause.
Finally, Sections VII-VIII use the foregoing analysis to evaluate why the
founding fathers acted as they did regarding the monetary powers put into the
Constitution. Many of the common arguments in the literature are dismissed as
inconsistent with the totality of the Convention debates. A new explanation will be

4

5
offered dealing with creating a specie reservoir in society. The outline of the analysis is
as follows:
I. The American Monetary Regime Leading into the Constitutional Convention,
1750-1787
A. Colonial Legislature-issued Tax-backed Fiat Paper Money Regimes and Their
Regulatory Constraints
B. The Revolution and Paper Money
C. The Economy and State Paper Money between the Treaty of Paris and the Adoption
of the Constitution
D. The Problem of Legal Tender Laws versus Paper Money Emissions Per Se
E. Did the Founding Fathers Distinguish Between Legal Tender Laws and Paper
Money Per Se?
II. The Beginnings—May 29 to July 26: The Virginia Plan, its Modifications, and
Rivals
A. The Randolph Opening
B. In the Shadows—The Pinckney Plan
C. Debating and Amending the Virginia Plan—May 30th through July 26th
III. Paper Money Riot Interlude?
IV. The Committee of Detail—July 27 to Aug. 6: The Initial Restructuring of
Monetary Powers
V. The End Game—Aug. 6 to 28: The Absolute Constitutional Proscription of
Monetary Powers
A. The Absolute Prohibition on Paper Money Issued by the National Government

5

6
B. The Absolute Prohibition on Paper Money Issued by State Governments
VI. National Banking as a Substitute Monetary Power?—Aug. 28 to Sept. 14
A. Who Shall Have the Power to Charter Banks?
B. The Post-Convention Constitutional Controversy over Who Can Charter Banks
VII. Why Did They Do It?
A. Rent-Seeking Bankers?
B. Big Tents, Polarization, Insider Speculation, and Income/Debt Redistribution
Schemes?
C. Creating a Specie Reservoir in Society for the Merchant Community Involved in
International Trade?
VIII. Epilogue
---------------------------------------I. The American Monetary Regime Leading into the Constitutional Convention,
1750-1787
A. Colonial Legislature-issued Tax-backed Fiat Paper Money Regimes and Their
Regulatory Constraints
The British North American colonies were the first modern western economies to
experiment with large-scale government issuances of fiat paper money. Colonial
legislatures directly issued bills of credit to pay for their government’s expenses and as
mortgage loans to subjects who pledged their lands as collateral. These bills were not
government bonds. Typically, they earned no interest, came in small denominations,
circulated at market-determined rates of exchange to specie and the paper monies of other
colonies, and were accepted by the issuing government in payment of that government’s
fees and taxes. Colonial governments never redeemed on demand their paper money for

6

7
specie nor entered the market at their discretion to buy and sell their paper money for
specie to defend a fixed exchange rate. These bills circulated inside, but seldom outside,
the colony of issue as cash alongside specie monies, which only entered and exited the
colony through merchant foreign trade and government transfers. Payments to parties
outside the colony were typically in specie units. By the middle of the 18th century, these
bills comprised a substantial portion of the money supply within their respective colonies.
Colonial legislatures backed their paper money by linking it not to specie but to future
taxes and mortgage payments designed to withdraw it from circulation in a timely
fashion. Upon redemption, it was burned. Each colony maintained the market value of its
paper money through its timely injection and then redemption, thereby controlling the
quantity of paper money in circulation. The presence of competitive currency substitutes
(specie) constrained colonies to follow a stable path with regard to the relative value of
their inside paper monies (Brock; Ferguson 1969, 249; 1983, 399, 404; Grubb 2003,
2004, 2005a; Perkins; Priest; Smith 1985).
The British government extended the Bubble Act to the colonies in 1741—
effectively eliminating banks—and imposed regulations on paper money with the
Currency Acts of 1751 and 1764. The Currency Acts allowed the colonies to emit paper
money as long as it met two requirements, namely 1) that it not be made a legal tender
and 2) that ample taxes be put in place to redeem each issue in a reasonable time. Some
colonies had instituted such policies on their own accord long before these regulations
were passed. After 1748, unlike most other colonies, Massachusetts renounced paper
money and returned to the specie standard for the rest of the colonial period. While paper
money could not be made a legal tender for all debts, it was always accepted in payment

7

8
for the issuing government’s taxes and so it became a de facto legal tender for public
debts in the issuing government’s jurisdiction. This in turn provided the anchor that
allowed the bills to circulate as cash within that colony. By 1750 colonial legislatures had
learned, for the most part, how to handle their tax-backed paper money regimes. This
colonial monetary system produced remarkable long-run stability in terms of low
inflation rates and stationarity in prices, exchange rates, and purchasing power parity
(Behrens; Bordo and Marcotte; Brock; Ferguson 1969, 249; 1983, 399, 404; Grubb 2003,
2004, 2005b; Perkins; Pickering XX, 306-309; Priest; Smith 1985).
The two regulatory pillars that made this colonial monetary system work were 1)
that paper money could not be made a legal tender (other than for paying taxes levied by
the issuing government), and 2) that the issuing government credibly commit, by enacting
taxing policies concurrent with issuing said paper money, to redeeming its paper money
in a timely fashion. Most of the founder fathers had lived and prospered as adults under
this regulatory system.
B. The Revolution and Paper Money
This system continued through the Revolution. Under the Articles of
Confederation both individual states and the Continental Congress issued their own taxbacked paper money. Beginning in 1775 the Continental Congress issued bills of credit—
Continental dollars—that depreciated to near zero and ceased to circulate after April 1781
(Bezanson 1951; Calomiris; Rockoff 14-42). Without the power to levy its own taxes,
Congress under the Articles of Confederation could not credibly commit to redeeming its
bills of credit. This structural flaw along with the exigencies of wartime finance and
doubts about the legitimacy of the Revolutionary government were the likely sources of

8

9
the monetary troubles behind the Continental dollar, not just the emission of paper money
per se. The Treaty of Paris resolved the issue of legitimacy and wartime financial
pressure. And one of the primary goals of the 1787 Constitutional Convention was to
correct the structural flaw by giving the national government an independent source of
revenue by granting it the direct power of taxation. This in turn would let Congress
credibly commit to redeeming its bills of credit and so potentially solve the national
government’s paper money problems.
Each of the 13 colony/states also issued its own paper money during the
Revolution that, while depreciating, held its value to a greater extent than did the
Continental dollar, in part because states had the power to tax and so could credibly back
their currencies. The overwhelming cost of financing the war and the net specie export
drain caused by wartime trade disruptions swamped their ability to fully tax-back their
currencies and prevented their currencies from holding at par with specie (Nettels 1-44).
C. The Economy and State Paper Money between the Treaty of Paris and the Adoption of
the Constitution
After the collapse of the Continental dollar in 1781, the national government did
not return to issuing fiat paper money. While all states had issued paper money during the
Revolution, new issues were rarer post-Revolution. Within three years of signing the
Treaty of Paris, 7 of the 13 states—Pennsylvania, North Carolina, and South Carolina in
1785; Rhode Island, New York, New Jersey, and Georgia in 1786—returned to issuing
new amounts of their own paper money usable, as during the colonial period, to pay taxes
levied and land mortgages held by the issuing state. State legislatures in Virginia,
Maryland, New Hampshire, and Massachusetts were also debating whether or not to issue

9

10
new bills of credit (Grubb 2003; Holton 2005a, 198). States were considering such
measures because of the substantial post-Revolution trade depression that devastated their
economies between 1782 and 1790. The problem facing the U.S. and the founding fathers
in the half decade leading up to the Constitutional Convention was not inflation, but
deflation, and serious deflation at that, caused by a temporary but sharp and substantial
trade deficit that drained foreign reserves (specie) out of the economy (Holton 2005b;
Nettels 45-64, 105).
Some founding fathers wrote as if they knew this. James Wilson, Convention
delegate from Pennsylvania and a major architect of the monetary powers adopted at the
Convention, explained in 1785:
The disagreeable state of our commerce has been the effect of extravagant and
injudicious importation. …When hostilities ceased, the floodgates of commerce
were opened; and an inundation of foreign manufactures overflowed the United
States: we seemed to have forgot, that to pay was as necessary in trade as to
purchase; and we observed no proportion between our imports, and our produce
and other natural means of remittance. What was the consequence? Those who
made any payments [to foreigners] made them chiefly in specie; and in that way
diminished our circulation (Adams 145).
Likewise, James Madison, Convention delegate from Virginia and one of the major
architects of the overall Constitution, remarked in a letter to Thomas Jefferson dated
March 18, 1786 that:
Another unhappy effect of a continuance of the present anarchy of our commerce,
will be a continuance of the unfavorable balance on it, which by draining us our
metals furnishes pretexts for the pernicious substitution of paper money, for
indulgences to debtors, for postponement of taxes. In fact most of our political
evils may be traced up to our commerce ones,... The lessons which the
merchantile interest of Europe have received from late experience will probably
check their propensity to credit us beyond our resources, and so far the evil of an
unfavorable balance will correct itself. But the merchants of G.B. [Great Britain]
if no others will continue to credit us at least as far as our remittances can be
strained, and that is far enough to perpetuate our difficulties unless luxurious
propensity of our people can be otherwise checked. This view of our situation

10

11
presents the proposed Convention as a remedial experiment which ought to
command every assent… The price of our Staple is down….[and the] price has
notwithstanding been falling ever since. … The scarcity of money must of
necessary sink the price of every article (Rutland 1973 VIII, 502-503).
Alexander Hamilton, Convention delegate from New York and another of the
major architects of the nation’s monetary powers, from 1781 through 1790 frequently
alluded to the scarcity of specie in circulation in the U.S. and fretted over ways to correct
this scarcity by creating a money that was a near-perfect substitute for specie but also was
not prone to the same problem as specie, namely temporary shortages caused by trade
shocks that sent specie (or its perfect substitutes) out of the country (Syrett II, 618-619;
III, 104, 175; VI, 71-72). Finally Gouverneur Morris, Convention delegate from
Pennsylvania and a major architect of the monetary powers adopted at the Convention,
observed during the Convention that “For a long time the people of America will not
have money [meaning specie] to pay direct taxes” (Farrand II, 307). Similar statements
indicating an awareness of this economic situation appeared in the popular press and
writings of other prominent people (Holton 2005b).
Price indices also show that from the end of the Revolutionary War in 1783
through the adoption of the U.S. Constitution in 1789 the U.S. suffered significant price
deflation (Grubb 2003, 1782-1783). For example, the Philadelphia price index fell 18
percent, the Charleston, South Carolina, price index fell 20 percent, and the New York
City price index fell at least 6 percent (Bezanson 1936, 392; Cole 121-122, 156). Price
indices were denominated in their respective state paper currencies. When prices are
declining, the currency is appreciating, namely more real goods can be purchased with a
given nominal amount of currency. Yet the post-Revolution rhetoric of many founding

11

12
fathers and most scholarship to this day says that state paper money was depreciating in
this period. How is that possible given price deflation?
The answer is that when contemporaries talked about the value of state paper
money it was not in terms of the real goods that it could purchase but in terms of how
much specie (foreign exchange) it could buy. State paper money appreciating in terms of
real goods but depreciating in terms in specie implies that specie was getting increasingly
scarce relative both to goods and paper money. This is consistent with a massive shortrun unexpected trade deficit temporarily draining specie overseas. In other words, the
specie price of goods in the U.S. between 1783 and 1789 (if we had such data) must have
been falling even faster than the paper money price of goods. The implication is that to
have an “undepreciating” paper currency in terms of specie in this period would have
necessitated an even greater price deflation and so an even deeper recession than what
occurred. The problem was not with state paper money per se, but with foreign trade and
specie. In fact, the states that stepped in to issue paper money post-Revolution can be
seen as trying to stem the price collapse due to the collapse of the specie money supply
by providing temporary needed liquidity to support at least domestic exchange (Holton
2005b).
The key difference between the colonial system and this latter state system of
paper money, with a few notable exceptions, was the extensive use of legal tender laws.
This was caused by the exigencies of wartime finance (inflationary pressures caused by
excessive emission of paper money relative to the taxing base), its immediate aftermath
(immediate post-war pressures to quickly service this war debt), and the trade recession
that led to a net drain of specie out of the economy (Holton 2004, 2005b; Nettels 23-88).

12

13
Legal tender laws were price controls, and wars and their immediate aftermath have often
necessitated some type of price-control exercise (Rockoff).
D. The Problem of Legal Tender Laws versus Paper Money Emissions per se
The legal profession’s definition of “legal tender”—that a person can be
compelled via legal sanctions to accept particular monies in payment of debt—is largely
irrelevant in terms of the economic impact of tender laws if said monies are competitively
priced in the marketplace. Under such conditions the receiver is indifferent between
accepting said money and any other market equivalent value (sans the minor issue of
transacting costs). The receiver would just proceed to the market and exchange his legal
tender money for what was contracted for or really desired in the initial exchange with
little loss of value.
Legal tender laws have economic impact when the said tender is not
competitively priced in the marketplace, typically due to government imposed price or
exchange rate controls that artificially peg the value of the tender above its market value.
To distinguish this condition from the legal profession’s generic understanding of legal
tender, it will be called here “binding legal tender.” Under such conditions a person
legally compelled to receive the tender in payment of a debt receives less than its market
equivalent in other goods or monies. As such, this person is no longer indifferent between
receiving the tender and receiving payment in an alternative form or in what was initially
contracted as payment—preferring the alternative to the legal tender. It is the binding
legal tender problem that the founding fathers faced.
In the Colonial and early Republican periods legal tender laws implied binding
legal tender. Most colony/state bills of credit had a par relationship to specie—either to

13

14
Spanish dollars or pounds sterling, e.g. 1.33 Maryland pounds being par to one poundssterling (McCusker; Smith 1985). The par rate was the rate at which the issuing
government typically committed to receiving its paper money in payment of its taxes.
Without a legal tender law, the rate of exchange in the marketplace could vary from the
par rate, and thus little damage to contracting would occur in that real transaction values
would be equivalently priced across different monies. If, however, the issuing
government declared its paper money to be a legal tender for all debts, then the pressure
was to accept it at its par rating to its specie counterpart. Because this legal expedient was
typically used during wartime emergencies and/or periods when a temporary unexpected
dearth of specie forced paper money to depreciate in terms of how much specie it could
buy, it meant being legally forced to accept paper money at considerably more than its
market-determined value in specie. This was a form of price or exchange rate control.
The Revolution might not have been successfully fought and financed without some
product price, currency price, and/or exchange rate control (Farrand II, 309; Rockoff).
Such controls, however, could only function as short-run stopgap measures. They could
not be successful for very long. Many of the founding fathers wrote as if they understood
this—namely that legal tender laws were a separate issue from paper money emissions
per se (see Section I. E. below).
The financial pressures in the immediate aftermath of the Revolution led several
states to declare their new paper money to be a binding legal tender with Rhode Island
being the most notorious (Bishop; Holton 2004). Rhode Island will be used to illustrate
important features of the post-Revolution finance problem. Like many states, Rhode
Island had issued both paper money and debt (bonds) during the Revolution, well beyond

14

15
the state’s near-term tax revenue capacity. The result was depreciation of both
instruments. The risk of the state defaulting on its bonds, and the immediate post-war
depression allowed some wealthy merchants to buy up these bonds at a price far below
their specie face value, such as at 8 to 1. After having bought up these bonds at huge
discounts, these same people in their position as, or influence over, state legislators were
suspected of being the force behind getting the state to raise taxes in specie substantially
so that the state could pay off the bonds at face value in specie. The proposed increase in
specie taxes, in a depressed economy with little specie inflow due to trade disruptions,
threatened to bankrupt many Rhode Island citizens and force them to sell off their
property at fire-sale prices, thus further enriching those with resources and credit to buy.
Rhode Island voters stopped this suspected “insider-trading” speculative scheme
through defeating those involved at the polls. This was an example of the “excesses” of
democracy that some Federalists carped about. The new legislators ended the potential
for any such scheme in the future through a new paper money emission in 1786. This
emission was made a legal tender specifically for the purpose of forcing holders of Rhode
Island war bonds to exchange them at face value for this new paper money. Given that
the fiscal capacity of the state had not yet recovered, the taxing provisions in place were
not sufficient to support this new paper money and so it also depreciated, though not
necessarily below the market price of the war bonds. Merchant-speculators in war bonds
who were seeking a payoff in specie from the state so they could cover payments outside
the state were suddenly forced to take that state’s inside paper money at par. In the
marketplace they could not convert this paper money into specie at the same war bond
face value, thus their ability to cover outside money transactions was threatened.

15

16
Much of the rhetoric at the time of the Convention (and even to this day) that
singled out Rhode Island as the poster-child for irresponsible state management of paper
money was written by the side that had its insider-trading get-rich speculation scheme
dashed by the “excess” of democracy in Rhode Island. Something similar to this scheme
was likely tried in Massachusetts with Shay’s Rebellion being its major outcome. As
shown throughout the rest of the study below, many of the founding fathers wrote as if
they knew and understood that the core problems were short-term war finance, post-war
trade depression, and the resulting binding legal tender laws, and not paper money per se
(see also Bishop; Farrand II, 307, III, 214-215; Grubb 2003, 1789-1790; Holton 2004;
Jensen III, 301-302; Perkins).
E. Did the Founding Fathers Distinguish Between Legal Tender Laws and Paper Money
per se?
The founding fathers wrote as if they understood the difference between binding
legal tender laws and the emission of paper money per se. Most had lived and
commercially prospered before the Revolution under colonial paper money regimes. For
them to have been unaware of British regulations regarding legal tender status versus
paper money per se would seem unlikely. In addition, this awareness can be seen in their
writings. Roger Sherman, Convention delegate from Connecticut, writing as far back as
1752, and Peyton Randolph, uncle and role model to Edmund Randolph, Convention
delegate from Virginia, writing as far back as 1759, recognized the difference between
binding legal tender laws and the emissions of paper money per se (Bradford 22, 166;
Philoeunomos; Randolph).

16

17
The distinction between binding legal tender laws and the emission of paper
money per se was also made by many founding fathers shortly before the Convention.
For example, William Paterson, Convention delegate from New Jersey, wrote in 1786,
“An increase of paper money if it be a tender, will destroy what little credit is left; will
bewilder conscience in the maze of dishonest speculations; will allure some and constrain
others into perpetuation of knavish tricks, will turn vice into legal virtue; and will
sanctify iniquity by law.” (Warren 551 [italics added]). The debate in the New Jersey
Gazette on 30 January 1786 focused on the difference between a non-legal-tender and a
binding-legal-tender paper money, the latter being bad. New Jersey nevertheless made its
1786 emission of paper money a legal tender.
In his address to the New York Assembly in February of 1787, just a few months
before the Convention, Hamilton pointed out the potential inequities across states that
would arise if states paid their share of Federal taxes in their respective state paper
monies. In effect, binding legal tender laws would allow states with higher paper money
depreciation rates to pay less tax in specie equivalents than states with lower paper
6

money depreciation rates (Syrett IV, 87; footnote 8 below). Hamilton’s logic presumes
that the problem is binding legal tender laws and not the emission of paper money per se.
Similarly, in a letter written April 15, 1787 just a month before the Convention,
Benjamin Franklin, Convention delegate from Pennsylvania, commented, “What you
mention of our paper money, if you mean that of this State, Pennsylvania, is not well
understood. It was made before my arrival [1785], and not being a legal tender can do no
injustice to anybody nor does anyone here complain of it, though many are justly averse
to an increase of the quantity at this time,…” Likewise, in a letter to George Mason,

17

18
Convention delegate from Virginia, dated May 15, 1787, Richard Henry Lee wrote,
“Knaves assure, and fools believe, that calling paper ‘money’ and making it a tender is
the way to be rich and happy: thus the national mind is kept in continual disturbance by
the intrigues of wicked men for fraudulent purposes, for speculative designs.” (Smyth IX,
561; Warren 551-52 [italics added]; see also Rutland 1970, 861).
Finally, many of the anti-paper-money statements made by the founding fathers
before, during, and after the Convention focused not on inflation (the over-issue of paper
money per se) but on the “fraud” and “injustice” caused when a paper money was made a
binding legal tender (e.g. Farrand III, 350; Jensen III, 141, 402). For example, in the
ratification debates in Pennsylvania shortly after the Convention, Wilson remarked, “It is
true we have no tender law in Pennsylvania; but the moment you are conveyed across the
Delaware [into New Jersey] you find it haunts your journey and follows close upon your
heels. The paper [in New Jersey] passes commonly at twenty-five or thirty percent
discount. How insecure is property!” (Jensen II, 500 [italics added]).
In conclusion, many founding fathers wrote as if they understood the distinction
between binding legal tender laws and paper money emissions per se, and that the former
and not the latter was the source of the monetary problems at hand. It is true that many of
the founding fathers, both pro- and anti-federalists, had made generalized anti-paper
money statements both prior to and after the Convention, e.g. Madison, Hamilton,
Mason, Robert Morris, etc. (Grubb 2003, 1781). This is not surprising given the debacle
of the paper Continental dollar during the Revolution and the continuing post-war efforts
by the states to refinance their wartime debts and stem the post-war depression by issuing
new paper money with the frequent use of binding legal tender laws. But it is one thing to

18

19
be against current monetary policy and the use of binding legal tender laws, suffer angst
over particular choices made by democratic legislatures, and engage in debate over what
the best current legislative policy should be, and quite another thing to make the leap to
enshrining absolute monetary restrictions into the supreme law of a constitution. How did
the founding fathers during the Convention make that leap?
II. The Beginnings—May 29 to July 26: The Virginia Plan, its Modifications, and
Rivals
A. The Randolph Opening
The Convention began in earnest on May 29th with an address by Edmund
Randolph of Virginia. Speaking for the Virginia delegation he presented, in order, the
following: 1) the characteristics that a proper government ought to have, 2) the defects of
the Articles of Confederation, 3) the present dangers being faced, and 4) a remedy in the
form of a new plan of government embodied in 15 resolutions—traditionally known as
the Virginia Plan (Farrand I, 15-28; III, 593-594). In assessing the defects of the Articles
of Confederation Randolph praised its authors but noted that certain problems could not
have been foreseen by them, one of these being that in 1776 the “…the havoc of paper
money had not been foreseen…” Randolph’s choice of words without further need of
elucidation would be consistent with a common understanding among the delegates that
the paper money emissions of the colonial governments prior to the Revolution had not
caused havoc. In other words, fiat paper money per se was not the problem.
When Randolph turned to his remedy, the Virginia Plan of government, he
presented no specific resolution or words touching directly on paper money. However,
Resolution 6 of the plan proposed to give the national government new general powers

19

20
that could potentially be applied to monetary issues, namely “…the National Legislature
ought to be impowered…to legislate in all cases to which the separate States are
incompetent, or in which the harmony of the United States may be interrupted by the
exercise of individual Legislation; to negative all laws passed by the several States,
contravening in the opinion of the National Legislature the articles of Union…” Deciding
what monies could be a legal tender in exchange across states and with the national
government would appear to fall within this new power. But as long as a state did not
make its paper money a legal tender for anything other than the payment of that state’s
taxes (making it a within-the-state inside money only), then such paper money emissions
would appear to be untouchable by national legislation. Such paper money would not
“contravene…the articles of Union” nor would the “harmony of the United States…be
interrupted by this exercise of individual [state] Legislation…” In essence, this can be
interpreted as potentially restoring one pillar of British monetary oversight of the
colonies, namely that individual states would be allowed to issue paper money as long as
it was not made a legal tender. That Resolution 6 of the Virginia Plan as strictly worded
potentially empowered Congress to ban state paper money emissions per se seems
7

doubtful.

Finally, Resolution 6 would also appear to give the national legislature the power
to issue its own national paper currency. Given that one of the new powers to be given
the national legislature was the ability to directly tax and collect revenue independent of
the states (perhaps the single most important new power sought), the problem of the
inability of the national government to redeem its paper money emissions in a timely
fashion through national taxation was removed. In other words, the key structural

20

21
problem that led to the Continental dollar fiasco during the Revolution would be
resolved. In essence, the new powers embodied in the Virginia Plan can be interpreted as
potentially restoring part of another pillar of British monetary oversight of the colonies,
namely that fiat paper money (on the national level) should be adequately backed by
future taxes. It is difficult to interpret the Virginia Plan as going beyond just
reestablishing the colonial monetary system—adding the powers and constraints needed
for its success.
B. In the Shadows—The Pinckney Plan
At the end of the same day that Randolph presented the Virginia Plan, Charles
Pinckney of South Carolina read his plan of government to the Convention. The speech
Pinckney made and his plan of government were not recorded by anyone, though
Madison wrote that along with the Virginia Plan, Pinckney’s Plan was “referred to the
Committee of the whole [the entire Convention]…” And Robert Yates of New York
wrote that Pinckney “…confessed that it [his plan] was grounded on the same principle as
of the above resolutions [the Virginia Plan]” (Farrand I, 16, 23, 24). Over the next two
months the Convention debated the details of the Virginia Plan, using it as the edifice for
constructing a new plan of government. The Pinckney Plan disappeared into the shadows.
It was never directly debated by the Convention. However, given that the Pinckney Plan
appears to re-emerge after July 26th in the Committee of Detail and have an impact on
that Committee’s reshaping of the amended Virginia Plan on monetary issues, it is
important to reconstruct Pinckney’s May 29th speech and plan with regard to monetary
powers.

21

22
After the Convention Pinckney published a pamphlet purporting to be the speech
he delivered at the opening of the Convention. How much of this material comprises
additions and deletions after the fact is hard to say and is a caveat to keep in mind
(Farrand III, 106-123, 595-609). Pinckney argued that the national Congress should have
the power both to revise and negate any state laws that appear to the national Congress as
improper. Pinckney wrote, “The proceedings of the States which merely respect their
local concerns, will always be passed [by the national congress] as matters of form, and
objections only arise where they shall endeavor to contravene the Federal Authority”
(Farrand III, 112-115). While this statement gives broader power over state laws than the
Virginia Plan, on monetary issues it would appear to lead to the same outcome as the
Virginia Plan. The national government could not stop states from issuing a non-legaltender inside paper money because that would be a purely local concern, but the national
government could stop states from making their paper money a legal tender particularly
with regard to its use in outside-money transactions (payments across-states and to the
National Treasury).
Pinckney also wrote that the national government should have, “The exclusive
right of…determining in what species of money the common Treasury shall be
supplied… If you allow the States to…emit Bills of Credit, they will force you to take
them in payment for Federal Taxes and Duties,…and though, Congress may determine,
that nothing but Specie shall be received in payment of Federal Taxes or Duties, yet,
while the States retain the rights they at present possess, they will always have it in their
power, if not totally to defeat, yet very much to retard and confuse the collection of
Federal Revenues. … There can be no other mode of ascertaining this, than to give to the

22

23
United States the exclusive right of coining, and determining in what manner the Federal
Taxes shall be paid” (Farrand III, 117-118). This statement argues that the national
government should have power to prevent states from making their paper monies legal
tender with regard to payments to the national government.

8

In the second sentence quoted above Pinckney would appear to be suggesting that
state emissions of paper money be banned outright. However, reading the key elements
of the passage more closely suggests that that is not the case, namely “If you allow the
States to…emit Bills of Credit, they will force you to take them…[as long as] the States
retain the rights they at present possess…” The only relevant other “right” Pinckney
could be referring to at the end of this passage (he explicitly mentions emitting bills of
credit at the outset of the passage) is a state’s right to declare its paper money a legal
tender. It is the state’s legal tender power that is the source of mischief, not the emission
of paper money per se. This interpretation is consistent with why Pinckney only proposes
that the national government be given the power to determine “in what manner Federal
Taxes shall be paid” and makes no proposal to ban state emissions of paper money. (See
also the interpretation in Farrand III, 604-607).
However, in the Pinckney Plan that was among the papers of the Committee of
Detail there is no mention of any national government power to determine “in what
manner Federal Taxes shall be paid” or anything related explicitly to paper money or
legal tender laws. Only the following related clause appears: “Each State retains its
Rights not expressly delegated—But no Bill of the Legislature of any State shall become
a law till it shall have been laid before S. &. H. D. in C. [Senate and House of Delegates
in Congress] assembled and received their Approbation” (Farrand II, 134-137). And a

23

24
clause similar to this in the Virginia Plan was voted removed by the Convention prior to
turning their deliberations over to the Committee of Detail.
C. Debating and Amending the Virginia Plan—May 30th through July 26th
From May 30th through July 26th the Committee of the Whole (the entire
Convention) debated and amended the Virginia Plan, including hearing rival plans.
Monetary powers, while not directly addressed, remained a subtext in these debates and
played a role in defining the future path taken.
On May 31st Resolution 6 of the Virginia Plan was debated. Regarding the clause
“the National Legislature ought to be impowered…to legislate in all cases to which the
separate States are incompetent…” Pinckney and John Rutledge of South Carolina
“objected to the vagueness of the term incompetent, and …[wanted to] see an exact
enumeration of the powers comprehended by this definition.” Randolph “disclaimed any
intention to give indefinite powers to the national Legislature, declaring that he was
entirely opposed to such an inroad on State jurisdictions…” Wilson “observed that it
would be impossible to enumerate the powers which the federal Legislature ought to
have.” Finally, Madison “said that he had brought with him into the Convention a strong
bias in favor of an enumeration and definition of powers necessary to be exercised by the
national Legislature; but had also brought doubts concerning its practicability.”

9

This

phrase of Resolution 6 was then passed unaltered 10 to 1. The next two phrases of
Resolution 6 (that the national legislature should have the power to legislate where the
harmony of the U.S. may be interrupted by the exercise of individual state legislation and
to negate all laws by the states contravening the articles of Union) were agreed to without
debate or dissent (Farrand I, 53-54, 60-61).

24

25
State paper money is first explicitly mentioned in the Convention on June 6th by
Mason in the debate over whether the national legislature should be elected by the people
10

or by the state legislatures with Mason being strongly in favor of election by the people.

Mason argued that “…there was a better chance for proper elections by the people,…than
by the State Legislatures. Paper money had been issued by the latter when the former
were against it. Was it to be supposed that the State Legislatures then would not send to
the National legislature patrons of such projects if the choice depended on them”
(Farrand I, 134). By contrast, Pinckney favored election by the state legislatures rather
than by the people. Pinckney “differed from gentlemen who thought that a choice by the
people would be a better guard against bad measures, than by the Legislatures. A
majority of the people in S. Carolina were notoriously for paper money as a legal tender;
the Legislature had refused to make it a legal tender. The reason was that the latter had
11

some sense of character…” (Farrand I, 137).

Finally, in the continuation of this debate

the next day Elbridge Gerry of Massachusetts, who also favored election by the state
legislatures, insisted “that the commercial & monied interests would be more secure in
the hands of the State Legislatures, than of the people at large. The former have more
sense of character, and will be restrained by that from injustice. The people are for paper
money when the Legislatures are against it. In Massachusetts the County Conventions
had declared a wish for a depreciating paper that would sink itself” (Farrand I, 154-155).
This initial explicit introduction of state paper money into the Convention debates
illustrates two argument-transformation themes in the rhetoric used at the Convention
that would continue and escalate in intensity over the remainder of the Convention. The
first argument-transformation theme is the equivocation or conflation of paper money

25

26
emissions per se with legal tender powers. While Pinckney makes a clear distinction
between state paper money as a legal tender and state paper money per se (suggesting
that it is the former and not the latter that is bad), his statement will be (sans one other)
the last time this distinction will be made at the Convention. Instead, as illustrated by
Mason’s and Gerry’s comments, the subsequent comments on state monetary powers will
undergo definition creep whereby emitting paper money and making paper money a
binding legal tender will become synonymous. The rhetoric will then slide into just
referencing the emission of paper money per se—forcing it to take on the entire mantle of
what is evil about state monetary powers. The second argument-transformation theme is
that in all subsequent comments on paper money there is a presumption that paper money
per se is bad. The power to emit paper money became a rhetorical code phrase for evil.
On June 8th Pinckney and Madison proposed strengthening Resolution 6 of the
Virginia Plan so that the national legislature would have the power to negate any state
law the national legislature thought was improper, rather than just those contravening the
articles of union. Though not directly mentioned, this change would give the national
legislature the power unconditionally to stop all state emissions of paper money if it so
wanted. In the ensuing debate, Gerry argued that he “could not see the extent of such a
power, and was against every power that was not necessary. … [But] He had no objection
to authorize a negative to paper money and similar measures.” Sherman wanted the cases
enumerated where a negative could be applied. However, Wilson again stated, “A
definition of the cases in which the Negative should be exercised, is impracticable.”
Others thought it would become a tool whereby the large states would tyrannize the small
States. The Convention voted down the change 7 to 3 (Farrand I, 162-168).

26

27
Gerry’s comment in the above debate is the only time at the Convention prior to
submitting the Convention’s deliberations to the Committee of Detail (July 26th) that
anyone suggested a specific monetary power that the national government should
possess, namely the power to stop state emissions of paper money. Gerry’s suggestion
was also not taken up, commented on, or further debated before July 26th. His comment
also illustrates the ease with which the definitional slide was made at the Convention
from legal tender laws being the problem to state paper money per se being the problem.
On June 15th Paterson presented what is traditionally referred to as the New
Jersey Plan. Largely designed as a “small” state alternative to the “large” states’ views on
representation in the national government, it contained nothing specifically or indirectly
that would bear on monetary powers, certainly nothing beyond that in the Virginia Plan
(Farrand I, 241-280, III, 611-615).

12

On June 18th Hamilton made his major speech that

included his plan of government. Like the New Jersey Plan, the Hamilton Plan contained
nothing directly or indirectly that would bear on monetary powers beyond that in the
Virginia Plan. Hamilton did take the opportunity in his speech to join the chorus of
rhetoricians using the emission of paper money per se as an illustration of an evil that had
to be stopped. While lauding the British Constitution Hamilton said, “Their house of
Lords is a most noble institution. …. They form a permanent barrier against every
pernicious innovation,… No temporary Senate will have firmness enough to answer the
purpose. The Senate of Maryland which seems to be so much appealed to, has not yet
been sufficiently tried. Had the people been unanimous & eager, in the late appeal to
them on the subject of a paper emission they would have yielded to the torrent” (Farrand
I, 282-311, III, 617-630).

27

28
In a long speech on June 19th Madison argued that the New Jersey Plan would
not “...prevent trespasses of the States on each other…[that] He considered the emissions
of paper money as also aggressions. The States relatively to one another being each of
them either Debtor or Creditor; the Creditor States must suffer unjustly from every
emission by the debtor States. We have seen retaliating acts on this subject which
threatened danger not to the harmony only, but the tranquility of the Union” (Farrand I,
13

317-318).

Again the two argument-transformation themes appear in Madison’s speech,

namely, the problem created by binding legal tender laws—the “trespasses of the States
on each other”—is redefined as being created by the emission of paper money per se and
that this by itself is evil.
On July 16th the Convention revisited the clause of Resolution 6 of the amended
Virginia Plan giving the national legislature the power “…to legislate in all cases to
which the separate States are incompetent; or in which the harmony of the U.S. may be
interrupted by the exercise of individual legislation…” The Convention again considered
the vagueness of this power and whether it should be explicitly enumerated. Pierce Butler
of South Carolina called for “…some explanation of the extent of this power; particularly
of the word incompetent. The vagueness of the term rendered it impossible for any
precise judgment to be formed.” Nathaniel Gorham of Massachusetts argued, “We are
now establishing general principles, to be extended hereafter into details which will be
precise & explicit” (Farrand II, 17).
On July 17th the Convention again took up this clause in Resolution 6. This time
it was Sherman who “observed that it would be difficult to draw the line between the
powers of the General Legislatures, and those to be left to the States…” He proposed that

28

29
the clause be amended to rule out national legislation that would “…interfere with the
Government of the individual States in any matters of internal police which respect the
Government of such States only, and wherein the General welfare of the United States is
not concerned.” Gouverneur Morris opposed this wording. He argued that “The internal
police, as it would be called & understood by the States ought to be infringed in many
cases, as in the case of paper money & other tricks by which Citizens of other States may
be affected” (Farrand II, 25-26). Morris’ rhetoric here has again muddled the lines
between state paper money emissions per se and the power to declare them a legal tender,
making the emission of paper money per se bear the entire burden of the problems caused
by legal tender laws—the “tricks by which Citizens of other States may be affected.”
Sherman’s proposal was voted down, 8 to 2, and the original clause of Resolution
6, with some slight rewording, was passed 6 to 4 (Farrand II, 25-26). The debate over this
clause up to this point is interesting for monetary powers. The strict construction of the
clause would appear to give the national legislature no power to stop state emissions of
paper money per se, but would appear only to give the national legislature the power to
stop states from declaring said money a legal tender in trans-state or national transactions.
However, Morris’ statement above would appear to construe the clause more broadly,
namely to include national prohibition of even a purely inside state paper money. Morris’
statement seems to be claiming that anything whatsoever that will possibly affect a
citizen of another state falls under the power of national prohibition in Resolution 6
regarding the “harmony of the United States.”
Yet, later that same day (July 17th), Morris strongly opposed giving the national
legislature the power to veto the “…laws passed by the several States…” (Farrand II, 27-

29

30
28). This action contradicts the seemingly broad-power interpretation of his prior
statement that he used when rejecting Sherman’s motion. Considering all of Morris’
statements together would appear to yield one consistent and narrow concern, namely
getting the power to prevent state emission of paper money per se. In a letter to Timothy
Pickering, December 22, 1814, Morris more or less admitted to this, saying that he had
“little recollection” of the details of the Convention, but that “Propositions to
countenance the issue of paper money, and the consequent violation of contracts, must
have met with all the opposition I could make” (Farrand III, 419-420). Even years after
the Convention, Morris continued to muddle the lines between paper money per se and
legal tender laws. The “consequent violation of contract” would only occur if paper
money were made a legal tender—again illustrating the slide of logic and definition creep
intended to make the emission of paper money per se bear the entire burden of the
problems cause by legal tender laws.
On July 17th the Convention also revisited the clause of Resolution 6 of the
amended Virginia Plan giving the national legislature the power “To negative all laws
passed by the several States contravening in the opinion of the National Legislature the
articles of Union, or any treaties subsisting under the authority of ye Union.” This clause,
agreed to on May 31st without debate or dissent, now excited significant opposition. It
was deleted by a vote of 7 to 3 (Farrand II, 27-28). Removal of this power would make it
more difficult for the national government using the power in the prior clause in
Resolution 6 (considered immediately above) to directly stop a state from issuing a legal
tender paper money.

30

31
On July 21st, while debating whether the national judiciary along with the
executive should have the power to revise or veto laws passed by the national legislature,
Morris continued the drumbeat of the evils of legislative emissions of paper money per
se. He said, “Emissions of paper money, largesses to the people—a remission of debts
and similar measures, will at sometimes be popular, and will be pushed for that reason.…
The press is indeed a great means of diminishing the evil, yet it is found to be unable to
prevent it altogether” (Farrand II, 76). Morris’ rhetoric here lumps paper money
emissions per se with “largesses to the public” and “a remission of debts.” But this would
only typically be the case for paper money under a legal tender law and not for paper
money per se (Holton 2004).
On July 26th the Convention’s deliberations were submitted to a Committee of
Detail to craft a draft constitution. Up to this point no explicit or direct proposals
regarding monetary powers had been made. At best, what remained of Resolution 6 of the
Virginia Plan potentially gave the national government the power to determine what
monies could be legal tender for cross-state trade and in transactions with the national
government, but as strictly constructed it probably could not be construed as giving the
national government power to prohibit state emissions of a non-legal-tender inside paper
money. However, Convention rhetoric on paper money, such as that by Gerry, Mason,
Madison, Hamilton, and Morris had continuously conflated paper money with legal
lender laws thus forcing the emission of paper money per se to bear the entire burden of
the problems caused by legal tender laws. This rhetoric set the stage for the Committee of
Detail to leap for the first time at the Convention to incorporating explicit clauses into the
Constitution dealing with paper money emission per se. Convention rhetoric, however,

31

32
may not have been enough to achieve this leap. Whether by conspiratorial craft or lucky
accident, a timely demonstration of the “evils” of state paper money was on display in
Philadelphia for the delegates to see.
III. Paper Money Riot Interlude?
A riot over Pennsylvania State paper money broke out in Philadelphia in midJuly. The Pennsylvania Herald and General Advertiser described two incidents—the first
on July 14th:
A correspondent observes that the speculations of a few artful people have
been frequently found extremely detrimental to the public; and no class is too
low; that it cannot by a bold combination, accomplishith its object. The hucksters
lately came to a resolution not to receive the copper-currency at less than 24
pieces for a shilling; but this depreciation was not publicly divulged til they had
passed all their stock of half-pence at the former value. There are others who
derive a livelihood from the exchange between the current mediums, that without
any regard to the relative value, keep it in constant fluctuation, and, from day to
day, pronounce upon the rate at which paper-money shall be taken for specie. The
first instance is a reproach to the policy and morals of the state, for government
should never leave it in the power of one part of the citizens to take advantage of
the innocent ignorance of another; and the second instance is a reproach to the
folly and weakness of those people, who will passively adopt the suggestions of
interested men, instead of exercising their own judgment to show, that the security
of the paper money is of an improving rather than a decaying nature.
And the second on July 21st:
A correspondent remarks that the panic which prevailed on Saturday last
[July 14th], respecting the paper-money of this state has not been more distressing
to the poor, than astonishing to the intelligent part of the community. Many
causes have been assigned for the sudden event, some grounded on mercantile
negotiations, that never existed, and others drawn from mistaken or perverted
interpretation of an expression which lately dropt from an eminent law
character—but not one can stand a rational investigation.
Convention delegates were apparently aware of the goings-on and took away a
darker view of the event than that painted in the newspaper. For example, Madison

32

33
related the events to Thomas Jefferson, who was in Paris, in a letter dated July 18, 1787
(Smith 1995, I, 484):
The paper money here ceased to circulate very suddenly a few days ago.
… The entire stagnation is said to have proceeded from a combination of a few
people with whom the Country people deal on market days against receiving it.
The consequence was that it was refused in the market, and great distress brought
on the poorer Citizens. Some of the latter began in turn to form combinations of a
more serious nature in order to take revenge on the supposed authors of the
stagnation. The timely interposition of some influential characters prevented a
riot, and prevailed on the persons who were opposed to the paper, to publish their
willingness to receive it. This has stifled the popular rage, and got the paper into
circulation again. … Nothing but evil springs from this imaginary money
whenever it is tried, and yet the appetite for it, when it has not been tried,
continues to be felt.
An interesting question for further research is whether these troubles were
engineered by Morris’ “monied interest” and/or the Bank of North America to help pave
the way for an outright constitutional ban on paper money. Allan Nevins (522) concluded
that the bank was involved, “In July of 1787, by concerted action, the banks and markets
of Philadelphia ceased to accept them [Pennsylvania State paper money].” The timing of
the stoppage by itself is suspicious. This event took place soon after Morris, a chief
operating officer of the Bank of North America, returned to the Convention from New
York where he had been since the end of May. It also occurred right before the
Convention decided to revisit Resolution 6 of the Virginia Plan, and right before Morris
began his drumbeat on the evils of paper money in his speeches from July 17th through
July 21st. And it occurred just before the Convention’s deliberations were turned over to
the Committee of Detail on which Wilson, a member of the board of the Bank of North
America, was a key member. Otherwise, Pennsylvania State paper money had remained
relatively stable over the long run as measured by its relatively constant (stationary with
no trend) exchange rate to pounds sterling from 1784 through 1790 (Bezanson 1936, 346;

33

34
Grubb 2003, 1786; 2005a). Finding a combination of speculators with enough control
over specie exchange in Philadelphia to accomplish a stoppage of paper money exchange
that didn’t somehow involve the Bank of North America would be difficult. In any event,
whether by conspiratorial craft or lucky accident, this overlooked episode may have been
an important contributor to the radical transformation in constitutional monetary powers
about to be undertaken at the Convention.
IV. The Committee of Detail—July 27 to Aug. 6: The Initial Restructuring of
Monetary Powers
On July 26th the Convention referred the Virginia Plan as amended by the
Convention to that point, as well as the New Jersey Plan and the non-debated Pinckney
Plan, to a Committee of Detail to craft a draft constitution. This Committee consisted of
Oliver Ellsworth of Connecticut, Gorham, Randolph, Rutledge, and Wilson (Farrand II,
85, 97-98, 128-137). Five working drafts attributed to the Committee have survived—
four written by Wilson, with the last containing emendations by Rutledge, and one
written by Randolph with emendations by Rutledge. Working backwards from the final
product reported to the Convention on August 6th, Wilson’s last working draft (with
emendations by Rutledge) appears to be the principle penultimate draft of the Committee
(Farrand II, 163-175, 177-189; Meigs 316-324). Where Randolph’s draft fits within the
first three Wilson drafts is hard to say; they overlap in some ways but not in others
(Farrand II, 137-163; Meigs 316-324). Randolph’s draft, unaltered by Rutledge, and the
first two Wilson drafts say nothing about the power to emit paper money or about
determining what monies may be made a legal tender either by the national government
or by the state governments.

34

35
Wilson’s third draft includes for the first time in the constitution-creation process
an explicit clause enumerating a monetary power, namely a restriction on legal tender—
“The Legislature of U.S. shall have the exclusive Power…of determining in what Specie
of Money the public Treasury shall be supplied” (Farrand II, 158-159). Nothing else,
however, is said prescriptively or proscriptively in this draft about the power to emit
paper money or about determining what monies may be a legal tender within state
jurisdictions. This power as explicitly enumerated here by Wilson was not mentioned in
the records of the Convention. But as argued above, it seems to be one of the powers
within the scope of the amended Resolution 6 of the Virginia Plan. While not appearing
in the Pinckney Plan that was given to the Committee of Detail, the wording of Wilson’s
monetary power clause closely follows the wording in Pinckney’s speech to the
Convention on May 29th—as published after the Convention (Farrand III, 118).
At this juncture, the structure of the constitutional monetary powers being crafted
were the closest to replicating the colonial monetary system as they ever would be. In
Wilson’s third draft constitution both the national government and the state governments
still retained the power to emit paper money. The national government had been given an
independent power to directly tax, thus allowing it to credibly commit to redeeming its
paper money, a power which it had not had under the Articles of Confederation, thus
solving the key structural problem underlying the collapse of the Continental dollar. The
national government also had the power to determine what could be legal tender for
national government transactions. This almost replicated the British legal tender
restrictions placed on the colonies.

35

36
From this point, the Convention embarked on a path leading to a radical departure
from the colonial system. In Wilson’s last (fourth) working draft he dropped the legal
tender restriction clause from his third draft and substituted in its place the clause, with
Rutledge reordering the words slightly, “No State shall…without the Consent of the
Legislature of the United States emit Bills of Credit.” In addition, the national
legislature’s power to emit bills of credit, part of the old powers carried over from the
Articles of Confederation, was now made an explicitly enumerated power given to the
national legislature (Farrand II, 168-169). No statement about legal tender powers at any
level of government was included in Wilson’s last draft. Perhaps Wilson reasoned that if
Congress had the power to ban states from emitting paper money that would solve the
problem of determining what monies could be a legal tender for national government
transactions—the former power encompassing the latter. But this change was also a
radical step in that it gave Congress, for the first time, the power to ban states from
issuing even a non-legal-tender inside paper money. This change would appear to be
going beyond the principles laid out so far by the Convention regarding national powers
not being allowed to interfere in matters purely internal to a state.
Besides emendating Wilson’s last working draft, Rutledge also added comments
to Randolph’s draft. In a margin note to Randolph’s enumerated powers given to the
national government “To regulate coining” Rutledge wrote “no State to be perd. in future
to emit Paper Bills of Credit witht. The App: of the Natl. Legisle nor to make any Thing
but Specie a Tender in paymt of debts” (Farrand II, 144). Given that the second half of
this clause does not appear in Wilson’s last working draft which Rutledge had also
emendated but does appear in the Committee’s final draft submitted to the Convention, it

36

37
seems likely that Rutledge added this note to Randolph’s draft near the very end of the
Committee’s deliberations. As argued above, the true monetary problem was the legal
tender issue. Perhaps Rutledge reasoned if Congress only had Wilson’s power to ban
state paper money, then that would not necessarily solve the legal tender problem. States
might declare something else to be a legal tender, such as bonds, state banknotes, tobacco
contracts, or land deeds. If trans-jurisdictional (outside) money was always to be specie,
then states had to be prevented from making “any Thing but Specie” a legal tender.
The draft constitution submitted by the Committee to the Convention on August
6th gave the national legislature the explicitly enumerated power to “…emit bills on
credit…”, and an explicitly enumerated power over state paper money and legal tender
laws, i.e. stating that “No State, without the consent of the Legislature of the United
States, shall emit bills of credit, or make any thing but specie a tender in payment of
debts…” (Farrand III, 182, 187; Meigs 134-135, 180-182, 311). By explicitly
enumerating individual monetary powers, the Committee was forcing the Convention to
deal up or down with these powers separately, as opposed to dealing with monetary
powers as implied by other granted powers. What is interesting is that it would be Wilson
himself, along with his Bank of North America protégé Morris, who would lead the attack
on these narrowly enumerated monetary clauses, the clauses that Wilson was the first to
draft out, in order to narrow and radicalize their scope even further.

37

38
V. The End Game—Aug. 6 to 28: The Absolute Constitutional Proscription of
Monetary Powers
A. The Absolute Prohibition on Paper Money Issued by the National Government
From the initial Virginia Plan presented at the beginning of the Convention
through all the Convention’s deliberations given to the Committee of Detail, the national
legislature was designed to have all the rights and powers it possessed under the Articles
of Confederation plus some new and enlarged powers. The Committee of Detail drafted a
list of these new and enlarged powers. In Wilson’s last draft, but not before, this list
included the power to “emit bills on the credit of the United States” (Farrand I, 21; II,
131, 142-144, 158-159, 167-169, 181-183). Under the Articles of Confederation,
Congress had exercised the power to emit bills of credit. Why the Committee of Detail
took it upon itself in its last draft, and for the first time in the constitution-revision
process, to put this one “old” power on the list of specifically enumerated “new and
enlarged” powers of the federal government is unclear. One outcome of doing this
became clear within a few days. By isolating this one “old” power from the other exiting
“old” powers, it became easier to attack and expunge.
With Congress being granted the new power to directly tax, the structural problem
under the Articles of Confederation that distinguished the well-working colonial
monetary system from the Continental dollar disaster had been removed. Under the draft
of the new constitution offered by the Committee of Detail, paper money issued by the
federal government, if not made a legal tender, should have worked as well as paper
money had in the late colonial period. However, within ten days of receiving this draft

38

39
constitution, the Convention decided that under absolutely no circumstances should the
federal government be allowed to issue paper money.
Gouverneur Morris led the attack on this power. The first two attacks were
indirect, with the first presented on August 15th during the debate over how easily an
executive veto of Congressional legislation could be overridden. Morris argued that
Congress should not have an ability to override an executive veto and, if that was not
agreeable, requiring a 3/4 vote rather than the proposed 2/3 vote of Congress to override
an executive veto would be preferable. Madison recorded Morris as having
dwelt on the importance of public Credit, and the difficulty of supporting it
without some strong barrier against the instability of legislative Assemblies. …
The legislature will contrive to soften down the President. He recited the history
of paper emissions, and the perseverance of the legislative assemblies in repeating
them, with all the distressing effects of such measures before their eyes. Were the
National legislature formed, and a war was now to break out, this ruinous
expedient would be again resorted to, if not guarded against (Farrand II, 299).
The Convention voted for a 3/4 rule (Farrand II, 301).
What is interesting about Morris’ argument here is that he explicitly links the
ruinous problems of paper money to “war.”

14

Was he admitting that paper money issued

by the federal government under the new constitution would not be a problem during
peacetime? The Convention delegates were likely aware of the “ruinous” effects of
Congress’ wartime issue of the paper Continental dollar. The exigencies of war would
typically require issuing more bills of credit than what could be credibly redeemed in the
near future through taxation. Wartime inflation and price controls would be the likely
result (Rockoff). Whether wartime inflation could have been avoided, regardless of the
monetary powers of the federal government, was not considered. Given that the debate
was not about wartime versus peacetime powers, Morris may have been trying to link the

39

40
disastrous wartime inflation of the Continental dollar already firmly planted in the minds
of the delegates with the general “evils” of paper money per se.
The second indirect attack came early on August 16th when the Convention took
up debating whether the federal government should have the power to tax exports.
Among his arguments in favor of taxing exports, Morris stated, “Taxes on exports are a
necessary source of revenue. For a long time the people of America will not have money
to pay direct taxes. Seize and sell their effects and you push them into Revolts—.” The
Convention, however, for other political reasons voted eventually not to allow the federal
government to tax exports (Farrand II, 307, 374, 657).
Morris’ comment says a lot about what he anticipated would be the course of
events under the monetary powers he wanted in the Constitution. Why would the “people
of America…not have money to pay direct taxes” to the federal government? If the
federal government issued an inside paper money, it would have to accept that paper
money in payment of its taxes. Having issued said inside money the people of America
would have little problem getting that money to pay federal taxes because, unlike outside
money (specie), it would seldom exit the country. If, however, the federal government
was prohibited from issuing an inside paper money, then taxes would have to be paid in
outside money, namely specie. For the most part, specie flowed into the economy from
the trade surpluses with the Caribbean and flowed out through the trade deficits with
Europe. Short-run trade imbalances always occurred. While periods of specie surplus
created little problem for paying federal taxes, periods of specie scarcity would be
consistent with what Morris was referring to when he talked about people not having
“money to pay direct taxes.” And Morris seemed to be expecting that periodic specie

40

41
scarcity would be a prevalent condition in the near future (Holton 2004, 2005b). Because
exports are more likely to be purchased with specie, taxing exports would give the federal
government direct access to specie as tax payments.
Morris’ comment also comes close to admitting what the true problem was
regarding the late 1786 and early 1787 rebellion in Massachusetts, called Shay’s
Rebellion, that so affected the delegates at the Convention—the likely reference to
“Revolts” in the above quote. If inside paper money is eliminated and the general public
is required to pay taxes in specie, as Massachusetts did after the Revolution, and if shortrun shifts in external trade cause a period of specie scarcity, then some people will be tax
delinquents and forced into bankruptcy. The government will have to confiscate and sell
the tax delinquents’ property for tax arrears. Such distressed property sales, when specie
is scarce, leads to substantially lower-than-average prices for the tax delinquents’
property. Those with wealth scoop up this property as fire-sale bargains. Given that those
who got the fire-sale bargains may have also been or were suspected of being involved in
engineering the passage of such money-tax policies in the first place, a sense of injustice
and hence revolt was the outcome. This was the essence of Shay’s Rebellion, as well as
the Whiskey Rebellion in western Pennsylvania in 1796. Stopping something like this
also lay behind the Rhode Island emission of paper money in 1786 (Bishop; Bouton;
Grubb 2003, 1789-1790; Holton 2004). Federalist rhetoric paints these episodes as
excesses of democracy where the populous rage for an inflationary paper money was led
by debtors out to cheat their creditors. By contrast, these episodes may really have been
examples of wealthy creditors out to use their power in government to alter the rules and
15

confiscate more wealth from the poor.

For Morris, the federal government’s direct

41

42
access to specie via taxing exports was one solution to the chain of events that might
likely accompany a prohibition on paper money emissions.
Having set the stage and gauged the opinions of Convention delegates, late on
August 16th Morris made his move to absolutely ban federally-issued paper money—
moving to strike out the words “and emit bills on the credit of the United States” from the
enumerated powers granted the national legislature. He reasoned that “If the United
States had credit such bills would be unnecessary: If they had not unjust & useless.” The
debate that followed is worth quoting at length:
Mr. Madison, will it not be sufficient to prohibit the making them a
tender? This will remove the temptation to emit them with unjust views. And
promissory notes in that shape may in some emergencies be best.
Mr. Gouverneur Morris. Striking out the words will leave room still for
notes of a responsible minister which will do all the good without the mischief.
The Monied interest will oppose the plan of Government, if paper emissions be
not prohibited.
Mr. Gorham was for striking out, without inserting any prohibition. If the
words stand they may suggest and lead to the measure.
Col. Mason had doubts on the subject. Congress he thought would not
have the power unless it were expressed. Though he had a mortal hatred to paper
money, yet as he could not foresee all emergencies, he was unwilling to tie the
hands of the Legislature. He observed that the late war could not have been
carried on, had such a prohibition existed.
M. Gorham—The power as far as it will be necessary or safe, is involved
in that of borrowing.
Mr. Mercer was a friend to paper money, though in the present state &
temper of America, he should neither propose nor approve of such a measure. He
was consequently opposed to a prohibition of it altogether. It will stamp suspicion
on the Government to deny it a discretion on this point. It was impolitic also to
excite the opposition of all those who were friends to paper money. The people of
property would be sure to be on the side of the plan, and it was impolitic to
purchase their further attachment with the loss of the opposite class of Citizens
Mr. Ellsworth thought this a favorable moment to shut and bar the door
against paper money. The mischiefs of the various experiments which had been
made, were now fresh in the public mind and had excited the disgust of all the
respectable part of America. By withholding the power from the new Government
more friends of influence would be gained to it than by almost any thing else—
Paper money can in no case be necessary—Give the Government credit, and other
resources will offer—The power may do harm, never good.

42

43
Mr. Randolph, notwithstanding his antipathy to paper money, could not
agree to strike out the words, as he could not foresee all the occasions that might
arise.
Mr. Wilson. It will have a most salutary influence on the credit of the
United States to remove the possibility of paper. This expedient can never
succeed whilst its mischiefs are remembered. And as long as it can be resorted to,
it will be a bar to other resources.
Mr. Butler. remarked that paper was a legal tender in no Country in
Europe. He was urgent for disarming the Government of such a power.
Mr. Mason was still averse to tying the hands of the Legislature
altogether. If there was no example in Europe as just remarked it might be
observed on the other side, that there was none in which the Government was
restrained on this head.
Mr. Read, thought the words, if not struck out, would be as alarming as the
mark of the Beast in Revelations.
Mr. Langdon had rather reject the whole plan than retain the three words
“and emit bills.”
16
[The motion to striking out “and emit bills” was passed 9 to 2.] (Farrand II, 308310).
There are several important aspects to this debate. First, the logic of the rhetoric
used above indicates that the founding fathers were operating under the assumption that
unless a power was explicitly given to the national government in the Constitution (or
directly implied by a power explicitly granted) that that power was denied to the national
government. By voting to strike out the words “and emit bills of credit” from the list of
powers to be given Congress, they considered themselves as voting to prohibit paper
emission by the national government—else their vote makes no sense. An explicit vote to
remove a power would trump any “implied” power argument for the national government
retaining that power under the auspices of some other explicitly granted power—else
explicitly removing that power from the list of powers granted makes no sense (assuming
that the founding fathers were not deliberately writing a deceitful Constitution—ratifying
one meaning while intending to execute another).

43

44
Second, for only the second (and last) time at the Convention the distinction was
raised between legal tender laws and the emission of paper money per se. And when
Madison raised this distinction—indicating that it was legal tender laws that caused all
the problems—Morris’ response was blunt and absolute, “The Monied interest will
oppose the plan of Government, if paper emission be not prohibited.” This absolute
prohibition with no qualifying considerations, and the (rather grandstanding) willingness
of Morris and his “monied interest” to risk losing the whole Constitution if an absolute
prohibition was not agreed to, was also echoed by several other delegates in the quote
above.

17

In addition, as if in answer to Madison, the game of conflating legal tender laws

with the emission of paper money per se was reasserted by all the other delegates
speaking on this matter. This absolute, risk all, no-compromise position taken by the
“monied interest” on absolutely banning federally-issued paper money logically implies
the same position with regard to state-issued paper money, which will be seen to be the
case below.
Third, this debate reveals that the delegates seemed to know that the recent
problems with paper money were not due to paper money per se, but were largely due to
the problems of wartime finance and its aftermath (post-war depression). For example,
Mercer refers to the “present state & temper of America” regarding paper money. Wilson
refers to the memory of paper money’s “mischiefs.” Ellsworth refers to this time being “a
favorable moment to shut and bar the door against paper money. The mischiefs of the
various experiments which had been made, were fresh in the public mind…” They
seemed willing to try the ignorance of the public and muddle the distinction between
peacetime and wartime financial performance in order to justify an absolute ban on paper

44

45
money emissions. If the public only remembered that the Continental dollar hyperinflated, and did not delve into the underlying causes of it, then they might easily blame it
on the emission of paper money per se. That a paper money expedient could be the best
choice from among the set of necessary financing evils during a war was noted but not
seriously considered. Madison’s reference to some “emergencies” and Randolph’s to not
being able to “foresee all occasions,” when paper money might be useful, would seem to
refer to wartime financing, and Mason explicitly says that “the late war could not have
been carried on” without paper money. The peacetime versus wartime financial
distinction was trampled under in the drive to absolutely ban government-issued paper
money.
Fourth, Morris says something very cryptic and telling about what alternatives
might be available. In response to Madison’s legal tender question, Morris initially says,
“striking out the words leave room still for notes of a responsible minister which will do
all the good without the mischief.” Who did Morris mean by “responsible minister”? It
cannot be an official arm of the national government as Morris finishes his statement with
“The Monied interest will oppose the plan of Government, if paper emissions be not
prohibited.” And no government “minister” in the executive branch, such as the future
Secretary of the Treasury, would have an independent power to tax and so control paper
money backing or have the power to control specie deposits in such a way as to function
as Morris’ “responsible minister” for issuing paper money. Who else is left? There is
18

perhaps only one candidate, Morris’ Bank of North America.

Since 1782 the Bank of North America had been trying to get its banknotes to
circulate as a national paper currency (Ferguson 1983, 402; Grubb 2003, 2004a; Lewis;

45

46
Wilson). Wilson, a member of the board of the bank, had argued in 1785 that the
“…advantage…[of] the bank of North America is the establishment of an undepreciating
paper currency through[out] the United States” (Adams 146). Apparently, Morris and
Wilson are not against all paper money, only against tax-backed government-issued paper
money. Banknotes that were fractionally backed in specie were acceptable. In other
words, Morris wanted governments at all levels to surrender paper money issuing power
to private banks, with the only quasi-national bank at the time being his Bank of North
America. Why did Morris use the cryptic phrase “responsible minister” and not just come
right out and say “Bank of North America”? It is likely, as will be shown below, that
Morris did not say “bank” because the mere mention of the word, even among the
Convention delegates, was so controversial that it was likely to kill the new
19

Constitution.

B. The Absolute Prohibition on Paper Money Issued by State Governments
Having secured an absolute ban on federally issued paper money, the move to
absolutely prohibit state issued paper money was probably a foregone conclusion. On
20

August 28th the Convention got to that part of the draft constitution.

Wilson and

Sherman moved to cut the phrase “without the consent of the Legislature of the United
States” from the clause “No State, without the consent of the Legislature of the United
States, shall emit bills of credit, or make any thing but specie a tender in payment of
debts…” This change, “making these prohibitions absolute,” elevated state paper money
to being on a par with higher-order political matters such as prohibiting states from
entering foreign alliances (Farrand II, 187, 657).

46

47
Having achieved the ban on federal bills of credit with the argument that “The
Monied interest will oppose the plan of Government, if paper emissions be not
prohibited,” the ensuing debate was short:
Mr. Gorham thought the purpose would be as well secured by the
provision…which makes the consent of the General Legislature necessary, and
that in that mode, no opposition would be excited; whereas an absolute
prohibition of paper money would rouse the most desperate opposition from its
partisans—
Mr. Sherman thought this a favorable crisis for crushing paper money. If
the consent of the Legislature could authorize emissions of it, the friends of paper
money would make every exertion to get into the Legislature in order to license it.
The question was divided into whether to have an absolute prohibition on states emitting
bills of credit, which passed 8 to 2, and whether to make the legal tender clause an
absolute prohibition, which passed 11 to 0 (Farrand II, 435, 439). The separate votes on
the two clauses indicate that the founding fathers could have potentially decided only to
absolutely ban legal tender provisions but not state paper money emissions per se—
indicating that despite the rhetoric that frequently conflated these two issues the founding
fathers recognized that legal tender laws and paper money emissions per se were in fact
21

not the same issue.

Sherman’s statement about it being a “favorable crisis” for crushing paper money
suggests that paper money per se was not the problem, and that the public’s confusion of
wartime finance and post-war depression monetary problems with peacetime or normal
monetary performance could be used to win an absolute paper money ban. Gorham’s
statement, as well as John Francis Mercer’s statement in the prior quote, also suggests
that the anti-paper money faction was willing to risk alienating much of the public and so
jeopardize ratification in order to get an absolute ban on paper money at all levels of
22

government.

47

48
Finally, on the same day a short debate took place that reveals what was not the
motive for banning state paper money. Rufus King of Massachusetts, “moved to add, …
a prohibition on the States to interfere in private contracts” to the list of powers to be
prohibited to the states. Morris responded that, “This would be going too far. … and
within the State itself a majority must rule, whatever may be the mischief done among
themselves.” Sherman then asked, “Why then prohibit [State] bills of credit?” To which
no answer was recorded (Farrand II, 439-440). For Morris, the problem with paper
money apparently was not that it could be used to redistribute income from one group to
another by effectively altering values within private contracts via legal tender laws and/or
unanticipated inflationary issues of paper money. Morris recognized that there were
myriad ways of redistributing income via state laws that were probably easier to institute
regarding the targeting of benefits than the rather clumsy method of issuing a
depreciating state currency (Nettels 85-86). Morris apparently did not care about intrastate political machinations leading to income redistribution schemes—rejecting one of
the common arguments the historical literature has ascribed to the Convention (and him)
for why state paper money was banned.
VI. National Banking as a Substitute Monetary Power?—Aug. 28 to Sept. 14
The British extended the Bubble Act to the colonies in 1741. This Act did not
allow corporations to form that had over six partner/investors, which in turn effectively
stopped commercial banks from developing in the colonies (Perkins 41; Priest). With
independence, colony/states were free to incorporate banks, which they began to do in
1781 when Pennsylvania chartered the Bank of North America, and in 1784 when New
York and Massachusetts chartered the Bank of New York and the Bank of Massachusetts,

48

49
respectively. Efforts to charter banks were underway in other states between 1784 and
1787, such as in Maryland where the state’s Senate had passed a bank charter bill that
was being blocked by that state’s House of Delegates. These banks took in deposits in
specie and issued banknotes as claims against said deposits and as loans. Depositors
could also issue checks as claims on their specie deposits. These banks were basically
engaged in modern, though unregulated, fractional-reserve practices with specie serving
as reserves. They issued more banknotes, loans, and claims on their specie deposits than
they had specie on reserve. While not a legal tender, these banknotes circulated as a
geographically localized currency because they could be redeemed in specie at the
issuing bank at face value, except during liquidity crises, but at variable marketdetermined discounts off the face value farther away from the issuing bank. Banknotes
competed with each other for usage as an inside paper money and with state bills of
credit. Banks and bank charters were a contentious and controversial issue in many state
legislatures (Behrens 79-87; Bryan 17-19; Freeman 575-612; Gras; Grubb 2003, 2005a;
Lewis; Nettels 75-81; Webster; Wilson).
A. Who Shall Have the Power to Charter Banks?
At the Convention, the delegates did not address the states’ power of
incorporation, either in general or with specific reference to banking. Apparently such
state powers were acceptable to the founding fathers and they were to be left intact by the
new Constitution. Several delegates were closely involved with state chartered banks,
either as stockholders, board members, directors, legal advisors, or sponsors of banking
bills, including Hamilton, Gerry, King, McHenry, John Langdon of New Hampshire,
Abraham Baldwin of Georgia, and the entire Pennsylvania delegation of Wilson,

49

50
Franklin, Thomas Mifflin, George Clymer, Jared Ingersoll, Thomas Fitzsimons, Robert
Morris, and Gouverneur Morris (Grubb 2003, 2005a; McDonald 89). Perhaps then it is
not surprising that the state power to charter banks was left untouched by the Convention.
Under the Articles of Confederation it was doubtful whether Congress had the
power to charter a national bank. For example, in 1780 Hamilton suggested that a
national “Convention should assemble” to remedy the Articles of Confederation by
granting Congress the power of “establishing banks….” (Freedman 76-77). In the 17851787 controversy in the Pennsylvania State Legislature over that state’s charter of the
Bank of North America, which Congress had also chartered and intended to be its
national bank, the actions of both the pro- and anti-bank parties indicated that both sides
had little faith in the validity of a charter from Congress. Both sides thought a state
charter was necessary (Lewis; Rappaport; Webster; Wilson). If a national bank chartered
by the federal government were to be allowed, it would have to fall under one of the new
and enlarged powers specifically enumerated in the new Constitution.
Whether the national government should be given the power to charter a national
bank was taken up in a roundabout way on September 14th when the Convention
addressed the general versus specific powers of incorporation to be granted the national
government. With regard to the power of incorporation, the draft constitution up to that
point gave the national government only the specific enumerated power to establish post
offices and post roads. Franklin moved that the national government also have the power
to cut canals. The debate expanded from there and the exchange between the delegates is
worth quoting at length (from Madison’s notes):
Mr. Madison suggested an enlargement of the motion into a power “to
grant charters of incorporation where the interest of the U.S. might require & the

50

51
legislative provisions of individual States may be incompetent.” His primary
object was however to secure an easy communication between States which the
free intercourse now to be opened, seemed to call for—The political obstacles
being removed, a removal of the natural ones as far as possible ought to follow.
Mr. Randolph 2ded. the proposition.
Mr King thought the power unnecessary.
Mr Wilson. It is necessary to prevent a State from obstructing the general
welfare.
Mr King—The States will be prejudiced and divided into parties by it—In
Philadelphia & New York, It will be referred to the establishment of a Bank,
which has been a subject of contention in those Cities. In other places it will be
referred to mercantile monopolies.
Mr. Wilson mentioned the importance of facilitating by canals, the
communication with the Western Settlements—As to Banks he did not think with
Mr. King that the power in that point of view would excite the prejudices &
parties apprehended. As to mercantile monopolies they are already included in the
power to regulate trade.
Col: Mason was for limiting the power to the single case of Canals. He
was afraid of monopolies of every sort, which he did not think were by any means
already implied by the Constitution as supposed by Mr. Wilson.
The motion being so modified as to admit a distinct question specifying &
limited to the case of canals. [The motion failed 8 to 3.]
The other part fell of course, as including the power rejected (Farrand II,
615-616).
McHenry’s notes support Madison’s notes on this issue. He wrote, “Moved by Dr.
Franklin seconded by Mr. Willson, to empower Congress to open and establish canals.
This being objected to—moved by Virginia To empower Congress to grant charters of
incorporation in cases where the U.S. may require them and where the objects of them
cannot be obtained by a State. Negatived” (Farrand II, 620).
Both Madison’s and McHenry’s notes of the Convention for that day are
corroborated by an incident recorded by Jefferson some years later. Jefferson wrote in his
personal notes on March 11, 1798:
[Abraham] Baldwin [Convention delegate from Georgia] mentions at table the
following fact. When the bank bill [First Bank of the U.S.] was under discussion
in the House of Representatives [1791], Judge [James] Wilson came in, and was
standing by Baldwin. Baldwin reminded him of the following fact passed in the
grand [1787] convention. Among the enumerated powers given Congress, was

51

52
one to erect corporations. It was, on debate, stuck out. Several particular powers
were then proposed. Among others, Robert Morris proposed to give Congress a
power to establish a national bank. Gouverneur Morris opposed it, observing that
it was extremely doubtful whether the constitution they were framing could ever
be passed at all by the people of America; that to give it its best chance, however,
they should make it as palatable as possible, and put nothing into it not very
essential, which might raise up enemies; that his colleague (Robert Morris) well
knew that ‘a bank’ was, in their State (Pennsylvania) the very watch-word of
party; that a bank had been the great bone of contention between the two parties
of the State…that therefore, to insert this power, would instantly enlist against the
whole instrument, the whole of the anti-banking party in Pennsylvania.
Whereupon it was rejected, as was every other special power, except that of
giving copyrights to authors, and patents to inventors; the general power of
incorporating being whittled down to this shred. Wilson agreed to the fact
(Farrand III, 375-376).
Apparently banks were more controversial than paper money, with the mere
mention of them, even indirectly, threatening the likely ratification of the Constitution.
Perhaps this is why on August 16th Gouverneur Morris used the term “responsible
minister” rather than “Bank of North America” when referring to a paper-money
substitute to federally issued bills of credit (Farrand II, 309).
B. The Post-Convention Constitutional Controversy over Who Can Charter Banks
It appears that the Convention intended not to give, and in a roundabout way
voted against giving, the federal government the power of incorporation, including the
particular power to charter banks. In 1791, however, Congress voted to charter a national
bank—the First Bank of the U.S.—to serve as the federal government’s bank. A sharp
debate and on going controversy ensued over the constitutionality of this act (Holdsworth
17-19). How was this possible given the Convention debate quoted above?
The Constitution’s construction was that any new or enlarged power that went
beyond the Articles of Confederation that was not explicitly enumerated as granted to the
23

federal government was denied it. This construction explains the Constitution’s brevity.

52

53
Except for erecting post offices and post roads, the power of incorporation including the
power to charter banks was not one of the new enumerated powers granted the federal
government. However, the powers explicitly voted by the Convention not to be included
among these enumerated powers, by construction, were not to be written into the
Constitution—thus keeping the Constitution from becoming an overly long and unwieldy
document.
This method of construction, however, opened an interpretive door that Hamilton
and supporters of a national bank rushed through. When a particular power was not
explicitly enumerated, Congress might still possess that power if that power was implied
by other powers that were explicitly enumerated in the Constitution. Hamilton was the
first to articulate this implied-powers doctrine, and it was in reference to the
constitutionality of the First Bank of the U.S. (Rutland XIII, 370-404; Syrett VIII, 62134). This doctrine went on to become a well-known and much-studied doctrine of
interpretation of constitutional law.
This doctrine is derived from the conclusion to Section 8 of Article 1 of the
Constitution that enumerates the powers of Congress. It states that Congress has the
power “To make all Laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into
Execution the foregoing Powers, and all other Powers vested by this Constitution in the
Government of the United States, or in any Department or Officer thereof.” The rather
plain language of this clause belies ascribing much genius to the creation of a “doctrine”
of implied powers. Most anyone at the time could read, understand, and more-or-less
agree on the broad meaning of this clause. For example, the Constitution did not give
Congress the explicit power to create a mint, but it did give it the explicit power to coin

53

54
money. Almost everyone seemed to agree that the power to coin money implied the
power to create a mint in order to coin money. The first Congress’ Congressional Mint
Act was constitutionally uncontroversial. By contrast, Congress’ Constitutional power to
coin money was not construed to imply the power to go into the goldsmith business or
24

charter mining companies.

Hamilton’s use of the implied-powers doctrine to assert that the First Bank of the
U.S. was constitutional can be seen as a rhetorical smoke screen. Hamilton’s foes could
read the implied-powers clause in the Constitution as well as he could. Their
constitutional objection to the First Bank of the U.S. was not over the application or
interpretation of this clause. To repeat: It’s not about implied powers. Implied powers
25

were a necessary but not a sufficient condition.

An explicit vote at the Convention to deny the federal government a particular
power trumps any implied-powers argument for the federal government retaining such a
power under the auspices of some other explicitly granted power. If this were not the
case, then explicitly voting to remove said power from the list of granted powers makes
no sense (assuming the founding fathers were not writing a deceitful Constitution—
ratifying one meaning while intending to execute another). If the Convention had
explicitly voted not to give the federal government the power to charter a national bank,
then that vote would trump any implied-power interpretation of the constitutionality of
the First Bank of the U.S. Hamilton’s own rhetorical position as well as that of Madison
and Gerry (see below) is consistent with this understanding.
Hamilton’s application of the implied-powers doctrine would be irrelevant if it
were known that the Convention had debated and explicitly voted not to give the federal

54

55
government the power to charter a bank. As such, the bank supporters had to argue that
no such debate or explicit vote took place at the Convention. Because no records of what
transpired at the Convention were yet published in 1791, such an argument might—and
did—succeed. This was the real issue over the constitutionality of the bank.
The Convention had been closed to the public. The Convention’s official Journal,
which was not made public until 1819, was in President Washington’s keeping (Farrand
I, xi-xxi; II, 648). The Journal, however, recorded almost nothing on the day in question
(September 14th)—only an 8 to 3 vote against “To grant letters of incorporation for
Canals &ca” (Farrand II, 610-611). The words “&ca” seem to indicate something in
26

addition to canals, but these words were not noted or discussed.

Madison’s notes were

not public, and would not be published until 1840, after Madison’s death. McHenry’s
notes, the only other notes taken that day, would not be published until even later
(Farrand I, xv-xxi).
In 1791 when Congress proposed the bill to charter the First Bank of the U.S.,
Madison argued in Congress that the bill was unconstitutional “because he well
recollected that a power to grant charters of incorporation had been proposed in the
General Convention and rejected” (Farrand III, 362). Madison had proposed that power at
the Convention and so was likely to have been attentive regarding the ensuing debate.
Madison also had his Convention notes to consult. Whether Madison let anyone else see
his notes is unclear. There is no indication by him or from anyone else that he did.
Madison was “regarded by his fellow delegates to the Convention as a semiofficial reporter of their proceedings, for several of them took pains to see that he was
supplied with copies of their speeches and motions” (Farrand I, xvi). Given that the

55

56
Journal failed to record most of the debates, Convention delegates who did not remember
the debates of a given day should have deferred to Madison’s recollection based on his
detailed semi-official notes. Some clearly did. Randolph, who was Attorney General in
1791, as well as Jefferson as Secretary of State, concurred with Madison’s memory
and/or accepted the authority of his recollection. For Madison, Randolph, and Jefferson
there wasn’t much to debate. Implied powers were not enough. The Convention had
explicitly voted not to allow Congress that power, so the First Bank of the U.S. was
unconstitutional. They recommended that President Washington veto the bill as
unconstitutional (Farrand III, 362-363; Rutland XIII, 370-404).
President Washington was at the Convention on September 14th. Either he knew
from his own memory what Madison knew, or he did not rightly remember that day’s
debates. The latter could well be likely. Washington never engaged in the debates at the
Convention and so may have paid little attention to particular debates. Washington did
possess the Convention’s Journal, but this Journal recorded almost nothing on the topic
at hand. But if Washington didn’t remember the debates of that day himself, why did he
not accept Madison’s recollection as definitive since it was based on Madison’s own
semi-official notes? At the Convention, Washington mostly likely watched Madison take
27

these notes every day.

Perhaps Washington’s sympathies were strongly tied to his

fellow officer Hamilton. Perhaps Hamilton and Robert Morris—head of the Bank of
North America and at whose house Washington often dined during the Convention—had
persuaded Washington that a national bank was necessary (Huston; Warren). Perhaps
Washington was predisposed to favor any interpretative opening that would allow him
not to veto the bill.

56

57
With no public record showing that the Convention explicitly voted not to allow
Congress the power of incorporation, the supporters of the bank could ignore Madison’s
statement. Instead, they could claim that no one at the Convention rightly remembered
what happened and that no such debate or vote may have even taken place. Indeed,
Gerry, who favored a national bank, was present at the Convention on September 14th,
but in February of 1791 he disagreed with Madison’s recollection of that day. He said, in
direct reference to Madison’s last quote above, “…are we to depend on the memory of
the gentleman [Madison] for a history of their debates, … This would be improper,
because the memories of different gentlemen would probably vary, … with respect to
those facts; … no motion was made in that Convention, and therefore none could be
rejected for establishing a National Bank; …” (Farrand III, 362-363). This also indicates
that it was unlikely that Madison showed his notes of the Convention to anybody else.
Hamilton made a similar statement later that month when he wrote a defense of
the constitutionality of First Bank of the U.S. in order to give Washington a reason not to
veto the bill,
Another argument…is, the rejection of a proposition by the Convention to
empower Congress to make corporations, either generally, or for some special
purpose.
What was the precise nature or extent of this proposition, or what the
reasons for refusing it, is not ascertained by any authentic document, or even by
accurate recollection. As far as any such document exists, it specifies only canals.
… It must be confessed, however, that very different accounts are given the
import of the proposition, and of the motives for rejecting it. Some affirm that it
was confined to the opening of canals and obstructions in rivers; others, that it
embraced banks; and others, that it extended to the power of incorporating
generally. Some, again, allege that it was disagreed to because it was thought
improper to vest in Congress a power of erecting corporations. Others, because it
was thought unnecessary to specify the power, and inexpedient to furnish an
additional topic of objection to the Constitution. In this state of the matter, no
inference whatever can be drawn from it (Farrand III, 363-364).

57

58
Hamilton makes three interesting references in his argument. First he referred to
no “authentic document” supporting Madison’s recollection. The only “authentic
document” that exists refers only to canals. Hamilton seems to be referring to, and had
consulted, the Convention’s Journal which was at that time in Washington’s keeping.
Hamilton did not consider any other notes from the Convention to be an “authentic
document.” Given that these other Convention notes had not yet been published or
otherwise made available for others, Hamilton could plausibly deny that he was making
an inaccurate assessment.
Second, Hamilton’s rhetoric presumes that an explicit vote at the Convention to
deny the federal government a particular power trumped any implied-powers argument. If
a clear inference could be drawn from an authentic document that the Convention had
voted to deny the federal government a given power, that sealed the fate of that power—it
was absolutely denied to the federal government. If the Convention’s Journal had
recorded the debate as extensively as Madison had recorded it, then by Hamilton’s own
rhetorical structure the bank was most likely unconstitutional. More troubling is
Hamilton’s penultimate sentence quoted above. It seems to imply that the Constitution
offered to the public for ratification may have been intentionally misleading regarding the
monetary powers that he now intended to exercise.
Third, Hamilton asserts in reference to the debates at the Convention on
September 14th that, “…the precise nature or extent of this position…[can] not [be]
ascertained…by accurate recollection.” Why did Hamilton not refer to his own
recollection from that day? His statement suggests that he was not present that day.
Madison records Hamilton as speaking at the Convention on September 12th and then

58

59
next on September 17th, but not between those days. His absence on September 14th
would also be consistent with the fact that if he were there it seems likely that he would
have spoken since national banks had long been an issue of importance to him (Freeman
1040; Syrett II, 400-418). If Hamilton was there and remembered the debate as recorded
by Madison, then he was willingly subverting the Constitution. If Hamilton either did not
remember the debate or was not in attendance, why did he not accept Madison’s
recollection as definitive?

28

Hamilton knew that Madison had taken copious and semi-

official notes of the Convention. Hamilton had himself given Madison a copy of his own
speech to the Convention so that Madison could accurately record it in his notes (Farrand
I, xvi, 282-293; III, 617-630).

29

Washington and Hamilton’s unwillingness to defer to

Madison’s semi-official note-based recollection is consistent with a willingness on their
30

part to subvert the Constitution over the bank issue.

Washington accepted Hamilton’s arguments and did not veto the bank bill
(Holdsworth 19). The nation got a national banknote currency that circulated alongside
the increasing plethora of banknotes issued by state-chartered banks. Perhaps Madison
could have stopped the First Bank of U.S. if he had made his notes of the Convention
public. Why didn’t he? Honor and the pledge to keep Convention deliberations nonpublic may have trumped any desire to stop constitutionally questionable acts (Farrand I,
15; II, 648).
VII. Why Did They Do It?
Before the U.S. Constitution, inside paper money was issued by state and national
legislatures. After the U.S. Constitution, both state and national legislatures were banned
from issuing paper money. Government-chartered, but privately run and largely

59

60
unregulated, banks filled the void. After 1789 the U.S. experienced an increasing plethora
of different banknote paper currencies. Judging by this outcome, the founding fathers did
not intend to constitutionally create a single uniform national paper currency or prevent
states and their banks from competing for seignorage with each other (Grubb 2003, 1782;
Rolnick, Smith, and Weber). And if the founding fathers are assumed not to be stupid, or
ignorant, or inexperienced in monetary matters, if they are assumed not to be fooled by
the difference between binding legal tender laws and paper money emission per se, if
they are assumed not to have confused war with peacetime monetary performance, and if
they are assumed not to have deliberately written a deceitful Constitution—intending to
ratify one meaning but execute another—then many of the explanations offered in the
31

literature and by the delegates themselves are ruled out.

So then, why did they do it?

A. Rent-Seeking Bankers?
Grubb (2003, 2005a) argued that it was the Convention’s banking faction, e.g.
Langdon, Baldwin, King, Hamilton, Gerry, McHenry, the entire Pennsylvania delegation,
and maybe a few others, who wanted an absolute Constitutional ban on the emission of
paper money by both state and national governments so as to constitutionally eliminate
competition with banknotes over what would become the dominant paper medium of
exchange (see also Ferguson 1969; 1983, 402, 404, 409-10; Nettels 85). Banknotes were
having a hard time supplanting government-issued paper money as the paper medium of
exchange. With government-issued paper money constitutionally eliminated, the power
and profitability of these banks, especially of the national banks, such as the Bank of
North America and subsequently the First Bank of the U.S., were substantially
32

increased.

While consistent and plausible, and explaining why the founding fathers

60

61
focused on paper money emission per se at both the national and the state level rather
than just focusing narrowly on the problem of binding legal tender or just on state paper
money, it does not explain the concurrence of those founding fathers with no apparent
banking connections. Unless these other founding fathers were duped or arm-twisted by
the banking faction, something more is needed.
Making the banking-faction argument more pervasive requires additional motives,
such as founding fathers not enamored of national banking or directly involved with state
banks may still have been in favor of local financial control. They may have wanted to
achieve economic development at a more targeted local level than what state-macromoney policies could achieve. This view is consistent with the Convention not restricting
or even debating state power to charter local banks but banning state-issued bills of
credit, and leaving the national government’s power to charter banks, at best, ambiguous.
More research is needed, however, before the strength of this argument can be gauged.
B. Big Tents, Polarization, Insider Speculation, and Income/Debt Redistribution
Schemes?
Perhaps the founding fathers thought that the only way to stop binding legaltender issues of paper money was to ban all emissions of paper money, even non-legal
tender emissions. Certainly much of the Federalist rhetoric cited above conflates paper
money emissions per se with binding legal tender laws or considers the latter to be a
33

consequence of the former.

This is the “big tent” theory of legal proscription, e.g. it is

not enough to ban murder, all the instruments that might be used to murder must also be
banned.

61

62
This explanation seems unlikely. First, the late colonial system had worked well
with only a ban on legal tender paper money and not on all paper money. Second, the
Convention did not ban other instruments that states had in the past made a legal tender.
Third, the founding fathers did not pursue this theory on other, arguably more important,
legal proscriptions put in the Constitution. For example, one of the key reasons for
holding the Convention was to regulate trade between the states. As such, the founding
fathers sought to prohibit states from taxing imports from, and exports to, other states.
However, contrary to the “big tent” theory of Constitutional prescript, they allowed states
to tax such imports and exports to support the execution of state-inspection laws (Farrand
II, 605, 657), thus opening the door for states to erect cost wedges between products
traded intra- versus inter-state, some of which were substantial (McCurdy). Finally, under
this theory the founding fathers should have also banned banknotes or at least banned
their acceptance as a legal tender. However, they did not do so. And Hamilton, as
Secretary of the Treasury, simply declared that the notes of many banks were specie and
therefore acceptable as legal-tender-like payments to the federal government (Syrett V,
394, 532-533; VI, 386-388; IX, 489).
After the Revolution, legislative polarization and civil unrest in many states, e.g.
in Rhode Island, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, Maryland, New Hampshire, and Virginia,
had been linked by Federalist rhetoric to the popular rage for paper money (Farrand I, II;
Grubb 2003, 1781; Holton 2004, 2005a, 2005b). If a goal of the Constitution was to
eliminate polarizing political disputes within states, then banning state paper money
rather than just restricting its legal tender status might make sense. If such were the case,
why constitutionally ban federally issued paper money? In addition, under such a

62

63
motivation the Constitution should have also banned banks, or have replicated something
like the British Bubble Act as applied to the colonies in 1741. State banking laws were as
much a source of political commotion as were paper money emissions. No other
controversial state legislative issue was singled out for Constitutional proscription.
A popular explanation for why the Convention banned paper money per se has
been that delegates held public securities and feared that they would not be redeemed at
face value (in specie) if governments could issue paper money (Beard 178-188; Ferguson
1969; 1983; Holton 2004; McDonald 89-110; McGuire 72-74). This idea is also
consistent with Morris’ argument that the federal government should have the power to
tax exports and so have direct access to tax revenue paid in specie. What scholars have
missed in this debate is that this issue is only about binding legal tender laws and not
about paper money emissions per se. If the Convention had simply banned paper money
from being made a legal tender, securities denominated in specie would be protected
against being paid off in depreciated paper money. Governments issuing paper money
would have to pay their specie-denominated debts at the market exchange rate for their
paper money. Creditors would incur no losses. Thus, efforts to link security holdings by
Convention delegates with votes at the Convention for banning paper money may miss
the mark.
The part of this public-securities argument that can be salvaged involves
government securities denominated in that government’s paper money. For such
securities, governments could pay them off with newly issued paper money, even if that
money was not a legal tender, because it was what was explicitly contracted. Security
holders would receive the face value of the debt, though that value may have depreciated

63

64
substantially from what it was at the time of contracting. This (unanticipated) inflation
risk, however, was what any security holder faced no matter what monetary unit they
contracted in—even specie. Market expectations governed price adjustments of said
securities at the time of contracting. The gains or losses due to deflation or inflation
would only be residual unanticipated luck. However, if governments were banned from
issuing paper money then they would have to pay off their non-specie denominated
securities in specie—the only money available. Because the courts would likely uphold
contract “nominalism,” this created the potential for speculative gains by Convention
delegates and their confidants (Holton 2004; Priest). With the Convention deliberations
kept secret, delegates would have superior information that soon governments would
have to pay off their non-specie-denominated securities at par in specie. They would have
had a head start on the market and could buy up government securities at their current
discounted prices, knowing that the securities would appreciate in the near term. This
motive would not show up as contemporaneous correlations between delegate security
holding and Convention votes because such a speculative scheme had not yet been
executed. Given that few government securities were denominated in that government’s
paper money, this motive seems unlikely.
Another explanation for why the founding fathers banned paper money is that
government-issued non-specie backed paper money could be a tool of income
redistribution. Independent of legal tender issues, income could be redistributed from
creditors to debtors through altering values within non-specie denominated contracts via
unanticipated inflationary issues of paper money. However, issuing depreciating state
paper money was a clumsy redistribution scheme, and the founding fathers left intact

64

65
other state powers that could be used to redistribute income that were more efficient at
targeting benefits and easier to implement than paper money schemes (Nettels 85-86). At
the Convention, Morris seemed to recognize that there were myriad ways of
redistributing income via state laws that affected private contracts, and seemed not to care
about these intra-state political machinations leading to mischievous income
redistribution schemes (see Section V. B. above). Madison voiced a similar assessment
when explaining the new Constitution to Jefferson in a letter written October 24, 1787—a
month after the Convention had closed:
The mutability of the laws of the States is found to be a serious evil. The injustice
of them has been so frequent and so flagrant as to alarm the most steadfast friends
of Republicanism. … The restraints agst. paper emissions, and violations of
contracts are not sufficient. Supposing them to be effectual as far as they go, they
are short of the mark. Injustice may be effected by such an infinitude of
legislative expedients, that where the disposition exists it can only be controuled
by some provision which reaches all cases whatsoever. The partial provision
made, supposes the disposition which will evade it (Rutland X, 212).
C. Creating a Specie Reservoir in Society for the Merchant Community Involved in
International Trade?
Finally, a new reason will be offered here. While not all Convention delegates
were directly connected to the nascent banking movement or holders of large amounts of
public securities, most were connected in some way with the nation’s international
trading community (Beard; Bradford; McDonald; McGuire 51-54). Access to outside
money, namely specie, was critical to the functioning of this trade. In general, specie
flowed in from the trade surpluses with the Caribbean and flowed out with the trade
deficits with Europe. With trade having to balance over the long run, specie would
typically be available and the presence of a non-legal-tender tax-backed inside paper
money would not threaten access to specie. The paper money that merchants received

65

66
from local citizens in payment for goods, if not used to pay local taxes, could always be
exchanged at the market-determined rates for specie when needed to meet outside
payments. However, trade was not always balanced in the short run. Sometimes more
specie flowed in than out, and at other times more flowed out than in. The former caused
no merchant outside-payment problem. However, when more specie flowed out than in,
merchants became desperate to find specie so as not to default on their outside-money
contractual commitments—as the 1782-1789 recession made evident.
This problem could be solved if the merchant community could secure a reservoir
of specie that could be tapped in times of short-run shortfalls in specie inflows and then
filled back up again in times of short-run excess specie inflows. This was the idea behind
the nascent merchant banks being developed at the time—having a “bank” of specie. If
merchants dealing with international trade pooled their specie as deposits in said bank,
then temporary short-run excesses and shortfalls in specie flows caused by the exigencies
of trade could be smoothed across individuals within the community via intra-community
short-term borrowing and lending. However, this could not stop large macro-trade shock
from causing specie shortfalls and price depressions community wide, such as happened
when Britain closed its Caribbean trade to the Americans shortly after 1783 (Bezanson
1951; Holton 2004; Rappaport).
The international-trading merchant community could secure a broader reservoir of
specie in society at large from which they could draw in times of short-run shortfalls in
specie inflows, if they could force the mass of citizens who were not directly engaged in
international trade to nevertheless hold and use specie as their primary medium of
exchange. They could only achieve this if they eliminated all non-specie-backed inside

66

67
34

paper money.

This meant eliminating the tax-backed paper money issued both by the

states and by the federal government; in other words, constitutionally all money was
either made outside money (specie) or was backed by outside money (banknotes) that
were convertible into specie on demand. This is what the founding fathers got
constitutionally, so maybe it was their overriding intent. This constitutionally
manufactured revolution in governmental monetary powers was not about securing
general monetary stability, but about securing narrower special interests (Grubb 2003;
2005a; McGuire).
In the end, society at large paid for serving as this specie reservoir. Given the
exigencies of trade, during periods of short-run excess specie inflows, the public
experienced credit expansion and suffered inflationary price rises and investment
overextension. Then during periods of short-run shortfalls in specie inflows (relative to
outflows), the public experienced credit contraction, money scarcity, and arguably the
more costly effects of bankruptcies, deflation, and investment retrenchment. Banks,
functioning as a money multiplier in this process, may have structurally amplified this
short-run or cyclical pain inflicted on the public for being the merchant community’s
specie reservoir. An inside government-issued tax-backed paper money not directly
linked to specie would likely have insulated and dampened the effects of international
35

trade-flow specie shocks on the public.

Luther Martin (and in an odd way Gouvernuer

Morris) probably saw the issue correctly (Farrand II, 307; III, 214-215).
VIII. Epilogue
Today the U.S. has the same written Constitution in terms of monetary powers
that the founding fathers created in 1787. Yet we have a national paper money that is

67

68
backed not by specie but only by federal government taxes, or the good faith and credit of
the federal government—a government that also has power to institute price and
exchange rate controls on said currency (Rockoff). This paper money is also a legal
tender, with the legal tender clause “This note is legal tender for all debts, public and
private” printed on each note. It is issued by the Federal Reserve Banking system that,
while only a quasi-government agency in the strict legal sense, is about as close to a
national banking system incorporated by the federal government as one can get. Unless
we take the original intent of the founding fathers in their debates and votes at the 1787
Convention on monetary/banking powers to be a devious ruse, then it is hard not to
conclude that we have strayed far away from what they tried to prohibit
36

constitutionally.

68

69
REFERENCES
Adams, Randolph G., ed., Selected Political Essays of James Wilson. New York: Alfred
A. Knopf, 1930.
Baack, Ben, “Forging a Nation State: The Continental Congress and the Financing of the
War of American Independence.” Economic History Review 54(4), Nov. 2002, pp. 639656.
Beard, Charles A., An Economic Interpretation of the Constitution of the United States.
New York: The Free Press, 1986.
Behrens, Kathryn L., “Paper Money in Maryland 1727-1789.” Johns Hopkins University
Studies in Historical and Political Science 41(1), 1923, pp. 9-98.
Bezanson, Anne, et al., Wholesale Prices in Philadelphia, 1784-1861. Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press, 1936.
Bezanson, Anne, Prices and Inflation during the American Revolution: Pennsylvania,
1770-1790. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1951.
Bishop, Hillman Metcalf, “Why Rhode Island Opposed the Federal Constitution.” Rhode
Island History 8(1), Jan. 1949, pp. 1-10; 8(2), Apr. 1949, pp. 33-44; 8(3), Jul. 1949, pp.
85-95; 8(4) Oct. 1949, pp. 115-126.
Bradford, M. E., Founding Fathers: Brief Lives of the Framers of the United States.
Lawrence, KS: University of Kansas Press, 2nd Edn., 1994.
Brock, Leslie V., The Currency of the American Colonies, 1700-1764. New York: Arno
Press, 1975.
Bordo, Michael D., and Ivan A. Marcotte, “Purchasing Power Parity in Colonial
America: Some Evidence for South Carolina 1732-1774.” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy 27, Autumn 1987, pp. 311-324.
Bouton, Terry, “Tying Up the Revolution: Money, Power, and the Regulation in
Pennsylvania, 1765-1800.” Unpublished PhD Dissertation, Duke University, 1996.
Bryan, Alfred Cookman, “History of State Banking in Maryland.” Johns Hopkins
University Studies in Historical and Political Science 17(1-3), 1899, pp. 1-144.
Calomiris, Charlie W., “Institutional Failure, Monetary Scarcity, and the Depreciation of
the Continental.” Journal of Economic History 48(1), Mar. 1988, pp. 47-68.
Cole, Arthur Harrison, Wholesale Commodity Prices in the United States, 1700-1861.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1938.

69

70

Elliot, Jonathan, ed., The Debates in the State Conventions on the Adoption of the
Federal Constitution as Recommended by the General Convention at Philadelphia in
1787. Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott Co., 1836.
Farrand, Max. ed., The Records of the Federal Convention of 1787. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press, Vols. 1-4, 1966.
Feldstein, Martin, ed., Economic and Financial Crises in Emerging Market Economies.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003.
Ferguson, E. James, “The Nationalists of 1781-1783 and the Economic Interpretation of
the Constitution.” Journal of American History 56(2), Sept. 1969, pp. 241-261.
Ferguson, E. James, “Political Economy, Public Liberty, and the Formation of the
Constitution.” William and Mary Quarterly 3rd Ser., 40(3), July 1983, pp. 389-412.
Freeman, Joanne B., ed., Alexander Hamilton: Writings. New York: The Library of
America, 2001.
Gras, N. S. B., The Massachusetts First National Bank of Boston, 1784-1934. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 1937.
Grubb, Farley, “Creating the U.S. Dollar Currency Union, 1748-1811: A Quest for
Monetary Stability or a Usurpation of State Sovereignty for Personal Gain?” American
Economic Review 93(5), Dec. 2003, pp. 1778-1798.
Grubb, Farley, “The Circulating Medium of Exchange in Colonial Pennsylvania, 17291775: New Estimates of Monetary Composition, Performance, and Economic Growth.”
Explorations in Economic History 41(4), Oct. 2004, pp. 329-360.
Grubb, Farley, “The Constitutional Creation of a Common Currency in the U.S., 17481811: Monetary Stabilization versus Merchant Rent Seeking,” in Jurgen Nautz and Lars
Jonung, eds., Conflict Potentials in Monetary Unions. [Beihefte der Vierteljahrshefte fur
Sozial-und Wirtschaftsgeschichte]. (Stuttgart: Steiner Verlag, 2005a, forthcoming.
Grubb, Farley, “Testing for the Economic Impact of the U.S. Constitution: Purchasing
Power Parity across Six British Colonies Versus across the Same Six U.S. States, 17481811.” Unpublished working paper, Economics Dept., University of Delaware, 2005b.
Holdsworth, John Thom, The First Bank of the United States. [Senate Document No. 571,
61st Congress, 2nd Session] Philadelphia: National Monetary Commission, 1910.
Holton, Woody, “’From the Labours of Others’: The War Bonds Controversy and the
Origins of the Constitution in New England.” William and Mary Quarterly 61(2), Apr.
2004, pp. 271-316.

70

71

Holton, Woody, “’Divide et Impera’: Federalist 10 in Wider Sphere.” William and Mary
Quarterly 62(2), Apr. 2005a, pp. 175-212.
Holton, Woody, “Did the Constitution Save the Economy?” Journal of American History
42, 2005b, forthcoming.
Hutson, James H., ed., Supplement to Max Farrand’s The Records of the Federal
Convention of 1787. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1987.
Jensen, Merrill, ed., The Documentary History of the Ratification of the Constitution.
Madison, WI: State Historical Society of Wisconsin, Vols. 1-3, 1976-1978.
Lewis, Lawrence, Jr., A History of the Bank of North America. Philadelphia: J. B.
Lippincott, 1882.
Main, Jackson Turner, The Antifederalists: Critics of the Constitution, 1781-1788. New
York: W.W. Norton, 1961.
McCurdy, Charles W., “American Law and the Marketing Structure of the Large
Corporation, 1875-1890.” Journal of Economic History 38(3), Sept. 1978, pp. 631-649.
McCusker, John J., Money and Exchange in Europe and America, 1600-1775. Chapel
Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 1978.
McDonald, Forrest, We the People: The Economic Origins of the Constitution. New
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 1992.
McGuire, Robert A., To Form a More Perfect Union: A New Economic Interpretation of
the United States Constitution. New York: Oxford University Press, 2003.
Meigs, William M., The Growth of the Constitution in the Federal Convention of 1787.
Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott, 1900.
Muhlenman, Maurice, Monetary Systems of the World. New York: Charles H. Nicoll
Publisher, 1895.
Nettels, Curtis P., The Emergence of a National Economy, 1775-1815. New York:
Harper & Row, 1962.
Nevins, Allan, The American States During and After the Revolution, 1775-1789. New
York: Macmillan Co., 1924.
New Jersey Gazette, Jan. 30, 1786.

71

72
Philoeunomos [Sherman, Roger], A Caveat Against Injustice or an Enquiry into the Evil
Consequences of a Fluctuating Medium of Exchange, Wherein is Considered, Whether
the Bills of Credit on the Neighbouring Governments, are a Legal Tender in Payments of
Money. New York: Printed by Henry De Forrest, 1752.
Pennsylvania Archives, 8th Series, Vol. 4, 1931.
Pennsylvania Herald and General Advertiser, July 14, 21, and 25 of 1787.
Perkins, Edwin J., American Public Finance and Financial Services, 1700-1815.
Columbus, OH: Ohio State University Press, 1994.
Pickering, Danby, The Statues at Large from the Magna Charta to the End of the
Eleventh Parliament of Great Britain, Anno 1761. Cambridge, UK: J. Bentham, Vol. 20,
1765.
Priest, Claire, “Currency Policies and Legal Development in Colonial New England.”
The Yale Law Journal 110(8), June 2001, pp. 1303-1405.
[Randolph, Peyton], A Letter to a Gentleman in London from Virginia. Williamsburg,
VA: Printed by William Hunter, 1759.
Rappaport, George David, Stability and Change in Revolutionary Pennsylvania.
University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1996.
Redish, Angela, “Why Was Specie Scarce in Colonial Economies? An Analysis of the
Canadian
Currency, 1796-1830.” Journal of Economic History 44(3), Sept. 1984, pp. 713-728.
Rockoff, Hugh, Drastic Measures: A History of Wage and Price Controls in the United
States. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1984.
Rolnick, Arthur J., Smith, Bruce D., and Weber, Warren E., “In Order to Form a More
Perfect Monetary Union.” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 17(4),
Fall 1993, pp. 2-9.
Rutland, Robert A., ed., Papers of George Mason. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North
Carolina Press, Vol. 2, 1970.
Rutland, Robert A., ed., Papers of James Madison. Charlottesville, VA: University Press
of Virginia, Vols. 8-14, 1973-1983.
Schweitzer, Mary M., “State-Issued Currency and the Ratification of the U.S.
Constitution.” Journal of Economic History 49(2), June 1989, pp. 311-322.

72

73
Smith, Bruce, “Some Colonial Evidence on Two Theories of Money: Maryland and the
Carolinas.” Journal of Political Economy 93(6), Dec. 1985, pp. 1178-1211.
Smith, James Morton, ed., The Republic of Letters: The Correspondence Between
Thomas Jefferson and James Madison, 1776-1826. New York: W. W. Norton, Vol. 1,
1995.
Smyth, Albert H., ed., The Writings of Benjamin Franklin. New York: Macmillan Co.,
Vol. 9, 1907.
Syrett, Harold C., ed., Papers of Alexander Hamilton. New York: Columbia University
Press, Vols. 2-10, 1961-1966.
Warren, Charles, The Making of the Constitution. Littleton, CO: Fred B. Rothman, 1993.
Webster, Pelatiah, Political Essays. New York: Burt Franklin, 1969 [originally 1791].
Wilson, Janet, “The Bank of North America and Pennsylvania Politics: 1781-1787.”
Pennsylvania Magazine of History and Biography 66(1), Jan. 1942, pp. 3-28.

73

74
FOOTNOTES
1

From May 28th through September 17th the delegates met every day except Sundays.

There was a brief adjournment on the 4th of July, from July 27th through August 5th
while the Committee of Detail crafted a draft constitution, and on September 11th while
the Committee on Style polished the draft (Farrand I, II). Not all States or delegates
attended continuously, see Farrand (III, 557-559, 586-590).
2

The “inside” versus “outside” money distinction is important. Outside money

(specie) is that used to clear international (trans-government-jurisdictional) debts for both
private and public trades. For a nation that did not produce specie, such as the U.S. in
1787, to have its money supply be only outside money meant that specie had to be
imported to serve as the domestic money supply, which only could be done by exporting
goods to import this money, thus sacrificing the importation of other real goods. It also
meant that the government had little direct influence over domestic monetary policy
(other than regulatory powers over foreign trade), and that the economy was exposed to
short-run swings in the availability of money (specie) caused by the exigencies of trade
flows, wars, etc. These short-run swings could put severe pressure on domestic
transactions, debt recovery, and tax revenues. The gain from using only outside money
was that, in the long run, international markets would equilibrate. Specie would flow
from where it was plentiful to where it was scarce, leading to a common long-run
stability in price trends internationally (Redish 713-714). Long-run domestic inflation
would be constrained to be similar to long-run inflation in the outside money
internationally. By contrast, when an inside money (not directly linked to specie) is used
in place of outside money for purely domestic transactions, debt recovery, and tax

74

75

payments, it frees the outside money to buy imported real goods thus increasing social
welfare (Pennsylvania Archives IV, 3284). It also increases the income (seignorage) of
the government issuing the inside money—a non-inflationary substitute for direct tax
revenue. The government would pay for goods with the initial issue of the inside money
that would then circulate in society as currency, and/or loan out said money at interest to
its citizens. Issuing an inside money also gave the government a short-run monetary
policy instrument to counter swings in economic activity caused by the exigencies of
trade flows, wars, and other international disruptions to the outside money supply. The
government could issue more inside money than it taxed out of circulation or vice versa
to counterbalance short-run swings in the availability of outside money (Ferguson 1983,
399-400; Grubb 2003, 1780, 1792). Having an inside money also insulated purely
domestic transactions, debt recovery, and tax payments from money scarcity caused by
excessive short-run specie outflows due to short-run imbalances in trade flows. The
market exchange rate between the inside and outside money, and thus the international
merchant trading community as opposed to the whole society, would be forced to absorb
the brunt of monetary shocks generated by the short-run imbalance in specie flows
caused by the exigencies of trade, wars, etc. When only outside money is used, these
short-run shocks are borne by the entire society and sometimes disproportionately by
purely domestic traders. The cost of using an inside money is the temptation to engage in
unanticipated inflationary finance by over-issuing it, thus inflating prices in the inside
money faster than prices in the outside money and so (unexpectedly) driving the
exchange rate between inside and outside money down. The typical causes are popular
politics—promising more government services than the people are willing to pay for with

75

76

taxes—and emergency expenditures such as during wars. The exchange rate between
inside and outside money is the disciplining tool to restrain governments from excess
inflationary finance. The legal tender issue (discussed later) becomes economically
important when governments try to escape this discipline by legally mandating the
exchange rate between the inside and outside money to be different from that determined
by the market. For an up-to-date discussion for contemporary economies, see Feldstein
(1-92).
3

The only enumerated monetary power given Congress by the U.S. Constitution was

the power to “coin money, regulate the value thereof, and of foreign coin” [Article 1
Section 8]. Congress could declare what its official monetary unit of account would be, as
it did in July of 1785—well before the Constitutional Convention—when it declared the
dollar to be the official unit of account for the national government. But Congress could
not constitutionally force others engaged either in private or state transactions to use a
specific monetary unit of account. State-chartered banks could have issued their
banknotes in monetary units other than U.S. dollars. The Constitution’s prohibition on
states issuing bills of credit and making anything other than gold and silver a legal tender
would not necessarily force a common monetary unit of account on the country for it
allowed any specie unit of account to be used in legal tender transactions. While the
national government did mint U.S. dollar coins after 1792, foreign coins of various
denominations—Spanish silver dollars, Spanish gold pistoles, Portuguese Johannes,
English silver shillings, etc.—remained in circulation for some time, and nothing legally
stopped people from selecting any of these other foreign specie denominations as a
monetary unit of account. Even regarding the legal tender that the Federal Government

76

77

would accept there was no necessary or legally forced common unit of account in the
early Republic. Congress by act of February 9, 1793 made the gold coins of Great
Britain, France, Spain, and Portugal and the silver coins of France and Spain a legal
tender. This act was frequently renewed, e.g. in 1798, 1806, 1819, 1821, 1823, 1834, and
1843. Not until the act of February 21, 1857 did Congress repeal all laws making foreign
coins a legal tender in the United States (Muhleman 39).
4

A common error repeated often in the literature is the claim that the Convention

intentionally crafted a Constitution where Congress was allowed the power to emit bills
of credit. For example, see Baack (653); Ferguson (1969, 254, 258); Nettels (98-99);
Rolnick, Smith, and Weber (3); Schweitzer (311). The analysis here, if nothing else, is a
valuable corrective in showing that under almost any logically consistent and coherent
interpretation such a claim cannot be easily sustained. See also footnote 23.
5

I will rely primarily on Convention records and supporting documents as compiled in

Farrand (I, II, III), and on his interpretation of those records and documents. The most
detailed records of the debates at the Convention are the notes taken by James Madison.
These “…have remained the standard authority for the proceedings of the Convention”
(Farrand I, xvi). As such, unless otherwise indicated, quotations of Convention debates
are taken from Madison’s notes. At the Convention, votes on motions were recorded by
state, not by individual delegate. Thus, when votes are reported in the text, e.g. 8 to 3
against, they refer to the number of states on either side of the issue.
6

Hamilton’s argument here is basically the same as that made by Charles Pinckney at

the opening of the Convention that initially found its way into an early draft of the

77

78

Constitution made by the Committee of Detail—only to be abandoned for more radical
proscriptions, see Section II. B., and Section IV. below.
7

On May 29th while taking notes on Randolph’s speech James McHenry of Maryland

jotted down, “Congress ought to possess a power to prevent emissions of bills of credit”
(Farrand I, 26). Was McHenry quoting Randolph’s speech or was this phrase simply
McHenry’s own sentiment expressed in his notes? The evidence strongly points against
the former and in favor of the latter interpretation. First, this phrase, or anything like it,
does not appear in the Convention’s Journal or in the notes taken by Madison, or by
Robert Yates (New York), or by William Patterson (New Jersey) for that day. Second,
the phrase in question, or anything like it, does not appear in Randolph’s own text of the
speech. Randolph provided the written text of his speech to Madison who substituted it in
place of his notes on the speech (appearing in Randolph’s handwriting in Madison’s
notes of the Convention for that day). Third, the phrase in question was jotted down by
McHenry in an odd location, namely in the section where Randolph was talking about
blessings that the National Congress could bestow on the union if only it was given its
own power of taxation (as opposed to appearing in the section which addressed the
disharmony and conflict among the States). Thus, one possible interpretation of
McHenry’s phrasing is that, given its own power to tax, Congress would not have to
resort to emissions of paper money as it did during the Revolution. In other words,
McHenry simply deduced that Congress ought to possess the power to tax that in turn
would mean that they would possess the power to prevent themselves from engaging in
emissions of bills of credit. Finally, McHenry’s notes for other days frequently contain
his own assessments and views in addition to recording some of the day’s discussions

78

79

among the delegates. Thus, another likely interpretation would be that the phrase in
question was an expression of McHenry’s own personal desires. McHenry had recently
sponsored a bill in the Maryland State Senate for establishing a bank. The Maryland
House of Delegates had repeatedly blocked this bill. In its place the Maryland House of
Delegates had passed a bill for a new emission of Maryland State paper money. In turn,
the Maryland Senate had repeatedly blocked this paper money bill. McHenry may have
seen a national congressional power to ban state paper money as the solution to this
stalemate between the banking faction and the state paper-money faction that would
allow his banking bill to succeed. See Bryan (17-19); Behrens (79-97); Grubb (2003,
1788-1789).
8

It should be noted that the New York State Assembly debated the same issue early in

1787 regarding how the states would pay for Congress’ proposed Continental Impost
(national tariff). If each state could pay the national government in its respective paper
money at the face value of that money in specie, rather than at its market value in specie,
then specie-value inequities in tax contributions would occur between states to the extent
that state paper monies traded at different market values off their face value in specie. For
example, in his address to the New York Assembly in February of 1787 Alexander
Hamilton argued, “The paper money of the state of New-York, in most transactions is
equal to gold and silver—that of Rhode-Island is depreciated to five for one—that of
North-Carolina to two for one—that of South-Carolina may perhaps be worth fifteen
shillings in the pound. If the states pay the duties in paper [at their face value and not
their market value], is it not evident that for every pound of that duty consumed by the
citizen of New-York he would pay 20s. [shillings] while the citizen of South-Carolina

79

80

would pay 15s. [shillings] of North-Carolina, 10s [shillings] and Rhode-Island, only four
[shillings]!” (Syrett IV, 87). The source of Hamilton’s problem was binding legal tender
laws and not the emission of paper money per se.
9

On June 2nd during the debate over how to elect the national executive, Elbridge

Gerry of Massachusetts also opined that “he thought the Community not yet ripe for
stripping the States of their powers, even such as might not be requisite for local
purposes” (Farrand I, 80).
10

Randolph’s opening speech on May 29th only referred to the “havoc of paper

money.” As such, it may have only been referring to the debacle of the national
government’s paper Continental dollar.
11

Hamilton’s notes for June 6th also mention paper money. His notes, however, are

cryptic and lacking in context, and so their meaning is hard to interpret. He wrote, “Paper
money is capable of giving a general impulse. It is easy to conceive a popular sentiment
pervading the E states—” (Farrand I, 146-147).
12

Among Sherman’s papers is a document outlining proposals for a plan of

government which includes the following: “That the legislature of the individual states
ought not to possess a right to emit bills of credit for a currency, or to make any tender
laws for the payment or discharge of debts or contracts, in any manner different from the
agreement of the parties, unless for payment of the value of the thing contracted for, in
current money, agreeable to the standard that shall be allowed by the legislature of the
United States, or in any manner to obstruct or impede the recovery of debts, whereby the
interests of foreigners, or the citizens of any other states, may be affected” (Farrand III,
616). When this plan was written and to whom it was shown is difficult to determine. No
80

81

specific reference to it appears in the Convention debates. Farrand (III, 615) suggests that
it represented the ideas of the Connecticut delegation in forming the New Jersey Plan.
However, nothing like the above passage appears in the New Jersey Plan, and it was not
among the documents referred to the Committee on Detail on July 26th.
13

The reference here is to the paper money emitted by Rhode Island in 1786. A major

complaint against this action by out-of-state creditors came when Rhode Island made this
paper money a legal tender, because it meant that out-of-state creditors would have to
accept Rhode Island paper money for payment of loans made within Rhode Island. The
retaliation of which Madison speaks were laws passed by the Connecticut and
Massachusetts legislatures that allowed their citizens, respectively, who owed debts to
Rhode Island creditors to pay their debts in Rhode Island in Rhode Island paper money
(Grubb 2003, 1782).
14

Hamilton made almost the same confession in 1790 as Secretary of the Treasury in

his Report on a National Bank in reference to the peacetime stability of state-issued paper
money. He said, “The emitting of paper money by the authority of Government is wisely
prohibited to the individual States, by the National Constitution. … In times of
tranquility, it [state-issued paper money] might have no ill consequences, it might even
perhaps be managed in a way to be productive of good; but in great and trying
emergencies, there is almost a moral certainty of it becoming mischievous” (Freeman
591-592).
15

Luther Martin, Convention delegate from Maryland, made similar observations

(Farrand III, 214-215).

81

82

16

See also footnote 4 above and footnote 25 below. McHenry’s notes for this day

corroborate the Convention’s decision to strike the words “and emit bills” from the
powers granted to the federal government (Farrand II, 311). Shortly after the Convention,
at the South Carolina ratification debate, Pinckney said, “Besides, if paper should become
necessary, the general government still possess the power of emitting it, and Continental
paper, well funded, must ever answer the purpose better than state paper” (Elliot 335).
While Pinckney did not speak on the day (August 16th) when the Convention voted to
ban the national government from emitting bills of credit, he did speak on August 15th
and again on August 17th and is thought to have been present on August 16th. And South
Carolina was recorded as voting for this ban on August 16th (Farrand II, 298, 304-310,
314; III, 589-590). Whether Pinckney had forgotten or was strategically lying is hard to
say. Pinckney’s claim also illustrates the key problem with the Constitution’s
construction that would prove so controversial regarding a national bank (see Section VI.
B.). Powers explicitly voted not to be given the national government were not written in
the Constitution.
17

Absolutely prohibiting government-issued paper money in the Constitution was

considered a high-risk, all-or-nothing, less-than-popular move. Those who most
advocated it, such as Morris and Wilson, while not directly connecting it with the issue of
how to get the Constitution ratified, took a position on ratification seemingly consistent
with this high-risk strategy. For example, Wilson argued for approval of only 7 out of the
13 states for the new Constitution to be adopted and put into operation in place of the
Articles of Confederation. Considering that 6 of the 13 states had so far won the political
battle within their respective states against issuing paper money after the Revolution, and

82

83

that anti-paper money forces had recently gained control of Pennsylvania’s political
process, the number that Wilson advocated to achieve ratification is telling (Farrand II,
468, 477, 562; Grubb 2003, 1790).
18

Gouverneur Morris could have meant something like the personal notes issued by

Robert Morris during the Revolution as Congress’ Superintendent of Finance. Given the
close relationship between these notes and those soon issued by Robert Morris’ Bank of
North America, the distinction is probably minor (Perkins 115-116). It is hard to conclude
that Morris meant any other than the Bank of North America here by the term
“responsible minister.” The only approximate national paper currency being issued
between 1782 and 1787 were the banknotes of Morris’ Bank of North America.
19

In a footnote to his notes on the Convention written sometime after the War of 1812

Madison explained Virginia’s affirmative vote for Morris’ motion to delete “and emit
bills on the credit of the United States” despite the objections raised by the Virginia
delegates Randolph, Mason, and himself, as “This vote in the affirmative by Virga. Was
occasioned by the acquiescence of Mr. Madison who became satisfied that striking out
the words would not disable the Govt from the use of public notes as far as they could be
safe & proper; & would only cut off the pretext for a paper currency and particularly for
making the bills a tender either for public or private debts” (Farrand I, xv-xix; II, 310).
This explanation may be a hindsight effort by Madison to cover himself for the problems
he and the national government faced during his presidency in financing the War of 1812
given no constitutional power to emit bills of credit and given that the charter of the First
Bank of the U.S. had lapsed in 1811 (Perkins 324-348).

83

84

20

On August 28th Pinckney moved again to add the power to the national legislature to

negate all state laws interfering with the harmony of the union. This power had already
been defeated by the Convention on July 17th and would not be adopted at this time
either (Farrand II, 27-28, 382, 390-392). Because the draft constitution submitted by the
Committee of Detail already explicitly gave the national legislature the power to negate
state emissions of paper money, giving the national legislature a general negative over
state laws is not relevant to the issue of monetary powers here as it was before August
6th. But Pinckney’s move here does indicate that the prior demand for a general negative
over state laws was not just a disguised demand for a negative over state-issued paper
money.
21

An interesting question is whether the order of the vote mattered to the outcome in

an agenda control interpretation. The vote on whether to absolutely prohibit state bills of
credit was taken first and then the vote on whether to prohibit making anything but gold
and silver legal tender was taken second. Given some doubt about the outcome of the
second vote, a delegate may have been induced to vote in favor of absolute prohibition on
the first vote. By contrast, had the second vote been taken first with the same outcome so
that all the delegates knew that states could not make their paper money a legal tender,
then the outcome of the (now) second vote on whether to absolutely prohibit state bills of
credit might have been different, in effect being only a vote over allowing a non-legal
tender paper money as opposed to the original vote which was over allowing paper
money in general.
22

During the South Carolina’s ratification debate, Pinckney argued (Elliot 333-336),

“This section [Articles 1, Section 10 restricting State sovereignty] I consider to be the
84

85

soul of the Constitution,… The only parts of this section that are objected to are those
which relate to the emission of paper money, and its consequence, tender-laws, and the
impairing the obligation of contract.” He then goes on for several pages defending the
Constitution’s absolute ban on state paper money. Apparently, Pinckney expected the
strongest opposition to ratification to come from this single clause. During the ratification
debates, Martin objected strenuously to the absolute ban on state paper money, claiming
that it was because the Convention was “…smitten with the paper money dread,…”
Martin “considered that this State [Maryland], and some others, had formerly received
great benefit from paper emissions,…[that] such emissions might hereafter be equally
advantageous; and further, that it is impossible to foresee, that events may not take place,
which shall render paper money of absolute necessity…” (Farrand III, 214-215). Finally,
Main (1961, pp. 268-279) argued that many Americans, maybe even a majority, were on
the side of paper money and unhappy with the Constitution over absolutely banning its
emission (see also Holton 2005a, 198):
This thesis….stressed the correlation between Antifederalism and paper money…
This interpretation has much truth. … It is also true…that paper money was a
factor in the [ratification] contest. In Massachusetts, towns opposing paper were
Federal by about four to one, while pro-paper money towns were Antifederal by
an even wider margin. [footnote 58: Pro-paper money towns cast only 3 votes for
and 22 votes against ratification; anti-paper money towns favored ratification 29
to 7.] The hard (or less soft) money towns in New Hampshire were Federal; most
of the Antifederal strength in Connecticut was found in paper money districts; and
the case of Rhode Island is sufficiently familiar. … In Maryland and Virginia the
paper money forces opposed ratification. This was also the case in North
Carolina, while in South Carolina, Antifederal strength lay in the backcountry,
which had favored inflation. … All the foregoing does not prove an exact
correlation… There are…exceptions… Leaving aside the fact that many
Antifederalist, especially the leaders, specifically denounced state currency
emissions, we have to consider the following exceptions: (1) in South Carolina, a
large number of planters, most of whom became Federalist, supported paper
emission; … (4) New Jersey endorsed both paper money and the Constitution; (5)

85

86

in Pennsylvania, although it is probable that a majority of the people were
Federal, a majority favored paper money… That paper money sentiment was in
some degree a factor in the existence of Antifederalism is scarcely to be
doubted—the Antifederalists drew more heavily by far than their opponents from
the ranks of paper money advocates…
23

This interpretation was restated explicitly in the 10th Amendment to the Constitution

adopted in 1791. By contrast, and in direct contradiction to the 10th Amendment, some
scholars often assert that the federal government can do anything it wants under the
Constitution as long as the Constitution does not explicitly prohibit it (the modern
Federalist view?). This interpretation renders Article 1 Section 8 of the Constitution
superfluous and nonsensical. It makes many of the debates and votes at the Constitutional
Convention equally superfluous and nonsensical, such as the debate and decision to state
specifically in the Constitution that Congress has the explicit positive power to establish
post offices but voting not to state specifically that Congress has the explicit power to
establish a university (Farrand II, 611, 616, 620).
24

For example, the Constitution explicitly grants Congress the power to establish post

offices and post roads. If the founding fathers had considered that the power to establish
post offices implied the power to establish post roads to carry the mail between post
offices, then no separate granting of power to establish post roads would have been
required in the Constitution. Explicitly enumerating such a power separately implies that
the founding fathers did not consider that the power to establish post roads was implied
by the power to establish post offices. The logic of such comparisons circumscribes the
implied powers clause in Article 1 Section 8. As such, the power to establish post offices
would not imply that Congress also has the power to go into the business of breeding
horses for post riders.

86

87

25

Scholars have often been deflected by this implied-powers argument for federal

power both to issue bills of credit and to charter banks without considering what was
meant by explicit Convention votes not to grant the federal government these powers. For
example, see Nettels (99).
26

“ca” can be an abbreviation for “chartered accountancy,” but how that applies here is

unclear.
27

The following is Madison’s description of how he took notes at the Convention: “I

chose a seat in front of the presiding member, with the other members, on my right and
left hand. In this favorable position for hearing all that passed I noted in terms legible and
in abbreviations and marks intelligible to myself what was read from the Chair or spoken
by the members; and losing not a moment unnecessarily between the adjournment and
reassembling of the Convention I was enabled to write out my daily notes during the
session or within a few finishing days after it closed” (Farrand I, xvi).
28

Because New York did not vote at the Convention after July 10th, Hamilton may not

have paid close attention to specific debates even when he was in attendance. Robert
Yates and John Lansing, the other delegates from New York, left the Convention by July
10th and did not return (Farrand).
29

Hamilton’s role here is difficult to fathom, in particular his silence during the

Convention on the issue of banks, especially on the crucial day in question—September
14th. None of Hamilton’s recorded statements at the Convention, including his plan of
government, mention banks (Farrand). However, before the Convention, Hamilton had
long advocated that the national government be given the power to charter banks
(Freedman 76-77; Holdsworth 9-19). After the Convention as Secretary of the Treasury,
87

88

Hamilton was the chief proponent of Congress’ right to charter a national bank (Freeman
575-646). Reconciling Hamilton’s very active argumentation and pursuit of a national
bank both before and after the Convention with his silence during the Convention is hard
to do without regarding Hamilton as being strategically cunning and deceptive (Ferguson
1983, 404-405; Grubb 2003, 1791). Perhaps Hamilton considered banking so
controversial an issue that any positive mention might excite too much opposition at the
Convention—killing the Constitution’s chances of ratification. Perhaps Hamilton thought
if he “played possum” he could get his way no matter what the Convention intended as
long as the Convention did not absolutely ban national banking by written clause in the
Constitution.
30

In a letter to Madison, dated June 20, 1791, George Nicholas concluded, “The Bank

&c. [First Bank of the U.S.] prove that paper barriers [the U.S. Constitution] are very
weak; could it have been foreseen that no greater regard would have been paid them
many federalists would have been the warmest opposers of the government” (Rutland
XIV, 33).
31

Ferguson (1969, 1983) emphasizes the federal debt as the driving force behind the

constitutional agenda of the nationalists. The debt problem, however, was solved by
giving the federal government the independent power to tax and by the transfer of state
lands claimed in the west to the federal government—moving the federal government
toward a solvent position asset-wise. With the exception of legal tender restrictions, paper
money and banks were separable issues to funding the debt and so funding the federal
debt cannot explain the particular monetary powers chosen to be in the Constitution.
32

For example, as early as 1780 Hamilton, in a letter to James Duane, confided,
88

89

And why can we not have an American bank? Are our monied men less
enlightened to their own interest or less enterprising in the persuit? I believe the
fault is in our government which does not exert itself to engage them in such a
scheme. … The only certain manner to obtain a permanent paper credit is to
engage the monied interest immediately in it by making them contribute the
whole or part of the stock and giving them the whole or part of the profits
(Freeman 83-84).
See also the letter from William Bingham, a director of the Bank of North America, to
Hamilton on November 25, 1789, where he advises Hamilton to establish a national bank,
that such a bank would receive “great Benefit & Emolument” from this situation, and that
the Bank of North America would be a good candidate for being the national bank (Syrett
V, 538-554).
33

For example, during the South Carolina ratification debates, Pinckney referred to

“…the emission of paper money and its consequences, tender-laws, and the impairing the
obligation of contracts” (Elliot 334 [italics added]).
34

For example, Pinckney’s argument for constitutionally banning paper money made

during South Carolina’s ratification debates is consistent with this position (Elliot 334).
35

For an up-to-date discussion of these issues for contemporary economies, see

Feldstein (1-92).
36

In the 19th century, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that under the “Necessary and

Proper” clause [the implied–powers clause] of the Constitution the federal government
had the power to emit bills of credit and to incorporate a national bank, these powers
being implied by other enumerated powers granted Congress (Warren 696, 700-701).
Whether the Supreme Court determined that the “Necessary and Proper” clause trumped
powers explicitly voted not to be included in the list of enumerated powers or whether

89

90

they just redefined “Necessary and Proper” to be “Expedient and Desirous” is a story for
another day.

90

