                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           ROBUSTNESS OF THE ESTIMATES OF THE
                          HYBRID NEW KEYNESIAN PHILLIPS CURVE

                                                Jordi Galí
                                               Mark Gertler
                                          J. David López-Salido

                                          Working Paper 11788
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11788


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2005




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Jordi Galí, Mark Gertler, and J. David López-Salido. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Robustness of the Estimates of the Hybrid New Keynesian Phillips Curve
Jordi Galí, Mark Gertler, and J. David López-Salido
NBER Working Paper No. 11788
November 2005
JEL No. E31, E32

                                           ABSTRACT

Galí and Gertler (1999) developed a hybrid variant of the New Keynesian Phillips curve that relates
inflation to real marginal cost, expected future inflation and lagged inflation. GMM estimates of the
model suggest that forward looking behavior is dominant: The coefficient on expected future
inflation substantially exceeds the coefficient on lagged inflation. While the latter differs
significantly from zero, it is quantitatively modest. Several authors have suggested that our results
are the product of specification bias or suspect estimation methods. Here we show that these claims
are incorrect, and that our results are robust to a variety of estimation procedures, including GMM
estimation of the closed form, and nonlinear instrumental variables. Also, as we discuss, many others
have obtained very similar results to ours using a systems approach, including FIML techniques.
Hence, the conclusions of GG and others regarding the importance of forward looking behavior
remain robust.

Jordi Galí
Department of Economics (E52-359)
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
jgali@mit.edu

Mark Gertler
Department of Economics
New York University
269 Mercer Street, 7th Floor
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
mark.gertler@nyu.edu

J. David Lopez-Salido
Bank of Spain
1       Introduction
In this paper we show that the estimates of the hybrid New Keynesian Phillips curve pre-
sented in Gali and Gertler (1999; henceforth GG) and refined in Gali, Gertler and Lopez-
Salido (2001; 2003; henceforth, GGLS) are completely robust to recent criticisms by Rudd
and Whelan (2005) and Linde (2005). It follows that the main conclusions in GG and GGLS
remain intact. In this section, we first summarize the results in GG and GGLS and then
provide a brief summary of the response to our critics. In the sections that follow we oﬀer
a more detailed response and also present some new results based on alternative estimation
approaches.

1.1     Background
GG present evidence to suggest that postwar U.S. inflation dynamics are consistent with a
simple hybrid variant of the New Keynesian Phillips curve (NKPC). The particular model
GG propose is based on Calvo’s (1983) staggered price setting framework. As in Calvo, each
firm has a probability 1 − θ of being able to reset its price in any given period, independently
of the time elapsed since its most recent price adjustment. Thus, a fraction θ of firms keep
their prices unchanged in any given period. In contrast to Calvo, however, of those firms
able to adjust prices in a given period, only a fraction 1 − ω set prices optimally, i.e. on
the basis of expected future marginal costs. A fraction ω, on the other hand, instead use a
simple rule of thumb: they set price equal to the average of newly adjusted prices last period
plus an adjustment for expected inflation, based on lagged inflation π t−1 . The net result is
a hybrid Phillips curve that nests the pure forward looking Calvo model as a special case.
     In particular, let mct be (log) real marginal cost and β a subjective discount factor.
Then the hybrid Phillips curve (with all variables expressed as deviations from steady state)
is given by
                           π t = λ mct + γ f Et {π t+1 } + γ b π t−1 + εt                    (1)
where


                                  λ = (1 − ω)(1 − θ)(1 − βθ)φ−1
                                 γ f = βθφ−1
                                  γ b = ωφ−1

with φ = θ+ω[1−θ(1−β)] 1 , and where the error term εt may arise from either measurement
error or shocks to the desired markup. Note that in the limiting case where ω goes to zero,
the equation becomes the pure forward-looking NKPC, with γ b = 0 and γ f = β.
    1
    The expression for λ arises in the case of constant returns to scale. Sbordone (2002) and Galí, Gertler,
and López-Salido (2001) show that with decreasing returns to scale, a given value of λ is associated with a
smaller value of θ, and hence a smaller degree of price rigidity.


                                                     2
     Assuming rational expectations and that the error term {εt } is i.i.d., GG estimate
equation (1) using Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) with variables dated t − 1 and
earlier as instruments. Three main findings emerge: (1) the coeﬃcient λ on real marginal
cost is positive and statistically significant; (2) the coeﬃcient γ b is statistically greater than
zero, implying that the pure forward-looking model is rejected by the data; (3) however,
forward looking behavior is dominant; across a range of estimates, the coeﬃcients γ f and γ b
generally sum to a close neighborhood of unity, with the coeﬃcient on lagged inflation, γ b , in
the interval 0.2 to 0.4. In a subsequent paper, GGLS broadly confirm these estimates for U.S.
data, though they tighten the range of point estimates of γ b to the neighborhood of 0.35. As
we elaborate below, these estimates suggest that the influence of backward-looking behavior
on inflation, while statistically significant, is nonetheless quantitatively modest, certainly as
compared to what the traditional Phillips curve literature suggests. Accordingly, a clear
message from both GG and GGLS is that, while the pure forward looking version of the
New Keynesian Phillips curve is rejected by the data, the hybrid variant with a dominant
role for forward-looking behavior does reasonably well. It is in this respect that the New
Keynesian Phillips curve provides useful insights into the nature of inflation dynamics.
     A significant corollary result is that the use of real marginal cost as the relevant real
sector forcing variable in the hybrid NKPC (as the theory suggests) is critical to the empirical
success.2 Specifications based instead on ad-hoc “output gap” measures (e.g., detrended log
GDP) do not perform well: The coeﬃcient on the output variable is either insignificant or
significant but with the wrong sign. There has been of course considerable criticism of the
output-gap based NKPC (e.g., Mankiw (2001)). Our results suggest that a key reason for
the lack of success of this formulation is that detrended output is not a good proxy for real
marginal cost, in addition to the need to allow for a modest amount of inertial behavior of
inflation.

1.2     Criticism and Summary of Our Response
Several recent papers (Rudd and Whelan, 2005; hereafter RW, and Lindé, 2005) have sug-
gested that some of the empirical findings described above may be the product of specification
bias associated with our GMM procedure. Here we show that these claims are plainly in-
correct. In addition to directly rebutting the arguments of these authors, we show that our
estimates are robust to a variety of diﬀerent econometric procedures, including GMM esti-
mation of the closed form as suggested by RW and nonlinear instrumental variables, in the
spirit of Lindé’s analysis. Beyond the fresh results we present here, we also summarize work
by authors who obtain very similar results to ours using alternative econometric approaches.
     How could our conclusions be so diﬀerent from those by RW and Lindé? Before going
into detail in the sections that follow, we summarize our response to each.
   2
   Sbordone (2002) emphasizes a similar point, though she restricts attention to the pure forward looking
model.



                                                   3
     As we elaborate below, the essence of RW’s argument is that our results are likely a
product of mis-specification if estimates of the closed form (obtained from solving out for
expected future inflation) are significantly diﬀerent from those obtained from estimating the
structural form directly. RW seem to suggest that this is in fact the case. However, as we
discuss, RW fail to exploit the connection between the key parameters of the structural form
of the hybrid model given by equation (1) and the reduced form parameters of the closed
form they estimate. In particular, the reduced form parameters of the closed form are explicit
functions of the parameters of structural form (1), including γ f and γ b , the parameters that
identify the relative importance of forward versus backward looking behavior. As we show
below when one estimates the closed form equation in a way that incorporates the restrictions
of the structural form, the parameter estimates are virtually identical to those obtained in
GG and GGLS by estimating the structural form directly. That is, estimating the closed
form does not make any tangible bit of diﬀerence to our results, leading us to conclude that
forward-looking behavior is as important as was suggested in our two earlier papers.
     That one should take into account the mapping between the structural form and the
closed form should be apparent from reading Sbordone (2002, 2005), who originally proposed
estimating the closed form of the NKPC. While Sbordone (2002) focused on just the pure
forward looking model, her paper in this volume, Sbordone (2005), estimates the closed form
of a hybrid model similar to ours (using an alternative estimation technique). She obtains
very similar conclusions to ours about the relative importance of forward versus backward-
looking behavior. She also directly rebuts another claim by RW, who go on to suggest that
because a discounted sum of expected future marginal cost adds little to the forecasting
power of lagged inflation for inflation, forward looking behavior must be unimportant. She
makes very clear why it is plainly incorrect to draw inferences about the relative importance
of forward versus backward-looking behavior from this kind of evidence3 . We refer the reader
to this discussion in her paper.
     As we also discuss, Lindé’s conclusions hinge on using estimators that fail to properly
account for the error term εt in equation (1), even though he emphasizes the importance
of this error term is his subsequent Monte Carlo analysis. This consideration is the reason
why the nonlinear least squares (NLS) procedure he proposes at the start of his paper
appears to yield results contradictory to ours: NLS is clearly inappropriate in this case as
the right hand side variables may be correlated with εt . Assuming that εt is i.i.d., it is
instead appropriate to use a nonlinear instrumental variables estimator (NLIV) with lagged
variables as instruments. Accordingly, we proceed to show that NLIV yields estimates that
   3
     See section 4 of Sbordone’s paper in this volume. As she observes, the NKPC implies that inflation
contains information about future movements in expected marginal cost. In a reduced form equation for
inflation that omits the forward-looking terms (i.e. the terms for expected future marginal cost), the coef-
ficient on lagged inflation may be enlarged due to omitted variable bias. Sbordone then presents evidence
that this bias is likely important in practice, undermining any attempt to give a structural interpretation to
coeﬃcients of a reduced form equation for inflation. Hence one cannot draw inferences about the importance
of backward-looking behavior simply from forecasting evidence.



                                                      4
are virtually identical to our GMM estimates (using a timing of instruments that is consistent
with the model and our earlier analysis). Thus his claim that our results are not robust to
using that alternative estimation approach is based on the fact that NLS is an inappropriate
estimator in the presence of an error term in the inflation equation.
     In the second part of his paper Lindé argues, on the basis of some Monte Carlo exercises,
that full information maximum likelihood methods (FIML) may be a more robust procedure
than single equation methods for the purpose of estimating the NKPC. While we do not take
a stand on this claim, we find Lindé’s argument unconvincing. In particular, as we discuss
below, Lindé’s Monte Carlo exercise is heavily tilted in favor of FIML. In a nutshell: he ends
up comparing a single equation estimator (that in some cases is poorly designed) against a
FIML estimator that presumes that the econometrician has a good deal of knowledge about
the true model of the economy a priori, something which is quite unlikely to be true in
practice. Also not convincing are Lindé’s FIML estimates on actual data: his results are
likely to be distorted because he uses detrended GDP rather than real marginal cost as a
driving variable, as we discuss below. In addition, many others who have used a systems
approach and have used real marginal cost in the NKPC have obtained very similar results
to our single equation method.


2    New Estimates of the Hybrid NKPC
Here we first briefly review the GMM estimation in GG and then demonstrate the robustness
of our results to two alternative estimation strategies: GMM estimation of the closed form
and NLIV. We then discuss results in the literature that are similar to ours, but obtained
using maximum likelihood estimation. Along the way we respond in detail to our critics.
    Let zt−1 be a vector of variables dated t−1 and earlier. Then, given rational expectations
and the assumption that the error term εt is i.i.d, it follows from equation (1) that

                      Et−1 {(π t − λ mct − γ f π t+1 − γ b π t−1 ) zt−1 } = 0              (2)
The orthogonality condition given by (2) provides the basis for the GMM estimation in GG
and GGLS.
     A potential shortcoming of this approach is as follows: If the instrument set includes
variables that directly cause inflation but are omitted from the hybrid model specification,
the estimation of (1) may be biased in favor of finding a significant role for expected future
inflation in determining current inflation, even if that role is truly absent or negligible. In
GG (1999) and GGLS (2001, 2003) we addressed this issue by allowing for additional lags of
inflation in the right hand side of (1) (in addition to using them as instruments), and then
showing that these additional lags were not significant. This exercise provided evidence that
additional inflation lags do not aﬀect current inflation independently of the information they
contain about future inflation.



                                                5
     RW pick up on this potential bias problem and construct a very dramatic example of
how it could lead of a significant upward bias in the estimate of γ f . It is important to realize,
however, that this example is based on the null hypothesis that inflation is purely backward
looking, an extreme scenario where our model is clearly not identified. Our estimation
strategy is instead based on the plausible null that there is at least some forward looking
behavior. Conditional on this null, the steps we took to check for mispecification were
entirely appropriate. In the end, however, we demonstrate the validity of our approach by
showing that our estimates are robust across many diﬀerent estimation strategies, including
the closed form emphasized by RW.

2.1     GMM Estimates of the Closed Form Specification
In particular, RW propose addressing the potential bias problem by estimating the closed
form of the hybrid model (1). As we noted earlier, however, in considering the closed form
they do not exploit the connection with the structural hybrid model (1). In particular, as
shown in GG (1999), the hybrid Phillips curve has the following closed form representation,
conditional on the expected path of real marginal cost:
                                                 ∞ µ   ¶k
                                           λ X 1
                       π t = δ 1 πt−1 +                   Et {mct+k } + εt                     (3)
                                        δ 2 γ f k=0 δ2
where δ 1 and δ 2 are, respectively, the stable and unstable roots of the second order diﬀerence
equation given by (1). These roots are given by:
                               p                                p
                           1 − 1 − 4γ b γ f                 1 + 1 − 4γ b γ f
                     δ1 =                        ;    δ2 =                                   (4)
                                 2 γf                             2 γf
     Using the same logic as earlier, we can obtain from equation (3) the following orthogo-
nality conditions
                                                    X
                                                    ∞
                         Et {(π t − δ 1 π t−1 − λ         δ −k
                                                            2 mct+k ) zt−1 } = 0               (5)
                                                    k=0
            λ
with λ =         ,
               and where (4) defines the mapping from the roots δ 1 and δ 2 to the parameters
          δ2 γ f
of hybrid model, γ b and γ f . One can then use GMM with lagged variables as instruments
to estimate the closed form given by (5), just as it is possible with the structural form. As
we will show shortly, estimating the hybrid NKPC in the form given by either equation (5)
or equation (2) gives virtually identical estimates of the key parameters λ, γ f and γ b .

2.1.1   Pitfalls of the RW Approach
As we hinted earlier, RW appear to obtain diﬀerent results because they fail to account for
the connection between the structural hybrid model and the closed form specification. More

                                                     6
specifically, RW begin with the closed form of the pure forward-looking model, given by
                                              X
                                              ∞
                                    πt = λ           β k Et {mct+k }                           (6)
                                               k=0

    Then they augment this equation with additional lags of inflation. In particular, for the
case of one lag of inflation, the equation they consider is given by
                                        X
                                        ∞
                               πt = λ         β k Et {mct+k } + φ π t−1                        (7)
                                        k=0

They recognize that this equation could be motivated as the reduced form of the hybrid
model, but do not attempt to identify the structural parameters γ f and γ b . At minimum,
however, the notation they use is confusing because β does not generally correspond to the
consumer’s discount factor β as in our analysis and elsewhere; instead it is a function of γ f
and γ b , as equation (3) makes clear.
     They then proceed to estimate equation (7) by GMM, using two diﬀerent approaches.
First, they calibrate β, and then estimate λ and φ. Second, they estimate all three parame-
ters. While the first approach permits a test of the pure forward-looking model (i.e., of the
null hypothesis φ = 0), it cannot provide a legitimate assessment of the hybrid model. The
reason is straightforward: Because they calibrate the discount factor β, they cannot identify
the primitive key primitive parameters of the structural model, γ f and γ b , as comparison of
equations (1), (3) and (7) makes clear. With their second approach, which involves estimat-
ing the discount factor, it is possible to identify these parameters, but they do not pursue
this route. In our view, the only way to obtain a proper sense of the relative importance of
forward versus backward-looking behavior is to indeed obtain direct estimates of γ f and γ b .
     In this regard, it is critical to note that, in the closed form, the parameter φ on lagged
inflation does not provide a simple measure of the degree of backward-looking behavior.
That is, φ should not be confused with γ b , the coeﬃcient on lagged inflation in the baseline
hybrid specification. More specifically, (3) implies that φ should correspond to the eigenvalue
δ 1 which, as (4) makes clear, is a nonlinear function of γ f and γ b . To illustrate the danger of
interpreting φ as a measure of the relative importance of the backward-looking component,
consider the following numerical example. Suppose that (in the notation of equation (1)), β =
1, and γ f = γ b = 0.5, so that forward and backward-looking behavior are equally important.
It is easy to check that in this case φ = δ 1 = 1. It would clearly be incorrect, however, to
suggest that an estimate of φ = 1 implies pure backward looking behavior. All this suggests
that one cannot assess the relative importance of forward versus backward-looking behavior
from the RW specification and that it is important to identify the parameters γ f and γ b
directly.




                                                      7
2.1.2    Estimates of the Closed Form of the Hybrid Model
Given these considerations, we estimate the closed form for the hybrid model given by
equation (1) that takes direct account of the coeﬃcient restrictions. As we have discussed,
our approach allows us to recover estimates of γ f and γ b , along with standard errors. As
shown below, the resulting estimates are similar to the ones obtained in GG and GGLS.
     All the estimates reported below are based on quarterly postwar U.S. data over the
sample period 1960:I-1997:IV. The data set is the same used in GG and GGLS, which provide
detailed descriptions. We report results for GDP deflator inflation, though similar results
obtain when using a measure based on the nonfarm business deflator. We follow GGLS by
using a smaller instrument set than in GG in order to minimize the potential estimation bias
that is known to arise in small samples when there are too many over-identifying restrictions
(see, e.g. Staiger and Stock (1997)).4 Accordingly, we restrict the instrument set to four lags
of inflation, and two lags of marginal cost, detrended real output and nominal wage inflation.
Finally, we report estimates using two alternative driving variables in the structural Phillips
curve: the log of real marginal cost (which we measure using the log of the nonfarm business
labor income share, as explained in GG), and detrended (log) GDP.
     To provide a benchmark we first report estimates of equation (1) based on the GMM
approach employed in our earlier work. Table 1 reports the corresponding estimates of γ b , γ f
and λ under the heading “baseline GMM.”.5 We report both unconstrained estimates and
estimates that impose the constraint that γ b + γ f = 1. The results are very similar to those
obtained in GG and GGLS. Marginal cost enters with the correct sign and is statistically
significant. The coeﬃcient on expected future inflation exceeds that of lagged inflation in
each case: γ f is roughly 2/3, while γ b is roughly 1/3. Imposing the condition γ b = γ f = 1
(as implied by the assumption that β = 1) does not alter the estimates appreciably. Not
surprisingly, given the results in GG, the estimate of λ switches sign when we use detrended
GDP. As we stressed in GG (1999) this finding may simply reflect that detrended GDP is
an inappropriate proxy for real marginal cost.
     The middle panel of Table 1 reports the GMM estimates of the closed form specification
(3). The estimates are based on the set of orthogonality conditions in (5). We follow RW by
using a truncated sum to approximate the infinite discounted sum of real marginal costs.6
However, as we stressed above, we diﬀer by exploiting the link between the hybrid model
and its closed form to identify the key parameters γ b and γ f of the hybrid model. The
implied estimates for γ b and γ f are virtually identical to those obtained from estimating the
hybrid model (1) directly. Finally, the slope coeﬃcient on the discounted stream of expected
future marginal cost is positive and highly significant, and does not diﬀer much from the
   4
     See p.1250 in GGLS (2001) for a discussion of the weak instruments issue in this context.
   5
     In GG and GGLS we also report estimates of the “deep parameters” θ, ω, and β that underly the reduced
form coeﬃcients.
   6
     We use sixteen leads of real marginal cost to construct the discounted stream of real marginal cost. We
also experimented with twelve or twenty-four, without the results being aﬀected.



                                                     8
corresponding baseline GMM estimates. Once again, the results are not aﬀected much when
we constrain the sum of the two inflation coeﬃcients to equal unity. When detrended GDP
is used instead, the slope coeﬃcient is no longer significant for the restricted case. We thus
conclude that estimating the closed form in a way consistent with the hybrid Phillips curve
specification yields results very close to those obtained in GG or GGLS, contrary to the
claim in RW.
     The mapping between the structural forms also permits us to be precise about why our
results suggest that the influence of backward looking behavior, while statistically significant,
is quantitatively modest. In particular, for the model with real marginal cost as the forcing
variable, our closed form estimates of γ b and γ f imply an estimate of the stable root, δ1 , of
0.6 with a standard error 0.06. For quarterly data, this is indeed represents a very modest
influence of lagged inflation on inflation persistence. Indeed, with δ 1 equal to 0.6, the “half-
life” of a percentage rise in inflation at time t is only slightly above one quarter - about
four months to be precise - everything else equal.7 This implies that the influence of lagged
inflation dies out a relatively rapid rate, certainly compared to the traditional Phillips curve
literature, which often suggests a permanent (or near-permanent) eﬀect of lagged inflation
on current inflation. We add that even an estimate of δ 1 of 0.8, which lies more than two
standard deviations above our point estimate, would still only suggest a modest degree of
persistence: In this instance the half-life would rise to just above two quarters - about seven
months to be precise.

2.2     NLIV Estimates of the Structural Hybrid NKPC
We next turn to the set of issues raised in the first part of Lindé (2005). Note that, as
pointed out by Lindé, it is possible to rearrange equation (1) in the following form:
                                     1      γ          λ
                           π t+1 =      πt − b π t−1 −    mct + ξ t+1 − εt                                (8)
                                     γf     γf         γf
where ξ t+1 ≡ π t+1 − Et {π t+1 } is the inflation forecast error. Lindé proceeds to estimate
equation (8) using nonlinear least squares (NLS). He also estimates a version that replaces
real marginal cost with detrended output. In either case, he obtains estimates of λ that have
the wrong sign and are generally insignificant (see Table 1 of his paper). He accordingly
concludes that the hybrid NKPC does not perform well and that the use of real marginal
cost versus detrended output makes no diﬀerence. Here we show that this conclusion is based
on an inappropriate estimation procedure.
     In particular, an NLS estimation procedure will generally yield biased estimates to the
extent that a non-negligible error term εt is present, so long as this error term is correlated
   7
     The thought experiment is as follows: Hold constant the path of marginal cost. Then suppose it is
exogenously given that inflation is one percentage point higher at time t. What then is the impact on
inflation is subsequent periods? We define the half-life as the period length j of time after which the impact
of the rise in inflation at t on inflation at t + j is half the initial period t increase.


                                                      9
with some of the right hand side variables.8 Here we repeat Lindé’s exercise but using instead
a non-linear instrumental variables (NLIV) estimator, with the same list of instruments that
we used in our GMM analysis in the previous section. The bottom panel of Table 1 reports
our NLIV estimates, both for the constrained and unconstrained cases. Clearly, the estimates
are very similar to the ones obtained under our baseline GMM specification: the coeﬃcient
on expected inflation is much higher than that on lagged inflation, even though the latter
is significant. Furthermore, the slope coeﬃcient is significant and with the right sign when
marginal cost is used as a driving variable, but of the wrong sign when detrended output is
used, in direct contradiction to Lindé’s claim.
     We should also emphasize that our NLIV estimates are robust to using alternative
instrument sets, though to economize on space we do not report the results here.9 It is
worth stressing, however, that the similarity between the NLIV and GMM estimates is
further evidence that the latter are not plagued by a weak instruments problem.
     In summary, we conclude that Lindé’s assertion that real marginal cost does not enter
significantly or with the right sign is simply a product of using least squares as opposed to
instrumental variables. Accordingly, his justification for using detrended output as opposed
to real marginal costs in his subsequent analysis (described below) vanishes.

2.3     Maximum Likelihood Estimates of the Hybrid NKPC
A possible alternative to the single equation/instrumental variables approach of the pre-
vious section is to use maximum likelihood. As Cochrane (2001) emphasizes, the issue of
which approach is best is completely open: There are no general theorems or Monte Carlo
exercises that suggest that one dominates the other. There are trade-oﬀs: Single equation
methods may be sensitive to the choice of instruments. On the other hand, maximum likeli-
hood estimation may be sensitive to imposing false assumptions about either the error term
(normality of the error term is required) or the overall model structure (in the case of FIML).
     In Section 4 of his paper Lindé (2005) tries to make a case for the use of FIML methods in
order to uncover “robust” estimates of the parameters of the NKPC. He starts by providing
some Monte Carlo evidence that suggests that the magnitude of the biases using FIML
estimates is smaller than the one that may arise from (poorly designed) NLS or GMM
methods. However, the Monte Carlo exercise Lindé performs to demonstrate the superiority
of FIML eﬀectively assumes that the econometrician has a good deal of knowledge about
the true model of the economy a priori, something which is quite unlikely to be true in
practice. The whole point of the kind of single equation method we used is to avoid having
   8
     For this reason, we use only lagged instruments in GG and GGLS. See the discussion on p. 1250 of
GGLS.
   9
     In particular, we have compared our results with three alternative instrument sets: the first includes
four lags of inflation, marginal cost, detrended output and wage inflation; the second consists of four lags of
price inflation, marginal costs, changes in commodity prices and interest rate spread (see GG for details),
and finally, we drop lag inflation from the last set of insruments. In all the cases the F-test of the first stage
regression clearly supports the joint significance of the instruments.


                                                       10
to take a stand on the structure of the entire economy. In fact, when he allows for some
mis-specification in the stochastic properties of the driving variables, FIML estimates display
a bias of an order of magnitude not smaller than the one he uncovers for his single-equation
GMM simulations.
     Also not convincing are Lindé’s FIML estimates on actual data. As we have suggested,
his justification for using detrended output instead of real marginal cost in the hybrid phillips
curve specification is based on a faulty estimation procedure. In turn, because detrended
output is likely a poor proxy for real marginal cost the FIML estimates are likely biased in
favor of a role for lagged inflation.10
     It is also worth emphasizing that Lindé’s FIML estimates are inconsistent with the re-
sults in a number of other recent papers that have similarly applied ML methods to estimate
dynamic sticky price models that embed a hybrid NKPC similar to equation (1). In partic-
ular, a significant number of these papers have found a dominant role for forward-looking
behavior in inflation dynamics. Using a FIML approach, Ireland (2001), for example, can-
not reject the null hypothesis that inflation dynamics in the postwar U.S. are purely forward
looking. Similarly, using Bayesian ML techniques, Smets and Wouters (2003 and 2004), Ra-
banal and Rubio (2005), and Levin, Onatski, Williams and Williams (2005) obtain results
very to our single equation approach: In particular, the estimates of the relative importance
of forward versus backing looking behavior are very close to the estimates we obtain. Im-
portantly, and in contrast to Linde, these papers use marginal cost in the NKPC, as theory
suggests, as opposed to detrended output.
     Finally, Kurmann (2002) uses a limited-information ML procedure to estimate the hy-
brid version of the NKPC as in (1), using a real marginal cost measure as the driving variable.
In a way consistent with our arguments above, he rejects an extreme version of (1) which
ignores the presence of an error term. When he allows for such an error term (which he in-
terprets as capturing deviations from rational expectations) he obtains coeﬃcient estimates
very similar to the ones found in GG. Indeed, he cannot reject the null hypothesis of a zero
backward looking component.
     We thus see that when diﬀerent ML methods have been applied in the literature to
estimate a properly specified hybrid NKPC, the resulting findings have been very much in
line with those reported in GG and GGLS. In addition, as we noted earlier, in this volume
Sbordone (2005) obtains very similar results to ours using a minimum distance estimator.


3      Conclusions
We have examined a number of criticisms of the GMM approach used in our earlier work
to estimate the hybrid version of the NKPC originally proposed in Galí and Gertler (1999),
  10
    Another issue is that Lindé’s FIML estimates do not take into account the restrictions that the model
imposes on the variance covariance matrix of the residuals of the estimated equations. The papers we
describe below, Ireland (2001) and Smets and Wouters (2002), properly take into account these restrictions.



                                                    11
which relates inflation to real marginal cost, expected future inflation and lagged inflation. In
our earlier work we showed that GMM estimates of that model suggest that the forward look-
ing component of inflation is very important and that real marginal costs are an important
determinant of short run inflation dynamics, as predicted by the theory. Backward-looking
behavior, while statistically significant, is quantitatively modest, particularly compared to
what the traditional Phillips Curve literature has suggested.
      Several authors have argued that our results may be the product of either some form of
specification bias or poor estimation methods. Here we show that these claims are incorrect:
Our results are robust to a variety of estimation procedures, including GMM estimation of
the closed form, and nonlinear instrumental variables. We have also discussed recent work
that obtains similar results using alternative econometric approaches, including maximum
likelihood procedures. Hence the conclusions of GG and others regarding the importance of
forward looking behavior appear to be robust.
      There are two important unresolved issues. One involves providing a more coherent
rationale for the role of lagged inflation in the hybrid NKPC. Christiano, Eichenbaum and
Evans (2005; henceforth CEE) and Smets and Wouters (2003, 2004) show that our hybrid
model can be motivated by a form of dynamic price indexing. Another possibility is that,
despite having the virtue of parsimony, the simple Calvo price setting model is just too
stylized. As Guerrieri (2001) has emphasized, with conventional time dependent staggering
of price setting (as in Taylor), lagged inflation may enter the Phillips curve specification even
if firms set price in a forward looking manner. Another possibilty is that lagged inflation
might reflect some form of least squares learning on the part of private agents, as suggested
by Erceg and Levin (2003), Dellas and Collard (2005) and others. More recently, Cogley
and Sbordone (2004), have shown that accounting for shifting beliefs about trend inflation
eliminates the role of lagged inflation in estimates of the NKPC. These explanations, as well
as others, are worth pursuing.
      Finally, it is important to stress the our results do not suggest that disinflations may
be painless. In this regard it is important to gain a better understanding of the dynamics
of marginal cost. As noted in GG (1999), it is hard to explain the inertial behavior in real
marginal cost using a model with frictionless labor markets. CEE, Sbordone (2004) and
others have made progress by allowing for nominal wage rigidity. More work along these
lines would clearly be desirable.




                                               12
    REFERENCES
     Calvo, Guillermo, 1983, “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 12 (3), September, 383-398.
     Cochrane, J., 2001, Asset Pricing, Princeton University Press.
     Christiano, L; M. Eichenbaum and Ch. Evans, 2005, “Nominal Rigidities and the Dy-
namic Eﬀects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
     Cogley, Timothy and Argia Sbordone (2004), “A Search for a Structural Phillips Curve,”mimeo.
     Collard, Fabrice Collard and Harris Dellas, 2005, “The New Keynesian Model with
Imperfect Information and Learning,” Journal of Money Credit and Banking, forthcoming.
     Galí, Jordi and Mark Gertler, 1999, “Inflation Dynamics: A Structural Econometric
Approach,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 44(2), October, 195-222.
     Galí, Jordi, Mark Gertler, and David López-Salido (2001): “European Inflation Dynam-
ics,” European Economic Review, 45 (7), 1237-1270.
     Galí, Jordi, Mark Gertler, and David López-Salido (2003): “Erratum to ’European
Inflation Dynamics’,” European Economic Review, 47 (4), 759-760.
     Guerreri, L.,2001,“Inflation Dynamics,” International Finance Discussion Papers #715,
Federal Reserve Board.
     Ireland, Peter N., 2001,: “Sticky Price Models of the Business Cycle: Specification and
Stability,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 47, no. 1, 3-18.
     Kurmann, A., 2002,“Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Dynamic Stochastic Theories
with an Application to the New Keynesian Pricing,” mimeo Université du Québec à Montreal,
CIRPRÉ
     King, R. and A. Kurmann, 2002, “Expectations and the Term Structure of the Interest
Rates: Evidence and Implications,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Quarterly Review
88/4 Fall 2002, 49-94.
     Levin, A., A. Onatski, N.Williams and J. Williams, 2005, “Monetary Policy Under
Uncertainty,” mimeo.
     Lindé, J., 2005, “Estimating New-Keynesian Phillips Curves: A Full Information Maxi-
mum Likelihood Approach,” Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.
     Mankiw, N.G., 2001, “The Inexorable and Mysterious Trade-Oﬀ between Inflation and
Unemployment,” The Economic Journal, 111, May 2001, C45-C61.
     Rabanal, Pau and Rubio, Juan F., 2005, ”Comparing New Keynesian Models of the
Business Cycle: A Bayesian Approach,” Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.
     Rudd, Jeremy and Karl Whelan, 2005, “New Tests of the New Keynesian Phillips
Curve,” Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.
     Sbordone, Argia, 2002,: “Prices and Unit Labor Costs: A New Test of Price Stickiness,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 49, no. 2, 235-456.
     Sbordone, Argia, 2004, “A Limited Information Approach to the Simultaneous Estima-
tion of Wage and Price Dynamics,” mimeo.
     Sbordone, Argia, 2005,: “Do Expected Future Marginal Costs Drive Inflation Dynam-
ics,” Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.

                                            13
     Smets, F. and R. Wouters (2003): “An Estimated Stochastic General Equilibrium Model
of the Euro Area,” Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 1(5), 1123-1175.
     Smets, F. and R. Wouters (2004) “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: a
Bayesian DSGE Approach,” mimeo.
     Stock, J. and Staiger, J. (1987): “Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak Instru-
ments,” Econometrica, vol. 65, no. 3, 557-586.




                                            14
                                         Table 1
                                  GMM and NLIV Estimates
                                     Marginal Cost       Detrended Output
         Parameters                γb     γf      λ      γb     γf     λ

         Baseline GMM              0.349 0.635         0.013      0.325     0.684     -0.005
                                   (0.041)   (0.042)   (0.006)    (0.040)   (0.043)   (0.003)
         γb + γf = 1                         0.653     0.009                0.672     -0.004
                                             (0.035)   (0.0051)             (0.040)   (0.002)


         Closed Form GMM           0.374 0.618 0.013              0.882 -0.000 0.016
                                   (0.028)   (0.033)   (0.004)    (0.017)   (0.000)   (0.005)
         γb + γf = 1                         0.627     0.010                0.460     0.002
                                             (0.022)   (0.001)              (0.034)   (0.001)


         NLIV                      0.260 0.738         0.013      0.216     0.811     -0.010
                                   (0.087)   (0.080)   (0.009)    (0.113)   (0.116)   (0.005)
         γb + γf = 1                         0.740 0.013                    0.776     -0.009
                                             (0.090)   (0.007)              (0.114)   (0.005)



     Note: in all cases the dependent variable is quarterly inflation measured using GDP Deflator.
Sample Period: 1960:I-1997:IV. Standard errors are shown in brackets. Instrument set includes two
lags of detrended output, real marginal costs and wage inflation and four lags of price inflation.
The F test of the joint significance of the instruments in the first stage regression is 63.31 with
p-value 0.000.




                                                  15
