                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            EVALUATION OF CURRENCY REGIMES:
                             THE UNIQUE ROLE OF SUDDEN STOPS

                                              Assaf Razin
                                             Yona Rubinstein

                                          Working Paper 11785
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11785


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2005




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Assaf Razin and Yona Rubinstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Evaluation of Currency Regimes: The Unique Role of Sudden Stops
Assaf Razin and Yona Rubinstein
NBER Working Paper No. 11785
November 2005
JEL No. F3

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper tackles two established puzzles in international macroeconomics literature. The first is
the lack of systematic difference in the macroeconomic performance across exchange rate regimes.
The second is the absence of a clear empirical relationship between macroeconomic performance
and capital-account liberalization. We suggest that both may appear because empirical

methodologies fail to account for a latent economic "crisis state," influenced by exchange-rate and

capital account regimes, and to allow the effects of a policy regime on growth to depend on whether

the economy is in a crisis-prone latent state. In practice, we model and estimate the latent state of the

economy as a crisis probability. In the framework we propose, exchange rate and capital market

liberalization regimes can have both a direct effect on short-term growth, and an indirect effect on

growth that is channelled through their effects on the crisis probability.

Assaf Razin
Department of Economics
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14583
and NBER
razin@post.tau.ac.il

Yona Rubinstein
yonar@post.tau.ac.il
CURRENCY REGIMES: CRISES AND GROWTH                                                                                     2

                                                                                                               -




Evaluation of Currency
Regimes: The Unique Role of
Sudden Stops


Assaf Razin1 and Yona Rubinstein1
Tel Aviv University




1. INTRODUCTION

     International economics theory has long recognized that pegging exchange rates
   should improve macroeconomic performance. The idea is that by fixing their currencies
   to international moneys (the Dollar, the Euro, or the Yen), fiscally-disciplined emerging
   economies could rapidly accumulate exchange reserves through export growth, be able
   to maintain a high saving ratio, and provide certainty to business and profit margins to
   investors. Such a policy environment can lead to a low and stable domestic rate of
   interest, and thus enables the economy to retain the confidence of international investors.
   However, every major international economic crisis of the past 15 years (save Brazil in
   2002) has been rooted in rigid exchange rate regimes. Thus, Stanley Fischer (2001)
   succinctly observed that: “Each of the major international capital market-related crises
   since 1994--Mexico, in 1994, Thailand, Indonesia and Korea in 1997, Russia and Brazil
   in 1998, and Argentina and Turkey in 2000--has in some way involved a fixed or pegged
   exchange rate regime. At the same time, countries that did not have pegged rates--among

   1
    We benefited from comments by the discussants and anonymous referees, and from discussions on the topics of the paper
   with Marianne Baxter, Alex Cukierman, Allan Drazen, Karen Dury, Alejandro Izquierdo, Paul Mc Nelis, Gian Maria Milesi-
   Ferretti, Ady Pauzner, Dan Trefler, Chetan Subramanian. We are indebted to Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, Carmen Reinhart,
   Federico Sturzenegger, and Romain Ranciere, for providing us with various data sets. We also thank Yaniv Yedid Levy for
   research assistance.
   Giuseppe Bertola was the Managing Editor in charge of this paper.
CURRENCY REGIMES: CRISES AND GROWTH                                                                                               3

  them South Africa, Israel in 1998, Mexico in 1998, and Turkey in 1998--avoided crises
  of the type that afflicted emerging market countries with pegged rates.”
    Indeed, there has been a long-standing view that an emerging economy under a peg,
  with government budget imbalances, trade deficits, and the presence of free-market
  policies that facilitate the outflow of capital, is likely to become vulnerable to sudden
  stops of capital inflows; hence, lead to a balance of payments crisis. A “sudden stops”
  crisis often entails a financial or currency crisis, accompanied by a sharp fall in output.
  Capital controls could reduce contagion effects, and thereby serve to lower the risk of
  financial crises.2 A possible channel through which the probability of a crisis affects
  growth is as follows. If the domestic currency is pegged to a "world currency" it
  provides a less risky environment for investors and the country may be able to attract
  more external funds to complement more domestically funded investment. This could
  then increase growth. However, if foreign investors perceive that there is a sufficiently
  high probability that there will be a sudden stop of inflows that leads to a crisis, they
  may be less willing to invest. This could then decrease growth.3 Similarly, benefits of
  capital market liberalization come typically from three factors. Revoking capital controls
  could lower the cost of capital and thereby promote investment. Capital-market
  liberalization could turn country-specific risks into diversifiable risks. Furthermore, the
  efficiency of allocation of domestic capital could also be enhanced. However, financial
  liberalization could also increase the risk of sudden stops to capital inflows, which could
  bring about defaults and recession. 4
    A related policy-regime evaluation issue is financial dollarisation, and its effect on the
  macroeconomic performance. The “original sin” concept, introduced by Barry
  Eichengreen and Ricardo Haussman (1999), explain the consequences for emerging
  markets of abrupt departures from an exchange rate peg regime due to sudden stops in
  capital inflows. The “original sin” concept underpins a crucial vulnerability of the
  economy under peg regimes. The phrase refers to the inability of a country to borrow
  abroad in its own currency, because no foreign creditor is willing to gamble on the
  potential exchange rate instability. A plausible explanation for the widespread use in
  dollarized debt is that countries are forced into this position because their monetary and
  fiscal policies lack credibility. If a country issued debt in domestic currency, it would

  2
    For an early analytical approach to the problem of sudden stops, see Calvo (1998). Among recent papers on sudden-stops’
  vulnerability, and its relation to fixed exchange rate regimes, see also Calvo (2000), Calvo, Reinhart and Vegh (1995), Chang
  and Velasco (2000), Ghosh, Gulde and Wolf (2000), Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995) and Williamson (2000). Sharp current
  account reversals, which require a quick adjustment of the balance between domestic saving and investment (see Milesi Feretti
  and Razin (1996)), and the associated substantial depreciations, that trigger financial distress, tend to cause and to exacerbate
  recessions.
  3
    In the empirical section we include the external debt as an exclusion restriction in the growth equation to identify the
  probability equation. In the data, the external debt is indeed strongly correlated with the crisis probability, but only weakly
  correlated with growth. The possible channel through which the probability of a crisis affects growth indicated in the text is not
  necessarily inconsistent with the empirical correlations to the extent that the funding of domestic investment is mostly from
  domestic saving when the crisis probability is low.

  4
    For an historical perspective on capital controls see Voth (2004). See also Rodrik (2002) who cites Keynes: “I
  sympathize with those who would minimize, rather than… maximize economic entanglements between
  nations. Ideas, art, knowledge, hospitality and travel should be international. But let goods be homespun
  whenever reasonable and above all let finance be primarily national.”
CURRENCY REGIMES: CRISES AND GROWTH                                                                                             4

  have an incentive to inflate its way out of debt. Investors, who expect that the
  government will succumb to such temptation, refuse to buy domestic currency-
  denominated debt papers.5 In net terms, the foreign currency liabilities of residents of
  developing and transition countries usually exceed their assets in foreign currencies,
  implying that they are exposed to exchange rate risk on their balance sheets, as well as
  through trade. Issues of both sovereign and corporate bonds on international markets are
  overwhelmingly in foreign currencies, even in the case of an advanced economy such as
  Korea, or a country whose exchange rate is strongly pegged to the U.S. dollar, such as
  Argentina in the 1990s. 6
    Combining these insights, this paper aims at contributes to the resolution of long
  standing puzzles in the literature. The main idea of the paper is that a sudden stop crisis
  that could have happened but did not, affects growth in a negative way, for example
  inducing a liquidity shortage. If this is the case, the puzzling failure to establish
  empirically a relationship between the exchange rate regime and the growth rate is due to
  the exclusion of the projected crisis probability from the econometric analysis. Arguing
  that such a crisis probability should indeed be included for the purpose of evaluating
  policy-regime implications, we estimate a reduced form empirical model relating short-
  term (cyclically unadjusted) output growth rates to policy regimes in a panel of
  developing countries. This makes it possible to estimate the effects of policy regimes on
  macroeconomic outcomes, and their relationship to the “crisis state” of the economy as
  projected by the market participants.
    The organization of the paper is as follows. In section 2, we briefly survey related
  empirical literature and discuss theoretical insights that serve as a background guide to
  the empirical analysis. In section 3, we describe the econometric methodology relevant
  for the evaluation of policy regimes in the presence of financial crises, and we introduce
  the data set. Section 4 presents the main empirical findings concerning the role of the
  crisis probability in the evaluation of policy regimes, and discusses their implications
  and robustness to different specifications, interpretations, and data sources. The
  concluding Section 5 summarized the results and reviews caveats and possible
  extensions.


2. RELATED LITERATURE

    Strikingly, the empirical literature has not been able to identify clear-cut real effects of
  exchange-rate regimes on the open economy. Indeed, Marianne Baxter and Alan

  5
    Indeed, 97 percent of all debt, placed in international markets between 1999 and 2001, was denominated in five currencies:
  the US Dollar, the Euro, the Yen, the Pound Sterling and the Swiss Franc. This feature of emerging markets' borrowing in the
  international market leads to balance-sheet type of currency crises, as formalized by Krugman (2000), and Schneider and
  Tornell (2000).
  6
     Part of this exchange rate risk can be hedged, although only (in the aggregate for a given developing country) to the limited
  extent that non-residents are willing to hold local currency exposure. Large cross-holdings of foreign assets and liabilities
  means that the valuation channel of exchange rate adjustment has grown in importance, relative to the traditional trade balance
  channel. In this context, see also Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2004), for an empirical analysis of the inter-connections between
  capital account openness and the exchange rate adjustment process.
CURRENCY REGIMES: CRISES AND GROWTH                                                                                                5

  Stockman (1989) and Robert Flood and Andy Rose (1995) find that there are no
  significant differences in business cycles across exchange rate regimes. A recent study
  Frankel and Wei (2004) explores how output lost in crises is related to various controls,
  including the degree of exchange rate flexibility, currency mismatch, FDI, etc. The
  exchange rate flexibility variable is found as not statistically significant.7
    Similarly, no definitive view emerges as to the aggregate effects of capital account
  liberalization. Indeed, Eichengreen (2001) who overviews the literature, points to
  ambiguities in the rather complex role played by capital account liberalization; and
  Rodrik (1998) finds no significant statistical association between capital account
  openness and growth. A recent study by Prasad et al (2005) finds that it is difficult to
  establish a robust causal relationship between the degree of financial integration and
  growth performance for developing countries. Kristin Forbes (2005) surveys the
  inconclusive macroeconomic evidence on capital controls like this: “…of the 14 recent
  papers they (that is, Prasad et al. (2005)) examine, three find a positive effect of financial
  integration on growth, four find no effect, and seven find mixed results”.8 Traditional
  explanations for the inconclusiveness focus on inaccurate measurement of capital
  account openness, 9 and on the possibly different effects of different types of capital
  flows and capital control.10


2.1. Theory as a guide to the empirical analysis

    This paper provides a different explanation to the puzzle. Self-fulfilling expectations
  games played by market participants have elements of a “beauty contest”. Market
  participants must care, not just about acting in the way that conforms with current
  fundamentals, but also about acting similarly to the way other do. Currency regimes
  determine the stochastic distribution of the fundamentals and the effect of the market


  7
    See however a recent study by Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenneger (2003), who find real effects of exchange-rate regime in cross-
  country data. Another exception is Rose (2000). In the paper, Rose uses evidence from existing currency unions in the world
  economy, to estimate the effect of currency unions on international trade. Rose finds that a currency union (which is an
  extreme form of a peg) expands bilateral trade between two average member countries by a huge proportion (200%, and more).
  Rose's currency union effects were reduced substantially when fixed country effects were incorporated in the analysis. Persson
  (2001) challenged Rose’s analysis, but also finds significant, albeit modest, effect of currency unions. Anderson and van
  Wincoop (2003) demonstrated the importance of including country fixed effects in gravity models. Although commonly
  estimated gravity equations generally have a very good fit to the data, they show that they are not theoretically grounded and
  prone to lead to biased estimation. They applied the method to solve the border puzzle. They find specifically that borders
  reduce bilateral national trade levels by plausible though substantial magnitudes.
  8
     A more definite view concerning positive effects of capital account liberalization on output, which is advanced by Fischer
  (1998), is supported by some evidence, provided by Quinn (1997). The role of pre-existing policies, and of trade-account vs.
  capital-account sequencing, in determining the effects of capital control liberalization on growth and investment, is examined
  by Arteta, Eichengreen and Wyplosz (2001), Chinn and Ito (2002), and Tornell, Westermann, and Martinez (2004). A recent
  evaluation of this literature by Prasad et al. (2004) yields also inconclusive result. It shows no significant relationship between
  financial openness and growth in real per capita income across countries, even after controlling for a series of standard
  explanatory variables (initial income, initial schooling, investment-GDP ratio, political instability, and regional dummies. See
  also Ariyoshi et al (2000), Bhagwati (1998), Edwards (1999, 2000) and Kaplan and Rodrik (2000).
  9
    Most of the studies use rough numerical indices of different policies and regulations. Other studies use de facto measures of
  integration (such as capital flows or foreign asset holdings) which are determined jointly with the macroeconomic performance
  they are supposed to explain.
  10
      Recent work (see, for example, Razin (2004)) suggests that the growth effects of foreign direct investment may be greater
  than other capital flows.
CURRENCY REGIMES: CRISES AND GROWTH                                                                                             6

  fundamentals on the macroeconomic performance. This is because the credibility, and
  effectiveness, of macroeconomic policies must depend on the currency regimes
  themselves. Thus, a currency regime exerts not only a direct effect on growth, through
  its effect on the market fundamentals (as in the traditional macroeconomic literature) but
  it also have an indirect effect on growth, through its impact on the probability of
  financial crises, based on the endogenously determined expectations, and the way these
  expectations are coordinated.
     In a stylised model of international capital flows associated with big fluctuations in the
  real exchange rate, Krugman (2000) identifies a general equilibrium link between real
  depreciations and macroeconomic performance in the presence of sudden stops. The
  driving mechanism in the model is the negative effect of real depreciations on the
  balance sheet of firms; hence on domestic investment spending. In that and other papers’
  common knowledge setting, all agents have the same knowledge about the
  fundamentals, and there exist multiple self-fulfilling equilibria. In recent literature,
  however, capital account reversals are triggered not only by fundamental shocks, but
  also by the degree to which market expectations about these fundamentals are
  coordinated (Morris and Shin, 2000). In the absence of common knowledge, an
  individual market participant receives only an independent and noisy signal about the
  fundamentals but also must have some uncertainty about the other market participants’
  expectations. Morris and Shin (2000) show how the market participants' knowledge
  about the statistical distributions of signals and market fundamentals (but not the actual
  realization of the fundamental and its idiosyncratic signals) helps to coordinate the
  behaviour of market participants.
     The coordination of expectations induces a unique equilibrium in such a set up, in
  which there exists a threshold level of the fundamental. That is, withdrawals from the
  domestic capital market materialize if the realized level of the fundamental is below the
  threshold; injections of capital into the market occur if the realized level of the
  fundamental is above the threshold. As a consequence, the equilibrium macroeconomic
  performance can be specified as a one-to-one function of a fundamental ex-ante
  probability of the financial crisis, derived from the probability distribution of the
  fundamentals is correlated with the macroeconomic performance.11 This gives a
  theoretical underpinning for the econometric model of the next section.


3. EMPIRICAL APPROACH

    The empirical test for the effects of exchange rate regimes on the economy is rooted in
  the theory of sudden stops that we describe in the previous section. Theory suggests that
  coordination of expectations by market participants may trigger a financial crisis in a
  situation characterized by a latent threshold state of the economy, determined by key
  macro fundamentals. The equilibrium is unique: a financial crisis occurs if the latent

  11
     Because the information is noisy, neither the market participants, who observe idiosyncratic signals, nor the econometrician,
  who observes only the equilibrium outcomes, could obtain precise information about the threshold level which triggers a
  crisis.
CURRENCY REGIMES: CRISES AND GROWTH                                                                                              7

  variable is below a certain threshold, and the economy's growth performance is weak.
  Above the threshold, financial crises are avoided and economic growth is strong. The
  estimated probability of sudden stops, which proxies the latent threshold state variable, is
  assumed to be negatively correlated with growth.
     From the perspective of the theory of policy regimes, there are good reasons to expect
  that the crisis threshold is also directly affected by the policy regime itself. For example,
  a peg is expected to lower the crisis threshold, and thus increase the crisis probability,
  for any given combination of country specific and world economy shocks. Likewise,
  capital market liberalization tends to raise the crisis probability. In other words, the
  adoption of a peg is expected to have a direct positive effect on growth, through the trade
  adjustment channel, and an indirect negative effect, through a crisis-probability channel.
  Similarly, the adoption of capital account liberalization is expected to have a direct
  positive effect on growth, through capital market efficiency channels, and an indirect
  negative effect, through a crisis-probability channel.
    The effect of the policy regime on growth is assumed to depend on the whether the
  economy is in a latent crisis state. The probability of the crisis state is obtained by fitting
  a Probit Model (or, alternatively, a Logit, or a Linear Probability Model) to the sample
  frequencies of observed crises, depending on the policy regime dummies and controls.
  Accordingly, a short term growth equation is fitted to the sample, depending on policy
  regimes, the estimated crisis probability, and standard controls. Policy-regime variables
  are modelled in level and change forms, capturing pre-existing policy-regimes and
  current changes in the regimes (whether a country switches from float to peg, or whether
  a country is imposing capital controls). The crisis probability itself depends on policy
  regime indicators, as well as on variable such as lagged sudden stops crises, government
  budget deficit, and initial GDP per capita.
    In practice, we estimate a reduced form empirical model relating short-term (cyclically
  unadjusted) output growth rates in a panel of developing countries, to policy regimes.
  The dependent variable, as an indicator of macroeconomic performance, is the short term
  (cyclically unadjusted) GDP growth rate. We choose as a measure of “sudden stop”
  crisis realizations a large annual depreciation in the real exchange rate. We model its
  probability by fitting a probability model (Probit, Logit, or linear), noting that such
  empirical models may be derived from a latent-variable specification (see e.g.
  Wooldridge, 2003) that is consistent with the theoretical framework outlined above.
    The measure of large real depreciations captures the effects of international financial
  crises on the domestic financial side as well as the real side of the economy.12 Typically,

  12
     Typically in the currency crisis literature sudden stops are measured by free falls in the nominal exchange rate. However,
  this does not distinguish between domestic price crises and balance-of-payments crises. In our indicator, crisis episodes do not
  include, therefore, countries which suffer from bouts of high inflation and currency depreciation, but with stable real exchange
  rates, because they do not qualify to be classified as balanced-of-payments crises. Evidently, the real exchange rate measure for
  crisis is strongly correlated with sharp reversals in the current-account balance; see Milesi-Ferretti and Razin (2000). Calvo,
  Izquierdo and Majia (2004) find that real exchange rate fluctuations coming hand in hand with sudden stops are a unique
  phenomenon in emerging-market economies. They use a sample of 32 developing countries, to analyze the empirical
  characteristics of sudden stops in capital flows and their relations to balance sheet effects. See also Bacchetta, Aghion and
  Banerjee (2001), Krugman (2000), Allen, Rosenberg, Keller, Sester, and Roubini (2002), and Eichengreen and Hausmann
  (1999). See also Bacchetta, Aghion and Banerjee (2001), Krugman (2000), Allen, Rosenberg, Keller, Sester, and Roubini
  (2002), and Eichengreen and Hausmann (1999s.
CURRENCY REGIMES: CRISES AND GROWTH                                                         8

  unexpected depreciations of the real exchange rate (rather than the nominal exchange
  rate) are likely to have significant balance-sheet effects, leading to bankruptcies and
  unemployment.
    The correlation between growth and currency regimes may of course reflect other
  underlying factors at play, not necessarily the true effect of the regime. For example, the
  cross-section correlation may be the outcome of time-invariant, unobserved,
  heterogeneity (across countries) rather than a causal effect of the regime on growth.
  Similarly, the time-series co-movements (within countries) may be the outcome of the
  effect of growth on the currency regime, rather than a causal effect of the regime on
  growth. To address the endogeneity issue we condition the time-invariant unobserved
  variation in the sample on country fixed-effects. We also instrument the variation over
  time in the sample (within a country) by using a measure of the past spell of the peg
  regime, which summarizes the history of the regime. The measure of the peg spell is
  defined as the number of years that a country had a pegged exchange rate up to that point
  of time, lagged by 6 years. Our identifying assumption is that the history of peg spell is
  not correlated with the error term (controlling for country fixed-effects). In addition, we
  also use lagged crisis (as a proxy for the crisis-related characteristics that are not
  captured by the country fixed effects or the peg spell measure), and lagged currency
  regime switches (as proxies for the current level or changes of the currency regime).
    Self-selection may of course be a problem. For example, when the crisis probability is
  high, a successful switch to peg can only be implemented by countries for which
  governments have some strong belief about the health of domestic economic
  fundamentals (like the case of Hong Kong during the Asian crises). Thus, the conclusion
  that the adoption of the peg is good for growth in a state of high probability of crisis may
  not be valid. Because the policy switch may be based on a self-selection of countries,
  from a pool of countries. In other words, it may be that a country chooses to adopt a
  specific exchange rate regime because of its underlying economic fundamentals. It may
  be the case that the probability of a crisis is driven by these fundamentals rather than by
  the exchange rate regime itself. In such a case one cannot necessarily conclude that the
  exchange rate regime is responsible for the outcome. To address this issue we run an
  auxiliary regression of the peg on several instruments, and use the instrumented peg not
  the actual peg, in the growth equation. The instruments that we have available are: (1)
  the past spell of the exchange-rate peg regime, (2) time dummies, and (3) country fixed
  effects. These instruments are likely to capture important characteristics of the health of
  a country's domestic economic fundamentals, and various time dependent shocks to the
  world economy. The latter are presumably strongly correlated with the choice of the
  exchange rate regime and the country's growth rate.
CURRENCY REGIMES: CRISES AND GROWTH                                                                                                  9

    In sum, our empirical methodology is capable of capturing the effects of policy
  regimes on macroeconomic outcomes, depending on a “Crisis State” of the economy, as
  projected by market participants.13


3.1. The data

    We have assembled data consisting of 105 middle and low income countries in the
  period 1970 to 1997. 14 Because of lags in the estimation (up to six period lags), and non
  availability of some variables for some countries, we reduce the sample to 92 countries
  (see Table 1), with 985 annual observations.
    We measure sudden stop crises by large fluctuations in the real exchange rate. In doing
  so, we attempt to capture the effects of the financial crisis on the real side of the
  economy through the balance sheet channel.15 16 Specifically, a sudden-stop crisis is
  defined by a sharp depreciation of the real exchange rate, with a 15 percent-per-year
  minimum threshold (a lower boundary of a one standard deviation band in our sample).
    We implement a binary index based on multiple categories of the IMF- classification
  of exchange rate regimes. We also implement a binary index based on the different
  multiple categories of the Reinhart and Rogoff classification of exchange rate regimes,
  but only for a sub-sample of 58 countries of the 100 countries.17 As a proxy for the
  exchange rate regime in the recent past we define the instrumental variable peg spell in
  period t for country j, as the number of the years from t-2 to t-6, in which the country has
  been on a peg.
    Measuring the degree of openness of trade and capital accounts is always a heroic task.
  Since 1950, the IMF has issued an annual publication, which tries to describe the
  controls that its member countries have in place on various current account capital
  account transactions. We measure capital-account openness by a binary index based on a

  13
     Nesting a probit estimate in a panel may raise in general issues in the statistical distribution of the error term. Often, a noisy
  explanatory variable may bias the standard errors in the second-stage growth regression. A bias in the standard errors exists
  when the latent variable, although being known to the economic agent, is, however unknown to the econometrician. This issue
  is mute in our case because the projected probability of the “Crisis-prone State” is the same for market participants and the
  econometrician. Hence, in our case the second-stage standard errors are not biased.
  14
     We updated data set, originally assembled by Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti and Assaf Razin (2000), to account for the Asian
  crisis in 1997.
  15
     Typically in the currency crisis literature sudden stops are measured by free falls in the nominal exchange rate. However,
  this does not distinguish between domestic price crises and balance-of-payments crises. In our indicator, crisis episodes do not
  include, therefore, countries which suffer from bouts of high inflation and currency depreciation, but with stable real exchange
  rates, because they do not qualify to be classified as balanced-of-payments crises. Evidently, the real exchange rate measure for
  crisis is strongly correlated with sharp reversals in the current-account balance. See Milesi-Ferretti and Razin (2000). See also
  Calvo, Izquierdo and Majia (2004) on sudden stops and real-exchange-rate fluctuations.
  16
     Calvo, Izquierdo, and Mejia (2004) find that real exchange rate fluctuations coming hand in hand with sudden stops are a
  unique phenomenon in emerging-market economies. They use a sample of 32 developing countries, to analyze the empirical
  characteristics of sudden stops in capital flows and their relations to balance sheet effects. See also Bacchetta, Aghion and
  Banerjee (2001), Krugman (2000), Allen, Rosenberg, Keller, Sester, and Roubini (2002), and Eichengreen and Hausmann
  (1999). See also Bacchetta, Aghion and Banerjee (2001), Krugman (2000), Allen, Rosenberg, Keller, Sester, and Roubini
  (2002), and Eichengreen and Hausmann (1999).
  17
     Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) updated the IMF official classification of exchange rate regimes prior to 1997, as described in
  the various issues of the IMF's Annual Report on Exchange Rate Arrangements and Exchange Rate Restrictions. The IMF
  empirical definition of exchange rate regimes is based on formal government statements. The Reinhart-Rogoff classification is
  based on an empirical algorithm, factoring in ex-post behavior. The Reinhart-Rogoff classification applies to only a subset of
  the original sample of 100 countries.
CURRENCY REGIMES: CRISES AND GROWTH                                                                                              10

  list of various restrictions on capital account transactions, reported in the IMF Annual
  Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions.18
     Table 2 presents some stylized facts for growth, the frequency of crises, the frequency
  of the peg regime, the average spell of the peg regime, and the frequency of capital
  controls; all classified by years and by regions. We can see that growth is variable across
  time and region, crises are rare, the frequency of a peg is large, and the frequency of
  capital controls is very large. In Table 3 we present simple correlations between the
  growth, peg, peg spell, capital controls and crises. There is almost no correlation
  between the peg regime and growth, indicating that the first “puzzle” is present in the
  data. Capital controls are correlated negatively with growth, positively with exchange
  rate pegs, and negatively with the crisis indicator. The peg state and peg spell are highly
  correlated (but the peg spell and growth are only weakly correlated), indicating that the
  peg spell could indeed serve as a good instrument. In Table 4 we present similar
  correlations while controlling for country fixed effects. Among the highlights we find
  that the peg and the growth rate are only weakly correlated while capital controls and
  growth are negatively correlated. We find that the crisis and peg are no longer strongly
  correlated, and capital controls and peg spell are not significantly correlated either. The
  fact that peg and peg spell are significantly correlated, whereas peg and growth are not
  correlated, implies that the peg spell is a good instrument for the policy regime dummies.


4. ESTIMATION RESULTS

    Table 5 presents the estimation of the base line econometric model. (A few outliers of
  exceptional negative growth are excluded.) The table consists of three panels. Panel A
  presents growth equations, with and without the probability of crisis as the explanatory
  variable. If the crisis probability is excluded, the coefficient of the instrumented peg is
  positive (2.8765) but not significant. The coefficient of capital controls is negative (-
  1.1670) and significant, while the coefficient of the switch to the peg is negative (-
  1.0252) but not significant. If the crisis probability is included, the coefficient of the
  instrumented peg is positive (5.2629) and significant. The coefficient of capital controls
  is negative (-1.5811) and significant, and the coefficient of the switch to the peg is
  negative (-2.8357) and significant. The direct effect of the policy regimes are uncovered
  if we control for the crisis probability in the growth equation. The crisis probability’s
  coefficient is negative (-6.0377) and significant.
    Panel B presents the crisis probability equation. Instrumented peg has a significant
  positive coefficient (2.6578), capital controls has a significant negative coefficient (-
  0.4594), and the switch to capital controls has a significant negative coefficient (-
  1.2737). The exclusion restriction variable, the external debt, has a significant positive
  coefficient (0.0125). Panel C presents the auxiliary peg equation. Lagged switch to peg,
  and peg spell, have positive and significant coefficients. This is a positive evidence for
  the role they play as instruments.

  18
       The policy regime dummies can be interpreted as rule based. For alternative quantitative measures, see Edison et al (2004).
CURRENCY REGIMES: CRISES AND GROWTH                                                         11

     We can decompose the effect of policy regimes on growth into direct and indirect
   effects for the sample average as follows. The instrumented peg has a coefficient of 0.6
   in the probit regression panel, whereas an increase in the crisis probability reduces
   growth by 6 percentage points (a lot!) per year, in the growth regression panel.
   Therefore, the indirect effect of the instrumented peg on growth is -3.6 percentage
   points, per year. The direct effect of the peg on growth is 5.2 percentage points, per year.
   The overall (marginal) effect is mildly positive, 1.6 percentage points, per year. But this
   is the magnitude of the effect for the sample average. Because the crisis probability
   equation is non linear, the composition and size of the effect would change with
   variations in the magnitude of the crisis probability.


4.1.   Exploring nonlinear effects

     One may wonder whether the non linear indirect effect, via the probability channel,
   shown in Table 5, masks another non linear direct effect of the regime on growth.
     In Table 6 we specify, as an alternative hypothesis, a polynomial structure for the
   currency regime. The Table has three panels: polynomials of order one, two and three,
   for the currency regime variable, respectively. Columns (iii) may seem to imply that the
   effect of the peg is non-linear because the coefficient of the linear term is positive and
   the coefficient of the quadratic term is negative. Yet, once we introduce the crisis
   probability as an independent variable in column (iv) the direct non-linear effect
   disappears because the coefficient of the quadratic term is insignificant. The polynomial
   of order 2 in panel C of Table 6 has insignificant coefficients, because of severe
   multicollinearity among variables of the polynomial.
     To investigate the phenomenon of non linearity further, we compare in Table 7 Probit,
   Logit and linear probability models. The coefficient of the instrumented peg is larger in
   the growth equation for all three probability models than in the growth equation where
   the crisis probability is excluded (see Panel A). Similarly, capital controls exert a
   stronger negative direct effect on growth if the crisis probability is included in the
   growth equation. The crisis probability has a significant negative coefficient in all three
   probability specifications. The effect is stronger in the Probit and Logit compared to the
   linear probability model.
     In Panel B the qualitative effects of policy regimes on the crisis probability are similar
   across the three probability specifications.
     We conclude that the main results are robust for the specification of the probability
   model. The Probit and Logit fit the data better than the linear probability.


4.2. The effects of currency regimes

     The reduced-form marginal effect of a policy-regime switch from float to peg, which
   incorporates both a direct and an indirect effect (which is working through the crisis
   probability), is plotted in Figure 1 against the projected probability (estimated in the
CURRENCY REGIMES: CRISES AND GROWTH                                                                                12

  Probit model). The U-shaped graph implies that in the extreme ranges, when the
  probability is relatively low and when the probability is relatively high, the marginal
  effect of the policy switch is positive. This is because in these ranges of the projected
  probability function the regime switch does not trigger a big change in the probability,
  and the direct effect on growth of the regime switch dominates the indirect effect. In the
  intermediate range for the probability function, the reduced-form marginal effect of a
  policy-regime switch from float to peg is negative. This because the policy-regime
  switch does generate a big marginal increase in the probability of crisis and the indirect
  effect of the regime switch dominates the direct effect. The linear probability model does
  not, however, produce a flat line. Indeed, a switch to peg does not have positive effects
  at ranges where the estimated probability of crisis is close to upper bound one.
    Figure 1 also plots the frequency of crisis probability in the sample. Almost all the
  observations are concentrated in the low probability range. There almost no observations
  for crisis probabilities above 50 percent. Therefore the high probability estimate of the
  effect of the peg is not policy relevant. As the probability gets closer to the sample
  average the growth effect of the peg is small, consistently with the first “puzzle” of the
  traditional literature. Similarly, Figure 2 demonstrates how the reduced-form marginal
  effect of capital controls, which incorporates both the direct and the indirect effects,
  depends on the crisis probability. The reversed U-shaped diagram implies that the
  marginal effect of the policy switch is mostly negative. However, in the intermediate
  probability range, the marginal effect of the policy-regime is less negative. As one gets
  closer to the sample average, the second “puzzle” of the traditional literature is observed.


4.3. Different exchange- rate regime classifications

    In this section we use the Reinhart-Rogoff classification for the exchange rate regime,
  as a robustness check to see if our results are sensitive to an alternative classification.
  The alternative classification applies to only a subset of the original sample of 100
  countries.19 Accordingly, we perform in this section a variety of robustness tests:
  sample-robustness and regression-specification. In addition to this we also address the
  difference between domestic price crises and sudden stops crises. 20


    19
        The frequency of currency and price crises in the sample are as follows. Sudden stop episodes appear in
  65.5 percent of observations, and domestic-price-crisis episodes occur in 46.1 percent of the observations.
    20
         We note that the literature has been dealing in the past extensively with the relation between inflation
  and growth. Bruno and Easterly (1998) propose a method, based on discrete high inflation crises, to look at the
  relationships between inflation and growth. They find that growth falls sharply during discrete high inflation
  crises; then growth recovers quickly after inflation falls below the threshold. Their approach, however, implies
  that growth is negatively affected by high inflation, above a certain threshold; but growth is not affected by
  inflation below the threshold. This discontinuity appears to be somewhat arbitrary. The Bruno-Easterly
  methodology is based on actual domestic price crises. Our methodology points out the role of a latent and
  continuous “crisis-prone state”, estimated by a continuous crisis probability function. This means that even if
  the crisis does not materialize, the crisis probability could still be sufficiently big to affect the rate of growth.
  In this section we consider the effect of domestic price crises in addition to sudden stops’ crises.
CURRENCY REGIMES: CRISES AND GROWTH                                                                                            13

    Table 8 describes the effect of the peg and capital controls on growth. Qualitatively,
  the findings in Table 8 (using the Reinhart-Rogoff classification in the sub sample) and
  Table 5 (using the IMF classification in the broad sample of 100 countries) are very
  similar: a switch to peg has positive coefficient, a switch to capital controls has a
  negative coefficient, and the crisis probability has a negative coefficient; all estimators
  are statistically significant. This can serve as evidence for the robustness of our
  methodological approach. In column (ii) of Table 8, the sudden stop probability includes
  the effect of the domestic price crisis. Notice that the effect of the crisis probability on
  growth is barely significant. In column (iii) we include two types of a projected
  probability of sudden stops: one which includes, and the other which excludes the effect
  of the price crisis. Observe that the coefficient of the latter type of projected probability
  is highly significant and negative. The estimated coefficient is larger in absolute value
  than the corresponding coefficient in column (i) of Table 8. The coefficient of projected
  probability of sudden stops which includes the effect of price crisis, in column (iii), is
  however not significant. We interpret this as evidence that domestic price crisis affect
  growth through the sudden-stops probability channel.


4.4. Currency regimes and debt dollarisation

    We observe that different economies in our sample have also different levels of
  exposure to capital flow volatility that can trigger unanticipated fluctuations in the real
  exchange rate. 21 We use the ratio of the country’s foreign currency liabilities to its
  money supply (FLM), as a proxy for the country’s foreign currency exposure to
  fluctuations in the real exchange rate. We address the effect of a policy-regime switch on
  dollarisation, and the role of dollarisation in the macroeconomic process.22
    Table 9 provides estimates of the influence of a policy-regime switch on dollarisation.
  Column (i) indicates that the policy regimes (a switch to peg, and the imposition of
  capital controls) do not have a direct effect on dollarisation. Column (ii) indicates a
  significant effect of the crisis probability, as a single explanatory variable, on
  dollarisation. Column (iii) indicates that policy regimes do not directly affect
  dollarisation, but only indirectly affect dollarisation through the crisis probability.
    So, overall, the table shows that the exchange rate regime can affect the crisis
  probability, which in turn can affect dollarisation. In Table 6 we showed that a switch to
  a peg raises the probability of a crisis, therefore the switch to a peg lowers dollarisation
  through its effect on the crisis probability. The opposite happens when a country
  switches to capital controls.




  22
     Savastano (2004) find that dollarisation appear to increase exchange rate pass-through. This mechanism may reinforce the
  claim that the “fear of floating” is a greater problem for developing economies, with highly dollarized debt. The role of balance
  sheet effects, the linkage between currency risk and country risk, and the impact of dollarisation on trade are analyzed in Levy
  Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2003). See also Calvo and Reinhart (2000).
CURRENCY REGIMES: CRISES AND GROWTH                                                                                            14

     We now turn to the analysis of how dollarisation influences growth. Columns (i) and
  (ii) of Table 10 indicate that FLM, the dollarisation measure, does not have any direct
  influence on growth, once we control for the actual realization of sudden stop crises. A
  crisis, as expected, reduces growth, and in a significant way. In column (iii) of Table 10
  we introduce the interaction between dollarisation and the realized sudden stops. The
  coefficient of the interaction term is negative and highly significant. This means that
  although dollarisation does not have an independent influence on growth, the interaction
  between dollarisation and the actual crisis, tend to reduce the growth rate drastically.
     This means that the following policy-regime induced mechanism may have been at
  work in the data: The imposition of capital controls tends to lower the probability of
  sudden stops and the decrease in the probability of sudden stops, in turn, tend to raise the
  level of dollarisation. If a crisis actually occurs, then the growth rate diminished. If,
  however the crisis does not materialize, then growth is to a large extent unaffected.


5. CONCLUSIONS, CAVEATS AND EXTENSIONS

    The choice of macroeconomic policies has been cast traditionally in terms of the well-
  known policy tri-lemma. This is a way of describing succinctly a choice among three
  policy goals: pegging the exchange rate, keeping the capital markets open, or conducting
  a business-cycle stabilizing monetary policy. The tri-lemma arises because only two of
  these policy goals can be achieved at any point in time. Both foreign and domestic
  economic shocks (including policy mistakes) may move the equilibrium nominal
  exchange rate away from the pegged rate. If the official rate is overvalued, the defence
  typically requires higher interest rates and fiscal contraction to reduce the current
  account deficit. If the excess demand has become large, either because policy was slow
  to react or because the country has been hit by a strong and long-lasting shock, the
  required policy actions may not be viable; either for political-economic reasons or
  because of the damage they will inflict on the banking system or on aggregate demand.
  Under those circumstances an attack on the exchange rate is likely to succeed.
  Therefore, there is a fourth policy goal: keeping the economy out of sudden stops to
  international capital flows, or other violent types of financial crises. The literature,
  however, often ignores this aspect of the currency-regime choice problem. 23

    A recurrent problem with the fixed exchange rate regime is that it provides a one-way
  bet to speculators. Often the consequence is massive capital outflows which put upward
  pressures on interest rates. In Latin America and south-east Asia in the 1990s,
  abandoning a fixed exchange rate regime led to severe recessions. On the other hand, the
  benefits of freely floating exchange rate are not unlimited. Exchange rate risks impose
  huge costs on firms. It is costly for firms to divest themselves of this risk, especially in
  low income countries where the financial markets are under-developed. As a


  23
     The tri-lemma, of a fixed exchange rate, capital mobility, and a monetary policy dedicated to domestic goals, is traditionally
  regarded as the main explanation of the non-viability of pegs.
CURRENCY REGIMES: CRISES AND GROWTH                                                        15

  consequence, currency regimes have conflicting effects on growth in a sample of
  emerging markets and low income countries. Therefore, it has been difficult to establish
  clear cut effects of currency regimes for these economies.
    Indeed, a long standing puzzle in the literature is the failure to find any systematic
  difference in the macroeconomic process across exchange rate regimes. Another puzzle
  is the absence of a robust empirical relation between macroeconomic performance and
  capital-account liberalization. The main idea of the paper is that sudden stop crises
  which could have happened but did not, have affected cyclically unadjusted growth
  negatively. 24 We bring out theory to rationalize the inclusion of the crisis probability in
  the growth equation in order to evaluate currency regimes. The external debt serves as
  the exclusion restriction variable to identify the probability equation. We use several
  instruments to deal with the endogeneity of currency regimes, including the past spell of
  the pegged regime.
     We find that the influence on the overall macroeconomic performance of currency
  regimes depends on the likelihood of sudden stops to capital flows. In various
  specifications, if the probability of sudden stops is excluded from the growth equation,
  we find that the instrumented peg and the financial liberalization regime indicators are
  insignificant in the growth equation; thereby tracing the literature “puzzles” in our
  sample. In various specifications, the instrumented peg has a positive and highly
  significant effect on growth after the inclusion of the crisis probability in the growth
  equations, and with the instrumented peg. The instruments that we use are: the past spell
  of the peg, country fixed effects, lagged crises, lagged policy regime switches, and time
  dummies. The external debt serves as the exclusion restriction variable.
    In addition, capital controls (both in levels and changes) have a negative, and highly
  significant, effect on growth after the inclusion of the crisis probability in the growth
  equations The projected probability of an international financial crisis increases with the
  imposition of an exchange rate peg, and falls with the imposition of capital controls
  (both in level and change forms); The spell of the peg, country fixed effects, lagged
  crises, time dummies, as instruments, and the external debt serves as the exclusion
  restriction variable.
    We also find that the projected crisis probability has significant effects on debt
  dollarisation, and, at the same time, currency regimes determine the degree of debt
  dollarisation through the crisis probability channel. It is the interaction term between the
  degree of dollarisation and realized crises which is significantly negative in the growth
  equation, whereas the coefficients of the currency regime dummies are not significant.

    The estimations imply that the overall effect of currency regimes on macroeconomic
  performance work through the direct channel and the crisis probability channel. The
  latter is intrinsically non-linear at an intermediate range of the crisis probability. Thus
  countries with low crisis probability can benefit from an exchange-rate peg and capital
  market liberalization. Countries with an intermediate level of the crisis probability can

  24
       Directly related is the "Peso problem" literature (e.g., Veronesi (2004)).
CURRENCY REGIMES: CRISES AND GROWTH                                                      16

  benefit from a more flexible exchange rate regime and some controls on capital flows.
  We do not have in our sample more than a few countries with an estimated crisis
  probability above 50 percent, however. Therefore we cannot draw any policy-relevant
  conclusion for the effect of policy regime on growth in the high crisis-probability range.

    We list a few caveats. The data have little time variation concerning the country-
  specific fiscal and monetary shocks. Therefore we are unable to conduct a full-fledged
  dynamic analysis. Accordingly, the econometric methodology we employ is not able to
  analyze persistency of the effects of policy regime on long term growth. The background
  theory that we present in the paper posits that optimising agents will design their
  portfolio strategies based on expectations about policy rules. We have no good theory
  however of policy reaction functions in a financially unstable environment. To take
  seriously the issue of the endogeneity of the policy regimes one has to develop such
  theory and have access to high-frequency data, defined consistently across countries.
    We also note that the indicators of capital controls used in the analysis do not
  distinguish controls on inflows and outflows. Controls on inflows may have quite
  different effects than controls on outflows. Therefore, they exert different influence on
  the probability of sudden stops. Cooper (1999, p. 111) notes that these descriptions are
  very imperfect measures of the extent of restrictions, particularly in the case of the
  capital account:
    “… Restrictions on international capital transactions … come in infinite variety.
  Therefore an accurate portrayal requires knowledge not only of the laws and regulations
  in place, but also of how they are implemented—which often requires much official
  discretion—and of how easily they are circumvented, either legally or illegally. The IMF
  reports the presence of restrictions, but not their intensity or their impact.”
    The IMF empirical definition of exchange rate regimes is based on formal government
  statements. The Reinhart-Rogoff classification is based on an empirical algorithm,
  clustering ex-post behaviour. Both are not pure rule-based proxies, as our framework
  assumes.
    Finally, we suggest two extensions. One extension of our analysis could consider
  regional spill-over effects. The crisis probability may affect one large country in the
  region, may have also negative effects on the growth of other countries in the region.
  Another extension concerns the choice between rules vs. discretion in monetary policy.
  Different monetary rules may systematically affect the probability of bank runs (as in
  Diamond and Dybvig (1983)), or stock market crashes. An econometric valuation of
  monetary rules can incorporate the effect of these rules on the probability of financial
  crises similarly to the evaluation of currency regimes in this paper.
CURRENCY REGIMES: CRISES AND GROWTH                                                             17



REFERENCES
  Allen, M., C. Rosenberg, C. Keller, B. Sester, and N. Roubini (2004). "A Balance Sheet Approach
    to Financial Crisis," IMF WP/02/210 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
  Anderson, J., and E. van Wincoop (2003). "Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border
    Puzzle,” American Economic Review (March).
  Ariyoshi, A., K. Habermeier, B. Laurens, Incintker-Robe, J. I. Canales-Kriljenko and A. Kirilenko
    (2000). “Capital Controls: Country Experiences with Their Use and Liberalization,” Occasional
    Paper 190 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
  Arteta, C., B. Eichengreen, and C. Wyplosz (2001). “When Does Capital Account Liberalization
    help more than it hurts?" NBER Working Paper No. 8414 (Cambridge, Massachusetts, National
    Bureau of Economic Research).
  Bacchetta, P., P. Aghion and A. Banerjee (2001). "Currency Crises and Money, in Credit-
    Constrained Economies," European Economic Review, Vol. 45, 1121–1150.
  Baxter, M. and A. Stockman (1989). “Business Cycle and Exchange Regime: Some International
    Evidence,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 23, 377–400
  Bhagwati, J. (1998). "The Capital Myth," Foreign Affairs, Vol. 77, No. 3 (May-June), 7–12.
  Bruno, M., and W. Easterly (1998). "Inflation Crises and Long-run Growth," Journal of Monetary
    Economics, Vol. 41 (February), 3–26.
  Calvo, G. A. (1998). “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple Analytics of Sudden
    Stops,” Journal of Applied Economics (CEMA), 1(1): 35-54.
  ———, A. Izquierdo and L.-F. Mejia (2004). “On the Empirics of Sudden Stops: The Relevance
    of Balance-Sheet Effects,” mimeo, University of Maryland (May).
  ——— and C. M. Reinhart (2000). "Reflections on Dollarisation," in Alberto Alesina and Robert
    Barro (editors), Currency Unions, forthcoming. (Stanford: Hoover Institution Press).
  ——— and C. M. Reinhart (2002). "Fear of Floating," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    Volume CXVII, No. 2 (May), 379–408.
  ———, C. M. Reinhart, and C. A. Vegh (1995). "Targeting the Real Exchange Rate: Theory and
    Evidence," Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 47, 97–133.
  Chang, R. and A. Velasco (2000). "Exchange Rate Policy for Developing Countries," American
    Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 90, No. 2 (May), 71–75.
  Chinn, M. D., and H. Ito (2002). "Capital Account Liberalization, Institutions and Financial
    Development: Cross Country Evidence," NBER Working Paper No. 8967 (Cambridge,
    Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research).
  Cooper, R. (1999). “Should Capital Controls be banished?” Brookings Papers on Economic
    Activity, 89-125.
  Diamond D. and P. Dybvig (1983). "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance and Liquidity," Journal of
    Political Economy, Vol. 91, 401-419.
  Edison, H., M. Klein, L. A. Ricci and T. M. Slok (2004). "Capital Account Liberalization and
    Economic Performance: Survey and Synthesis, IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 51, No. 2 (August), 219–
    256.
  Edwards, S. (1999). "How Effective are Capital Controls?" Journal of Economic Perspectives,
    Vol. 13, No 4 (Fall), 65–84.
  ——— (2000). "Exchange Rate Regimes, Capital Flows and Crisis Prevention," NBER
    (December). Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research.
  Eichengreen, B. (2001). "Capital-Account Liberalization: What Cross-Country Studies Tel Us?"
    World Bank Economic Review, Vol. 15, 341–365 (Washington: The World Bank).
  Eichengreen, B. and R. Hausmann (1999). "Exchange Rates and Financial Fragility," NBER
    Working Paper 7418 (November). Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic
    Research.
  Fischer, S. (1998). "Capital-Account Liberalization and the Role of the IMF," in Should the IMF
    Pursue Capital-Account Convertibility? Princeton Essays in International Finance, Vol. 207, 1–
    10, Princeton University, International Finance Section,
  ——— (2001). "Distinguished Lecture on Economics in Government-Exchange Rate Regimes: Is
    the Bipolar View Correct?” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, Volume 15, No. 2 (spring),
    3–24.
CURRENCY REGIMES: CRISES AND GROWTH                                                               18

  Flood, R. P. and A. Rose (1995). “Fixing Exchange Rates: A Virtual Quest for Fundamentals,”
    Journal of Monetary Economics.
  Forbes, K. J. (2005). “The Microeconomic Evidence on Capital Controls,” NBER Working Paper
    No. 11372 (June). Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research.
  Frankel, J. A., and S.-J. Wei (2004). "Managing Macroeconomic Crises," NBER Working Paper
    No. 10907 (November). Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research.
  Ghosh, A. R., A.-M. Gulde and H. C. Wolf (2000). "Currency Boards: More than a Quick Fix?"
    Economic Policy, Vol. 31 (October), 270–335.
  International Monetary Fund, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange
    Restrictions, various years.
  Kaplan, E. and D. Rodrik (2000). "Did the Malaysian Capital Controls Work?” Kennedy School of
    Government (December).
  Krugman, P. (2000). "Balance Sheets, The Transfer Problem, and Financial Crises," in
    International Finance and Financial Crises: Essays in Honor of Robert P. Flood, Jr., ed. by Peter
    Isard, Assaf Razin, and Andrew K. Rose, 31–44 (Kluwer Academic Publishers).
  Lane, P. R. and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti (2004). "Financial Globalization and Exchange Rates,"
    CEPR Discussion Paper No. 4745 (November).
  Levy-Yeyati, E. and F. Sturzenegger (2003). ‘To Float or to Fix: Evidence on the Impact of
    Exchange Rate Regimes on Growth’, American Economic Review, Vol. 93(4), 1173-1193
  Milesi-Ferretti, G. M. and A. Razin (1996), ‘Current-Account Sustainability’, The Princeton
    Studies in International Finance, No 81, International Finance Section, Princeton University.
  Milesi-Ferretti, G. M. and A. Razin (2000). "Current Account Reversals and Currency Crises:
    Empirical Regularities," in Currency Crises, ed. by Paul Krugman, 285–323 (Chicago:
    University of Chicago Press).
  Morris, S. and H. S. Shin (2000). "Rethinking Multiple Equilibria in Macroeconomic Modeling,"
    NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Number 15, 139–161.
  Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogoff (1995). ''The Mirage of Fixed Exchange Rates,'' Journal of Economic
    Perspectives, Vol. 9, No. 4 (Fall), 73–96.
  Quinn, D. (1997). ''The Correlates of Change in International Financial Regulation,'' American
    Political Science Review, Vol. 91, No. 3, (September), 531–51.
  Persson, T. (2001). “Currency Unions and Trade: How Large is the Treatment Effect?” Economic
    Policy, Vol. 33, 433–448.
  Prasad, E., K. Rogoff, S.-J. Wei and M. A. Kose (2005). " Financial Globalization, Growth on
    Developing Countries, and Volatility in Developing Countries” NBER Working Paper no.
    10942, forthcoming in Globalization and Poverty, Ann Harrison (editor), University of Chicago
    Press.
  Razin, A. (2004). “The Contribution of FDI Flows to Domestic Investment in Capacity, and Vice
    Versa,” in Growth and Productivity in East Asia, NBER-EASE, Volume 13, T. Ito and A. K.
    Rose (eds.), University of Chicago Press.
  Reinhart, C. and K. Rogoff (2004), "The Modern History of Exchange Rate Arrangements: A
    Reinterpretation," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 119, Issue 1, February, 1–48.
  Rodrik, D. (1998).        "Who Needs Capital-Account Convertibility?" Princeton Essays in
    International Finance, No. 207, 55–65.
  Rodrik, D. (2002). “Feasible Globalizations,” NBER working paper 9129.
  Rose, A. (2000). “One Money, One Market: Estimating the Effect of Common Currencies on
    Trade,” Economic Policy, Issue 30, 7–45.
  Schneider, M. and A. Tornell (2000). “Balance Sheet Effects, Bailout Guarantees and Financial
    Crises,” NBER Working Paper No. W8060.
  Tornell, A., F. Westermann and L. Martinez (2004). "The Positive Link Between Financial
    Liberalization, Growth, and Crises," NBER Working Paper No. 10293 (February).
  Veronesi, P. (2004). "The Peso Problem Hypothesis and Stock Market Returns, The Journal of
    Economic Dynamics and Control, Vol. 28, No. 4 (January) 231-245.
  Voth, H.-J. (2004). “Capital Controls in Post War Europe,” CREI paper no. 14, University of
    Pompeu Fabra, April.
  Williamson, J. (2000). ”Exchange-Rate Regimes for Emerging Markets: Reviving the Intermediate
    Option”. (Washington: Institute for International Economics (September).
  Wooldridge, J. M. (2003). Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach. Second              Edition
    Thompson South Western.
   EVALUATION OF EXCHANGE-RATE                                                              21



APPENDIX A. A stylised model of sudden stops

    The model posits an exogenous stochastic process for the fundamentals (e.g.,
  aggregate export volumes) that foreign creditors estimate based on public and private
  information. The extended model features a double guessing game by the foreign
  creditors, who receive noisy signals. First, each foreign creditor assesses the realized
  state of the domestic economy fundamentals; and, second, he/she guesses the likelihood
  of the credit extension-withdrawal action that all the other foreign creditors are going to
  take, given the signals they receive. The rational-expectations’ equilibrium of such
  global game is the set of self fulfilling guesses so that the level of domestic investment
  implicit in the credit offers must match the actual level of investment that takes place
  given those offers.
    Assume that there are N domestic entrepreneurs, who are single mindfully engaged in
  wealth accumulation (save only), and N foreign creditors, who supply the credit which
  domestic entrepreneurs demand in order to make investment. Let Itα denote investment in
  capacity by an individual entrepreneur, and let borrowing be specified as λ times the
  entrepreneur’s net worth, W. Denote by yt, Ft-1 and pt, the domestic output (produced by
  a standard Cobb-Douglas technology with a capital input output share α), the initial debt,
  indexed to foreign goods, and the real exchange rate (the relative price of foreign goods
  in terms of domestic goods), respectively. The entrepreneur’s net worth is:

    Wt= α yt- pt Ft-1 .                                                                  (A1)

    A foreign lender imposes a credit limit, so that the investment, Itα, is constrained by the
  entrepreneur’s net worth, Wt, and the leverage fraction, λ:

    Itα≤ (1+λ)Wt                                                                         (A2)

    Market-clearing real exchange rate is specified as a function of aggregate investment
  and output:

           [1 − 1(1 − α )(1 − υ )]Yt − (1 − υ ) I t
    pt =                     ~                      ,                                    (A3)
                             Xt

  where, I=NIα, Y=Ny, denote the aggregate domestic investment and aggregate output,
                                                                             ~
  respectively. The coefficient υ denotes the marginal propensity to import, X t denotes
  the stochastic volume of exports, expressed in terms of foreign goods. The cumulative
                           ~                  ~
  distribution function of X t is given by G( X t ).
    An increase the aggregate investment I t triggers real appreciation, a fall in pt ,
  through a standard “transfer problem” mechanism [see Krugman (2000)].
EVALUATION OF EXCHANGE-RATE                                                                22

  Rates of return differentials, which induce foreign creditors to extend loans to
domestic entrepreneurs, are captured by a weak form of the interest parity condition:

               pt
  (1 + rt )         ≥ (1 + r * ),                                                       (A4)
              pt +1

where, r and r* denote the marginal productivity of capital and the foreign interest rate,
respectively. We start with the case of common knowledge, as in Krugman (2000).
Figure A describes the multiplicity of equilibrium outcomes, depending on the
                        ~
realization of exports, X t . Because the entrepreneur is insolvent if exports are low and
the real exchange rate is depreciated, the credit constraint is binding strongly. In this case
there exists a unique equilibrium with zero investment. In an intermediate case there are
multiple equilibrium-investment outcomes, due to the existence of expectations-
coordination failure. Because the credit constraint is not binding if the real exchange rate
is appreciated, there exists a unique equilibrium with investment determined by marginal
productivity conditions, if export volumes are high.
  Now turn to the case of noisy signals about exports. Assume that a foreign creditor i
                                   ~
receive a private signal θi about X t as follows.

         ~
  θ i = X t + ε ti .                                                                    (A5)


  The error term εti is assumed to be i.i.d.
  An individual foreign creditor’s decision whether or not to extend credit to the
domestic entrepreneur crucially depends on her signal, a draw from a uniform
distribution with a support [-ε, ε].
                                                                             ~*
  Applying the global-game methodology, there exists a cut-off signal, θ i = X t + ε ti ,
                                                                          *          *

so that

                     ~ ~
                  p( N t* , X t* )
     E [(1 + rt )                  ] − (1 + r * ) = 0 .                                 (A6)
  N ~U [ 0 ,1]        pt +1

  The marginal individual creditor, who receives a threshold signal

         ~
  θ i* = X t* + ε * ,
                    ti
                                                                                        (A7)


  The creditor is indifferent between withholding, and extending the credit to the
domestic entrepreneur counterpart.
                                                                             ~
  Observe that the reduced-form function of equilibrium pt is decreasing in N , the
number of foreign creditors, and decreasing in export volumes (the fundamental which
                                ~
drives the equilibrium outcome) X t .
EVALUATION OF EXCHANGE-RATE                                                                23
                           ~*
  The threshold level, X t , therefore determines a unique equilibrium outcome as a
                                                          ~*
solution to the global game. Below the threshold X t investment is equal to zero,
                                                                                ~*
because all foreign investors tend to withhold credit. Above the threshold, X t , domestic
investment is driven by a standard rate-of-return consideration reaching a unique level
of I t ; because all foreign investors extend credit and strict interest parity prevails. This
means that there is also a unique probability of a sudden stop in capital flow:

                     ~*
  Prob{I=0}=G( X t ).                                                                   (A8)

  Furthermore, the associated (expected) level of aggregate investment is given by

               ~
  ( I (1 − G ( X t* )) .                                                                (A9)


  Because of the uniqueness of equilibrium it can be summarized by a projected crisis
probability, which is directly linked to the level of aggregate domestic investment and
the real exchange rate. An essential feature of the equilibrium is the existence of a
threshold in the value of some synthetic index of fundamentals (e.g., aggregate export
volumes) that separate “crisis states” from “no crisis states”. Building on such
framework we can explain episodes of capital flow reversals. That is, how a state, in
which foreign creditors decide not to keep lending to the country (be long on foreign
currency), depends on an estimate that the fundamental is below an endogenous
equilibrium threshold. The position of the threshold depends: (a) on the distribution of
the fundamentals; (b) on the stochastic features of the process through which information
reaches foreign creditors; as well as (c) on the policy regime. We also introduce the
plausible assumption that the adoption of a peg has a direct positive effect on growth
through traditional channels, and an indirect effect. The latter negative effect goes
through a crisis-probability channel.
EVALUATION OF EXCHANGE-RATE   24

Figure A
Table 2:
Growth, Crises, Pegged Exchange Rate and Capital Controls: Sample Averages

                           All          Decades                       Region

Variable                                1970s     1980s     1990s     Africa     Latin      Asia          Europe

Growth                           3.32      5.16      2.93      3.00       3.06       2.71          4.92      3.11

Crisis Years (fractions)         0.12      0.07      0.13      0.12       0.10       0.16          0.12      0.06

Peg Years (fractions)            0.63      0.79      0.66      0.51       0.73       0.57          0.55      0.48

Average years                    3.61      4.33      3.74      3.06       4.03       3.34          3.20      2.91
under peg (t-6 to t-2)

Capital Controls' Years          0.88      0.82      0.90      0.88       0.97       0.75          0.84      1.00
(fractions)
Table 3:
Correlations Between Growth, Peg, Peg Spell, Capital Controls and Crisis (without Country Fixed-Effects)

                                                               Capital
                    Growth        Peg           Peg Spell      Controls      Crisis

Growth                     1
Peg                     -0.0029          1
Peg Spell               -0.0265       0.7431*          1
Capital Controls       -0.0748*       0.1212*       0.0934*          1
Crisis                  -0.0404      -0.0599*      -0.0537*       -0.008              1

Africa

                                                               Capital
                    Growth        Peg           Peg Spell      Controls      Crisis
Growth                    1
Peg                    0.0244           1
Peg Spell              0.008         0.7703*          1
Capital Controls      -0.0561        -0.0093       -0.0015           1
Crisis                -0.0353        -0.0249       -0.0034        0.0262              1

Latin

                                                               Capital
                    Growth        Peg           Peg Spell      Controls      Crisis
Growth                     1
Peg                     0.0024           1
Peg Spell              -0.0475        0.6243*          1
Capital Controls      -0.1032*         0.086        0.0049           1
Crisis                 -0.0213       -0.1465*      -0.1769*        0.046              1

Asia

                                                               Capital
                    Growth        Peg           Peg Spell      Controls      Crisis
Growth                    1
Peg                    -0.0139          1
Peg Spell              -0.0071       0.8204*          1
Capital Controls      -0.1278*       0.2207*       0.2118*           1
Crisis                 -0.0761        0.033        0.0563         -0.0366             1

Europe

                                                               Capital
                    Growth        Peg           Peg Spell      Controls      Crisis
Growth                   1
Peg                   -0.1034           1
Peg Spell             -0.1281        0.7819*           1
Capital Controls          .             .              .             .
Crisis                 -0.08         0.0619         0.1224           .                1

.
Table 4:
Correlations Between Growth, Peg, Peg Spell, Capital Controls and Crisis (Controling for Country Fixed-Effects)

                                                                Capital
                     Growth        Peg            Peg Spell     Controls       Crisis

Growth                      1
Peg                      0.0058          1
Peg Spell               -0.0216       0.4262*            1
Capital Controls       -0.0733*       0.0698*        -0.0163           1
Crisis                  -0.0033       -0.0152         0.0129        0.0145              1

Africa

                                                                Capital
                     Growth        Peg            Peg Spell     Controls       Crisis
Growth                      1
Peg                       0.019          1
Peg Spell                0.0125       0.5031*           1
Capital Controls        -0.0161       0.1474*        0.1832*           1
Crisis                  -0.0009       0.0419         0.0800*        -0.048              1

Latin

                                                                Capital
                     Growth        Peg            Peg Spell     Controls       Crisis
Growth                      1
Peg                     -0.0145          1
Peg Spell               -0.0755       0.3788*            1
Capital Controls       -0.1619*       0.0699         -0.0960*          1
Crisis                   0.0168       -0.0559         -0.0673       0.0423              1

Asia

                                                                Capital
                     Growth        Peg            Peg Spell     Controls       Crisis
Growth                      1
Peg                      0.0391           1
Peg Spell               -0.0459        0.4468*           1
Capital Controls        0.0358        -0.1195*       -0.0772           1
Crisis                  -0.0692        -0.0499        0.0277        0.0118              1

Europe

                                                                Capital
                     Growth        Peg            Peg Spell     Controls       Crisis
Growth                      1
Peg                     -0.1345          1
Peg Spell               0.0207        0.0513            1
Capital Controls            0            0              0              1
Crisis                   0.0729       -0.0096        0.0192            0                1

.
Table 5: The Effect of Exchange Rate and Capital Account Regimes
on Growth: Controling For The Crisis Probability

Panel A: Dependent Variable: Growth Rates
Variables                                                 (i)               (ii)

Peg (instrumented)                                      2.8765            5.2629
                                                       (2.2557)         (2.5410)**

Capital Controls (t-1)                                 -1.1760           -1.5811
                                                      (0.8093)*         (0.8323)*

Switch to Capital Controls between t-2 to t-1           -1.0252          -2.8357
                                                       (1.1191)         (1.4304)**

Growth t-1                                             0.2006            0.1986
                                                     (0.0315)***       (0.0314)***

Growth t-2                                             -0.0713           -0.0737
                                                      (0.0303)**        (0.0303)**

The Crisis Probability                                    --             -6.0377
                                                                        (2.9790)**

Adj R-Square                                            0.062             0.066
DW                                                       1.99             1.99

Panel B: Dependent Variable: Currency Crisis (0,1). 1 if REE(t)-REE(t-1)>15%
                                                   Coefficient      dF/dX
                                                   (Probit)

Peg (instrumented)                                     2.6578            0.6008
                                                     (0.8524)***       (0.1920)***

Capital Controls (t-1)                                 -0.4594           -0.1217
                                                      (0.2686)*         (0.0808)*

Switch to Capital Controls Between t-2 to t-1          -1.2737           -0.2879
                                                     (0.4518)***       (0.0988)***

External Debt ($ Billions)                              0.0125           0.0028
                                                      (0.0049)**       (0.0011)**
Pseudo R-Square                                        0.2031            0.2031
DW                                                       1.99             1.99

Panel C: Dependent Variable: Peg (0,1).
Switch to peg between t-2 to t-1                        3.6315
                                                      (0.4065)***

Peg Spell                                               0.6866
                                                                   (0.0798)***

Pseudo R-Square                                                      0.4498
Note:
All specifications include country-fixed effects.
The specification in panel A includes also budget deficit (insignificant).
The specification in panel C includes also time fixed effects.
 Standard errors in parenthesis
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Table 6:
Non Linear Effects of Currency Regimes on Growth
Dependent variable: Growth Rates

                                                              Panel A: linear                 Panel B^: quadratic         Panel C^: ^2 and ^3
Variables                                                            (i)            (ii)          (iii)         (iv)           (v)          (vi)

Peg (instrumented)                                                2.8765          5.2629      8.6448        8.4918        9.6462        7.0377
                                                                 (2.2557)       (2.5410)**    (4.0144)**    (4.0091)**    (7.1621)      (7.2795)
Peg^2                                                                --             --        -16.2712      -9.2390       -22.6610      0.2035
                                                                                              (9.5537)*     (10.2252)     (39.0248)     (40.7507)
Peg^3                                                                --             --             --               --    7.3612        -10.6584
                                                                                                                          (43.5874)     (44.5246)

Capital Controls (t-1)                                            -1.1760        -1.5811      -1.3239       -1.7576       -1.3192       -1.7762
                                                                 (0.8093)*      (0.8323)*     (0.7821)      (0.8132)*     (0.7830)*     (0.8174)**
Switch to Capital Controls between t-2 to t-1                     -1.0252        -2.8357      -0.9813       -2.7122       -0.9869       -2.7510
                                                                 (1.1191)       (1.4304)**    (1.0773)      (1.4066)*     (1.0784)      (1.4166)*
Growth t-1                                                        0.2006          0.1986      0.1837        0.1824        0.1836        0.1826
                                                                (0.0315)***     (0.0314)***   (0.0305)***   (0.0304)***   (0.0305)***   (0.0304)***

Growth t-2                                                       -0.0713         -0.0737      -0.0725       -0.0743       -0.0725       -0.0743
                                                                (0.0303)**      (0.0303)**    (0.0293)**    (0.0293)**    (0.0294)**    (0.0293)**

The Crisis Probability                                               --          -6.0377           --       -5.8760            --       -6.0352
                                                                                (2.9790)**                  (3.0768)*                   (3.1496)*

Adj R-Square                                                       0.062          0.066          0.097          0.097        0.097          0.097
DW                                                                  1.99           1.99           1.99          1.99          1.99          1.99

Note:
All specifications include country-fixed effects.
The specification in panel A includes also budget deficit (insignificant).
The specification in panel C includes also time fixed effects.
 Standard errors in parenthesis
^ Only in the growth equation.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Table 7: The Effect of Exchange Rate and Capital Account Regimes on Growth:
Probit, Logit, and Linear Probability Models
Panel A: Dependent Variable: Growth Rates
Variables                                                              (i)          (ii)         (iii)         (iv)

Peg (instrumented)^                                                 2.8765        5.2629        5.0509        4.8414
                                                                   (2.2557)     (2.5410)**    (2.4859)**     (2.6585)*
Capital Controls (t-1)                                              -1.1760       -1.5811       -1.5271       -1.5313
                                                                   (0.8093)*     (0.8323)*     (0.8255)*     (0.8481)*
Switch to Capital Controls between t-2 to t-1                      -1.0252       -2.8357       -2.7956        -2.7802
                                                                   (1.1191)     (1.4304)**    (1.4084)**     (1.6837)*
Growth t-1                                                          0.2006        0.1986        0.1984        0.2000
                                                                  (0.0315)***   (0.0314)***   (0.0314)***   (0.0315)***
Growth t-2                                                         -0.0713       -0.0737       -0.0740       -0.0726
                                                                  (0.0303)**    (0.0303)**    (0.0303)**    (0.0303)**

The Crisis Probability                                                  --       -6.0377       -5.5940        -5.0882
                                                                                (2.9790)**    (2.7106)**     (3.6483)*

Adj R-Square                                                         0.062        0.066         0.066         0.064
DW                                                                    1.99         1.99          1.99          1.99

Panel B: Dependent Variable: Currency Crisis (0,1). 1 if REE(t)-REE(t-1)>15%
                                                                                Coefficient   Coefficient   Coefficient
                                                                                  Probit        Logit         Linear

Peg (instrumented)^                                                               2.6578        4.5922        0.7708
                                                                                (0.8524)***   (1.5553)***   (0.2386)***
Capital Controls (t-1)                                                            -0.4594       -0.8375      -0.1112
                                                                                 (0.2686)*     (0.4900)*    (0.0512)**
Switch to Capital Controls Between t-2 to t-1                                     -1.2737       -2.3839       -0.3172
                                                                                (0.4518)***   (0.7605)***   (0.0815)***

External Debt ($ Billions)                                                        0.0125        0.0236        0.0028
                                                                                (0.0049)**    (0.0086)***   (0.0011)**
Pseudo R-Square                                                                   0.2031        0.2055
Adj R-Square                                                                                                  0.2407

DW                                                                                 1.99          1.99          1.99

Note:
All specifications include country-fixed effects.
The specification in panel A includes also budget deficit (insignificant).
The specification in panel C includes also time fixed effects.
^ Instrumented as in panel C of Table 5
( ) Standard errors in parenthesis
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Table 8:
The Effect of Exchange Rate and Capital Controls Regimes:
The Reinhart-Rogoff (2002) Classification*,**



Dependent Variable: Growth Rates

Variables                                                                             (i)                 (ii)                (iii)
Peg at time t-1                                                                    1.656                1.330               1.729
                                                                                  (0.557)              (0.549)             (0.565)
Capital Controls at t-1                                                           -0.439               -0.587               0.156
                                                                                  (0.890)              (0.991)             (1.022)
Switching to Capital Controls between t-2 to t-1                                  -5.852               -3.374              -6.155
                                                                                  (1.799)              (1.518)             (1.809)
The probability of having currency crisis this year^                              -14.843                                  -22.359
excluding the effect of price crisis                                              (4.937)                                  (7.996)
The probability of having currency crisis this year - real^^                                           -6.824               7.632
including the effect of price crisis                                                                   (4.084)             (6.578)

Controllers
Growth rate at time t-1                                                            0.176                0.191               0.183
                                                                                  (0.034)              (0.034)             (0.034)
Growth rate at time t-2                                                            0.008                0.022               0.019
                                                                                  (0.035)              (0.035)             (0.035)
Currency crisis at time t-1                                                        2.812                0.917               3.340
                                                                                  (0.978)              (0.629)             (1.069)
Currency crisis at time t-2                                                       -1.904               -1.804              -1.831
                                                                                  (0.479)              (0.483)             (0.481)
Price (CPI) crisis at time t-1                                                    -0.100                1.078              -1.251
                                                                                  (0.491)              (0.772)             (1.133)
Price (CPI) crisis at time t-2                                                     0.385                0.374               0.468
                                                                                  (0.488)              (0.491)             (0.490)


Notes:
* Reinhart and Rogoff (2002) classified into 5 categories: (i) peg, (ii) limited flexibility, (iii) managed floating
, (iv) freely floating and (v) freely falling. We aggregate it into 2 main categories: (i) peg_rr, including the first 3 and (ii)
float_rr, including the other two.
** Data includes 58 countries in the years 1970 to 1997
^ The estimated the likelihood for a currency crisis ignoring the effect of price crisis.
^^ The estimated probability for a currency crisis including the effect of past price crisis
All specifications include linear time trend
( ) Standard errors in parenthesis
Table 9:
The Effect of Sudden Stop Crisis and
Dollarization (Foreign Liabilities - Money Supply Ratio) on Growth

Variable                                      (i)          (ii)          (iii)

Foreign Liabilities - Money Suuply Ratio         0.001       -0.001         0.000
(FLM)                                          (0.042)      (0.042)       (0.042)

Sudden Stop Crisis                              -0.881       -0.781        -0.250
                                               (0.384)      (0.378)       (0.431)

Growth at t-1                                                 0.173         0.172
                                                            (0.021)       (0.021)

Interaction

Sudden Stop Crisis * FLM                                                   -2.384
                                                                          (0.931)

Country fixed effect                         Yes           Yes           Yes

Observations                                        2228          2228       2228
Table 10:
The Effect of Sudden Stop Crisis on Dollarization (Foreign Liabilities - Money Supply Ratio)

Variable                                                     (i)           (ii)       (iii)

Crisis at t-2                                             -0.034                       -0.034
                                                         (0.020)                      (0.020)

Peg at time t-2                                            0.042                        0.010
                                                         (0.024)                      (0.028)

Capital Controls at t-2                                   -0.013                       -0.009
                                                         (0.028)                      (0.028)

The probability of having currency crisis this year^                    -0.200         -0.176
                                                                       (0.070)        (0.083)

Country fixed effect                                   Yes           Yes            Yes

Observations                                                  1176           1176         1176
      Figure 1: The Marginal Effect Of The Peg And The Crisis Probability


                6                                                                                                                      0.45



                                                                                                                                       0.4
                5
                                                                         Frequency of probaiblity (probit)          Probit
                                                                                                                                       0.35
                4


                                                                                                                                       0.3
                3
Effect of Peg




                                                                                                                                       0.25

                2

                                                                                                                                       0.2

                1
                                                                                                                                       0.15


                0
                 0.00   0.10   0.20       0.30       0.40         0.50            0.60           0.70        0.80            0.90   1.000.1


                -1
                                                                                                                                       0.05



                -2                                                                                                                     0
                                                            Crisis Probability
Figure 2: The Marginal Effect Of Capital Controls And The Crisis Probability


                   0                                                                                                                  0.6

                                                                                      Frequncies of probability (probit)
                                                                                      Linear probability - level                      0.4
                                                                                      "Linear probability - switch"
                 -0.5                                                                 Probit - level
                                                                                      Probit - switch                                 0.2


                                                                                                                                      0
                  -1

                                                                                                                                      -0.2
 Effect of Peg




                 -1.5                                                                                                                 -0.4


                                                                                                                                      -0.6

                  -2
                    0.00   0.10   0.20   0.30      0.40         0.50           0.60         0.70          0.80             0.90   1.00-0.8


                                                                                                                                      -1
                 -2.5

                                                                                                                                      -1.2


                  -3                                                                                                                  -1.4
                                                          Crisis Probability
