                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               CREATIVE CAREERS:
               THE LIFE CYCLES OF NOBEL LAUREATES IN ECONOMICS

                                        Bruce A. Weinberg
                                        David W. Galenson

                                       Working Paper 11799
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w11799


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2005




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2005 by Bruce A. Weinberg and David W. Galenson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Creative Careers: The Life Cycles of Nobel Laureates in Economics
Bruce A. Weinberg and David W. Galenson
NBER Working Paper No. 11799
November 2005, Revised October 2007
JEL No. J24,O30,B31

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper studies life cycle creativity among Nobel laureate economists. We identify two distinct
life cycles of scholarly creativity. Experimental innovators work inductively, accumulating knowledge
from experience. Conceptual innovators work deductively, applying abstract principles. We find that
conceptual innovators do their most important work earlier in their careers than experimental laureates.
For instance, our estimates imply that the probability that the most conceptual laureate publishes his
single best work peaks at age 25 compared to the mid-50s for the most experimental laureate. Thus
while experience benefits experimental innovators, newness to a field benefits conceptual innovators.

Bruce A. Weinberg
Department of Economics
Ohio State University
410 Arps Hall
1945 North High Street
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
weinberg.27@osu.edu

David W. Galenson
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
galenson@uchicago.edu
                                              2

At what stage of their careers are scholars most creative? Even beyond its intellectual

challenge, this question has obvious practical significance. If they do not ask it in any

other context, most scholars consider it in evaluating appointments and promotions in

their own departments, as they try to assess the likely future path of other scholars’

research.

       In view of the practical importance of the life cycle of scholarly creativity, it is

surprising that it has received little systematic study, and virtually none by economists.

This may be because many academics think they already understand it. Many

economists, for example, appear to believe creativity is the particular domain of the

young. One prominent economist, former President Lawrence Summers of Harvard

University, vetoed offers of tenured professorships to two 54-year-old scholars out of

concern for what the university’s dean of the faculty called the problem of “extinct

volcanoes.” In support of Summers, a 35-year-old professor of earth sciences explained

that “It’s more exciting to be around a place where things are going on now - not a place

where people have done important things in the past.” (Golden 2002).

       There is a systematic relationship between age and scholarly creativity, but it is

more complex than many academics appear to assume. By studying the careers of a

group of Nobel laureates in economics, we will show that there are two distinct life

cycles of scholarly creativity, with peaks at very different stages within a single

discipline. The evidence furthermore reveals that which path a scholar follows is related

to the nature of his work and that there are only very slight systematic changes in the

nature of a scholar’s important work over the life cycle. This understanding of the life

cycles of innovative economists constitutes an important step toward a theory of human

creativity in general.
                                               3

       To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to find differences in the life cycle

of scholarly creativity within a single discipline and to relate these differences to the

nature of individual scholars’ work. While psychologists have studied life cycle

creativity, they have generally aggregated practitioners by discipline, focusing on

differences across disciplines in peak ages of creativity (e.g. Lehman 1953, Chaps. 15-16;

Simonton 1988, pp. 66-71). Moreover, they have attributed differences across disciplines

to the nature of the disciplines themselves, not to the individuals who are active in those

disciplines. The limited work on life cycle creativity by economists, like that by

psychologists, has treated disciplines as the unit of analysis (see Lillard and Weiss 1978;

Diamond 1986; Levin and Stephan 1991; Stephan and Levin 1993; Hamermesh and Oster

1998; Van Dalen 1999).

       We believe it is important to recognize that there are important practitioners of

both types described in this paper within most, if not all, intellectual activities. The

differences existing studies have found across disciplines in the central tendency of

important contributors’ peak achievements by age may be largely a consequence of

differences across disciplines in the relative numbers of the two types of innovators.

Viewing life cycle creativity as an individual and not a disciplinary phenomenon also

suggests that there may be systematic changes over time in the mean age of peak

creativity within disciplines as the relative numbers of the two types of innovators change

in response to contributions made in those disciplines (see Jones 2005 and Jones and

Weinberg 2006).

       We also depart from most of the existing literature by focusing on very important

innovators under the belief that important individuals are particularly interesting for
                                             4

understanding innovation. Most exiting work focuses on less important scholars

(exceptions are Stephan and Levin 1993; van Dalen 1999; Jones 2005; and Jones and

Weinberg 2006).

Conceptual and Experimental Innovators

       Recent research on the careers of modern painters, poets, and novelists has

revealed that there have been two very different types of innovator in each of these

activities (Galenson 2001, 2003, 2004). The basic distinction between the two turns on

whether the individual artist works deductively or inductively. Conceptual innovators,

who are motivated by the desire to communicate specific ideas or emotions, have precise

goals for their works. They often plan them carefully in advance, and execute them

systematically. Their innovations appear suddenly, as a new idea produces a result quite

different not only from other artists’ work, but also from the artist’s own previous work.

In contrast, the goals of important experimental innovators are ambitious but vague, as

they seek to present perceptions that are less precise. The imprecision of their goals leads

them to work tentatively, by a process of trial and error. They arrive gradually and

incrementally at their major contributions, often over an extended period of time.

       The long periods of trial and error often required for important experimental

innovations make them tend to occur late in an artist’s career. So for example Paul

Cézanne, Robert Frost, and Virginia Woolf all arrived at their greatest accomplishments

after many years of work. Conceptual innovations are made more quickly, and can occur

at any age. Yet the achievement of radical conceptual innovations depends on the ability

to perceive and appreciate extreme deviations from existing conventions, and this ability

tends to decline with experience, as habits of thought become more firmly established.
                                               5

The most important conceptual innovations consequently tend to occur early in an artist’s

career. Thus for example, Pablo Picasso, T. S. Eliot, and Herman Melville all made their

greatest contributions early in their long lives.

        The distinction between deductive and inductive innovators applies equally to

economists. Conceptual economists pose precise problems, and solve them deductively.

They may do this throughout their careers, but their most general - and consequently

most important - innovations tend to come early in their careers, when they are more

likely to challenge basic tenets of the discipline that are widely treated as rules by more

experienced scholars. In contrast, experimental economists may pose broader questions,

which they solve inductively by accumulating evidence that serves as the basis for new

generalizations. The more evidence they can analyze, the more powerful their

generalizations, so the most important experimental innovations are often the product of

long periods of research.

        This paper extends the study of the life cycle of creativity to a select group of

innovative economists. Based on the analysis presented above the hypothesis to be tested

is that economists who have made important conceptual innovations should tend to make

their most important contributions earlier in their careers than their counterparts who

have made experimental innovations. We also study the extent to which the nature of a

scholar’s important contributions is fixed as opposed to changing systematically over the

life cycle.

Data

        We measure the importance of work using citations. Citations were collected

from the Web of Science, an on-line database comprising the Social Science Citation
                                                      6

Index, the Science Citation Index, and the Arts and Humanities Citation Index.1

         We collected the number of citations to all works in each year of each laureate’s

career made between 1980 and 1999 inclusive.2 These data on citations to the works each

laureate published in each year of his career are our units of analysis. For the purpose of

the empirical analysis, laureates are included in our sample from the time they received

their doctorate or from the time of their first cited publication if it preceded their

doctorate or if they never earned a doctorate.

         The importance of scholars depends primarily on their most important

contributions. We use two methods to identify the years in which the laureates made

important contributions. One method is to identify all years in which citations are above a

threshold. To do this, we first estimate the mean and standard deviation of each laureate’s

annual citations. We define years in which a laureate’s citations were at least 2 of his

standard deviations above his mean to be his two standard deviation peaks. To estimate

the year in which each laureate made his single most important contribution, we also

consider the single year with the most citations for each laureate. We refer to this year as

the laureate’s single best year.

         Most other analyses of Nobel laureates, especially of those in the hard sciences,

have sought to identify when people did the work for which they received their Nobel

Prizes. Unfortunately, the Nobel Committee does not systematically indicate the


1
  We searched for citations under each Nobel laureate’s last name and initials. For laureates who published
with their middle initial, we searched for citations with and without the middle initial. To exclude citations
to other authors with the same last name and initials, citations were checked against publication lists. The
database lists coauthored papers under the lead author’s name. Citations to the Modigliani-Miller papers
were included in the counts for both laureates.
2
  Collecting citations to individual works would have been prohibitively costly given the number of
published works and the number of citations. In virtually all years with high citations, a single work
dominates the citations. Citations to important books were assigned to the year the first edition was
published. The period 1980-1990 was chosen based on the availability of online data. Citations to works
that have been incorporated into the literature will be lower. Works published around 1980 will receive
more citations than those published earlier or later. The dates reflect when works were published, which
will be after the work was done, because of publication lags. We are not aware of reasons why any of these
factors would bias our estimates toward early peaks for conceptual laureates and late peaks for
                                                      7

publications for which economics prizes were awarded. Consequently, researchers who

have sought to use the Nobel Committee’s statements to date when economists did their

most important work have, in fact, been forced to rely on a wide variety of approaches.

(For instance, van Dalen 1999 uses reports of the Nobel Prize committee, but also uses

autobiographies, biographies and citations.) Citations provide a widely-accepted,

objective method that can be consistently applied to all the laureates.3

         Our measure identifies scholars’ most influential work, which will reflect a

combination of the originality of the work and the importance of the question to other

scholars.4 While the receipt of a Nobel Prize may increase an individual’s citations (see

Merton 1968), we do not use citations to make inter-personal comparisons, only to

determine when each laureate did his most important work. We are not aware of evidence

that receiving a Nobel Prize increases citations to work from particular ages nor are we

aware of reasons that additional citations would be to the late works of experimental

laureates or to the early works of conceptual laureates.

Attributes of the Laureates’ Work

         Our theory distinguishes experimental from conceptual innovators. Experimental

innovators work inductively. Their innovations derive from knowledge accumulated with

experience. Because empirical research frequently involves generalizing from a body of

evidence, empirical innovators are often, but not always, experimental. An example of a

conceptual empiricist would be someone whose primary contribution was testing

hypotheses formulated a priori.

         Conceptual innovators work deductively. Their innovations derive primarily from



experimental laureates.
3
  While our understanding of the Nobel citations, when they are sufficiently explicit, indicates that the most
cited works and the works for which people received the Nobel Prize frequently coincide, when they do
not, it is not clear that the opinion of the Nobel Prize committee is preferable to that of the discipline as a
whole.
4
  On citations as a measure of scientific importance, see Simonton 1988, pp. 84-85.
                                                    8

a priori logic and are often direct responses to existing work. Theorists tend to be

conceptual. The most abstract and mathematical theorists tend to be the most conceptual.

        While our distinction between experimental and conceptual work is different from

the distinction between theoretical and empirical work, we are not aware of any

systematic classification of the laureates even as theoretical or empirical.5 To classify

each laureate’s work, we have obtained objective characteristics of each laureate’s two

standard deviation peaks.6 As indicated, experimental work relies on direct inference

from facts. The characteristic that best measures the use of facts with the least processing

are references to specific items – places, time periods, and industries or commodities.

Conceptual work involves deriving results from assumptions made a priori. The

characteristics that are most associated with conceptual work are the use of assumptions

and proofs; the use of equations; and the presence of a mathematical appendix or

introduction. Table 1 lists these measures, their construction, and their means and

standard deviations.7

        As indicated, the true distinction between the conceptual and experimental

approaches is not qualitative, but quantitative. We use these objective characteristics of

the each laureate’s single most important work to array the laureates from most

experimental to most conceptual. To do this, we rank the laureates on each characteristic.


5
  The Nobel Commission, for instance, does not systematically indicate whether the prizes were awarded
for empirical or theoretical contributions.
6
  We examined 19 pages from each piece. When the work contained 20 or more pages, we sampled 19
pages evenly spaced through the work – the pages that were 5%, 10%, 15% and so forth through the work.
When a work contained less than 19 pages, we inspected all pages. To obtain estimates that would be
comparable to works with 19 or more pages, we calculated the number of each item per page and
multiplied these per-page figures by 19. When a page partially or completely blank, we used the following
page or, if that page was partially or completely blank, the preceding page. Complete pages of references
were replaced by the last page that was not in the references section. Appendix pages and pages of notes
were included.
7
  We might have included a measure of the use of statistical procedures. The use of statistical procedures
tends to be highest among laureates whose work is neither extremely conceptual nor extremely
experimental – the most extreme conceptual laureates rarely analyze data and the most extreme
experimental laureates usually use data, but with less processing. We do not include a measure of the use
of statistical procedures because of its non-monotonic relationship to the nature of work.
                                                   9

We then constructed the sum of the ranking for the number of assumptions and proofs;

the number of equations; and the presence of a mathematical appendix or introduction

and subtracted from it the rank in the number of specific references. We use rankings to

preserve variations in the frequency of each characteristic while ensuring that a laureate’s

classification is not dominated by an extreme value for any single characteristic. The

conceptual laureates have the highest values on this index, while experimental laureates

have low values.

        Our data cover Nobel laureates in economics born in or before 1926 who

published primarily in English.8 Because the youngest laureate who was clearly

experimental was born in 1926, this cutoff ensures that our laureates span the full range

of types in a common cohort.

The Nature of Work: Fixed or Changing

        Thus far, we have discussed the nature of a laureates’ work as a time-invariant

characteristic. In principle the nature of a laureate’s work may change over the life-cycle.

We are able to assess the extent to which the nature of the laureates’ important

contributions changes over their lives because we have on average 2.5 two standard

deviation peaks per laureate.

        Let Ageij give the age at which laureate i published his jth two standard deviation

peak; Indexi denotes our index of the nature of laureate i’s jth two standard deviation

peak; and Laureatei denote a dummy variable equal to 1 for laureate i and 0 otherwise.

Formally, we estimate,

                    Indexi = πAgeij + ∑i δ i Laureatei + ε ij .                  (1)

Here the δ i are the coefficients on the laureate fixed effects, which capture time-


8
  Maurice Allais, Leonid Kantorovich, Tjalling Koopmans, and Reinhardt Selten were excluded because of
language of publication. (Koopmans’ began his career as a physicist and his most cited publication, Über
die Zuordnung von Wellenfunktionen und Eigenwerten zu den einzelnen Elektronen eines Atoms, is in
                                              10

invariant differences in the nature of work across the laureates, and π gives the

relationship between age and the nature of a laureate’s work.

        We estimate πˆ = −.611 , with a standard error of .350, implying a p-value of .085.

The mean difference in age between a laureate’s first and last two standard deviation

peak is 14.9 years. Over this length of time, a laureate’s work shifts by 9.1 points, 4.5%

of the range of 201. Thus, there is some tendency for any given laureate to become more

experimental as he ages, but this tendency is quite weak both statistically and

economically.

        Another way to assess the importance of changes that are related to age relative to

time-invariant factors is to decompose the variance in the index. We do this by estimating

the partial R2 of the age variable and the partial R2 of the laureate fixed effects in

regression (1). The laureate fixed effects account for 71.6% of the variance in the index,

while age accounts for only 1.1% of the variance. Thus the vast majority of the variation

in the index is due to time-invariant, individual differences with very small systematic

variations due to aging.

        To these best of our knowledge these are first estimates of the stability or fluidity

of the nature of innovators’ work over the life cycle and they show remarkable stability.

In the empirical work that follows, we exploit both the time-varying and time-invariant

components of the variation in the nature of the laureates’ works. Table 2 shows the time-

invariant estimates of the nature of the laureates’ works based on the fixed effects

estimated in (1).

Classification of the Laureates

        A discussion of how our index of conceptual versus experimental work applies to

each individual in our sample would be prohibitive. Nevertheless, some discussion of

individual laureates will clarify the experimental-conceptual distinction and how it is


Physics in German.
                                             11

captured by our index.

        Paul Samuelson is one of the most conceptual laureates. Samuelson begins his

most cited work, the Foundations of Economic Analysis of 1947 by stating,

        The existence of analogies between central features of various theories
        implies the existence of a general theory which underlies the particular
        theories and unifies them with respect to these central features. This
        fundamental principle of generalization by abstraction was enunciated by
        the eminent American mathematician, E. H. Moore more than thirty years
        ago. It is the purpose of the pages that follow to work out its implications
        for theoretical and applied economics.... Seemingly diverse fields –
        production economics, consumer behavior, international trade, public
        finance, business cycles, income analysis – possess striking formal
        similarities.... Only after laborious work in each of these fields did the
        realization dawn upon me that essentially the same inequalities and
        theorems appeared again and again, and that I was simply proving the
        same theorems a wasteful number of times. (p. 3).

Samuelson explicitly states that his contribution is to provide a rigorous, unified

methodological foundation for a range existing work, making his work conceptual.

        The econometrician Trygve Haavelmo is also among the most conceptual of the

laureates. Econometrics is important for empirical analysis and some econometricians

make empirical contributions as well as contributions to econometric theory. How

econometricians will be classified depends on whether their most important contribution

is empirical (or arises from empirical work), which tends to be experimental, or in

econometric theory, which tends to be conceptual. Haavelmo’s most cited work, the

essay “The Probability Approach to Econometrics” of 1944, is “an attempt to supply a

theoretical foundation for the analysis of interrelations between economic variables (p.

iii).” He motivates it stating,

        If we want to apply statistical inference to testing the hypotheses of
        economic theory, it implies such a formulation of economic theories that
        they represent statistical hypotheses, i.e., statements – perhaps very broad
        ones – regarding certain probability distributions. The belief that we can
        make use of statistical inference without this link can only be based upon
        a lack of precision in formulating the problems (p. iv).
                                                12

The empirical implications of his work notwithstanding, Haavelmo’s contribution, like

Samuelson’s, is to provide a rigorous, unified methodological foundation for existing

work. His work is also conceptual even though its subject is estimation.

       Robert Fogel is among the most experimental laureates. Fogel concludes his most

cited work, Without Consent or Contract of 1989, by discussing how his understanding

of slavery evolved based on his empirical studies of it. He explains how his findings

contradicted the traditional view of slavery he held when his research began stating,

       Engerman and I delayed publication of our preliminary findings for nearly
       two years as we investigated these possibilities and searched for new data
       that might reverse the computation. The results of these searches did not
       relieve me of the dilemma. Quite to the contrary, the new evidence further
       eroded my confidence in conventional views of the moral problems of
       slavery (p. 391).

That the accumulation of evidence, which in Fogel’s case took decades, would cause his

conclusions to contradict his expectations so thoroughly indicates that Fogel is an

experimental researcher.

Estimates

       We perform a variety of analyses to estimate the relationship between the nature

of a laureate’s work and the age at which he makes his important contributions. We begin

with regressions of the age at which each Nobel laureate has his two standard deviation

peaks, single best year, or two standard deviation peaks other than his single best on our

index. To illustrate this procedure, let Ageij give the age at which laureate i had his jth

important year. Let Indexij denotes our measure of the nature of laureate i’s jth important

work. Formally, we estimate,

                                 Ageij = γ 0 + γ 1 Indexij + ε ij .

We normalize Indexij to have a mean of zero across the laureates, so that γ 0 gives the

mean age of two standard deviation peaks for the average laureate. Given that higher

values of the index correspond to more conceptual laureates, we hypothesize that γ 1 < 0 .
                                              13

        The estimates are shown in the top panel of Table 3. The bottom panel shows the

estimated age for the most experimental and most conceptual work as well as the

difference between them. The first column shows that a 1 point increase in the index

corresponds to a .1 year reduction in the mean age of two standard deviation peaks.

Given the range of our index of 201, the implied difference in mean age of important

contributions between the most experimental and most conceptual laureates is 20.5 years.

        The second column shows analogous results for the single best years. Here each

laureate appears exactly one time and Ageij denotes the age at which laureate i had his

single best year. For the single best years, a 1 point increase in the index corresponds to a

.113 year reduction in the mean age. Given the range of our index, the implied difference

in mean ages of the single best years between the most experimental and most conceptual

laureates, is 22.7 years.

        The third column of the table shows results using the two standard deviation

peaks other than the single best. For this analysis, the sample is restricted to laureates

with two or more two standard deviation peaks, because the single best year is excluded.

The estimates are smaller than for the single best years, but remain negative and

statistically significant. As indicated by the intercepts, the single best years occur at

earlier ages than the other two standard deviation peaks.

        We next perform a similar analysis, replacing the index for each work with the

time-invariant fixed effect for the nature each laureate’s work. The preceding estimates

account for the effect of changes in the nature of a laureates’ work over the life, which

affect when they do their important work, although these variations are potentially

endogenous. Insofar as there are random variations across works in the characteristics we

study for a given nature of work, using fixed effects will reduce attenuation bias.

        Let IndexiFE denote the fixed effect estimated for laureate i from equation (1) and

Ageij again give the age at which laureate i had his jth important year. We estimate,
                                               14

                                Ageij = γ 0 + γ 1 IndexiFE + ε ij .

Here too, IndexiFE is normalized to have a mean of zero across the laureates, so that γ 0

gives the mean age of two standard deviation peaks for the average laureate. As above,

we hypothesize that γ 1 < 0 .

       The estimates reported in the first 3 columns of Table 4, are broadly comparable

to those reported in Table 3. Using the fixed effects for the nature of work instead of a

work-specific measure slightly increases the estimated relationship between the nature of

a laureate’s work and the age of his two standard deviation peaks other than the single

best (and all two standard deviation peaks). Thus, eliminating attenuation bias has a

greater effect than eliminating endogeneity, which is not too surprising, given the very

weak relationship between age and the nature of work reported above.

       As discussed, we estimate the age at which the laureates did their important works

using citations. While citations are a widely-accepted method for determining the

importance of work, and the only objective method of which we are aware, we consider

whether our results depend on our use of citations. The most thorough attempts to

measure the age at which the Nobel laureate economists did their most important work

using autobiographical and biographical sources are van Dalen (1999) and Jones (2005).

Columns 4 and 5 reproduce our analysis using Jones’s midpoint years and then van

Dalen’s “Motherlode years,” which are closest to our single best years. The estimates

remain large and statistically significant using both of these measures.

Life-Cycle Profiles

       To provide further information about the life-cycle pattern in the importance of

work, we estimate the probability that a laureate had an important year on polynomials in

age interacted with our index for the nature of a laureate’s work and interactions between

age and the index. Let i index laureates and t index the calendar year. Let Ageit denote

laureate i’s age in year t. As above, IndexiFE denotes our measure of the nature of
                                                15

laureate i’s work based on the fixed effects estimated in equation (1). Our dependent

variables, Two Standard Deviation Peakit and Single Best Yearit are dichotomous

variables equal to 1 if laureate i had citations 2 of his standard deviations above his mean

or his maximum citations in year t and zero otherwise. Our specification for Two

Standard Deviation Peakit is

 Two Standard     ⎧0 if β 0 + β1 Ageit + β 2 Ageit 2 + β 3 IndexiFE + β 4 IndexiFE ⋅ Ageit + ε it ≤ 0
                 =⎨
Deviation Peak it ⎩1 if β 0 + β 1 Ageit + β 2 Ageit 2 + β 3 IndexiFE + β 4 IndexiFE ⋅ Ageit + ε it > 0
                                               .
The specification for Single Best Yearit is analogous. Assuming that εit is normally

distributed implies a probit structure. Each laureate contributes an observation for each

year of his career.

       We normalize the index to have a mean of zero, so the coefficients β1 and β 2

give the relationship between age and the probability of having an important year for a

laureate with the mean nature in the sample. The coefficient β 4 governs how the peak of

the profiles change with the nature of a laureate’s work. The profile for a laureate with a

                                                       β1 + β 4 IndexiFE
value of the index of IndexiFE peaks at Agei = −
                                                 *
                                                                         , where a hump-shaped
                                                              β2

profile requires β 2 < 0 . Because higher values of the index correspond to more

conceptual work, our hypothesis that conceptual laureates do their best work earlier in

their careers implies that β 4 < 0 . Both β 3 and β 4 control how the height of the profile

changes with the nature of work. Our model contains a quadratic in Ageit; a first-order

interaction between Ageit and IndexiFE ; and a linear direct effect of IndexiFE because all

higher order terms are statistically insignificant in one or both regressions.

       Table 5 presents the estimates. The estimates show the expected hump-shaped

relationship between age and the probability of an important work or a single best year.

The negative estimates of β 4 on the interaction between the index for the nature of a
                                             16

laureate’s work and his age, which are statistically significant at any conventional level,

show that conceptual laureates do their important work earlier than experimental

laureates.

       Figure 1 plots the probability of a two standard deviation peak and a single best

year implied by the models for the most conceptual and experimental laureates. The

profiles for the conceptual and experimental laureates differ markedly. The most

conceptual laureate’s probability of a two standard deviation peak is 15% in the first year

of the career and it reaches a peak at age 28.8 years. For the most experimental laureate,

the probability of two standard deviation peak is less than half of a percent at the

beginning of the career, reaching a peak at age 56.9, close to double the age of the most

conceptual laureate. By comparison, the mean laureate’s profile peaks at age 47.1.

       The profiles for the single best years are beneath those for the two standard

deviation peaks because there are fewer single best years than two standard deviation

peaks. There is little difference in the shape of the profiles between the two standard

deviation peaks and single best years for the most experimental laureates – both peak in

the mid 50s. For the most conceptual laureate the probability of a single best year is close

to that of an important year at the beginning of the career, but increases less before

dropping. For the most conceptual laureate, the probability of a single best year peaks at

age at age 24.8.

Conclusion

       The empirical analysis of this paper provides strong support for the proposition

that there have been two very different life cycles of creativity for important scholars in

economics. As in the arts, conceptual innovators in economics have tended to produce

their most important contributions considerably earlier in their careers than their

experimental counterparts. It appears that the ability to formulate and solve problems
                                             17

deductively declines earlier in the career than the ability to innovate inductively. As

scholars age, they accumulate knowledge related to their fields of study, and become

increasingly accustomed to particular habits of thought about their disciplines. Both of

these effects may increase the creativity of inductive scholars, since the power of their

generalizations will tend to be greater as the evidence on which they are based increases.

As experimental scholars age their efficiency in analyzing and accumulating useful

information may increase, and the empirical base for their research may consequently

grow at an increasing rate over extended periods. In contrast, at a relatively early stage

both the accumulation of knowledge and the establishment of fixed habits of thought may

begin to reduce the ability to create radical new abstract ideations that is key to important

conceptual innovations. This difference in the impact of experience on the two different

types of innovator may explain why some great scholars are most creative early in their

careers, and others late.

       Although some academics appear to believe that creativity is exclusively

associated with youth, others understand that there are two different life cycles of

creativity, and that which a scholar follows is related to his approach to his discipline.

When Harvard’s president vetoed job offers to two 54-year-old scholars, government

professor Michael Sandel observed that “a prejudice for younger over older candidates

amounts to a prejudice for mathematical and statistical approaches - such as those

reflected by Mr. Summers’s own economics background - over historical or

philosophical approaches, where people often do their best work in their fifties, sixties or

beyond.” (Golden 2002)
                                          18

Endnote

We thank Jeff Rosen, Alicia Lee, and Gwen Jacobs for excellent research assistance and

Andrew Abel, Daron Acemoglu, David Blau, Aya Chacar, Dan Hamermesh, David

Hirschliefer, and Howard Marvel and seminar participants at New York University; Ohio

State University; the Society of Labor Economists; Maastricht University; Dartmouth

College; the University of Connecticut; and the NBER Productivity Lunch for comments.

Financial support was provided by a grant from the National Science Foundation.
                                          19

References

Ronald H. Coase (1937). “The Theory of the Firm.” Economica
Ronald H. Coase (1959). “The Federal Communications Commission.” The Journal of
      Law and Economics 2 (October): 1-40.
Ronald H. Coase (1960). “The Problem of Social Cost.” The Journal of Law and
      Economics 3 (October): 1-44.
Arthur M. Diamond, Jr (1986). “The Life-Cycle Research Productivity of
       Mathematicians and Scientists.” Journal of Gerontology 41 (No. 4, July): 520-
       525.
Robert William Fogel (1989). Without Consent or Contract: The Rise and Fall of
       American Slavery. New York: W.W. Norton and Company.
Robert K Merton (1968). “The Matthew Effect in Science.” Science 159 (January 5): 56-
       63.
Milton Friedman (1953). Essays in Positive Economics. Chicago: University of Chicago
       Press.
Milton Friedman and Anna Jacobson Schwartz (1963). A Monetary History of the United
       States 1967-1960. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Milton Friedman (1999). “George Joseph Stigler.” Biographical Memoirs 76: 340-359.
David W. Galenson (2001). Painting outside the Lines. Cambridge: Harvard University
      Press.
__________ (2003). “Literary Life Cycles: The Careers of Modern American Poets.”
      NBER Working Paper 9856.
__________ (2004). “A Portrait of the Artist as a Young or Old Innovator: Measuring the
      Careers of Modern Novelists.” NBER Working Paper, 10213.
Daniel Golden, “Course Correction,” Wall Street Journal, Jan. 11, 2002.
Trygve Haavelmo, (1944). “The Probability Approach in Econometrics.” Econometrica
      12 (Supplement): iii-vi, 1-115.
Benjamin F. Jones (2005). “Age and Great Invention.” Working Paper.
Harvey C. Lehman (1953). Age and Achievement. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Sharon Levin and Paula Stephan (1991). “Research Productivity Over the Life Cycle:
       Evidence from American Scientists.” American Economic Review 81 (No. 1.
       March): 114-132.
                                          20

Lee A. Lillard and Yoram Weiss (1978). “Experience, Vintage, and Time Effects in the
       Growth of Earnings: American Scientists 1960-1970.” Journal of Political
       Economy 86: 427-448.
Sharon M. Oster and Daniel S. Hamermesh (1998). “The Research Productivity of
       Economists.” Review of Economics and Statistics 53 (No. 1): 154-156.
Paul A. Samuelson (1983 [1947]). Foundations of Economic Analysis. Cambridge:
       Harvard University Press.
Paula Stephan and Sharon Levin (1993). “Age and the Nobel Prize Revisited.”
       Scientometrics 28 (No. 3): 387-399.
George J. Stigler, (1971). “The Theory of Economic Regulation.” The Bell Journal of
      Economics and Management Science 2 (Spring): 3-21.
Dean Keith Simonton (1988). Scientific Genius. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hendrik P. Van Dalen (1999) “The Golden Age of Nobel Economists.” American
      Economist 43 (No. 2, Fall): 19-35.
E. Roy Weintraub (2002). How Economics Became a Mathematical Science. Durham:
       Duke University Press.
                                            21


Table 1. Objective Characteristics of Works.
Characteristic                               Description                          Mean
References to        The sum of:
Specific Items       • The number of pages with references to specific places
                     • The number of pages with references to specific time       12.461
                        periods                                                  (15.134)
                     • The number of pages with references to industries or
                        commodities
Assumptions and      The sum of:
Proofs               • The number of pages with formal proofs
                     • The number of pages with proof structure                   1.340
                     • The number of pages with explicit statements of           (4.423)
                        assumptions, axioms, lemmas, postulates, theorems,
                        formal definitions
Equations            The number of (whole-line) equations                         19.877
                                                                                 (22.867)
Mathematical          A binary variable equal to 1 if the work has a technical     .218
Appendix              appendix or introduction                                    (.416)
Note. Standard deviations in parentheses.
                                          22


 Table 2. Classification of Laureates.
 Name                                               Index Fixed Effect
 North                                                   -75.500
 Fogel                                                   -75.000
 Myrdal                                                  -73.833
 Lewis                                                   -70.500
 Kuznets                                                 -68.500
 Schultz                                                 -62.500
 Friedman                                                -46.000
 Hayek                                                   -37.500
 Coase                                                   -33.000
 Ohlin                                                   -23.000
 Tinbergen                                               -10.000
 Meade                                                    -7.750
 Buchanan                                                 -7.500
 Simon                                                    -7.167
 Leontief                                                 -5.200
 Miller                                                    0.250
 Solow                                                     8.333
 Frisch                                                   15.833
 Stigler                                                  16.500
 Klein                                                    19.750
 Hicks                                                    21.500
 Tobin                                                    27.333
 Stone                                                    31.000
 Modigliani                                               34.750
 Haavelmo                                                 53.750
 Samuelson                                                55.800
 Harsanyi                                                 62.500
 Vickrey                                                  63.000
 Arrow                                                    69.750
 Debreu                                                   76.500
 Markowitz                                               114.750
Note. The index is the time-invariant component of the index estimated from equation (1)
for each laureate, which adjusts for age, and is normalized to have a mean of zero.
                                           23


 Table 3. Regressions of Age of Two Standard Deviation Peaks and Single Best Years on
 the Conceptual-Experimental Index for Individual Works.
                                                                              Two Standard
                                                                            Deviation Peaks
                                        Two Standard        Single Best         other than
                                      Deviation Peaks          Years            Single Best
 Index                                     -0.102              -0.113             -0.091
                                           (0.024)            (0.030)             (0.035)
 Intercept                                 48.218             44.917              50.418
                                           (1.314)            (1.705)             (1.824)
 Observations                                 78                 31                  47
   2
 R                                          0.187               0.329              0.129
 Age for most Experimental                 56.378             53.957              57.698
 Age for most Conceptual                   35.876             31.244              39.407
 Difference                                20.502             22.713              18.291
Note. Standard errors reported in parentheses. The index is for the main work published
in each year and is normalized to have a mean of zero across laureates so that the
intercept gives the mean age for the mean laureate. The ages and difference in bottom
panel are estimates based on the models.
                                           24


Table 4. Regressions of Age of Two Standard Deviation Peaks and Single Best Years on
the Conceptual-Experimental Index Fixed Effects.
                                                          Two
                                                       Standard     Jones’s
                                                       Deviation Midpoint
                                  Two                    Peaks       Years
                               Standard                other than             Van Dalen’s
                              Deviation      Single      Single                Motherlode
                                 Peaks Best Years         Best                     Years
Index                           -0.117       -0.109      -0.121      -0.068        -0.055
                                (0.029)     (0.035)     (0.043)     (0.022)       (0.025)
Intercept                       48.218       44.982      50.335      36.893       38.960
                                (1.322)     (1.819)     (1.801)     (1.105)       (1.252)
Observations                       78          31          47          31            31
  2
R                                0.177        0.237       0.151       0.249         0.144
Age for most Experimental       57.052       53.212      59.471      42.027       43.113
Age for most Conceptual         34.792       32.474      36.450      29.090       32.649
Difference                      22.259       20.737      23.020      12.937       10.464
Note. Standard errors reported in parentheses. The index is the time-invariant component
of the index for each individual reported in Table 2, which adjusts for age and is
normalized to have a mean of zero across laureates so that the intercept gives the mean
age for the mean laureate. The ages and difference in bottom panel are estimates based
on the models.
                                          25


 Table 5. Probit models of Age and the Probability of Two Standard Deviation Peaks and
 Single Best Years.
                           Two Standard Deviation Peaks                Single Best Years
 Age                              0.1036 (0.0295)                       0.1244 (0.0516)
      2
 Age                             -0.0011 (0.0003)                      -0.0015 (0.0005)
 Index                            0.0159 (0.0048)                       0.0205 (0.0075)
 Age*Index                       -0.0003 (0.0001)                      -0.0005 (0.0002)
 Intercept                       -3.8359 (0.7214)                      -4.4916 (1.1940)
 Observations                          1,771                                 1,771
Note. Standard errors reported in parentheses. The index is the time-invariant component
of the index for each individual reported in Table 2, which adjusts for age and is
normalized to have a mean of zero across laureates so that the coefficients on Age and
Age2 give the profile of the mean laureate.
                                                            26

Figure 1. Age and the Probability of a Two Standard Deviation Peak and Single Best
Year, by Nature of Work.
a. Most Experimental Laureate
                        0.100

                        0.090

                        0.080

                        0.070

                        0.060
          Probability




                        0.050

                        0.040

                        0.030

                        0.020

                        0.010

                        0.000
                                22   32     42         52              62      72          82   92
                                                                 Age

                                          Two Standard Deviation Peaks      Single Best Year

b. Most Conceptual Laureate
                        0.160


                        0.140


                        0.120


                        0.100
          Probability




                        0.080


                        0.060


                        0.040


                        0.020


                        0.000
                                22   32     42         52              62      72          82   92
                                                                 Age

                                          Two Standard Deviation Peaks      Single Best Year

Note. Curves give the probabilities predicted from the probit models in table 5.
