NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ECONOMIC OUTCOMES AND THE DECISION TO VOTE:
THE EFFECT OF RANDOMIZED SCHOOL ADMISSIONS
ON VOTER PARTICIPATION
Justine S. Hastings
Thomas J. Kane
Douglas O. Staiger
Jeffrey M. Weinstein
Working Paper 11794
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11794
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2005

We would like to thank Charlotte Mecklenburg Schools as well as Amy Weeks at the Mecklenburg County
Board of Elections for making this project possible. We thank Donald Green for invaluable comments and
the Institution for Social and Policy Studies at Yale University for financial support. We would also like to
thank Joseph Altonji, Steven Berry, Steven Coate, Fabian Lange, Dean Karlan, and Ebonya Washington, as
well as participants at the Yale University Industrial Organization lunch and Labor and Development lunch
for excellent comments and discussion. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Justine S. Hastings, Thomas J. Kane, Douglas O. Staiger, and Jeffrey M. Weinstein. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Economic Outcomes and the Decision to Vote: The Effect of Randomized School Admissions on
Voter Participation
Justine S. Hastings, Thomas J. Kane, Douglas O. Staiger, and Jeffrey M. Weinstein
NBER Working Paper No. 11794
November 2005, Revised December 2006
JEL No. D72, I28
ABSTRACT
There is little causal evidence on the effect of economic and policy outcomes on voting behavior.
This paper uses randomized outcomes from a school choice lottery to examine if lottery outcomes
affect voting behavior in a school board election. We show that losing the lottery has no significant
impact on overall voting behavior; however, among white families, those with above median income
and prior voting history, lottery losers were significantly more likely to vote than lottery winners.
Using propensity score methods, we compare the voting of lottery participants to similar families
who did not participate in the lottery. We find that losing the school choice lottery caused an
increase in voter turnout among whites, while winning the lottery had no effect relative to
non-participants. Overall, our empirical results lend support to models of expressive and
retrospective voting, where likely voters are motivated to vote by past negative policy outcomes.
Justine S. Hastings
Yale University
Department of Economics
P.O. Box 20868
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
justine.hastings@yale.edu
Thomas J. Kane
Harvard University
Graduate School of Education
Gutman Hall 455
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
kaneto@gse.harvard.edu

Douglas O. Staiger
Dartmouth College
Department of Economics
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
douglas.staiger@dartmouth.edu
Jeffrey M. Weinstein
Yale University
Department of Economics
P.O. Box 20868
New Haven, CT 06520
jeffrey.weinstein@yale.edu

1

Introduction
What motivates citizens to vote? Understanding the factors that influence voting

behavior is a central issue in political economy and public finance. Political platforms,
campaign tactics, and public policy are all affected by voter behavior. Furthermore, the
funding of critical public goods such as public education is often directly determined by
ballot box outcomes. Consequently, the way in which economic outcomes influence voter
turnout and voting behavior has important implications for understanding electoral
politics, the provision of public goods, and equilibrium welfare in a democratic system.
Because the marginal impact of any one individual’s voting decision is likely to
be much smaller than the cost of participating (Downs (1957), Olson (1965), Palfrey and
Rosenthal (1985), and Feddersen (2004)), researchers have turned to empirical estimation
to examine the determinants of voting. There is a significant literature using
observational data to link economic and policy outcomes with voting behavior (Kramer
(1971), Bloom and Price (1975), and Kinder and Kiewiet (1979)). Many of these papers
use macroeconomic outcomes and national election results to test models of retrospective
voting; where voters punish or reward incumbents for past performance. Because
economic indicators are correlated with other factors that may affect elections, a more
recent line of research has focused on randomized field experiments to identify the
factors that affect voting behavior. For example, Gerber and Green (2000) randomized
get-out-the-vote efforts such as door-to-door canvassing, to test if appeals to civic duty,
the closeness of the election, or neighborhood solidarity cause people to vote. They find
convincing evidence that canvassing efforts significantly increase voter turnout. While
these experiments carry the force of causal identification, they cannot test how policy or
economic outcomes impact voter decisions.
In this paper, we present new evidence on voter turnout using a unique policy
experiment that randomized economic outcomes across potential voters. We use school
district administrative data and voter registration data for families in Mecklenburg
County, North Carolina (which includes the city of Charlotte, North Carolina). In 2002,
the Charlotte-Mecklenburg school district (CMS) implemented a district-wide school
choice plan after its race-based bussing plan was terminated by the courts. Under the

3

choice plan, parents in the district submitted their top three choices of schools for their
children, and the district assigned students to schools through a lottery system. We match
administrative data on students’ choices, lottery numbers, demographics, and school
assignments to voter records from the Mecklenburg County Board of Elections for the
school board election immediately following the implementation of the school choice
plan. We test if losing or winning the lottery to attend one’s first-choice school affected
the decision to vote. Since lottery outcomes were randomly assigned, they are orthogonal
to other factors that may influence voting behavior, such as past voting behavior, income,
or a person’s political views.
We find that, on average, school admissions decisions had no significant impact
on the decision to vote. However, among white families, those with the highest voter
participation rates, lottery losers were significantly more likely to vote in the ensuing
school board election than lottery winners. The effect among whites is large in
magnitude: losing the lottery increases the odds of voting by 38.7% relative to winning.
This corresponds to a 7 percentage point increase in voter turnout. We then test if this
differential effect of losing the lottery relative to winning the lottery is consistent with an
increase in voter turnout for lottery losers or a decrease in turnout for lottery winners. In
order to do so, we identify a group of students who were not lottery participants and were
the least affected by the introduction of the school choice plan. The voting behavior of
these “status-quo” families serves as a measure of voting behavior in the absence of
positive or negative school choice lottery outcomes. We use propensity score estimates to
re-weight the sample of status-quo students, balancing the distribution of baseline
characteristics across the status-quo and lottery groups. Regression results indicate that
losing the school choice lottery led to an increase in voter turnout among white families
relative to those unaffected by the lottery, while winning the lottery had no effect on
voting behavior.
Our findings are broadly consistent with randomized field trials of get-out-thevote efforts, which have found effects of similar magnitude from door-to-door canvassing
efforts. As in our results, that work suggest larger effects among regular voters in
municipal elections (Green and Gerber, 2004). Overall, our empirical results lend support
to models of expressive and retrospective voting, where likely voters are motivated to

4

vote by past negative policy outcomes (Bloom and Price, 1975). They may do so because
of the gain in utility from expressing frustration (a form of expressive voting) or to
punish incumbent for past negative outcomes (a form of retrospective voting where
punishment of the incumbent motivates turnout more than reward does). The results are
also consistent with Hirshman’s (1970) idea of Exit, Voice, and Loyalty in consumer
responses to firm behavior. When faced with a monopolist provider of a product without
close substitutes, such as a public school district, consumers may voice frustration with
the product, here at district officials through school board elections, since they cannot
easily exit by switching to an alternative supplier.
This paper proceeds in four sections. The first section reviews the relevant
literature. The second section describes the details of the CMS choice plan and lottery,
which is followed by a discussion of the school board election and the voter registration
data. The fourth section describes the data and presents the results. The final section
concludes.

2

Literature Review
The expected impact of any individual’s vote on an election outcome is likely to be

much smaller than the cost of participating (Downs (1957), Olson (1965), Palfrey and
Rosenthal (1985), and Feddersen (2004)), creating difficulty in motivating voting as the
result of a personal cost-benefit trade-off. This paradox of not voting had led to a growing
empirical literature examining other factors that influence voting behavior. George and
Waldfogel (2002), Gentzkow (2006), and DellaVigna and Kaplan (2006) study the
effects of media exposure on voter turnout. George and Waldfogel (2002) find that an
increase in the circulation of the New York Times is correlated with a decline in the
readership of local newspapers as well as the probability of voting in local elections by
college-educated individuals relative to others. Similarly, Gentzkow (2006) finds that the
introduction of television led to declines in newspaper readership, radio listening,
political awareness, and voter turnout, with the largest effects in local elections. Finally,
DellaVigna and Kaplan (2006) find a positive effect on voter turnout in towns where the
Fox News Channel had entered by the time of the election.

5

A second line of research has focused on field experiments to investigate reasons for
voter turnout. Gerber and Green (2000) use field experiments with random assignment of
get-out-the-vote canvassing to examine what motivates voting. They find that door-todoor canvassing has a significant impact on voter turnout and is much more effective than
alternative get-out-the-vote methods such as phone calls. In addition, the authors vary the
canvassing treatment to test different voting motivations, randomly appealing to i) a
sense of civic duty, ii) an importance for welfare of local community (community
solidarity), and iii) a statement of a ‘close election’ aimed at affecting the subject’s
perception of the probability of swinging the election. They find the strength of estimated
impact on voter turnout was 9.1, 5.1, and 12.1 percentage points, respectively, lending
suggestive evidence that an increased chance of being pivotal has the strongest impact on
voting behavior, although the estimates are not statistically significantly different. Green
and Gerber (2004) provide a summary of empirical evidence from voter mobilization
field experiments.
There is little evidence on the effect of economic and policy outcomes on voter
behavior, in part because it is difficult to identify exogenous sources of variation in these
outcomes. Green (2005) studies the impact of PROGRESA, a government transfer
program in Mexico aimed at poor rural neighborhoods, on community-level voting
behavior. In order to identify the effect, she exploits discontinuities in a community’s
propensity to be enrolled in PROGRESA. Green does not find evidence that PROGRESA
significantly affected community voter turnout or the fraction of votes for the incumbent.
There is a recent literature using school choice lotteries and randomized voucher
experiments to identify the impact of school choice on student outcomes (Hastings, Kane,
and Staiger (2006a,c), Cullen, Jacob, and Levitt (2003), Mayer, et al. (2002), Krueger and
Zhu (2004), and Rouse (1998)). Instead of focusing on student outcomes, our paper uses
randomized school admissions generated by a school choice lottery to estimate how being
given access to a better school influences parents’ decision to vote. As far as we know,
this is the first analysis of the causal effect of randomly assigned economic outcomes on
subsequent voting behavior. The link between school choice and voter behavior is of
direct interest, in that it determines implicit incentives for politicians that may prevent

6

efficient adoption of school choice programs. A few papers have found that higher
income homeowners with access to better schools oppose school voucher ballot
initiatives (Brunner, Sonstelie, and Thayer (2001) and Brunner and Sonstelie (2003)), but
none of these studies involved random assignment or were able to evaluate whether the
actual impact of the policy influenced voting behavior.

3

3.1

The CMS School Choice Plan

School Choices
For three decades the Charlotte-Mecklenburg public school district (CMS) bused

students to assigned schools to achieve racial integration. In September 2001, the U.S.
Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals declared the school district “unitary” and ordered the
district to dismantle the race-based student assignment plan by the beginning of the next
school year. As a consequence the school district moved to implement a new districtwide public school choice plan to replace the bussing system beginning in the 2002-2003
school year.
In the spring of 2002, parents were asked to submit their top three choices of
school programs for each child. Each student was assigned a “home school” in her
neighborhood, typically her closest school, and was guaranteed admission to this school
if she was not admitted to any of her top three choices. Students were similarly
guaranteed admission to continue in magnet programs in which they were enrolled in
Spring 2002. Admission to non-guaranteed schools was determined by a lottery system
described further in the next section. After the first year of the choice plan, parents with
children in rising grades, parents entering CMS, and any parents who wished to change
their child’s school were required to submit choice forms in a similar manner. Again
admission to oversubscribed schools was assigned by lottery. Students who were in nonrising grades and had already sorted into one of their preferred schools in the first year of
school choice did not have to submit a choice form if they wished to stay where they

7

were. In each year, CMS had near perfect compliance; approximately 95% of parents
who were required to submit a choice form did so.
The implementation of the school choice program resulted in a large redistricting
of home school assignments. Prior to choice, school assignment zones were drawn to
capture non-contiguous black and white neighborhoods to achieve racial balance. With
the introduction of the choice plan, families were assigned to a default school in their
neighborhood. As a result, approximately 50 percent of parcels lost property rights to the
school they were assigned to under the bussing plan. The introduction of the school
choice plan was intended to provide more educational options to parents. The initial
school choice plan was to stay in effect for 3 years (through 2005-2006 school year), at
which time there would be an extensive review of the choice system allowing for public
comment and discussion.
We were given secure access to administrative data including the choice response
forms for the first two years of school choice. For each school year, the school choice
response forms were submitted in the spring of the prior school year. For example,
choices for the 2002-2003 school year were submitted in Spring 2002, and choices for the
2003-2004 school year were submitted in Spring 2003. For each of these school lotteries,
we have the choice response forms and demographic information including geographic
location for approximately 95% of the students who were required to submit choice
forms.1

3.2

Lottery Assignments
In the first school choice lottery, every student was required to submit a choice

form to CMS. As described earlier, each student was assigned a new neighborhood
school, at which they were given a guaranteed seat. If a student chose this new ‘home
school’ as her first choice, she was guaranteed admission. Many students did not list their
home school for any of their three choices.2 Our analysis will focus on students who did
1

The remaining 5% of students did not submit choice forms even though they were required to. CMS
officials then assigned them to their guaranteed neighborhood school.
2
Please see Hastings, Kane, and Staiger (2006b) for a detailed description of the choices and how they
varied in the student population.

8

not choose their guaranteed home school, whose admission to their first-choice school
was determined by lottery number.
In the second year school choice lottery, only students who were in rising grades,
new to CMS, or affected by changes in home school boundaries resulting from the
opening of new schools were required to submit choice forms. If a non-rising grade
student wished to continue at her current school (the school she was admitted to after the
first year of school choice assignments), she was not required to submit a choice form.
Hence from the second year of lottery assignments, we will again only use those students
who chose a non-guaranteed school as their first choice, and hence had an admission
status determined by the school choice lottery. Across the two years of lottery choices,
slightly over half of the students submitting choice forms chose their guaranteed school,
and the remaining students chose a school for which they were not guaranteed admission.
Admission of students to non-home choices was limited by grade-specific
capacities set by the district. In the first year of school choice, the district allowed
significant increases in enrollment at high-demand schools in an effort to give each child
one of her top three choices. As a result, approximately 95% of students in the first year
of choice received admission to one of their top three choices. School capacities were not
expanded in the second year of school choice; however, parents were not informed of this
policy change prior to submitting choices.
Approximately one third of the schools in the district were oversubscribed in the
first year, and approximately two thirds of schools were oversubscribed in the second
year. The district implemented a lottery system for determining enrollments in those
oversubscribed schools. Under the lottery system, students choosing non-home schools
were first assigned to priority groups and student admission was then determined by a
lottery number. The priority groups for district schools were arranged in the following
lexicographic order:
Priority 1:

Student who had attended the school in the prior year. (Students were
subdivided into 3 priority groups depending upon their grade level, with
students in terminal grades—grades 5, 8 and 12—given highest priority.)

9

Priority 2:

Free- or reduced-lunch eligible student applying to school where less than
half the students were free- or reduced-lunch eligible.

Priority 3:

Student applying to a school within her geographic Choice Zone.3

Under the lottery system, students listing a given school as their first choice were
sorted by priority group and a randomly assigned lottery number.4 Slots remaining after
home school students’ first choices were accounted for were assigned in order of priority
group and random number.5 If a school was not filled by those who had listed it as a first
choice, the lottery would repeat the process with those listing the school as a second
choice, using the same priority groups as above.
Students who were not assigned one of their top choices were placed on a waiting
list. About 19% of students winning the lottery to attend their first-choice schools
subsequently attended a different school, with 13% choosing to attend their home school
instead and another 6% choosing to attend a different school entirely, with most of these
students changing address. When slots became available, students were taken off the wait
list based on their lottery number alone, without regard for their priority group.
This system of assigning students to schools effectively splits parents into two
groups. If parents selected their home school as their first choice, they knew they were
guaranteed admission. If parents selected a non-guaranteed school, they knew that
admission would be assigned by lottery if the school were over subscribed. This second
group learned whether they were admitted or not to their first-choice school at the end of
the school assignment period, but did not learn the reason for being admitted (e.g.,
because of a high priority, because of a high lottery number, or because the school was
not over-subscribed). Thus, from the parents’ perspective, being admitted to any non-

3

The county was split into four geographic Choice Zones. A student could choose any school in any
Choice Zone; however, bussing would only be provided by the district to schools within the student’s
Choice Zone.
4
The random number was assigned by a computer using an algorithm that we verified with CMS computer
programmers. Parents do not know their lottery numbers. They submit their choice forms to CMS, who
assigns a random number to each submission and then communicates outcomes to parents once the lottery
assignment algorithm is run.
5
Once any sibling was admitted to a school, other siblings could choose to attend the school. In other
words, if two siblings list the same school as their first choice, their lottery number is effectively set to the
minimum of their individual lottery numbers. We dropped those who were admitted to a school because of
a sibling preference.

10

guaranteed school was the result of winning a lottery – even though lottery numbers
played no role in determining admission for many priorty groups.

4
4.1

The Election and Voter Registration Data
The November 2003 School Board Election
On November 4, 2003, Mecklenburg County voters went to the polls to vote in

elections for local officials including the three at-large school board members.6 The
CMS school board is composed of nine members: three at-large members and one
member for each of six sub-districts. All board members are elected to four-year terms
with at-large members and district members elected in an alternating cycle every two
years. The school board decides on goals and policies for CMS including funding
initiatives and bond measures, new school sites, and funding allocation. The school
board also appoints the Superintendent, who runs the daily operation of the school district
and implements the board’s policy.
Of the three at-large board members up for re-election, two did not seek reelection. The one member who did seek re-election was also the sitting chair of the
school board. Table I shows the names and occupations, and describes the platforms of
the candidates for the three at-large seats, as well as the total votes cast for each
candidate. The three candidates with the most votes are elected as at-large members, and
typically serve as the school board chair and vice chairs.7
Two items in Table I are important to note. First, the sitting chair was not reelected, losing by a small margin. Second, based on the official platforms of the
candidates, changing the school choice system was not one of the foremost campaign
issues. Instead, the winning candidates focused on traditional issues such as budget
streamlining and funding increases, improving quality and retention of teachers, and

6

Other offices up for election included mayor and city council.
Source: Charlotte Advocates for Education voting guide. The Chair and Vice-Chair serve one-year terms
and are not necessarily at-large members.

7

11

improving student achievement in general.8 One reason for this may have been that the
old regime of bussing for integration was outlawed by the courts, and the district had
made a three-year commitment to the school choice plan before conducting a review
process and discussing potential changes. In addition, since most residents received their
first-choice school in the first year of choice, many constituents may have been satisfied
with the choice system, and more concerned with other issues such as funding, growth,
and education improvement.

4.2

Mecklenburg County Voter Registration Data
The November 2003 elections followed directly after the first school year under

school choice, and after the first two school choice lotteries and assignments had been
made. Figure 1 presents a timeline of events. The Mecklenburg County Board of
Elections keeps voter registration data with demographic information and past voting
history for up to 20 elections for every registered voter in Mecklenburg County. The data
are updated continuously as new voters register and as current voters change addresses
within county. We were able to obtain an older version of the voter registration file that
was inadvertently preserved from March 2004. This data set includes the full name,
address, ethnicity, gender, party affiliation, date of last address change, and voting history
for every registered voter in Mecklenburg County as of March 2004. The addresses from
this file were geocoded by the Board of Elections, giving us precise longitude and
latitude coordinates for each registered resident. Since most moving occurs during the
spring-fall months, the March 2004 geocoded data provide fairly accurate information on
voters and their locations in November 2003 at the time of the election.
Table II describes the demographics of registered voters and those who cast
ballots in the November 2003 election. Based on demographic information for the county
8

The one candidate to mention issues related to the school choice plan was Mr. Mike Kasper who stated
one primary objective was to establish ‘Neighborhood Schools Zones’ that are permanent. This platform
was directed at the high-growth and wealthy southern districts within CMS who had experienced several
home school boundary changes with the opening of new schools over the past 10 years: both before and
after the school choice plan was implemented. Some parents in those communities wanted to have more
stability in their designated neighborhood school as new schools were opened. This area is largely affluent
and white – the group of citizens who are traditionally most likely to vote.

12

as a whole, whites are more likely to be registered and are more likely to have voted if
they are registered. Moreover, registered voters have on average significantly higher
incomes than the county-wide population average, where income is measured by the
median household income for residents of the voter’s own race living in the voter’s own
block group as reported by the 2000 Decennial Census. Of registered voters, those
actually casting ballots in the 2003 election were again wealthier than the average
registered voter. In addition, voters registered as Independent or Libertarian (not
Republican or Democrat) were less likely to cast ballots in the election than those who
were registered as Republican or Democrat.

5

5.1

Estimating the Impact of Lottery Outcomes on the Decision to Vote

Defining the Randomized Sample of Lottery Participants
We use the school lottery outcomes to create treatment and control groups. We

focus on the subset of students choosing schools that were over-subscribed. We then limit
our sample to students in randomized groups, that is, those priority groups for which
admissions to the first-choice schools were determined solely on the basis of a random
number. Recall from Section 3.2 that admissions to oversubscribed schools were
determined by the concatenation of a priority number, which depended on student and
school specific factors such as free- and reduced-lunch status, and a randomly generated
lottery number. We ignore members of priority groups in which all students were either
admitted or denied admission—since the assignment of lottery numbers had no impact on
their admission status. Hence, for all students in the analysis, the randomly generated
lottery number solely determined admission to the first-choice school within each school
choice and grade combination. In some schools, the randomized group will consist of
students who attended the school the year before, or free- or reduced-lunch eligible
students, or students from the Choice Zone. The randomized group may also be different
for different grade levels in a school.
We began with the choice forms submitted by 105,706 students in the first year,
and 33,530 students in the second year. After dropping students who had special

13

disabilities needs and students who were admitted because of siblings, we were left with
a sample 92,789 in the first year and 29,104 in the second year of data. Of these,
approximately 60% in the first year and 51% in the second year listed their guaranteed
school as their first choice and were therefore not subject to randomization. We then
further excluded students within priority groups that were sufficiently high or low so that
all members of the priority group were admitted or excluded from admission to their firstchoice school and grade combination. This left us with 10,174 students in randomized
groups: 6,931 students from the first lottery year and 3,243 students from the second
lottery year.
Of the 10,174 students in randomized groups, we excluded 62 students (124
observations) who were in randomized groups for both lottery years but won one lottery
and lost the other. We further excluded 98 students who were graduating seniors in the
2002-2003 school year since they were not enrolled in CMS in the following year (after
graduation) making it impossible to link them to voter registration files based on home
address in fall of 2003. In addition, following Hastings, Kane, and Staiger (2006a,c), we
further exclude 351 inactive students in the randomized groups. Inactive students are
students who reside in Mecklenburg County but do not receive schooling through CMS at
the time they submit their school choice application. These include current private school
or home school students who participate in the lottery in order to potentially gain
admission to a public school they would prefer to their current alternative. We drop the
inactive students because (like the seniors) they were unlikely to be enrolled in CMS and
provide a home address in the fall of 2003, particularly if they lost the lottery to attend
their first-choice school. Finally, we drop an additional 193 students with missing
baseline information.
Table III shows the characteristics of the remaining 9,408 students in randomized
groups versus the characteristics of all students in CMS. Students in randomized groups
are slightly more likely to be African American and slightly more likely to be recipients
of federal lunch subsidies. In addition, they come from guaranteed school assignment
zones with significantly lower than average test score outcomes. However, they chose
schools with higher than average standardized test score results. School test scores are
calculated as the average of the student-level standardized test scores for students

14

attending each school program. The student-level test scores are standardized by the
district-wide mean and variance within each grade.

5.2

Matching Student Data to Voter Registration Data
Within the randomized groups, we would like to estimate the impact of winning

the lottery to attend a first-choice school on the decision to vote. Therefore, we must first
match the voter registration data to the lottery outcome data. We have geocoded
locations for students and voters, as well as street address and full name for students and
street addresses and full names for registered voters from the voter data. We use the
student locations provided to us in the Fall 2003 student census, which the district uses to
create the official enrollment lists for federal and state funding. The census is taken on
the 20th day of the school year - approximately at the end of September 2003. This gives
us address information as close as possible to the actual election date. We use these
geocoded residential locations to create matches between students and registered voters
in the voting file.
Student locations were geocoded by the district at the center of the housing parcel,
while the voter registration data were geocoded to the middle of the street in front of the
residence. Hence the geocodes did not perfectly overlap across the two data files. In order
to match voters to students, we created small geographic circles around each student, and
pulled off all voters that fell within that geographic radius. Within each geographic
radius, we then matched voters to students by matching on exact street address and exact
last name. This resulted in approximately 90% of our overall matches. We then examined
the remaining students, creating matches for those with hyphenated last names and those
with slight name misspellings (e.g. McDowell vs. MacDowell), still requiring a match on
geography and street address. Those students with no match are then counted as having
no registered voters in their household.

5.3

Attrition

15

Lottery outcomes are from the spring of 2002 and 2003, while voter data is based
on residential location in the fall of 2003. Some students in randomized groups have left
CMS by the fall of 2003, and for these students the voter data is missing leading to
potential attrition bias. Of the 9,408 students in randomized groups, 8,085 remained
enrolled in CMS by the fall of 2003 for an average attrition rate of just over 14%.9 Table
IV presents results comparing attrition across lottery winners and lottery losers from a
regression of an indicator of whether a student was not present in CMS in the fall of 2003
on an indicator of whether she won the lottery, controlling for baseline characteristics and
school choice and grade (lottery-block) fixed effects.10 Among all students, lottery
winners were less likely to attrit than lottery losers. This differential attrition was quite
small in magnitude and insignificant in either lottery year individually but was significant
in the pooled randomized sample. Columns 2 and 3 present the differential attrition rates
for lottery losers versus lottery winners by race. The differential attrition is higher for
whites than for non-whites and significant for whites in the pooled sample as well as
among 2002-2003 lottery participants. For non-whites, differential attrition is near zero
and insignificant for all lottery groups. Overall, the low rates of attrition in this sample
minimize the possibility that the initial randomization is biased by systematically missing
data from attriters. To the extent that lottery losers who leave CMS may have been
particularly angry (and therefore most likely to vote), their somewhat higher rates of
attrition would act, if anything, to understate voter turnout among those losing the lottery,
particularly among white families – thus working against our results.
In order to further verify the validity of the initial randomization in our final
analysis sample, we compare the baseline characteristics of lottery winners and losers
among the 8,085 non-attriting students in the randomized groups. Table V reports mean
baseline characteristics for lottery winners and losers, as well as regression adjusted
differences from an OLS regression of each baseline characteristic on an indicator of
whether the student won the lottery as well as fixed effects for the school program and
9

This attrition is reasonably consistent with estimates of inter-county mobility rates from the Census.
Approximately 6% of school age children living in the South moved to a different county between March
2002 and March 2003. Mobility rates tend to be somewhat higher in urban, high-poverty populations
(Schachter, 2004).
10
Note that lottery-block fixed effects span priority group fixed effects. We must control for lottery-block
fixed effects since the odds of admission change across each lottery.

16

grade for which the lottery is being conducted. Before adjusting for lottery block fixed
effects, there are a few differences in baseline characteristics between lottery winners and
losers. However, these differences were largely due to a correlation between the
characteristics of lottery participants and the lottery odds. After including a fixed effect
for each school program and grade, all such differences were smaller and were generally
not significantly different from zero. In particular, the final row of Table V shows that
prior voting history is not caused by lottery outcomes. The 2001 election was the most
recent school board election prior to 2003. The exogeneity of lottery outcomes to prior
voting history is important since prior participation in school board elections is the single
strongest predictor of future voting behavior. The only characteristic for which there
remained a statistically significant difference after including the lottery block fixed
effects was free- and reduced-lunch recipient status. Since admission priorities depended
in part on a student’s lunch status, there were very few lotteries that had any variation in
this variable, making this estimated difference somewhat suspect.11

5.4

Regression Results
Table VI reports the estimates of the effects of losing the lottery relative to

winning the lottery on voter turnout using a conditional logit specification (Chamberlain
(1980)) which conditions on choice-grade (lottery-block) fixed effects and student
baseline demographic characteristics. Standard errors are clustered at the choice-grade
level. The dependent variable is an indicator variable if any person in the student’s
household voted. For some of the smaller lottery blocks, there is no variation in the
dependent variable across students. These observations are dropped from the conditional
logit estimation since they add no information to the likelihood function. This reduces
the number of observations in this analysis to 7,365.
The results presented in Column 1 of Table VI show that, overall, there was no
significant differential impact of losing versus winning the lottery on voter turnout.
However, Column 2 shows that among parents of white students, those families that are
11

The results in Table V do not change significantly if we use the full sample of 9,408 students (including
the attriters) for whom we have student level characteristics (excluding prior voting history).

17

most likely to vote in any election, there is a strong and significant differential impact of
losing the lottery on voter turnout. In particular, among white voters, losing versus
winning the lottery increases the odds of voting by approximately 38.7% (exponentiating
the logit coefficient). Given a 31% voting rate among white lottery winners, this
translates into a 7 percentage point increase in the voting rate. This is a very strong, but
not unreasonably strong, impact on voter turnout. For example, the estimated impact is
approximately as large as the effect of door-to-door canvassing identified in Gerber and
Green (2000) of 8-9 percentage points (relative to an average voting rate of 45% in their
sample). In contrast, there is no significant effect of lottery outcomes on voting in the
non-white population. Baseline characteristics are included to improve precision of the
estimates but do not affect the point estimates of the impact of randomly assigned lottery
outcomes on voter turnout. The baseline coefficients validate correlations in the overall
voting population: voter turnout is significantly higher among whites, higher-income
populations, and among citizens who voted in the prior school board election (November
2001).
Table VII presents alternative specifications for the relationship between lottery
outcomes and voting behavior. Columns 1 through 3 present the results from a linear
probability model using an indicator if someone from the household voted as the
dependent variable, controlling for baseline characteristics and lottery-block fixed effects.
The results are similar in sign and magnitude to those presented in the conditional logit
specification, with losing the lottery significantly increasing voter participation among
white lottery participants by approximately 5 percentage points.
Columns 4 through 9 use the total number of people who voted from a student’s
household as the dependent variable. This measure may more accurately reflect the
change in total voter turnout caused by losing the lottery; however, because the number
of adults of voting age present in a household varies with race and income level, it also
includes in it a family size or marital status component that we do not directly observe.
Nevertheless, results using the vote count as the dependent variable are similar to those
based on whether anyone in the household voted, showing significant positive effects of
losing the lottery on voting among whites. Columns 4 through 6 use a linear specification
while Columns 7 through 9 use a fixed-effect poisson model for count data (which drops

18

observations in lottery blocks with no voters, yielding a sample of 7,373 observations).
Across these two specifications, the estimated change in voter turnout for lottery losers
versus lottery winners is roughly the same. For example, Column 5 shows that the
number of votes per household increases by .082 among white lottery losers, while
Column 8 shows the increase at .091 (17.8% increase on a base of 0.51 total voters per
household).

5.5

Do Lottery Losers Vote More or Do Winners Vote Less?
The results from Tables VI and VII document a robust positive effect of losing the

lottery relative to winning the lottery on voter turnout among white lottery participants.
Furthermore, it is reasonable to generalize these results to lottery participants outside of
the randomized groups, since parents who applied to non-guaranteed schools were
unaware of being in the randomized groups and only knew their admission outcome.
However, by themselves, these lottery results cannot determine whether voter turnout
increases among lottery losers or decreases among lottery winners.
In order to determine if losers vote more or winners vote less (or both), we need a
counterfactual estimate of voting behavior for families had they been unaffected by the
school choice lottery. Ideally we would like a set of families who had the same incentives
to vote as they would have had absent the school choice plan. For example, this could be
a set of families who were randomly excluded from the choice plan as long as exclusion
did not cause a change in voting behavior. Since the school choice plan was implemented
district-wide, and since lottery participation was not randomized, we do not have a
randomly generated group of excluded families, let alone ones for whom exclusion would
have no effect on their voting behavior. We can, however, identify families unaffected by
the policy change who may serve as a reasonable counterfactual for the randomized
lottery participants. These families are ones who chose their guaranteed school, and for
whom their guaranteed schools (at all levels) under the choice plan were the same as their
assigned schools under the previous bussing regime. The school choice plan left these
families effectively with the same schools that they would have had in the absence of the
policy change, and we might expect their voting behavior to be the same under the school

19

choice plan and under a counterfactual continued bussing regime. We refer to this group
of families as the ‘status-quo’ group. Comparing lottery winners and losers (in the
randomized group) to the status-quo group provides a test of whether losers vote more or
winners vote less, relative to what would have occurred in the absence of the choice
plan.12
In order to construct the status-quo group, we took the following steps. First,
using the boundary changes in school assignment zones that were implemented with the
school choice plan, we identified families who kept guarantees to all levels of schools for
which they had guarantees in the 2001-2002 school year and whose children were
assigned to those schools. These families make our ‘status-quo’ group. There are 7,966
‘status-quo’ students who had guarantees to and were assigned to the schools and grades
chosen by students in our randomized groups.
Table VIII summarizes differences in baseline characteristics for students in the
status-quo versus the randomized groups. Columns 1 and 2 present mean characteristics
for students in the status-quo and randomized groups, respectively, while Column 3
presents regression adjusted differences in baseline characteristics between the status-quo
and randomized groups controlling for school choice and grade level (lottery-block) fixed
effects. Students who have guaranteed rights to attend the chosen schools are
significantly more likely to be white, less likely to receive federal lunch subsidies, and
have on average higher neighborhood income levels. Their parents also are much more
likely to have participated in the prior school board election. Thus there is substantial
non-overlap in the baseline characteristics that determine voting between the status-quo
and randomized groups.
We use a propensity score approach to better match the baseline characteristics of
the status-quo group to the randomized groups (Hirano, Imbens, and Ridder (2003),
Barsky et al. (2002), Imbens (2003)). Let the propensity score (P) be the probability that a
student is in the randomized groups (as opposed to the status-quo group) within each
12

We treat the status-quo families as having neither won nor lost since they did not participate in a gamble,
and their decision not to participate was mostly caused by predetermined residential location and the
geographic redistricting that occurred with the choice plan. One may instead argue that these parents
considered themselves winners just like lottery participants who won admission to a non-guaranteed
school. In this case, they would not serve as a valid counterfactual for voting behavior in the absence of
winning or losing the school choice lottery.

20

chosen school as a function of baseline characteristics. We re-weight observations in the
status-quo sample by P/(1-P), which balances their distribution of baseline characteristics
with the randomized group within each chosen school. To construct the propensity score,
we estimate a separate probit for each chosen school, controlling for free- and reducedlunch status, white, female, median income, median income squared, and an indicator if
someone from the household voted in the 2001 election.13 We dropped students in
schools for which the number of students in either the randomized or status-quo group
was less than 10 or in schools in which being in the randomized group was perfectly
predicted by observable characteristics. This dropped 553 students from the randomized
groups and 1,510 students from the potential pool of status-quo students. Baseline
conditional logit estimates of the effect of losing the lottery on voter turnout were similar
after dropping these students.
The final column of Table VIII presents the regression adjusted difference in
baseline characteristics between the randomized groups and the status-quo group, using
the propensity score to re-weight the status-quo group. In contrast to the un-weighted
difference in the previous column, there is no significant difference in baseline
characteristics between the randomized and status-quo groups in the re-weighted sample.
Thus, re-weighting based on the propensity score yields a (weighted) status-quo sample
that is much better matched to the randomized sample in terms of observable
characteristics. Using these weights, we can estimate the average treatment effect of
losing the lottery and winning the lottery on voter turnout relative to a comparable statusquo group.
Table IX presents weighted estimates of the effect of losing the lottery or being in
the status-quo group on voting behavior, relative to winning the lottery. Because our
weights vary within lottery-block (the fixed-effect level), we cannot use the conditional
logit specification, so we focus on the linear probability model instead. The excluded
group is lottery winners. Columns 1 through 6 present results using the same
specification as those in Table VII, Columns 1 through 6, adding the status-quo group of
13

Note that estimating separately for the sample of students choosing each school adds considerable
flexibility to the probit, and saturates the propensity score model without saturating the model of interest.
Estimating the propensity score using one probit for the entire sample of students (thus excluding the
interactions with school chosen) and controlling for lottery-block fixed effects did not sufficiently balance
baseline characteristics between the status quo and randomized groups within lottery block.

21

students and estimating by weighted least squares (with the status-quo group weighted as
discussed above). As before, the coefficient on losing the lottery is positive and
significant for whites in both Columns 2 and 5. However, across all columns, the voting
behavior of the status-quo group is statistically the same as that of the lottery winners.
These estimates suggest that losing the lottery causes an increase in voter turnout among
white families, while winning the lottery causes no change in turnout relative to statusquo voting behavior.
5.6

Alternative Specifications
Our empirical evidence suggests that losing the school choice lottery leads to

increased voter turnout amongst white families. However, income and prior voting
history are both highly correlated with race. Evidence on voter response to randomized
get-out-the-vote campaigns suggests that prior voters are the most likely to respond to
canvassing efforts in municipal and local elections (Green and Gerber (2004), p. 37).
Table X presents estimates from specifications that include interactions between
losing the lottery and each of these baseline characteristics. As in Tables VI and VII,
these specifications are estimated using only the students in the randomized group.
Column 1 shows that the effect of losing the lottery on voter turnout is increasing in
income and that the interaction with race becomes insignificant once this interaction is
included. Income is measured as the median income for households in student i’s block
group of student i’s race demeaned by the county-wide median income of $51,000 and
divided by 1,000. Hence, these coefficients imply that losing the lottery has no impact on
voting at incomes of around $40,000 but increases the odds of voting by over 50% at
incomes in the $100,000-$150,000 range. Column 2 adds an interaction between prior
voting history and lottery outcomes. The coefficient on the interaction between voting
history and losing the lottery is positive and significant indicating that, among probable
voters (with median income), losing the lottery increased the odds of voting by 41% (an 8
percentage point increase off of a base of 67% for probable voters who won the lottery).
The coefficient on income interacted with lottery outcomes remains unchanged. Hence,
the asymmetric effect of losing the lottery on voter turnout is more likely a function of
income and past voting history than it is of race.

22

The final two columns of Table X allow the effect of losing the lottery on voter
turnout to be a function of the difference in the quality of the child’s first-choice school
and the child’s neighborhood school, where quality is measured by the average
standardized test score for students in the school. The majority of students who did not
win admission to their first-choice school were admitted to their neighborhood school,
and one might expect a larger impact on voting if students were denied access to a school
with much higher test scores than their neighborhood school. Column 3 of Table X shows
an insignificant coefficient on the interaction between losing the lottery and the score gap
between the first-choice and home school. Column 4 of Table X breaks the interaction
between losing the lottery and the score gap into two terms to further test if those who
experienced losses in academics were more likely to vote. The first term is the difference
between the first-choice school score and the last year’s school score if the family
received admission to their first-choice school (the academic gain), while the second term
is the difference between the home school score and the last-year’s school score in the
event that the family lost the lottery (the academic loss). This alternative specification of
the relative importance of improving education for lottery losers and lottery winners does
not yield significant results either. Hence, the impact of losing the lottery on voting does
not appear to be a function of the difference in the test scores between the child’s firstchoice school and the child’s neighborhood school.

5.7

Precinct-Level Outcomes
If the current results are generated by the desire to voice frustration or

retrospectively punish incumbents for negative policy outcomes, we might expect lottery
losers to turn out against the incumbent school board chair. Unfortunately, with
individual-level data, we cannot say anything about how people voted, only whether or
not they voted. Nevertheless, we can examine the cross-sectional relationship between
the precinct fraction of votes against the incumbent and the fraction of families who were
negatively impacted by losing the school choice lottery.
Our approach is as follows. Mecklenburg County had 190 precincts at the time of
the 2003 election. We first use geocoded student locations and precinct boundary files to

23

determine the precinct that each family lived in. Using the school assignment outcomes,
we categorize students as losing the lottery if they did not gain admission to their firstchoice school. Thus, we assume that voting behavior among all families that lost the
lottery was similar to what we estimated using the randomized groups. Our results in
Table VI imply that the voting behavior of white families changed as a result of losing
the lottery. Therefore, we generate the fraction of students in each precinct who were
white and who were denied admission to their first choice school, as well as precinctlevel averages of student characteristics that might affect election results. Table XI
presents results for regressions in which the dependent variable is the precinct-level
fraction of voters who did not vote for the incumbent (i.e., (#voters - #votes for
incumbent)/#voters). The key independent variable is the fraction of students living in the
precinct who were white and had lost the lottery. While this approach does not carry the
force of randomized assignment, it is helpful to see if election results by precinct are
consistent with our prediction that losing the school choice lottery moved the election
results against the incumbent.
Columns 1 through 3 present regression results with various added controls. The
first column controls only for the precinct-level share of voters not voting for the
incumbent in the prior election (1999). Note that 4 precincts were not present in 1999, so
our sample size declines to 186 when we add this control. The coefficient is highly
significant and close to 1. The precinct fraction of white families who lost the school
choice lottery is positive and highly significant with a coefficient of 0.437. The second
column adds controls for additional precinct-average student characteristics. The size and
significance of the coefficient on fraction of students who were white and lost the lottery
is similar across the two specifications. Column 3 adds fixed effects for the 6 School
Board Districts. Each of these districts is represented by a school board member.
Although these members were not up for re-election (recall only the at-large members
were on the ballot), it may be the case the voter behavior differs across these districts.
Adding these variables decreases the significance of the coefficient of interest to the 10%
level, but it does not change the point estimate significantly. Taken as a whole, the results
in Table XI suggest that lottery losers who were likely voters turned out at the polls and
voted against the incumbent school board chair.

24

6

Conclusion
This paper provides empirical evidence on the factors that influence the decision

to vote by using a unique policy experiment that randomized economic outcomes across
potential voters. Overall we do not find a significant effect of losing the school choice
lottery on voter turnout. However, losing the school choice lottery significantly increased
the probability of voting in the ensuing school board election among likely voters –
whites or high income households that voted in the prior election. The significant impact
of losing the lottery among likely voters is consistent with results from door-to-door
canvassing experiments (Green and Gerber (2004)), which find that canvassing and getout-the-vote efforts have greater effects on regular voters than on infrequent voters,
particularly in low turnout elections such as municipal elections. This paper adds further
evidence on the motivation to vote by examining the impact of actual economic
outcomes, exploiting randomization generated by public policy.
The empirical results suggest an asymmetric effect: losing the school choice
lottery led to increased voter turnout among likely voters, but winning the lottery did not
seem to have an effect on voting behavior. These results are consistent with retrospective
and expressive models of voting behavior, where negative outcomes motivate more than
positive outcomes do. It is also consistent with Hirschman’s (1970) ideas of Exit, Voice,
and Loyalty. In a monopoly product market, like public education, consumers (parents)
may not be able to easily exit in response to dissatisfaction with firm product quality or
firm policy. When exit is not possible, the primary means to express frustration and
dissatisfaction is through voice, which in this case may be expressed through the polls.
This result has important implications for the political economy of public
schooling and the provision of public goods more broadly. The results imply that
personal disappointment or negative outcomes provide a strong motivation to vote among
higher-income and past election participants. This suggests that the optimal political
strategy for those seeking re-election may be to minimize losses to subgroups of higherincome constituents. Even within income or within voting propensity, if negative
outcomes disproportionately increase voter turnout, then policies that hurt a minority but

25

benefit the majority may be politically unviable. Within the provision of education as a
public good, these results also bring into question predictions of public good provision
based on a median voter model or any rational choice model of voter behavior. Concepts
of efficient sorting, equilibrium quality provision, optimal allocation, and mechanism
design in a public school choice program need to consider the political viability of public
school programs designed to increase competition and school quality under public school
choice. School district policies that seek to increase school quality provision or choice
options to less advantaged communities at a cost to a minority of affluent constituents
may not be politically feasible.

26

References
Barsky, Robert, John Bound, Kerwin K. Charles, and Joseph P. Lupton. 2002.
“Accounting for the black-white wealth gap: A nonparametric approach,” Journal
of the American Statistical Association 97(459):663-673.
Bloom, Howard S., and H. Douglas Price. “Voter response to short-run economic
conditions: The asymmetric effect of prosperity and recession.” American
Political Science Review 69(4):1240-54.
Brunner, Eric, and Jon Sonstelie. 2003. “Homeowners, property values, and the political
economy of the school voucher,” Journal of Urban Economics 54(2):239-57.
Brunner, Eric, Jon Sonstelie, and Mark Thayer. 2001. “Capitalization and the voucher:
An analysis of precinct returns from California’s Proposition 174,” Journal of
Urban Economics 50(3):517-36.
Chamberlain, Gary. 1980. “Analysis of covariance with qualitative data,” Review of
Economic Studies 47(146):225-38.
Charlotte Advocates for Education. 2003. Make your mark on the Board. Charlotte:
Author.
Cullen, Julie B., Brian A. Jacob, and Steven D. Levitt. 2003. “The effect of school choice
on student outcomes: Evidence from randomized lotteries,” NBER Working
Paper No. 10113.
DellaVigna, Stefano, and Ethan Kaplan. 2006. “The Fox News effect: Median bias and
voting,” NBER Working Paper No. 12169.
Downs, Anthony. 1957. An economic theory of democracy. New York: Harper and Row.
Feddersen, Timothy J., 2004. “Rational choice theory and the paradox of not voting,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 18(1):99-112.
Gentzkow, Matthew. 2006. “Television and voter turnout,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 121(3):931-72.
George, Lisa, and Joel Waldfogel. 2002. “Does the New York Times spread ignorance and
apathy?” Working Paper, Wharton School of Business, University of
Pennsylvania.
Gerber, Alan S., and Donald P. Green. 2000. “The effects of canvassing, telephone calls,
and direct mail on voter turnout: A field experiment,” American Political Science
Review 94(3):653-63.

27

Green, Donald P., and Alan S. Gerber. 2004. Get out the vote! Washington: Brookings
Institution Press.
Green, Tina R. 2005. “Do social transfer programs affect voter behavior? Evidence from
PROGRESA in Mexico, 1997 – 2000,” Manuscript, University of California,
Berkeley.
Hastings, Justine S., Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger. 2006a. “Gender and
performance: Evidence from school assignment by randomized lottery,”
American Economic Review 96(2):232-236.
Hastings, Justine S., Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger. 2006b. “Parental
preferences and school competition: Evidence from a public school choice
program,” NBER Working Paper No. 11805. May 2006 version available at
http://aida.econ.yale.edu/~jh529/HKS_QualityCompetition_NBERWP.pdf.
Hastings, Justine S., Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger. 2006c. “Preferences and
heterogeneous treatment effects in a public school choice lottery,” NBER
Working Paper No. 12145. June 2006 version available at
http://aida.econ.yale.edu/~jh529/HastingsKaneStaiger_Preferences&SchoolChoic
e_NBERWP.pdf.
Hirano, Keisuke, Guido W. Imbens, and Geert Ridder. 2003. “Efficient estimation of
average treatment effects using the estimated propensity score,” Econometrica
71(4):1161-1189.
Hirschman, Albert O. 1970. Exit, voice, and loyalty: Responses to decline in firms,
organizations, and states. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Imbens, Guido W. 2004. “Nonparametric estimation of average treatment effects under
exogeneity: A review,” Review of Economics and Statistics 86(1):4-29.
Kinder, Donald R., and D. Roderick Kiewiet. 1979. “Economic discontent and political
behavior: The role of personal grievances and collective economic judgments in
congressional voting,” American Journal of Political Science 23(3):495-527.
Kramer, Gerald H. 1971. “Short-term fluctuations in U.S. voting behavior, 1896-1964,”
American Political Science Review 65(1):131-43.
Krueger, Alan B. and Pei Zhu. 2004. “Another look at the New York City school voucher
experiment,” American Behavioral Scientist 47(5):658-98.
Mayer, Daniel P., Paul E. Peterson, David E. Myers, Christina Clark Tuttle, and William
G. Howell. 2002. “School choice in New York City after three years: An
evaluation of the School Choice Scholarships Program,” Washington, DC:
Mathematica Policy Research, Inc.

28

Mecklenburg County Board of Elections. 2003. November 4, 2003 - 2003 Municipal
General and School Board Election. Retrieved July 31, 2005 from
http://www.meckboe.org/pages/Election/e_info/general03/index.html.
Mecklenburg County Board of Elections. 2004. March 2004 Mecklenburg County Voter
Data File. Retrieved April 1, 2005 from Mecklenburg County Board of Elections.
North Carolina State Board of Elections. October 2003 North Carolina County Statistics
Report. Retrieved December 8, 2005 from
http://www.sboe.state.nc.us/voterreg/vregoct02/precinct03.pdf.
Olson, Mancur. 1965. The logic of collective action. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Palfrey, Thomas, and Howard Rosenthal. 1985. “Voter participation and strategic
uncertainty,” American Political Science Review 79(1):62-78.
Rouse, Cecilia. E. 1998. “Private school vouchers and student achievement: An
evaluation of the Milwaukee Parental Choice Program,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 113(2):553-602.
Schachter, Jason P. 2004. “Geographical mobility: 2002 to 2003,” Current Population
Reports P20-549, U.S. Census Bureau.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2003 American Community Survey, Mecklenburg County, North
Carolina - General Demographic Characteristics; using American FactFinder.
Retrieved August 10, 2005 from http://factfinder.census.gov.
U.S. Census Bureau. Census 2000, Mecklenburg County, North Carolina - Fact Sheet;
using American FactFinder. Retrieved August 10, 2005 from
http://factfinder.census.gov.
U.S. Census Bureau. Census 2000, Summary File 3; using American FactFinder.
Retrieved January 10, 2005 from http://factfinder.census.gov.

29

Figure I: Timeline of Events

Choices Processed,
School Assignments
Made for 2002-2003
School Year

Choices Processed,
School Assignments
Made for 2003-2004
School year

30

Fall
Census:
20th Day
of Class

Nov.
School
Board
Election

March
Voter
Data

Table I: November 4, 2003 School Board Election: At-large Candidates
Votes
Received
37,164

Candidate Name
Kaye McGarry

Occupation
Business Owner/ Author/
Speaker

Important Issues
Reprioritize budget so that more is
spent on teachers and less on
bureaucracy, increase qualified teacher
retention

Joe (Coach) White

Retired Football Coach

Increase funding, increase community
involvement and improve relationship
with School Board

31,360

Kit Cramer

Group Vice President for
Education, Charlotte
Chamber

Student achievement, reduced teacher
turnover

31,004

Wilhelmenia
Rembert***

University Administrator
and Tenured Professor,
Current School Board Chair

Enhance teacher quality and
compensation, improve student
achievement for all groups of students

30,602

Mike Kasper

Controller

Simplified and transparent budget,
establishment of ‘Neighborhood
Schools Zones’ that are permanent

24,863

George Dunlap

Police Officer

Student achievement, fiscal
responsibility

22,651

Larry Bumgarner

Information Not Available

Information Not Available

14,886

Rachel B. Hall

Information Not Available

Information Not Available

9,529

Queen Norwood
Thompson

Social worker/ Drop-out
counselor

Accountability system that assesses
quality of education for each child not
just based on test scores, empower
inner-city schools through specialized
programs

5,868

Fred Marsh

Retired Small Businessman

Higher test scores, lower drop out rates

5,054

Nick Holley

Campaign Manager for Kim
Holley for US Congress

Reducing mobile classroom units,
increasing CMS student achievement
standards

4,544

Notes: Top three candidates won the election. ***Wilhelmenia Rembert was incumbent chair who lost the election by 402 votes.
Data Sources: Election totals are from Mecklenburg County Board of Elections. Candidate information taken from the candidates'
written information about themselves and their positions as printed in the Charlotte Advocates for Education voting guide for the
November 4, 2003 election.

31

Table II: Summary Statistics from Voting Data

Demographics:
Percent White
Percent Female
Own Block-group and Race
Median Income in 2000 Census
Party Affiliation:
Percent Democrat
Percent Republican
Total N

Mecklenburg
County

Registered
Voters

Voters in 2003
Election

58.04%
51.14%

71.12%
54.94%

73.65%
55.32%

$50,579

$61,294

$66,261

----736,815

42.69%
35.59%
427,133

45.80%
39.52%
97,258

Notes: Data from Mecklenburg County Board of Elections March 2004 Voter file and North Carolina State Board of
Elections, and the US Bureau of the Census, 2000 Decennial Census, State and County Quick Facts and 2003 American
Community Survey

Table III: Student Characteristics

Student Demographics:
Black
Female
Free or Reduced Lunch
Own Block-group and Race
Median Income in 2000 Census
Choice School Characteristics:
Average Combined Scores
Percent Free or Reduced Lunch
Home School Characteristics:
Average Combined Scores
Percent Free or Reduced Lunch
Number of Students

All Students

Randomized

41.2%
49.6%
33.1%

53.9%
51.4%
37.8%

$55,670

$53,012

0.051
36.3%

0.085
36.6%

-0.074
41.0%
92,789

-0.205
47.4%
9,408

Notes: Data from Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools. Statistics on All Students taken from the
2002-2003 school year. Randomized groups include students in 2002-2003 and 2003-2004
school lotteries for whom lottery number alone determined assignment.

32

Table IV: The Impact of Random Assignment to First-Choice School on Attrition
Regression Adjusted Difference: Lottery
Mean
Winners vs. Lottery Losers
(1)
(2)
(3)
All Students
0.141

All Students
-0.025**
(0.009)
N=9,408

White
-0.057***
(0.017)
N=3,344

Non-White
-0.013
(0.009)
N=6,064

2002-2003 Lottery Randomized Groups: Not Present in Fall
2003 Student Census

0.158

-0.021
(0.011)
N=6,452

-0.054**
(0.020)
N=2,243

-0.005
(0.012)
N=4,209

2003-2004 Lottery Randomized Groups: Not Present in Fall
2003 Student Census

0.103

-0.029
(0.015)
N=2,956

-0.063
(0.033)
N=1,101

-0.025
(0.014)
N=1,855

Variable
2002-2003 and 2003-2004 Randomized Groups: Not
Present in Fall 2003 Student Census

Notes: Each entry in the table is from a separate regression of an indicator of attrition on whether the student was assigned to her first-choice school,
controlling for lottery-block fixed effects and the following baseline covariates: black (for All Students only), female, free- or reduced-lunch status,
median income. Standard errors adjust for clustering at the lottery-block level. Asterisks indicate significance (*=.05, **=.01, ***=.001).

33

Table V: Characteristics of the Randomized Groups
Regression
Adjusted
Difference

Won
Lottery

Lost
Lottery

0.326

0.337

Female

0.519

0.521

Free or Reduced Lunch

0.353

0.423

$51,659

$52,295

-0.227

-0.214

Percent Free or Reduced Lunch

0.488

0.479

Percent Black

0.529

0.525

0.211

0.206

0.009
(0.011)

3,478

4,607

8,085

Variable
Student Characteristics:
White

Own Block-group and Race
Median Income 2000 Census
Home School Characteristics:
Average Combined Score

Prior Household Voting Behavior:
Household Voted in 2001
N

0.007
(0.009)
0.0001
(0.013)
-0.031*
(0.014)
212.580
(526.713)

0.006
(0.008)
-0.001
(0.005)
-0.006
(0.005)

Notes: Adjusted difference reports the coefficient on whether the student was assigned to her
first-choice school from separate regressions with each variable in the first column as the
dependent variable, controlling for lottery-block fixed effects. Standard errors adjust for
clustering at the lottery-block level. Asterisks indicate significance (*=.05, **=.01,
***=.001).

34

Table VI: The Impact of Winning or Losing the Lottery on Voting in 2003 Election
(3)
(2)
(1)
Dependent Variable:
Indicator if at least one member of student’s
Non-White
White
All Students
household voted in 2003 election
Randomized Outcome:
0.131
0.327*
-0.036
Lost Lottery
(0.095)
(0.139)
(0.135)
Student Baseline Characteristics:
0.239*
--White
(0.096)
---0.016
0.010
-0.045
Female
(0.082)
(0.120)
(0.106)
-1.016***
-11.975***
-1.071***
Free or Reduced Lunch
(0.260)
(0.758)
(0.294)
0.007***
0.011***
0.005
Median Income (demeaned)
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.003)
3.086***
2.624***
3.471***
Household Voted in 2001
(0.087)
(0.112)
(0.126)
Mean of Dependent Variable
Total Observations
Log Pseudolikelihood

0.227
7,365
-2114.496

0.367
2,432
-930.437

0.166
4,602
-1004.351

Notes: Conditional (fixed-effects) logit estimation with lottery-block fixed effects; standard errors adjust for clustering at
the lottery-block level. Asterisks indicate significance (*=.05, **=.01, ***=.001).

35

Table VII: Specification Checks
Landscape Format on Different Page

36

Table VIII: Comparing Characteristics of Status-quo and Randomized Groups
Regression Adjusted
Difference: Without
Probability Weights
Status-quo
Randomized
Variable
Student Baseline Characteristics:
White

0.690

0.332

Female

0.501

0.520

Free or Reduced Lunch

0.195

0.393

Median Income (Demeaned)

16.655

1.021

Household Voted in 2001

0.317

0.208

N

7,966

8,085

Regression Adjusted
Difference: With
Probability Weights

0.317***
(0.024)
-0.016
(0.010)
-0.280***
(0.046)
13.524***
(1.509)
0.129***
(0.016)

0.0006
(0.023)
-0.027
(0.026)
-0.044
(0.028)
0.363
(1.783)
0.004
(0.023)

16,051

13,988

Notes: Adjusted difference reports the coefficient on whether the student was in the status-quo group from separate regressions with each
variable in the first column as the dependent variable, controlling for lottery-block fixed effects. Standard errors adjust for clustering at the
lottery-block level. Asterisks indicate significance (*=.05, **=.01, ***=.001).

37

Table IX: Weighted Results of Losing the Lottery Versus Status-quo on Voting
OLS Estimation
OLS Estimation
Dependent Variable: Number of
Dependent Variable: Indicator if at least
members of student’s household who
one member of student’s household
voted in 2003 election
voted in 2003 election
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
All Students
0.037*
(0.014)

White
0.086***
(0.025)

Non-White
0.007
(0.010)

All Students
0.051**
(0.019)

White
0.122***
(0.035)

Non-White
0.010
(0.013)

Status-quo Group

0.004
(0.022)

-0.011
(0.041)

0.028
(0.015)

0.006
(0.028)

0.003
(0.052)

0.028
(0.020)

Total Observations
Adjusted R-squared

13,988
0.4036

6,876
0.3916

7,112
0.4347

13,988
0.4751

6,876
0.4567

7,112
0.4988

Variable
Lost Lottery

Notes: OLS estimation with lottery-block fixed effects; standard errors adjust for clustering at the lottery-block level. Asterisks
indicate significance (*=.05, **=.01, ***=.001). Regressions include baseline controls: race, gender, median income, voting
history, free- and reduced-lunch status.

38

Table X: The Impact of Losing the Lottery on Voting: Interactions of Lottery Outcomes with Race,
Income, Prior Voting History, and School-Level Academics
Dependent Variable:
(1)
(3)
Indicator if at least one member of student’s
(2)
(4)
household voted in 2003 election
Randomized Outcome:
Lost Lottery

Lost Lottery*(Score First Choice – Score
Home School)

0.120
(0.126)
-0.022
(0.172)
0.010*
(0.004)
-0.00007
(0.00006)
-----

-0.018
(0.138)
-0.045
(0.168)
0.010*
(0.004)
-0.00006
(0.00006)
0.347*
(0.164)
---

-0.030
(0.151)
-0.046
(0.167)
0.010*
(0.004)
-0.00006
(0.00006)
0.345*
(0.164)
0.049
(0.182)

-0.029
(0.151)
-0.045
(0.166)
0.010*
(0.004)
-0.00006
(0.00006)
0.345*
(0.164)
---

Won Lottery*(Score First Choice – Score
Last Year’s School)

---

---

---

-0.035
(0.184)

Lost Lottery*(Score Home School – Score
Last Year’s School)

---

---

---

-0.075
(0.280)

Lost Lottery*White
Lost Lottery*Median Income
Lost Lottery*Median Income Squared
Lost Lottery*Voted in 2001

Total Observations
Log Pseudolikelihood

7,365
-2111.204

7,365
-2108.712

7,365
-2108.476

7,365
-2108.374

Notes: Conditional (fixed-effects) logit estimation with lottery-block fixed effects; standard errors adjust for clustering at the
lottery-block level. Asterisks indicate significance (*=.05, **=.01, ***=.001). Regressions include baseline controls: race, gender,
median income, median income squared, voting history, free- and reduced-lunch status, and all school level academic variables
that are interacted with winning or losing the school choice lottery.

39

Table XI: Relationship Between Precinct-Level Election Results and Losing the Lottery
Dependent Variable: Precinct fraction of
votes against incumbent in 2003 election
Constant

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.078***
(0.017)

-0.011
(0.045)

0.0002
(0.047)

Precinct Fraction of Votes Against
Incumbent in Prior Election

0.916***
(0.026)

0.929***
(0.038)

0.908***
(0.041)

Precinct Fraction of Students Who Are
White and Lost the Lottery

0.437***
(0.124)

0.392**
(0.135)

0.278
(0.171)

Precinct Fraction White

---

0.090*
(0.044)

0.097
(0.051)

Precinct Fraction Free or Reduced Lunch

---

0.106*
(0.051)

0.113*
(0.054)

Precinct Average Median Income

---

-0.0001
(0.0002)

-0.0001
(0.0002)

School Board District Fixed Effects

No

No

Yes

0.9150
186

0.9182
186

0.9212
186

R-squared
N

Notes: Weighted OLS regression estimation with robust standard errors. Observations (precincts) are weighted by total voter
turnout in the precinct in 2003 election. Asterisks indicate significance (*=.05, **=.01, ***=.001).

40

