                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         ESTABLISHING CREDIBILITY:
            EVOLVING PERCEPTIONS OF THE EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK

                                          Linda S. Goldberg
                                          Michael W. Klein

                                        Working Paper 11792
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w11792


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2005




The views expressed in this paper are those of the individual authors and do not necessarily reflect
the position of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. We have benefited
from comments from Donald Andrews, Menzie Chinn, Sylvester Eijffinger, Graham Elliott, Arturo
Estrella, Jeff Fuhrer, Francesco Giavazzi, Ulrich Muller, Zhongjun Qu, Richard Portes, John Rogers,
David Romer, Jim Stock, Cedric Tille and participants at the January 2005 ASSA meeting, the March
2005 TAFI JIMF conference, the Spring 2005 NBER IFM meeting, the NBER Monetary Economics
2006 Summer Institute, and participants in the Federal Reserve System Committee Meeting on International
Economics.

© 2005 by Linda S. Goldberg and Michael W. Klein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Establishing Credibility: Evolving Perceptions of the European Central Bank
Linda S. Goldberg and Michael W. Klein
NBER Working Paper No. 11792
November 2005, Revised December 2006
JEL No. F3,E5,E6

                                                ABSTRACT

The perceptions of a central bank's inflation aversion may reflect institutional structure or, more dynamically,
the history of its policy decisions. In this paper, we present a novel empirical framework that uses
high frequency data to test for persistent variation in market perceptions of central bank inflation aversion.
The first years of the European Central Bank (ECB) provide a natural experiment for this model. Tests
of the effect of news announcements on the slope of yield curves in the euro-area, and on the euro/dollar
exchange rate, suggest that the market's perception of the policy stance of the ECB during its first
six years of operation significantly evolved, with a belief in its inflation aversion increasing in the
wake of its monetary tightening. In contrast, tests based on the response of the slope of the United
States yield curve to news offer no comparable evidence of any change in market perceptions of the
inflation aversion of the Federal Reserve.

Linda S. Goldberg
Research Department, 3rd Floor
Federal Reserve Bank-New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
and NBER
linda.goldberg@ny.frb.org

Michael W. Klein
Fletcher School
Tufts University
Medford, Massachusetts 02155
and NBER
michael.klein@tufts.edu
                                                                                       Establishing Credibility


1. Introduction

        The perception of the inflation aversion of a central bank plays a key role in
determining whether its goal of low inflation is attained. This point is, by now, a standard
theoretical result.1 It is also received wisdom among practitioners. In a survey of the heads
of 84 central banks, as well as 52 prominent academic monetary economists, Blinder (2000)
finds that anti-inflation credibility is considered vitally important and “helps keep inflation
low.”
        This consensus on the importance of the perception of inflation aversion naturally
leads to the question of how it is achieved, and whether and how it evolves over time. One
view is that establishing an appropriate institutional structure is the key element in insulating
the monetary authority from political pressure and thereby convincing markets that a central
bank has strong aversion to inflation. A second, more dynamic, view focuses on the role that
actual policy conduct plays in building the reputation of a central bank. These two different
views have distinct implications for the relative importance of the institutional structure of a
central bank as compared to its conduct for attaining and maintaining its credibility. 2
        A majority of respondents to Blinder’s survey believe that central bank credibility is
based more on its history of actions than on the construction of institutional structures that
insulate a central bank from political concerns and afford it independence. Nonetheless,
there is also a consensus among respondents that structure matters. This latter view is
consistent with empirical research that has found that institutional structure is associated with
economic performance in cross sections of countries, perhaps because it indicates the ability
of an institution to “tie its hands” and commit to a policy that may cause short-term pain in




1
  Seminal contributions on the role of credibility include Kydland and Prescott (1977), Calvo (1978), and Barro
and Gordon (1983).
2
  Blinder (2000) points out that the term “central bank credibility” can mean inflation aversion, incentive
compatibility or pre-commitment. He reports that, among these three concepts, “…central bankers identify
inflation aversion with credibility far more closely than do [academic] economists.” (p. 1424) Using a five-
point scale, nearly 90 percent of his central bank respondents identified the concepts “credibility” and
“dedication to price stability” as “quite closely related” or “virtually the same,” while just over half of the
academic respondents replied that these two terms were either “unrelated,” slightly related,” or “moderately
related.” In the title and body of this paper, we use the term “credibility” to mean inflation aversion.
Theoretical contributions in which credibility is synonymous with inflation aversion include Rogoff (1985,
1987) and Backus and Driffill (1985).


                                                                                                             1
                                                                                         Establishing Credibility


the pursuit of longer-run gain.3 There is less evidence, however, on whether and how the
credibility of a particular central bank evolves over time in response to the conduct of policy.
The goal of our paper is to use high-frequency data from asset markets to address this issue.
Thus, this work contributes to a growing literature that focuses on shifts in the market
assessment of the policy stance of a central bank and central bank efforts to obtain and keep
policy credibility.
         Questions relating to the achievement and the maintenance of inflation aversion
credibility are especially relevant for a new central bank, or a central bank that has a change
in leadership. An analysis of the experience of the European Central Bank (ECB) during its
early years of operation provides a natural experiment for considering this question. The
architects of the institutional structure of the ECB were mindful of lessons from economic
theory concerning the importance of independence from political considerations.4 The role
of conduct was also clearly apparent. As indicated by the survey results in Blinder (2000),
the directors of central banks are vitally aware that their policies are closely scrutinized for
indications of general tendencies. This may be especially true with a new central bank where
each policy choice can lead to a larger updating of market priors than would be the case for a
long-established central bank.
         This paper starts, in Section II, with the insight that the response of asset prices to
inflation news reflects market perceptions of the policy stance of the central bank.5 In
particular, Ellingsen and Söderström (2001) have demonstrated that a surprise increase in


3
   For example, Cukierman (1992) analyzes the charters of central banks and shows, in a cross-country panel,
that average inflation is lower in countries in which laws afford central banks greater independence. Alesina and
Summers (1993) also find cross-country evidence that the level of inflation, as well as its variability, is
negatively associated with indicators of central bank independence, but there is no association between central
bank independence and real variables. Questions have been raised, however, about whether the de jure structure
is closely linked to the de facto behavior of institutions (Forder 1999).
4
  Article 108 of the treaty establishing the European Community discusses insulating monetary policy decisions
from political influence. More recently, the May 2006 ECB publication “The European Central Bank, the
Eurosystem, the European System of Central Banks” states “When performing Eurosystem related tasks, the
ECB and the national central banks must not seek or take instructions from Community institutions or bodies, or
from any government of an EU country or from any other body. Likewise, the Community institutions and
bodies and the governments of the Member states must not seek to influence the members of the decision
making bodies of the ECB or of the NCBs [national central banks] in the performance of their tasks.” (p. 14)
5
  Forward market information has been used in other tests of policy regime credibility. For example, Svensson
(1991) shows that forward exchange rates were not within the target zone band of the European Monetary
System (EMS) in the 1980s, a result he interprets as indicating that the EMS generally did not offer credible
bands on its members’ currencies. Svensson (1993) presents a similar set of tests to determine whether the
inflation targets of Canada, New Zealand and Sweden were consistent with market yields.


                                                                                                               2
                                                                                        Establishing Credibility


inflationary pressures should result in a greater increase in a long interest rate relative to a
short interest rate when a central bank is perceived as being more tolerant of inflation and
less credible as an inflation fighter.6 These results suggest that if the credibility of a central
bank is earned through its conduct of policy, one would expect to find a significant change in
the relationship between inflation news and the term structure, as well as news and the
exchange rate, as credibility evolves.7 Alternatively, if the public’s view of a central bank’s
anti-inflation stance arises from a static institutional structure, then there should be no
evidence of a change in the responsiveness of the term structure or of the exchange rate to
news.8
         In Section III we study evolving central bank credibility by applying newly developed
tests for persistent time variation in regression coefficients (from Elliott and Müller 2006) to
high frequency financial market data. Specifically, we explore the evolution of the credibility
of the European Central Bank from the time it began its operations in January 1999 through
mid-2005. The regressions utilize hourly data on the term structure of bonds of euro-area
countries and the United States, and on the euro-dollar exchange rate, and regression analysis
tracks associated reactions to economic news announcements. The new econometric
techniques applied are especially relevant for this context since they allow a gradual
evolution of parameters in a manner consistent with results from theoretical models
supporting gradual expectations updating by market participants.
         The estimates presented in Section III suggest that the market’s perception of the
inflation aversion of the ECB has evolved over time. We find evidence of significant
persistent parameter instability for European term structures and the euro-dollar exchange
rate. As a benchmark, we also look for evidence of persistent parameter instability in the
response of the US term structure to news, but find that this relationship was stable during
this period, a result consistent with the view that the Fed’s long-standing commitment to


6
  A quantitative assessment is presented in Ellingsen and Söderström (2004).
7
  Of particular relevance for this paper, which studies the effect of announcements on the slope of the yield
curve, is work that links the empirical failure of the pure expectations hypothesis of the term structure of
interest rates and the excess sensitivity of long maturity yields to changes in monetary policy, such as Fuhrer
(1996), Gürkaynak, Sack and Swanson (2005), and Kozicki and Tinsley (2005).
8
  Klein, Mizrach and Murphy (1991) develop a similar type of analysis concerning differences in the
responsiveness of asset prices to news as policy evolves in their study of the changing responsiveness of dollar
exchange rates to news about the United States current account. They find the 1985 Plaza Accord altered
perceptions of the degree to which American policy was concerned with the U.S. current account deficit.


                                                                                                              3
                                                                                         Establishing Credibility


price stability anchored market expectations at this time.9 We also find no significant change
in the linkages between U.S. and euro area inflation during this time.
         These combined findings are consistent with market participants updating their views
of the anti-inflation stance of the European Central Bank. We provide additional support for
this conclusion based on the smoothed time path of the estimated parameters of the
coefficient on the news announcement. For this work, we implement a new econometric
technique from Müller and Petalas (2005). The results on rotations of the yield curve in
response to news show that monetary tightening by the ECB altered the estimates of the
market’s perception of the ECB’s anti-inflation stance. Discrete structural break tests (from
Andrews 1993) verify the robustness of these results on the presence and dating of a change
in market perceptions of the anti-inflationary stance of the ECB.
         Thus, overall, this paper provides support for a dynamic view of the evolution of the
perceived policy stance of the European Central Bank, with enhanced perceptions of
credibility as the ECB tightened policy in the early years of its existence. The evidence
presented here is consistent with the view voiced by many of Blinder’s respondents that
actions, and not just institutional structure, influence perceptions of the policy stance of a
new central bank. The tools we apply to high frequency data from bond markets and news
announcements provide a set of methods to track central bank credibility and market
perceptions as it evolves.




9
  We do not find evidence of parameter instability for the response of the term structure of US interest rates to
news for our sample period, January 1999 to June 2005. Those papers that find a role for a shift in Fed policy
focus on longer and earlier sample periods. For example, the sample for Fuhrer (1996) is 1966 to 1994, the
sample for Gürkaynek, Sack and Swanson (1995) is 1990 to 2002, and the samples used by Kozicki and Tinsley
(2005) begin in 1946, with the longest one ending in 1997.


                                                                                                               4
                                                                           Establishing Credibility


2. Central Bank Policy and Market Responses to News

       In this section we present a specification that allows for a change in perceptions about
the policy stance of the central bank to alter the response of asset prices to news. The
motivation for this specification begins with the long-established fact that asset prices
respond to news. But the magnitude of this effect, and even its direction, may depend upon
the perceived policy stance of the central bank. This is especially true with respect to the
term structure of interest rates. For example, a number or empirical studies have shown that
the failure of the Pure Expectations Hypothesis of the term structure of interest rates for the
United States can be attributed to changing views of the policy stance of the Federal Reserve
(e.g. Fuhrer 1996, Gürkaynek, Sack and Swanson 1995, Kozicki and Tinsley 2005).




2.1 Theoretical Underpinnings

       The theoretical work of Ellingsen and Söderström (2001) shows how the response of
the term structure of interest rates to news varies with a change in the perceived policy stance
of the central bank. The model assumes central bank private information on the state of the
economy or the inflation target of the central bank. A dynamic aggregate demand – aggregate
supply model with Svensson (1997)-style inertia in inflation and output is assumed, with
forward-looking monetary policy that is set optimally with respect to a quadratic loss
function for the central bank. Ellingsen and Söderström augment this model with a term
structure equation. The focus of their work is on how monetary policy decisions may both
reveal private information about the state of the economy and reflect the unknown policy
stance of the central bank.

       The key result in Ellingsen and Söderström (2001) for our work is their finding that
with “… a more inflation-averse central bank, short rates will respond more, but long rates
less to a given shock.” (p. 1601). In their model, both a positive demand shock and a positive
supply shock leads to a smaller effect on the slope of the yield curve when the central bank is
perceived to be strongly averse to inflation than when it puts relatively greater weight on




                                                                                                 5
                                                                                         Establishing Credibility


output deviations rather than inflation deviations in its loss function.10 The intuition behind
this result is that a positive inflation shock leads to an expectation of an increase in the short-
term interest rate which causes a decrease in economic activity. A central bank that is more
inflation averse (that is, one that places relatively more weight in its loss function on
inflation, and less on deviations of output from its target) responds more strongly to a
positive inflation shock, and creates a deeper recession, than a central bank that is less
inflation averse. In the long run, a given inflationary shock will persist for less time in the
economy if the central bank is more inflation averse, so future short rates will increase less
with a given shock if the central bank is more inflation averse. Thus, the slope of the yield
curve responds less to a given inflationary shock when a central bank is more inflation
averse.11

         This theoretical result provides the foundation of the specification used in our
empirical analysis.12 To translate the result from this model to an empirical specification, we
begin by writing the differential of the term structure as

                              ditL ditS
(1)      d (itL − itS ) = (       −     ) dη
                              dη dη

where itL is a long interest rate, itS is a short interest rate, and dη is the shock to either

demand or supply.

         The effect of a change in the inflation aversion of the central bank on the
                                                                                   ⎛ ditL                ⎞
responsiveness of the term structure to the shock turns on the relative size of d ⎜⎜                     ⎟ dλ
                                                                                                         ⎟
                                                                                   ⎝ dη                  ⎠


10
   The supply shock is the innovation to an equation in which inflation depends upon its lagged value as well as
lagged output. The demand shock is the innovation to an equation in which output depends upon its lagged
value and the lagged real interest rate. Both shocks are assumed to be i.i.d. with mean zero, which is relevant
for our analysis since the shocks we study are the surprise component of news announcements.
11
   Ellingsen and Söderström write that, due to the inertia in inflation and output “even a large dose of forward-
looking behavior does not destroy our qualitative results.” (p. 1598) and they note that purely forward looking
models are at odds with the data, citing Estrella and Fuhrer (2002). Ellingsen and Söderström also investigate
how differences in the information available to the public and to the central bank affects the response of the
slope of the yield curve to monetary policy shocks, but the information structure does not affect the response of
the slope of the yield curve to inflation news.
12
   Earlier empirical studies have also considered the possibility that the effects of news on asset prices of
different maturities reveals information about market participant beliefs about central bank policies. See
Huizinga and Mishkin (1986) and Fleming and Remolona (1999).


                                                                                                               6
                                                                            Establishing Credibility



       ⎛ di S ⎞
and d ⎜⎜ t ⎟⎟ dλ where λ is the relative weight on deviations of output from its target,
       ⎝ dη ⎠
compared with deviations of inflation from its target, in the central bank loss function in
Ellingsen and Söderström (2001) (and therefore, a central bank with a larger value of λ is less
inflation averse). Proposition 2 of that paper shows that

            ⎛ di L   ⎞        ⎛ di S   ⎞
(2)      d ⎜⎜ t      ⎟ dλ > d ⎜ t
                     ⎟        ⎜ dη
                                       ⎟ dλ
                                       ⎟
            ⎝ dη     ⎠        ⎝        ⎠

and, therefore, a positive inflationary shock will elicit more of a response at the long end of a
yield curve, with the slope of the yield curve changing accordingly, when a central bank is
perceived to be less inflation averse (that is, when it has a larger value of λ) than when it is
perceived to be more inflation averse.

        This result can be mapped to the standard linear specification linking the surprise
component of news to the change in an asset price. The specification for the effect of news
on asset prices, allowing for the possibility of a time-varying coefficient on the news
variable, is

(3)     qt + − qt − = α + γ i (xt + − Et − xt + ) + ε t +

where qt + − qt − is the change in the term structure over the short period of time between t-,

just before an announcement, and t+, just after that announcement (i.e. d (itL − itS ) ), xt +

represents the announced value of a variable, which is known at time t+, Et − xt + represents

the expected value of that variable before the announcement (so xt + − Et − xt + is the surprise

component of the announcement), and ε t + is a white-noise error term. As emphasized in

Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold and Vega (2003) this parsimonious specification is most
appropriate when the time horizon between t- and t+ is short, for example, when it is
measured in minutes rather than days, and when news about the variable x does not become
available at the same time (that is, within the span t- to t+ ) as announcements about some
other relevant variable.




                                                                                                  7
                                                                                 Establishing Credibility


          We identify γ i , qt + − qt − , and (xt + − Et − xt + ) in (3) with the terms in equation (1)

    ditL ditS
(       −     ) , d (itL − itS ) , and dη , respectively.   The inclusion of a subscript for the
    dη dη
coefficient (that is, γ i rather than γ ) indicates that it can vary over time in a manner
consistent with the theoretical result in (2) that the responsiveness of the term structure to
inflation news changes as perceptions of the inflation aversion of the central bank evolve.
Also note that the perceived inflation aversion, rather than the actual inflation aversion,
matters for γ i because the very short-run response of an asset price to news is driven purely

by private expectations and perceptions of policy. In particular, given the result in (2), γ i
decreases as the public perception of a central bank’s aversion to inflation gaps relative to
output gaps rises (in terms of the Ellingsen and Söderstrom (2001) model, as the public’s
perceived value of λ decreases).



2.2 Empirical Strategy

          To illustrate our empirical strategy we first present a particularly stark example and
discuss what we would expect to find in a regression on the term structure. We then discuss
a more realistic situation and describe how the econometric tests we employ allow us to test
for the presence of time variation in λi in that case.

          Suppose a dramatic policy action undertaken at time T by a central bank significantly
increases its perceived aversion to inflation from that moment on. Before time T, the public
perception of the relative weight placed on output in the central bank’s quadratic loss
function is λ D (for dovish) and after the policy action it is λ H (for hawkish) where λ D > λ H .
The coefficients in (3) associated with these parameters are γ D and γ H , respectively. The
result from Ellingsen and Söderström (2001) presented in (2) shows that γ D > γ H . Therefore,
with knowledge of the date T, one could simply perform a Chow test for a statistically
significant difference between γ i before and after this date.

          While this example shows how we might expect the coefficient in (3) to change over
time, it offers an unrealistic picture of the likely evolution of perceptions of the anti-inflation


                                                                                                       8
                                                                                             Establishing Credibility


stance of the European Central Bank. The two key differences between this example and a
more realistic framework are the lack of a single, widely-recognized dramatic change in
policy that was clearly a watershed, and the likelihood that perceptions changed gradually
rather than once and for all.13 A more articulated model could specify the manner in which
the market’s view of the stance of the central bank evolves over time in response to policy.

         But we need not constrain ourselves to one type of model or another to implement the
main econometric technique that we use for identifying the changes over time in the slope of
the yield curve. Elliott and Müller (2006) have developed a test for the presence of persistent
time variation in one or more regression coefficients. Their quasi-Local Level (qLL) statistic
provides asymptotically equivalent tests for a large class of persistent breaking processes
against the alternative of structural stability. The test does not require the specification of an
exact breaking process, such as breaks that occur in a random fashion, serial correlation in
the changes of coefficients, or a clustering of break points.14 This feature of their test makes
it well suited for our purposes since we do not need to test for a particular type of updating
by market participants of their views on central bank inflation aversion. The qLL statistic
takes a negative value, and a value smaller (more negative) than the critical value implies a
failure to reject time variation in one or more coefficients for the entire sample period. This
procedure tests for persistent time variation over the entire sample and, as such, does not
identify a particular date as the one most likely to represent a discrete break point.15
         We would like to ensure that the persistent time variation in γ i is due to variation
over time in the perceived inflation aversion of the ECB rather than, say, variation over time
in the direct responsiveness of the change in asset prices to the surprise component of news.
In the wake of the creation of a new central bank, such as the ECB in January 1999, it is
reasonable to expect that the most likely source of a time variation in γ i is changes in the
perceived inflation aversion. In fact, we do find evidence that there has been persistent time

13
   Theoretical analysis of learning about central bank behavior is consistent with a gradual evolution of
perceptions rather than a one-time shift. For example, see Backus and Driffill (1985) or, for a more recent
contribution, Athey, Atkeson, and Kehoe (2005).
14
   Elliott and Müller write that, for their tests, “…the precise form of the breaking process [of the coefficients] is
irrelevant for the asymptotic power of the tests.” (p.927) An implication of this is that “From a practical
perspective… the researcher does not have to specify the exact path of the breaking process in order to be able
to carry out (almost) efficient inference.” (p. 914)
15
   The specification (3) allows for time variation in γ. In the interest of offering a more general set of tests, we
will also consider the possibility of time variation in α.


                                                                                                                    9
                                                                                            Establishing Credibility


variation in the slope coefficient in term spread regressions for Germany, France and Italy,
and we interpret this as reflecting an evolving view of the inflation aversion of the ECB.
          This interpretation is bolstered by some other tests. Evidence will be presented that
shows no persistent time variation in γ i for the slope of the U.S. term spread. This test using
the U.S. yield curve is offered as a benchmark; were we to find evidence of parameter
instability for regressions based on this series, we would be concerned that evidence of
parameter instability using European bond yields may not, in fact, reflect an evolving
perception of ECB inflation aversion but, rather, some structural change common to financial
markets across all four of these industrial countries. As a further robustness check, we test
for the changing effects of news announcements on the bilateral euro/dollar exchange rate.16
Furthermore, we will also present evidence that the relationship between U.S. inflation and
inflation in the euro-area has not exhibited persistent time variation; given the use of U.S.
Core CPI news, this then helps isolate inflation aversion as the source of the persistent time
variation in γ i .17
         Our interpretation that the persistent time variation in the slope coefficient for
European term spreads and the euro/dollar exchange rate reflects evolving perceptions of the
inflation aversion of the ECB is also bolstered by comparing estimates of the smoothed time
path of γ i (using the method developed by Müller and Petalas 2005) to actual changes in
ECB policy. We will show that the decrease in the estimated values of slope coefficients
occurs in wake of monetary tightening by the ECB. The results from these smoothed
estimates are supported by the sup-Wald tests for parameter stability (see Andrews 1993,
2003) which offer a break date for γ i that roughly corresponds to the peak value of the
estimated smoothed time path. Furthermore, the presence of a statistically significant break
date supports the conclusion of the Elliott and Müller (2006) test concerning the persistent
time variation of the coefficient.




16
   The appendix presents the theoretical underpinnings of the exchange rate specification. If we failed to find
persistent parameter instability in the euro-dollar exchange rate regression we would be concerned that there
may have been a common structural change across United States and euro-area markets over the sample period.
17
   We will also test for separate persistent time variation in the intercept term, αi, and for joint persistent time
variation in both the slope coefficient and the intercept.


                                                                                                                 10
                                                                             Establishing Credibility


3. Implementation to Evolving Market Perceptions of the European Central Bank

       In this section we first discuss, in Section 3.1, the data we use for our tests. The
results of the Elliott and Müller (2006) test are presented in Section 3.2. These tests show
evidence of significant persistent time variation in the slope coefficient for term spreads of
German, French and Italian bonds, as well as for the euro/dollar exchange rate, but not for
United States bonds. In Section 3.3 we show that the timing of changes in the estimates of
the smoothed time path of γ i corresponds to actual policy changes undertaken by the ECB.
Finally, in Section 3.4, to demonstrate the robustness of our results concerning the presence
and timing of a persistent change in the market’s perception of the ECB’s anti-inflation
stance, we present sup-Wald tests (from Andrews 1993) for a discrete break in the regression
relationship and the dates associated with those breaks.


3.1 Data
       The two types of data used in our analysis are various asset prices, where the assets
are government bonds and foreign exchange, and inflation announcements and related market
expectations. We begin this section with a discussion of the five different asset prices used
as dependent variables in our estimation. We then describe our construction of inflation
surprises.


       Asset Price Data: Five different dependent variables are used in the regressions. In
each case, the dependent variable, qt + − qt − , represents the change in q between thirty minutes

before and thirty minutes after each monthly inflation announcement over the period January
1999 to June 2005. The change in the term spread between 10-year and 2-year interest rates
for French, Italian, German, or United States government bonds are four of the dependent
variables. The fifth dependent variable is where qt + − qt − represents the change in the

logarithm of the euro /U.S. dollar exchange rate, thirty minutes before and thirty minutes
after the news announcement. In this case, a positive value of qt + − qt − rather than indicating

an increase in the premium of the long rate relative to the short rate, indicates a depreciation
of the euro. Evidence that γ i decreases over the sample period in the exchange rate
specification is consistent with a situation of more of an increase in the perceived anti-


                                                                                                 11
                                                                                      Establishing Credibility


inflation stance of the ECB, as compared to the U.S. Federal Reserve. Combined with the
yield curve results, the γ i decrease on the euro/ U.S. dollar exchange rate reflects a stable
perception of the stance of the Fed combined with a perception of an increasingly anti-
inflation stance of the ECB .


           Inflationary Announcements and Expectations: To capture the economic news
η t that lead to asset price updating, we restrict our attention to inflation announcement
measures. Candidate data releases for our study potentially include indicators of consumer
price inflation for the full euro-area, for individual countries in the euro-area, and for the
United States. The construction of the “news” variable, which is the appropriate variable to
be employed in the specification, also requires measures of market expectations for the full
sample period.
           Although our primary analytical emphasis is on evolving credibility of the ECB, and
we use data on European yield curves, our analysis utilizes data on the U.S. core CPI release,
not European inflation reports. There are three well-established reasons for this choice. First,
the euro-area inflation series – both the announcements and expectations of the
announcements -- were not available at the time of the introduction of the euro in January
1999 and thus these euro-area series cannot be used to study the critical early years of the
ECB when market participants were forming expectations of its monetary policy preferences.
Second, the actual news content and market impact of inflation announcements from
individual European countries has been of limited value to markets because of issues related
to data quality and data leaks prior to official announcement times. This widely documented
finding is consistent with regression findings that show that the European price
announcements have low news content and have weak effects on asset prices in Germany,
Italy, France, the United Kingdom, and Europe as a whole.18 A third reason for the use of
U.S. rather than European data is based on a positive, rather than a negative, finding. As
documented in Andersen et al. (2003), Goldberg and Leonard (2003), Faust, Rogers, Wang,
and Wright (2006), and Ehrmann and Fratscher (2005), U.S. announcements have strong
news content, and they have large and significant effects on both United States and European


18
     Recent studies include Goldberg and Leonard (2003),and Ehrmann and Fratscher (2005).


                                                                                                          12
                                                                                       Establishing Credibility


asset prices. Financial market studies document this phenomenon as well.19 One reason
exposited for this impact is that U.S. inflation news contains information that is perceived as
relevant for European inflation.20
        We have selected the United States Core CPI as the series for our analysis of the
interaction between news, asset prices, and changing central bank credibility or inflation
aversion. The core CPI data are among the one most closely followed by the market, both in
terms of significance in econometric studies and as reflected by the fact that, in recent years,
this series, as compared with a range of alternative price news, was typically the only
inflation series discussed by Alan Greenspan in his Humphrey – Hawkins testimony.21
        The news or surprise component of core CPI is defined as the difference between the
actual release value and the markets’ prior expectation of the contents of the release. The
expectations data we use are median responses from weekly surveys of market participants
conducted by Money Market Services, a division of Standard & Poor’s, and more recently
from Action Economics.22 A regression of the 75 median monthly survey responses on the
actual monthly inflation reports generates a coefficient of 0.68, with p-value of 0.026, with
the regression unable to reject unbiasedness of the survey as a predictor of the actual value of
the inflation reports. In creating the inflation “news” variable, we normalize news by the
sample standard deviation of the difference between the reported and the expected values of
the announcements so that the variable introduced as news driving the yield curve and
exchange rates in our empirical methods has mean 0 and standard deviation 1.


3.2 Time Variation in the Effects of News on the Slope of the Yield Curve
        In this section we apply the tests for time variation in the slope of the specifications,
reporting the results of the Elliott and Müller (2006) qLL statistic for regressions using the
five series discussed above as dependent variables. As mentioned above, the qLL statistics


19
   A recent market studies supporting these conclusions is Citigroup (2006).
20
   Of course, an impact of U.S. inflation news for European outcomes does not preclude an ECB reaction to
European inflation series as well. But, over the hour-long period representing the time before and after a U.S.
inflation announcement, the time period we study, this news is the dominant information reaching the market.
21
   See Clark (2001) for evidence on this point and for an overview of related literature.
22
   Money Market Services were the source of these data through December 2003. Haver Analytics provided
continuous expectations and announcement data through 2005 using data from Action Economics. Gürkaynek
and Wolfers (2005) show that these data have been among the best performing expectations series for important
macroeconomic variables over the sample period that we analyze.


                                                                                                            13
                                                                                          Establishing Credibility


are negative. Evidence of an evolving view of the policy stance of the ECB over time is
given by a value of the qLL statistic smaller (i.e. more negative) than its critical value for
regressions using the change in the term spread for German, French and Italian government
bonds, as well as for the change in the euro/dollar exchange rate. In a regression using the
US term spread the value of the qLL statistic larger than its critical value is evidence against
persistent time variation in the perception of λ, the anti-inflation stance of the Federal
Reserve over this period.
         Results of this test are presented in Table 1.23 The first row is a test of the general
persistent variation in the slope coefficient only. The second row is a test of the general
persistent variation in the intercept only. The third row is a joint test of the general persistent
variation in both the slope and the intercept coefficients. Critical values are included in the
bottom row of the table. Entries in bold and italic represent a qLL statistic that is significant
at better than the 99 percent level of confidence, bold entries represent a qLL statistic that is
significant at between the 95 percent and 99 percent levels of confidence, and italic entries
represent a qLL statistic that is significant at between the 90 percent and 95 percent levels of
confidence.


               Table 1: Elliott-Müller Test for Persistent Time Variation
Test of Time              Change in Term Spread of Government Bonds of                          Change in
Variation of           Germany       France         Italy   United States                       Euro/$
Slope, γ           -11.11       -8.75         -7.43         -5.61                               -8.79

Intercept, α       -7.84             -3.14              -7.44              -7.85                -3.21
Joint Slope & -21.72                 -9.08              -7.13              -8.75                -16.69
Intercept
No. of obs.   74                     74                 72                 73                   75

Critical Values: 1 coefficient (Slope alone) 1% -11.05; 5% -8.36; 10% -7.14
                 2 coefficients (Slope & Intercept) 1% -17.57; 5% -14.32; 10% -12.80

         The results in Table 1 provide evidence of persistent time variation in γ i in
regressions of inflation news on the change in the term spread of German government bonds

23
  As suggested by Elliott and Müller (2006), we allow for the possibility of heteroskedasticity in the variance-
                                       {                   }
covariance matrix of the score series ( x t + − E t x t − ) × ε t + by using the Newey-West (1987) correction. We
have written a Stata program for conducting the Elliott – Müller test which is available on request.


                                                                                                              14
                                                                          Establishing Credibility


and French government bonds, and in the euro/dollar exchange rate, at greater than the 95
percent level of confidence, and on the change in the term spread of Italian bonds at between
the 90 percent and the 95 percent level of confidence. In contrast, there is no significant
evidence of persistent time variation in the slope coefficient in a regression of news on the
change in the term spread of United States government bonds over this same period of time.
As robustness checks to alternative specifications, we also provide tests for persistent time
variation in the intercept, as well as jointly over the slope and intercept of these
specifications. There is also no significant evidence of any persistent time variation in the
intercept α i of these regressions, with none of the test statistics for significant at the 95
percent level of confidence.
       All of these results are consistent with the model presented above in which γ i varies
with an evolving view of the inflation aversion of the European Central Bank in the period
after its inception. There is not a corresponding evolution in the view of the inflation
preferences of the Federal Reserve during this period, which followed almost fifteen years of
observations of the policy actions of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors under the
leadership of Chairman Greenspan.
       The finding of a significant persistent variation for the slopes of the German, French
and Italian yield curves, as well as for the euro/dollar exchange rate, and the rejection of
significant persistent time variation for the slope of the US yield curve, suggest that results
are being driven by variation in the market’s perception of the anti-inflation stance of the
ECB, rather than some overall change in inflation dynamics affecting the US as well as
European countries.
       One might argue that these results are consistent with a situation where the signal
value of the inflation news changed over time due to changing fundamental relationships
between the eurozone and the United States. This could arise, for example, if a change in the
relationship between U.S. and European inflation rates occurred over this period since the
announcements are, in all regressions, of U.S. Core CPI as the η t . The results presented in
Table 2, however, show that this is not the case. This table presents tests of significant time
variation in the coefficient of regressions of monthly inflation in the Euro area, Germany,
France and Italy as a function of US monthly inflation. As shown in that table, there is no
evidence of significant time variation of the coefficient on monthly United States inflation in


                                                                                              15
                                                                              Establishing Credibility


for the period January 1998 to December 2005 in any of these four regressions. The smallest
qLL statistic is -6.9 (the critical value for the 90 percent level of confidence is -7.14). In all
cases but for Germany, there is also a highly significant relationship between U.S. inflation
and the inflation rate in the European countries, or the euro area as a whole.


     Table 2: Elliott-Müller Test for Persistent Time Variation in Effect
    of US Inflation on Inflation in euro area, Germany, France, and Italy
πi = α + βπUS + ε                                    Monthly Inflation in
                                     Germany          France          Italy       Euro Area
          qLL for β          -3.16              -4.29           -6.91             -1.86
               α            0.117             0.055             0.163        0.107
             (s.e.)         (0.038)           (0.026)           (0.0137)     (0.027)
               β            0.021             0.362             0.117        0.275
             (s.e.)         (0.100)           (0.069)           (0.036)      (0.072)
Critical Values for qLL: 1% -11.05; 5% -8.36; 10% -7.14
Regressions run using monthly inflation data for period January 1998 – Dec. 2005 (96 obs.)
Bold and Italic = significant at 99% level, Bold = significant at 95% level,
Italics = significant at 90% level.

       The evidence in these tables is suggestive of an evolving perception of the policy
stance of the European Central Bank. This conclusion is bolstered by the estimated time path
of γ i presented in the next section.


3.3 Estimated Paths of γ i
       The central hypothesis in this paper is that the perceived anti-inflation stance of the
European Central Bank evolved with its policy actions. The qLL statistics presented in the
previous section suggest that there was, in fact, persistent time variation in the term spreads
of German, French, and Italian bonds, as well as in the euro/dollar rate, over this sample
period, but there was no similar significant variation in the U.S. term spread. While these
results support our hypothesis, an even stronger case can be made by considering the
estimated time paths of the estimated γ i ’s in light of the policy moves by the ECB and the
economic performance of the Euro-12 area during this period. In this section we show that
the estimated parameter paths of γ i from regressions for each of the three European term
spread regressions and the euro/dollar rate regression followed a pattern consistent with an


                                                                                                  16
                                                                                              Establishing Credibility


evolving credibility of the ECB, given its policy moves and the economic environment in the
eurozone over this time.
         Figure 1 presents the estimated smoothed parameter paths of γ i for each of the four
term spreads and Figure 2 presents the estimated smoothed time path for the euro/dollar
exchange rate and, to provide context, repeats the presentation of the time paths for the
United States and German term spreads from Figure 1. The time paths are calculated using
the technique developed by Müller and Petalas (2005), who show how to estimate the
parameter path for general unstable time series models by minimizing a weighted average
risk criterion, a procedure that is akin to a smoothing problem. This procedure requires only
general assumptions about the true persistent time variation of the coefficients.24 The dashed
vertical lines in these figures indicate dates of interest rate cuts by the ECB, and the solid
vertical lines demark the period of the seven interest rate increases, from November 1999
through October 2000.
         Before turning to the evolution of the time paths during the full sample period, we
first note that Figure 1 shows that the estimated value of γ i at the beginning of the sample is
greater for the three European government bonds than for the United States bond. This is
consistent with the view that, at the outset of the operation of the European Central Bank, the
market perceived the ECB as more willing to tolerate inflation than the Federal Reserve.25
Another immediately apparent characteristic of the four time paths in Figure 1 is the relative
variability of the three European γ i ’s as compared to that of the United States which, of




24
  Müller and Petalas (2005) describe their procedure as an extension of the Kalman smoothing formulae with
the optimal smoother for the true path of the time varying coefficient a function of the score
sequence {( xt + − Et xt − ) × ε }. See their paper for details, and for an outline of how to implement their procedure.
                         t+

We have written a Stata program for implementing the Müller - Petalas procedure, which is available on
request.
25
   This could reflect the efforts by politicians to weigh in on the conduct of ECB policy in the period before it
began operations. For example, Austrian Chancellor Viktor Klima said, at a summit in Pörtschach, Austria, in
October 1998, “There are good conditions for low interest rates in the euro zone. Stable prices, growth and
employment are not contradictory.” Oskar Lafontaine, appointed Finance Minister of Germany in the Autumn
of 1998, called for the new ECB to lower interest rates from the time of his appointment until his resignation in
March 1999. In response, Wim Duisenberg, the first president of the ECB, stated in November 1998 that it was
a “normal phenomenon” for politicians to offer their views on the conduct of monetary policy, but “it would be
very abnormal if those suggestions were to be listened to.” See “Wim Duisenberg, Banker to a New Europe,”
The Economist, November 26, 1998.



                                                                                                                    17
                                                                     Establishing Credibility




                   Figure 1: Term Spread Responses to News



    .02
    .01
gamma
    0
    -.01




            June-1999 June-2000 June-2001 June-2002 June-2003 June-2004 June-2005
                                           Date

                     German Term Spread                         French Term Spread
                     Italian Term Spread                        US Term Spread
                     7 Rate Hikes Nov. 1999 - Oct. 2000




             Figure 2: Euro and Term Spread Responses to News
    .04
      .02
gamma
 0  -.02
    -.04




            June-1999 June-2000 June-2001 June-2002 June-2003 June-2004 June-2005
                                           Date

                    German Term Spread             Slope coef, Euro Term Spread
                    US Term Spread                 7 Rate Hikes Nov. 1999 - Oct. 2000




                                                                                         18
                                                                                         Establishing Credibility


course, is a reflection of the results of the Elliott – Müller tests presented in the previous
section.26
         The time variation of the estimated paths of γ i in light of both the actions undertaken
by the European Central Bank and contemporaneous published views of its conduct bolster
our contention that the variation in this parameter is due to changing views of ECB policy
stance rather than, say, changes in the links between U.S. and European inflation. In order to
make this point, we offer in Table 3 an overview of the policy of the European Central Bank
from the time it began its operations in January 1999 until the end of our sample period in
June 2005, and the economic environment in which these policy moves took place. This
table includes the prevailing interest rate for refinancing operations set by the ECB (which is
its policy interest rate), the dates when new interest rates took effect, the year-on-year HICP
inflation for the euro-area in the month immediately before the policy move, the
unemployment rate for the Euro-12 countries in the month preceding the policy moves, and
the growth of real GDP in the quarter preceding the policy moves.27 We also will refer to
conclusions on ECB conduct presented in various annual volumes of the Centre for
Economic Policy Research (CEPR) publication Monitoring the European Central Bank.
         Table 3 shows that the policy interest rate, the rate on main refinancing operations,
was 3.00% in January 1999. The inflation rate in the December 1998 was 0.79%, and the
unemployment rate was 9.71% in that month, while the growth for the Euro-12 in the last
quarter of 1998 was 1.90%.28 The ECB lowered the policy interest rate by 50 basis points
three months after it began operations. There were no further policy moves until a 50 basis
point increase in November 1999 that returned the interest rate to 3.00%. At that time, the
year-on-year HICP inflation rate had risen from under 1% in the early Spring of 1999 to
1.36% in October, real GDP growth had picked up and the unemployment rate had fallen.
Reflecting on this period and the initial policy stance of the ECB, the June 2000 issue of
Monitoring the European Central Bank (Favero, Freixas, Persson, and Wyplosz, 2000)

26
   The standard deviations of the estimated γi’s are 0.0043 for Italy, 0.0047 for France, 0.0057 for Germany, and
0.0203 for the euro/dollar exchange rate, but only 0.0036 for the United States, all of which are consistent with
the results of the Elliott – Müller qLL statistics presented in Table 1.
27
   On June 8 2000 the ECB announced that, starting June 28, 2000, the main refinancing operations of the
Eurosystem would switch from fixed rate tenders to variable rate tenders. Thereafter the key interest rate set by
the ECB was the minimum bid rate of the variable rate tenders for the main refinancing operations. See
www.ecb.int/stats/monetary/rates.



                                                                                                             19
                                                                                        Establishing Credibility




                                    Table 3:
          Dates of Changes in Interest Rate by European Central Bank
                     and HICP Inflation in Previous Month
                         January 1, 1999 – June 2005
  With Effect from             Policy Interest          Year-on-year         Unemployment          Real GDP
                                Rate (Main             HICP inflation,       Rate, Euro-12,        growth in
                                Refinancing              in previous          in previous          previous
                                Operation)*                 month                month              quarter
  January 1, 1999                   3.00                     0.79                 9.71                1.90
   April 9, 1999                    2.50                     0.98                 9.46                2.11
 November 5, 1999                   3.00                     1.36                 8.82                3.05
 February 4, 2000                   3.25                     1.85                 8.59               4.08
  March 17, 2000                    3.50                     1.94                 8.54
   April 28, 2000                   3.75                     1.93                 8.47                4.38
    June 9, 2000                    4.25                     1.73                 8.21
September 1, 2000                   4.50                     2.02                 8.09                4.63
  October 6, 2000                   4.75                     2.50                 8.08                3.82
   May 11, 2001                     4.50                     2.75                 7.72                2.87
  August 31, 2001                   4.25                     2.55                 7.77                2.08
September 18, 2001                  3.75                     2.34                 7.80
 November 9, 2001                   3.25                     2.25                 7.86                1.66
 December 6, 2002                   2.75                     2.29                 8.42                1.14
   March 7, 2003                    2.50                     2.37                 8.56                1.07
    June 6, 2003                    2.00                     1.81                 8.67                1.00
Source: European Central Bank, http://www.ecb.int/stats/monetary/rates/html/index.en.html
All data are in percent. HICP inflation, Unemployment, GDP growth from ECB webpage. See
http://sdw.ecb.int
* Interest rate is for Main Refinancing Operations. On June 8, 2000, the ECB announced that, starting from the
operation to be settled on June 28, 2000, the main refinancing operations of the Eurosystem would switch from
fixed rate tenders to variable rate tenders. The minimum bid rate for these variable rates refers to the minimum
interest rate at which counterparties may place their bids.


presented the view that the ECB ran a looser monetary policy than the one that would have
been expected from the Federal Reserve or the Bundesbank had these central banks faced a
similar economic environment. The authors of this publication concluded that there was
“some market evidence that the ECB's credibility has indeed been wavering, at least in the
second part of 1999.”
        Our estimates of γ i in the early part of our sample are consistent with the view

expressed in this CEPR publication. The estimated values of γ i for the European term


                                                                                                             20
                                                                                     Establishing Credibility


spreads initially rise, reaching a peak at the time of the May 1999 Core CPI announcement
for the French and Italian bond yields and at the time of the June 1999 announcement for the
German bond yields. These peaks followed in the wake of the April 1999 interest rate cut,
but preceded the series of interest rate hikes that began in November of that year. The peak
value of γ i for the euro/dollar exchange rate occurs in April 2000, in the midst of the seven
interest rate increases by the ECB between November 1999 and October 2000.
          Real GDP growth continued to rise and the unemployment rate continued to decrease.
during the period between November 1999 and October 2000 when the ECB raised interest
rates seven times, with a cumulative change in the interest rate of 175 basis points to 4.75%
by October 2000. The March 2001 issue of Monitoring the European Central Bank (Alesina,
Blanchard, Galí, Giavazzi and Uhlig, 2001) concluded that these interest rate increases
marked a departure of ECB policy from its earlier pattern.29 Accordingly, our estimates of
γ i for the European term spreads and the euro/dollar exchange rate declined through this
period.
          This decline in our estimates of γ i for the German and Italian term spreads continued,

and our estimate of γ i for the French term spread and the euro/dollar rate remained largely
unchanged, in the wake of the four interest rate cuts between May 2001 and November 2001.
At this time, GDP growth continued to slow and unemployment began to rise. The fact that
these rate cuts were not viewed as the ECB backsliding from its hawkish stance is supported
by the surprise at the continued tightness of ECB monetary policy expressed in the April
2002 volume of Monitoring the European Central Bank (Begg, Canova, De Grauwe, Fátas,
and Lane, 2002)
          This volume of Monitoring the European Central Bank called for a shift in policy in
light of the softening economic conditions in the eurozone. In fact, the ECB cut its policy
interest rate three times over the next half-year, in December 2002, March 2003 and June
2003. By the time of the last of these interest rate cuts, the estimated values of γ i for the
French and Italian term spreads were higher than their respective values immediately in the
wake of the interest rate cut in November 2001. Subsequently, there was a reduction in the

29
   This volume of MECB also demonstrated some frustration with a continuing lack of policy transparency, as
shown by its recommendation that “The Bank should stop leaving markets and policy analysts to guess what it
is really attempting to accomplish as by doing this it runs the risk of a breakdown in communications.”


                                                                                                         21
                                                                                         Establishing Credibility


estimated γ i for the Italian and French term spreads, which is consistent with unchanged
monetary policy in the face of continued weak economic performance and quiescent
inflation.


3.4 Sup-Wald Statistics
        We conclude our analysis with sup-Wald tests for discrete changes in γ i , based on
Andrews (1993, 2003), to gauge the robustness of both the Elliott – Müller qLL tests and of
the smoothed paths of the γ i coefficients obtained through the Müller – Petalas procedure.
These sup-Wald tests are based on a more restricted assumption concerning the break point
than the qLL test but, since a break point rather than the overall stability of the parameter is
estimated, the sup-Wald tests also provide a date for the break. We compare these dates to
the smoothed parameter paths presented in Section 3.3.
        The sup-Wald tests are conducted by running a series of regressions that take the

form

(4)                            (                 )           (                )
        q t + − q t − = α + β xt + − E t − x t + + β I D I x t + − E t − x t + + ε t +

where DI is a dummy variable that equals 0 for the first n observations of the sample and
equals 1 for the remaining T – n observations. The sup-Wald test requires running a set of
0.7×T regressions (if one imposes a 15 percent trimming of observations, as is suggested by
Andrews 1993) which generates a set of 0.7×T β I ’s and 0.7×T associated test statistics. The
sup-Wald test compares the largest F-value for all of the β I ’s with critical values presented
in Andrews (2003) and, if this sup-Wald statistic exceeds the critical value, the date
associated with that β I is the statistically significant estimated break date.
        Table 4 presents the sup-Wald statistics based on sets of the five different dependent
variables that take the form of (4), among which four have as the dependent variable the
change in one of the term spreads, and one has as the dependent variable the change in the
euro/dollar exchange rate. The statistics presented in the top section of this table show
evidence of a significant break, at better than the 99 percent level of confidence, for the
regressions using the change in the term spread for German government bonds and for the



                                                                                                             22
                                                                            Establishing Credibility


euro/dollar exchange rate, and at between the 95 and 99 percent level of confidence for the
change in the term spread of Italian government bonds. According to the sup-Wald tests,
there is no evidence of a significant discrete break for the regression using the change in the
term spread of French or United States government bonds.


                 Table 4: sup-Wald Test for Discrete Break Point
                     Change in Term Spread of Government Bonds of                 Change in
Break Point in     Germany France             Italy    United States              euro/dollar
Sup-Wald           20.31         1.78           11.91           4.31              12.25
Statistic
Estimated          Nov.16,2000                  June 15, 2001                     Feb. 21,2001
Break Date
No. of obs.        74            74             72              73                75

Critical Values (from Andrews 2003) 1% 12.16; 5% 8.68; 10% 7.12
Tests conducted with 15 percent symmetric trimming.

       It is interesting to compare the dates obtained through the sup-Wald tests with the
smoothed parameter paths obtained using the Müller – Petalas method, where the latter can
also be viewed as encompassing either discrete or gradual break points. The dates presented
by sup-Wald tests for the significant estimated break points for the term spread regressions,
November 16, 2000 for the German case and the June 15, 2001 for the Italian case, occur
about mid-way between the peak and the trough of the respective time paths of γ i in the
period between mid-1999 and late-2001. There is also a consistency between the estimated
break points of February 21, 2001 for the euro/dollar regression and the Müller – Petalas
estimated time path for the coefficient in that regression. These break dates, based upon sup-
Wald tests, occur after the seven interest rate increase by the ECB between November 1999
and October 2000, and before any (for the German term spread and the euro/dollar rate) or all
but one (for the Italian term spread) of the subsequent interest rate cuts. Thus, these tests
suggest the robustness of the results presented in the previous sections.




                                                                                                 23
                                                                              Establishing Credibility


4. Conclusions
       The importance of the reputation of a central bank for the success of its operations is
stressed in theory and is evident from practical experience. An important question is whether
a central bank gains credibility in its anti-inflation stance through its institutional structure or
through the conduct of policy. This question is especially relevant for a newly established
central bank that faces the challenge of establishing its reputation, sometimes in the face of
political controversy over the appropriate conduct of monetary policy.             Likewise such
questions are important for changing leadership at established central banks, and critical for
understanding the implications for central bank credibility as choices are made over
alternative monetary regimes, for example, regarding inflation targeting.
       The evolution of the markets’ perceptions of the inflation aversion of the European
Central Bank since it began operations in January 1999 is interesting for a number of reasons.
One of these reasons is the inherent interest of the economic experience of the eurozone. A
second reason is that the establishment of the European Central bank provides a natural
experiment for considering how the reputation of a central bank evolves over time. This
episode is a particularly interesting because of the controversy surrounding the conduct of
monetary policy in Europe as the ECB began its operations.
       In this paper, we have addressed these issues by proposing and executing a novel test
for the study of the evolution of market perceptions about the inflation aversion of a central
bank through the use of high-frequency data. This methodology and the use of high
frequency data provide a unique window into the evolution of perceptions of monetary policy
rules, an issue more typically and less precisely addressed using lower frequency data. We
find evidence of an evolution of perceptions of the policy stance of the ECB, one linked to its
interest rate policy. There is not a similar shift in the market’s perception of the policy stance
of the Federal Reserve, a period marked by the stability in its leadership, the consistency of
its stated goals, and the broad support for its conduct of policy. The tools we have presented
and applied are relevant for ongoing questions of changing effects of news on market
activity, and changing policies and perceptions of monetary authorities worldwide.




                                                                                                  24
                                                                       Establishing Credibility


                                      References
Alesina, Alberto, Olivier Blanchard, Jordi Galí, Francesco Giavazzi and Harald Uhlig, 2001.
Defining a Macroeconomic Framework fo the Euro Area: Monitoring the European Central
Bank, Number 3, March. Centre for Economic Policy Research, London.

Alesina, Alberto and Lawrence H. Summers, 1993, “Central Bank Independence and
Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence,” Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking, vol. 25, no. 2 (May), pp. 151 – 162.

Andersen, Torben G., Tim Bollerslev, Francis X. Diebold and Clara Vega. 2003. “Micro
Effects of Macro Announcements: Real-Time Discovery in Foreign Exchange,” American
Economic Review, vol. 93, no. 1 (March), pp. 38 – 62.

Andrews, Donald. 1993. “Tests for Parameter Instability and Structural Change with
Unknown Change Point,” Econometrica, vol 61, no. 4 (July), pp. 821 – 856.

______________. 2003. “Tests for Parameter Instability and Structural Change with
Unknown Change Point: A Corrigendum,” Econometrica, vol 71, no. 1 (January), pp. 395 –
397.

Athey, Susan, Andrew Atkeson, and Patrick Kehoe. 2005. “The Optimal Degree of Monetary
Policy Discretion” Econometrica, vol. 73, no. 5 (September), pp. 1431-1475.

Backus, David and John Driffill. 1985. “Rational Expectations and Policy Credibility
Following a Change in Regime,” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 52, no. 2 (April), pp. 211
– 221.

Barro, Robert J. and David B. Gordon. 1983. “A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a
Natural Rate Model,” The Journal of Political Economy, vol. 91, no. 4 (August), pp. 589-
610.

Begg, David, Fabio Canova, Paul De Grauwe, Antonio Fátas, and Philip R. Lane. 2002.
Surviving the Slowdown: : Monitoring the European Central Bank, Number 4, April. Centre
for Economic Policy Research, London.

Blinder, Alan. 2000. “Central Bank Credibility: Why Do We Care? How Do We Build It?”,
American Economic Review, vol. 90, no. 5 (December), pp. 1421 – 1431.

Calvo, Guillermo. 1978. “On the Time Consistency of Optimal Policy in a Monetary
Economy”, Econometrica, vol. 46, no. 6 (November 1978), pp. 1411-1428.

Chinn, Menzie and Jeffrey Frankel. 2004. “The Euro Area and World Interest Rates” Santa
Cruz Center for International Economics, Working Paper Series 1016, Center for
International Economics, UC Santa Cruz.

Citigroup. 2006. Economic Data Surprises: Impact & Trading Opportunities in FX Markets.


                                                                                           25
                                                                         Establishing Credibility




Clark, Todd. 2001. “Comparing Measures of Core Inflation”, Economic Review, quarter 2,
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp.5-31.

Cukierman, Alex. 1992. Central Bank Strategy, Credibility and Independence: Theory and
Evidence, The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Ehrmann, Michael and Marcel Fratzscher. 2005. “Equal Size, Equal Role: Interest Rate
Interdependence between the Euro Area and the United States”, Economic Journal, vol. 115
(October), pp. 928 – 948.

Ellingsen, Tore and Ulf Söderström. 2001. “Monetary Policy and Market Interest Rates,”
American Economic Review, vol. 91, no. 5, December, pp. 1594 – 1607.

______________. 2004. “Why are Long Rates Sensitive to Monetary Policy?,” IGIER
working paper n. 256 (March).

Elliott, Graham and Ulrich Müller, 2006. “Efficient Tests for General Persistent Time
Variation in Regression Coefficients,” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 73, issue 4 , pp. 907
– 940 (October).

Engel, Charles and Jeffrey Frankel. 1984. “Why Interest Rates React to Money
Announcements: An Explanation from the Foreign Exchange Market,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, vol 13, pp. 31 – 39.

Estrella, Arturo and Jeffrey C. Fuhrer. 2002. “Dynamic Inconsistencies: Counterfactual
Implications of a Class of Rational Expectations Models,” American Economic Review, vol.
92, no. 4, September.

Faust, Jon, John Rogers, Shing-Yi Wang, and Jonathan Wright. 2006. “The High Frequency
Response of Exchange Rates and Interest Rates to Macroeconomic Announcements”,
Journal of Monetary Economics.

Favero, Carlo A., Xavier Freixas, Torsten Persson, and Charles Wyplosz. 2000. One Money,
Many Countries: Monitoring the European Central Bank, Number 2, June. Centre for
Economic Policy Research, London.

Fleming, Michael and Eli Remolona. 1999. “Price Formation and Liquidity in the U.S.
Treasury Market: The Response to Public Information” Journal of Finance, vol. LIV, no. 5
(October).

Forder, James. 1999. “Central Bank Independence and Credibility: Is there a shred of
evidence?: Review,” International Finance, vol. 3, no. 1 (April), pp. 167 – 185.

Fuhrer, Jeffrey C. 1996. “Monetary Policy Shifts and long-term interest rates,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, vol. 111, pp. 1183 – 1209.



                                                                                             26
                                                                        Establishing Credibility


Goldberg, Linda and Deborah Leonard. 2003. “What Moves Sovereign Bond Markets? The
Effects of Economic News on U.S. and German Yields”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
Current Issues in Economics and Finance vol. 9, no. 9 (September).

Gürkaynek, Refet, Brian Sack and Eric Swanson. 2005. “The Sensitivity of Long-Term
Interest Rates to Economic News: Evidence and Implications for Macroeconomic Models”
American Economic Review vol 95 no.1 (March) 425-436.

Gürkaynek, Refet and Justin Wolfers. 2005. “An Initial Analysis of Market-Based Macro
Forecasts, Uncertainty, and Risk” forthcoming in NBER International Seminar on
Macroeconomics 2005.

Huizinga, John and Frederic Mishkin. 1986. “Monetary Policy Regime Shifts and the
Unusual Behavior of Interest Rates,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy
24 (Spring), pp. 231-274.

Klein, Michael W., Bruce Mizrach and Robert G. Murphy. 1991. “Managing the Dollar: Has
the Plaza Mattered?” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 23, no. 4 (November), pp.
742 – 751.

Kozicki, Sharon and P.A. Tinsley. 2005. “What do you expect? Imperfect policy credibility
and tests of the expectations hypothesis,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 52, pp. 421 –
447.

Kydland, Finn and Edward Prescott. 1977. “Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistence
of Optimal Plans,” The Journal of Political Economy, vol. 85, no. 3 (June), pp. 473-492.

Müller, Ulrich and Philippe-Emmanuel Petalus. 2004. “Efficient Estimation of the Parameter
Path in Unstable Time Series Models.” mimeo, Princeton University.

Newey, Whitney K. and Kenneth West. 1987. “A Simple, Positive Semidefinite,
Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix,” Econometrica, vol.
55, pp. 703 – 708.

Rogoff, Kenneth. 1985. “The Optimal Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary Target,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.100 (November), pp.1169-89.

Svensson, Lars E.O.. 1991. The Simplest Test of Target Zone Credibility”, IMF Staff Papers,
vol. 38, pp. 655 – 665.

______________. 1993.“The Simplest Test of Inflation Target Credibility,” National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Paper No. 4604, December.

______________. 1997 “Inflation Forecast Targeting: Implementing and Monitoring
Inflation Targets,” European Economic Review, vol. 41, no. 6, June, pp. 1111 – 1146.



                                                                                            27
                                                                                                    Establishing Credibility


                                                                 Appendix

       The use of both European and American term structures suggests another test,
following the specification in (3) but one where qt + − qt − is defined as the percentage change
in the euro/dollar exchange rate. The link between the term structure tests and the exchange
rate test can be seen by first considering the interest parity relationships

          itL , EUR − itL ,US = E t e L − e0
(A1)
          itS , EUR − itS ,US = E t e S − e0

where itL , EUR and itL ,US are the long interest rates in one of the European countries and the US,
respectively, Et e L is the expected logarithm of the euro/dollar exchange rate at a time in the
future matching the the maturity of the long interest rate, e0 is the logarithm of the current
spot exchange rate, and, in the second line, the replacement of L with S reflects an interest
parity relationship with shorter maturity interest rates and an expected logarithm of the
exchange rate at a moment in the future matching the shorter maturity. Subtracting the short-
maturity interest parity relationship from the long-maturity interest parity relationship, we get

(A2)      (i   t
                L , EUR
                          − itS , EUR ) − (itL ,US − itS ,US ) = Et e L − Et e S

As discussed below, the same news variable will be used for both European and US term
structures. Thus, considering the values of (A2) before and after the news announcement, we
have

(A3) (Et + e L − Et + eS ) − (Et − e L − E t − e S ) = (α EUR − α US ) + (γ iEUR − γ iUS )(xt + − E t − xt + ) + (ε tEUR
                                                                                                                     +        + )
                                                                                                                         − ε tUS

The expected exchange rate variables are unobservable, but a change in expected
depreciation between the time before and the time after the announcement would affect the
current spot rate. With this in mind, we can estimate

(A4) et + − et − = (α EUR − α US ) + (γ iEUR − γ iUS )(xt + − Et − xt + ) + (ε tEUR
                                                                                +        + )
                                                                                    − ε tUS

                                                                       (           )
to test for a persistent parameter variation in γ iEUR − γ iUS . A finding of persistent parameter
                                                     (                 )
variation in the coefficient on xt + − Et − xt + in (A4), along with a finding of persistent
parameter variation in European term structure regressions but not in US term structure
regressions, would bolster our conclusion of an evolving perception of the anti-inflation
stance of the European Central Bank.




                                                                                                                           28
