NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MOTIVATIONS FOR PUBLIC EQUITY OFFERS:
AN INTERNATIONAL PERSPECTIVE
Woojin Kim
Michael S. Weisbach
Working Paper 11797
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11797
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2005

Woojin Kim is a doctoral student at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and Michael S. Weisbach
is the Stanley C. and Joan J. Golder Distinguished Chair in Finance at the University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign and a Research Associate of the National Bureau of Economic Research. We would like to thank
Bo Becker, Murillo Campello, Robin Greenwood, Brian Henderson, Alexander Ljungqvist, Marco Pagano,
Josh Pollet, and seminar participants at the University of Illinois and the Stockholm School of Economics
for helpful comments. Contact information: Woojin Kim, 340 Wohlers Hall, University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, Champaign, IL 61820, email: wkim5@uiuc.edu; Michael S. Weisbach, 340 Wohlers Hall,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL 61820, email: weisbach@uiuc.edu. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
©2005 by Woojin Kim and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Motivations for Public Equity Offers: An International Perspective
Woojin Kim and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 11797
November 2005
JEL No. F3, G3
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the extent to which investment financing and market-timing explanations
motivate public equity offers. We consider a sample of 16,958 initial public offerings and 12,373
seasoned equity offerings from 38 countries between 1990 and 2003. We provide estimates of the
change in each accounting variable for each dollar raised in an equity offer, and for each dollar of
internally generated cash. Our estimates imply that firms invest 18.8 cents in R&D and 7.3 cents in
capital expenditures for an incremental dollar raised in an equity offer during the year following the
offer, rising to 84.8 cents and 14.3 cents when the change is measured over a four-year period. These
findings are consistent with one motive for the equity offer being to raise capital for investment.
However, firms also hold onto much of the cash they raised, and this fraction is higher when the firm
has a high q. In addition, firms are more likely to issue secondary shares, which are usually sold by
insiders, when q is high, enabling insiders to benefit personally from potential overvaluation. These
results suggest that market timing as well as investment financing is a motivation for equity offers.
Woojin Kim
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
wkim5@uiuc.edu
Michael S. Weisbach
University Of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
340 Wohlers Hall
1206 S. Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
weisbahc@uiuc.edu

The relation between equity markets and firms’ real decisions is an old and still extremely
important topic in finance. Understanding this relation is complicated by the fact that there are a number
of channels through which equity markets can affect firms. First, firms can raise capital to finance
investments by selling equity in the public market. Additionally, if equity prices are higher than
warranted by firms’ fundamentals, then by issuing equity, firms can increase the value of existing shares
at the expense of new shareholders. 1 Finally, when firms sell equity for the first time in an initial public
offering, the firm changes in a number of ways that increase the liquidity of insiders’ portfolios and the
firm’s access to capital. Thus, there are at least three possible, not necessarily mutually exclusive,
motives for equity offerings: to finance investments, to transfer wealth from new shareholders to existing
shareholders, and to increase liquidity for both insiders and the firm.
The academic literature has not yet distinguished fully between these explanations. The only
empirical paper that addresses the question of the motivation for initial offerings is Pagano, Panetta, and
Zingales (1998). These authors find that for a sample of Italian IPOs, the predominant reason why firms
go public is to rebalance their capital structure and to exploit mispricing rather than to raise capital for
financing investments. For seasoned offerings, a number of papers have addressed the mispricing
explanation; Loughran and Ritter (1995) and Baker and Wurgler (2000) are notable contributions. In
addition, Greenwood (2005) finds that higher cash holdings lead to lower future returns at the aggregate
level, consistent with firms issuing equity when their shares are overvalued rather than when they have a
particularly high demand for capital.
However, these papers do not link the equity issues with the subsequent firm-level investments.
The literature is remarkably silent on the fundamental question underlying equity issues (and other capital
raising activities): How is the money raised in the offering used by the firms that raise it? This paper
provides systematic evidence on this question as well as other potential motives for issuing publicly-

1

Discussion of the possibility of selling overvalued equity to finance investments goes back at least to Keynes
(1936), p. 151. For further discussion and tests of this idea, see Fischer and Merton (1984), Barro (1990),
Blanchard, Rhee, and Summers (1993), Stein (1996), and Baker, Stein and Wurgler (2003).

1

traded equity. It relies on a sample of 16,958 initial public offerings and 12,373 seasoned equity offerings
from 38 countries, covering the 1990-2003 period. The focus is on the ultimate use of the capital raised,
how this use varies with firm valuation, and how this variation is consistent with alternative motivations
for equity offers.
To understand the reasons for equity offerings, it is important to distinguish between equity
offerings that raise capital and those that do not. One aspect of equity offerings not emphasized by the
corporate finance literature is the fact that firms have a choice of what kind of shares to offer. Firms can
issue new, primary shares, or offer existing shares held by insiders, which are known as secondary shares.
Only primary share issuances can be used to finance investments, since they lead to capital inflows to the
firm while secondary share offers do not. 2
We first document the extent to which firms offer primary and secondary shares in public equity
offerings across the different regions in our sample. We find that the proportion of primary shares sold is
roughly 80% in IPOs and 60% in SEOs. For IPOs, this fraction varies internationally, with Asian
countries typically having the highest fraction of primary shares, European countries having the lowest,
and the United States in between. Cross-regional variation in SEOs is smaller than in IPOs, although
European countries still exhibit the lowest proportion of primary shares.
To examine the effect of equity offerings on investment, we next consider a variety of alternative
accounting variables designed to capture the uses of the capital raised in the IPOs and SEOs. While it is
almost definitional that new capital into the firm has to show up somewhere on the books, there are a
number of alternative possible uses for the capital. We examine increases in total assets, inventory,
capital expenditures, acquisitions, R&D, cash, and long-term debt reduction. We measure the increases in
each variable over a variety of time intervals, ranging from one year to four years, and compare them
across the types of shares being offered.

2

Existing theoretical models on IPOs do not seem to incorporate the two types of shares simultaneously. For
example, Chemmanur and Fulghieri(1999)’s model considers sale of primary shares to fund a new investment
project, while Zingales(1995) and Mello and Parsons(1998) focus on the sale of secondary shares and does not
model new investment and production activity.

2

Univariate statistics on changes in these variables following IPOs indicate that primary only
offerings have the highest increases in most of the variables, followed by combined offerings and
secondary only offerings. Moreover, the magnitude of primary issues is significantly correlated with
increases in capital expenditure, R&D expenditure and cash holdings up to four years after the IPO. In
contrast, the value of the secondary offerings is not related to these variables in most cases.
We next formally estimate the increase in the accounting variables that represent possible uses of
the capital raised following IPOs. In doing so, we control econometrically for other sources of funds,
firm size, as well as year and country fixed effects. The largest increase is for cash holdings; for every
dollar raised in the IPO, cash holdings rise by 1.067 cents in the year after the IPO. This decreases to
88.8 cents over a four-year period after the IPO as the money is spent on various projects. The largest
expenditures appear to be on R&D and capital expenditures, which increase by 18.8 cents and 7.3 cents
respectively per dollar raised in the year following the IPO, and by 84.8 cents and 14.3 cents over a fouryear period. These results are consistent with the investment financing motivations for the equity offer
and suggest that capital raising is a lumpy process, so that firms raise capital and spend it over a relatively
long period of time.
We estimate similar equations predicting the uses of funds on the sample of SEOs. As for IPOs,
there are substantial and statistically significant increases in investments, including R&D, capital
expenditures, acquisitions and inventory. This finding suggests that one motivation for SEOs is to raise
capital for investments. In addition, firms appear to save a substantial fraction of cash raised in SEOs,
which declines somewhat as the time horizon gets longer. This high savings rate could reflect firms’
issuing equity when their stock price is high, even if they do not have unusually good investment
opportunities.
Finally, we explore the extent of market timing motivations in a more direct manner by relating
Tobin’s q with the issuance and investment decisions in SEOs. First, we examine how the fraction of
types of shares sold in an SEO is affected by potential mispricing. If firms sell shares because the stock
price is particularly high, we expect that self-interested managers would sell a higher fraction of their
3

personal shares through a secondary offering. In contrast, if we observe a firm issuing equity at times
when the price is relatively low, then we would expect a higher proportion of shares sold to be primary.
We find that, controlling for other factors, a higher abnormal valuation proxied by Tobin’s q or residuals
from a first-stage regression of q on fundamentals implies a higher fraction of secondary shares in the
offering. These results are consistent with market timing stories; when equity values, reflected by q, are
high, managers are more likely to sell their own shares in a secondary offering so that they can benefit
personally.
We also examine whether the sensitivity of investment to primary capital raised in SEOs varies
according to the level of Tobin’s q. We do so because SEOs done to take advantage of high valuation
should occur in firms with relatively high q’s. To the extent that these SEOs do provide additional
capital, the new funds should be more likely to be kept as cash. However, when the purpose of the SEO
is to provide capital for investments, we expect to see more of the money raised to be used to pay for
these investments. Consistent with this intuition, we find that following an SEO, firms with low Tobin’s
q’s spend relatively more on capital expenditures and long term debt reductions than firms with high q’s.
In contrast, firms with high q tend to keep more cash from a marginal dollar raised than do low q firms.
These findings suggest that when firms with low q’s do seasoned offerings, the purpose of these offerings
is to fund investments, while firms with high q’s are more likely to do seasoned offerings to take
advantage of their higher valuation.
Overall, the results suggest that equity offerings are done both to raise capital for investment and
to exploit favorable market conditions. Firms sometimes issue public equity to take advantage of a hot
market. When they do so they are more likely to use secondary offerings so that they can profit
personally or if they do issue primary shares, then they tend to keep the proceeds as cash. However, firms
also issue equity when stock prices are less favorable. In these cases, the offerings are more likely to be
composed of primary shares and they tend to use the funds they raise to finance R&D, to purchase
inventory, to make capital expenditures and to reduce long-term debt.

4

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section I describes our data sources and our
sample. Section II provides the distribution of primary and secondary shares offered in IPOs and SEOs
across the 38 countries. Section III presents the averages of subsequent increases in assets and
expenditures for each of the three IPOs offer types and estimates the relation between the capital raised
and increases in investments. Section IV estimates similar equations examining the relation between
capital raised and increases in investment for SEOs. Section V reports the relation between Tobin’s q of
the firm doing the offering and the proportion of secondary shares in the offering. It also presents results
indicating how the valuation, reflected by q, affects the use of these proceeds. Section VI is a short
conclusion.

I. Data Sources and Sample Description
A. Data Sources
We obtain our IPO and SEO data from SDC Global New Issues Database. This database provides
information on total proceeds and the number of primary and secondary shares offered for each IPO and
SEO. WorldScope provides the accounting data for our sample of equity offers. We augment
WorldScope with Standard and Poor’s Xpressfeed, which provides U.S. and international data
comparable to Compustat. SDC has very limited coverage for non-U.S. offers prior to 1990, so we set
our sample period to be from January 1990 to December 2003.
From all IPOs reported in SDC, we first eliminate those observations that do not contain
information on the total number of shares sold or the breakdown of these shares into primary and
secondary shares. We also exclude IPOs where the reported value of proceeds is inconsistent with the
offer price and the number of shares sold by more than $5 million. A total of 2,301 IPOs and 7,090 SEOs
were dropped using these initial filters. Since our focus is on public equity offers, we additionally

5

exclude all private placements and rights offerings (16,415 SEOs). 3 We then exclude the following firms
from our sample:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)

All utilities (3 digit SIC's from 491 to 494) : 250 IPOs, 508 SEOs
All financials(1 digit SIC 6) : 5,057 IPOs, 3,858 SEOs
All privatizations: 173 IPOs, 160 SEOs. 4
All telecoms(2 digit SIC 48): 655 IPOs 5, 682 SEOs
All transition economies: 1,117 IPOs, 164 SEOs from China, Hungary, Poland and Russia
All nations with fewer than 10 IPO's during the sample period: 89 IPOs from 32 countries,
338 SEOs from 45 countries
These requirements are imposed to identify a sample of non-regulated private firms that issue

publicly-traded equity. 6 After applying these filters, we end up with a sample of 16,958 IPOs and 12,373
SEOs from 38 countries, each occurring between 1990 and 2003.7
B. Equity Issues Around the World
Table I presents descriptive statistics on our sample. Panels A-1 and A-2 present the number of
IPOs and SEOs across different regions over time while Panels B-1 and B-2 report the total value of
proceeds raised in IPOs and SEOs, respectively. The U.S. is by far the largest IPO market in our sample,
accounting for 27% of all IPOs in terms of numbers and 45% in terms of total proceeds. 8 European IPOs
are somewhat modest both in numbers and value in the early 1990s, but start to pick up in the mid 1990s
and surpass the U.S. in the total number of IPOs by the late 1990s. Asian IPOs peak in the mid 1990s and
then drop significantly in 1998-99 after the financial crisis of 1997. Although Asian IPOs comprise 37%

3

Forty percent of private placements and rights offerings are from Australia. These offerings tend to be very small.
The privatizations are identified from Boutchkova and Megginson (2000), Belke and Schneider (2003), and
Hoover's Online. For all IPOs which raised more than $100 million that are not identified as privatizations in the
previous two papers, we manually checked Hoover’s Online to verify whether the IPO was a privatization or not.
For those IPOs that were not identified on Hoover’s Online, we checked the company’s website if it had one as of
June 2004. Subsequent SEOs by these firms are also excluded from the sample.
5
Telecoms are similar to utilities in terms of regulations, and many of them also overlap with privatizations.
6
Concurrent issues both in domestic market and in foreign market in the form of ADRs or direct cross listings are
counted as one issue, and the total proceeds and the number of shares are aggregated after adjusting for differences
in currencies.
7
Roughly two-thirds of the IPOs and half of the SEOs do not have accounting information just prior to the issue,
partly because our accounting data stops at 2001.
8
The amount raised through ADRs is included in the country of origin rather than in the U.S. Canadian domestic
IPOs from 1990 to 1992 are all dropped according to the initial filter, and their coverage stops at 2001 in our dataset.
4

6

in terms of numbers, they only account for 12% of the total proceeds, implying that Asian IPOs are
generally smaller on average than other IPOs. 9
The cross-regional pattern for SEOs is somewhat similar to IPOs. The U.S. is the largest issuer,
with 37% of the issues and 49% of the proceeds. Other regions are noticeably smaller, with none
accounting for more than 20% of the total issues or proceeds. Unlike the IPO time series, SEOs continue
both in U.S. and also worldwide, even after the market decline in 2000, with the total number remaining
fairly constant at close to one thousand per year. The proceeds raised in the SEOs decline with the stock
market after 2000, so that the amount in 2003 is only 40% of 2000. However, the magnitude of the
decline is proportionately smaller compared to IPOs, where the proceeds in 2003 is less than a quarter of
2000. This time-series pattern suggests that IPOs may be more sensitive to market valuations than SEOs.

II. Primary vs. Secondary Offers
Equity offers vary along a number of dimensions, an important one of which is the type of shares
being sold to the public. Firms have a choice of selling new, ‘primary’ shares, or existing, ‘secondary’
shares. A primary offering increases the number of shares outstanding and raises capital for the firm,
while secondary offerings keep the number of shares outstanding constant and has no revenue
consequences to the firm. A third type of offering is a combination of the two, selling some new shares
and some previously-owned shares.
Table II presents statistics on the three types of equity offers in our sample. Panels A-1 and A-2
report the number of IPOs and SEOs that belong in each of the three categories, while Panels B-1 and B-2
present total proceeds from each type. 10 Panels B-1 and B-2 also separate combined offerings into
primary shares and secondary shares and report the proceeds for each type within the combined category.
Clearly, primary offerings are the most common, comprising 76.2% of IPOs and 60.7% of SEOs. Pure
secondary offerings are relatively uncommon especially for IPOs, accounting for only 1.7% of IPOs and
9

Almost 60% of Asian IPOs are from India, and Indian IPOs tend to be very small. The median value of proceeds
in India is only US$ 0.7 million, compared to the global median of US$30 million.
10
The detailed breakdown by each country is provided in the Table I of the Appendix.

7

18.7% of SEOs, while the remaining 22.2% of IPOs and 20.7% of SEOs are combinations of primary and
secondary offerings. We can infer the total value raised from primary shares and secondary shares
respectively by separating out the proceeds from the combined category into those raised from primary
shares and those raised from secondary shares and adding them back into proceeds from primary only and
secondary only offerings. The last five columns of panels B-1 and B-2 in Table II present these
calculations.
Overall, 79% of the total proceeds in IPOs are comprised of new capital raised through primary
shares. However, there are distinct cross-regional variations. Other than Japan, Asian IPOs tend to offer
mostly primary shares, with primary offerings accounting for more than 95% of the proceeds of the IPOs.
In contrast, European IPOs exhibit relatively higher percentages of secondary only (12.8% of the
proceeds) and combined offerings (33.5%), and lower percentage of primary only offerings (53.8%).
These differences could potentially reflect differences in the institutional environment and are consistent
with the high rate of secondary offerings in Europe that has been documented elsewhere. In the Pagano,
Panetta, and Zingales (1998) sample, for example, only 41% were primary-only offerings and 49% were
secondary-only. Similarly, Jenkinson and Ljungqvist (2001) report that 67% of IPOs in Portugal and
23% in Germany were entirely secondary in the 1980s and early 1990s. In addition, Jenkinson and
Ljungqvist report that European IPOs have begun using a higher proportion of primary offerings since the
early 1990s. Both the fact that Europe has traditionally had a high proportion of secondary offerings, as
well as the recent change towards primary offerings within Europe, suggest that perhaps the conclusions
of Pagano, Panetta, and Zingales (1998) should be reexamined, since that study contains only 69 IPOs
from one European country in the 1980s.
For SEOs, the proportion of primary shares is relatively smaller than in IPOs, accounting for 58%
of the total proceeds. Unlike IPOs, cross-regional differences seem to be less apparent, although
European SEOs still exhibit the lowest proportion of primary shares. For the U.S., the breakdown is

8

broadly consistent with the numbers reported in Asquith and Mullins (1986) for an earlier time period. 11
At first, the pattern of seasoned offerings containing more secondary issues may seem counterintuitive
since the insiders in a publicly traded firm can sell their shares directly in the open market. However,
regulations regarding the disclosure of insider trading restrict insiders from selling freely in the market,
leading them to resort to SEOs for selling their secondary shares.

III. Investment Financing as a Motivation for Initial Public Offerings
Going public is generally considered a watershed moment in a firm’s history, being associated
with a number of important changes. Once a firm is publicly-traded, there is a market in which
executives and other insiders can sell their shares. In addition, the firm can raise capital in public equity
(and possibly debt) markets, and the firm faces increased disclosure and regulatory requirements. Yet,
one possible explanation for going public that is sometimes overlooked is the capital that is raised at the
time of the issue.
One empirical study examining the motives for IPOs is Pagano, Panetta, and Zingales (1998).
These authors find that in their sample of Italian IPOs from the 1980s, investments do not increase
following the IPO, suggesting that demand for capital is not a major reason for going public. The extent
to which these findings extend to a broader sample of firms in other countries in other time periods is
clearly of interest.
A. Univariate Analysis of Increases in Investments across IPO Offer Types
A clear prediction of the hypothesis that firms issue equity to raise capital for investments is that
investments should be larger for firms raising capital through an equity issue than they would have been
had the firms not done the equity issue. We do not, of course, know what firms’ investments would have
been had they not raised capital. We do, however, have a sample of firms that did secondary equity issues
that were not associated with capital raising, because the revenues from those sales do not belong to the
11

Asquith and Mullins (1986) report that out of 266 SEOs by U.S. industrial firms from 1963 to 1981, 48% were
primary only, 32% were secondary only, and 20% were combined offerings. In our U.S. subsample, primary-only
SEOs comprise 46% of the sample, secondary-only SEOs 14%, and combined offers 40%.

9

firm. We expect investments to increase more for firms that do primary issues than those doing
secondary issues, with combined issues in between. We first compare univariate statistics on possible
uses of funds for firms doing alternative types of equity offers. Subsequently, we estimate
econometrically the expected use of incremental dollars raised in equity offerings.
We measure changes in seven accounting variables, each of which captures a potential use of the
funds raised. In particular, we consider changes in total assets, inventory, capital expenditure, acquisition,
R&D, and cash, as well as reductions in long-term debt. 12 The first five variables are meant to capture
possible ways in which the capital could be invested in real assets, while changes in cash holdings and
reductions in long-term debt measure possible uses of the funds other than direct investment. To
minimize the impact of outliers, we focus on a logarithmic transformation of each variable. For balance
sheet items (total assets, inventory, and cash), we calculate the log of one plus the change in each variable
normalized by total assets prior to the IPO: ln[((Vt − V0 ) total assets 0 ) + 1] , where V is the variable
being measured, year 0 is the fiscal year end just prior to the IPO and year t is number of years after year
0. For income statement and cash flow statement items (capital expenditure, acquisition, R&D and
reduction in long-term debt), we consider the log of one plus the accumulation in each variable since the
IPO, normalized by total assets prior to the IPO: ln[(∑it =1Vi total assets 0 ) + 1] .
Table III reports the means and medians of this normalized increase for each variable, broken
down by offer type. This table computes the changes for periods between one year and four years in
length. It also presents t-statistics for comparisons of means between the primary-only and combined
groups, and between the combined and secondary-only groups, as well as the Mann-Whitney z-statistic
for comparison of medians.
We consider differences between offer types to examine the linkage between new, primary capital
coming into the firm, and increases in subsequent investment. The numbers in Table III indicate that
except for a few cases, increases are the largest in the primary-only group, followed by the combined
12

Capital expenditures, acquisitions and reduction in long-term debt are directly taken from the cash flow statement,
and reflect cash outflows from investing and financing activities.

10

group. IPOs that only offer secondary shares exhibit the lowest increases in most cases. Moreover, the
differences in increases of these variables between IPO offer types are generally statistically significant.
The correlation between IPO type and the increases in total assets probably reflects that primary
offers are used at the fastest growing firms. Firms that are growing the fastest are likely to have the
greatest demand for external capital, to pay for both direct investments and indirect investments.
While the correlation between increase in total assets and IPO type could come through a number
of channels, the correlation between the increases in the investment variables (inventory, capital
expenditures, acquisitions, and research and development) and the type of IPO provides more direct
evidence. In particular, it seems likely that firms increasing investments most rapidly have the greatest
demand for capital, and thus choose to issue primary shares when they go public. A desire to fund
investments in inventory, capital expenditures, acquisitions and research and development could lead
some firms to go public. In contrast, firms that go public to allow managers to cash out through
secondary offers will have, on average, a lower demand for capital. As a result, we could observe the
pattern documented in Table III, in which primary offers are associated with higher increases in
investment than secondary offers.
Increases in cash could be due to firm’s motivations to enhance financial flexibility independent
of the valuation in the market or it could be a result of active market timing efforts without investment
opportunities as suggested by Greenwood (2005). We attempt to distinguish between these two
possibilities in Section V.
In summary, the differences in normalized increases in the seven variables across different types
of IPO offerings for various horizons suggest that the firms in each group might have different
motivations for going public. Firms issuing primary shares appear to use the capital both to increase
investment, and to increase financial flexibility, presumably to be able to fund future investments.
Yet, while these comparisons are suggestive, they omit at least four potentially important
considerations. First, Table II documents that type of IPO is highly correlated with the place of issue and
accounting variables are likely to be so as well, for no other reason than the fact that accounting is done
11

differently in different countries. Second, Jenkinson and Ljungqvist (2001) suggest that there has been a
secular trend towards primary issues at least in Europe, which should be controlled for econometrically.
Third, the univariate comparisons make no use of the quantity of equity that is issued, which certainly
could affect the use of the funds. Finally, we do not consider differences within the ‘combined’ category;
presumably a firm that issues 99% primary shares and 1% secondary is different from one that issues 99%
secondary and 1% primary. We next consider the normalized increases in our accounting variables in a
mutivariate setting, controlling for these factors.
B. Multivariate Analysis of Changes in Accounting Variables across IPO Offer Types
To estimate the uses of the capital raised in the equity offering, we rely on a specification that
allows primary capital from the equity offering, secondary capital from the equity offering, and other
sources of funds to enter the specification separately. We normalize each by total assets and take the log
of one plus the normalized cash flow as a way of minimizing the effect of outliers. 13 We also include the
log of total assets as a control for size and fixed effects for year and country, and use heteroscdasticityconsistent standard errors clustered by two-digit SIC industry. 14 For each of seven possible uses of the
capital raised, we estimate:
(1)

⎡⎛ primary capital ⎞ ⎤
⎡⎛ secondary capital ⎞ ⎤
⎡⎛ other sources ⎞ ⎤
⎟ + 1⎥ + β 2 ln ⎢⎜
⎟ + 1⎥ + β 3 ln ⎢⎜
⎟ + 1⎥
Y = β 1 ln ⎢⎜⎜
⎟
⎜
⎟
⎜
⎟
⎢⎣⎝ total assets 0 ⎠ ⎦⎥
⎢⎣⎝ total assets 0 ⎠ ⎦⎥
⎣⎢⎝ total assets 0 ⎠ ⎦⎥
+ β 4 ln[total assets 0 ] +

2001

38

∑ θ year _ dummy + ∑ λ country _ dummy + ε
i

i =1990

j

j =1

where Y = ln[((Vt − V0 ) total assets 0 ) + 1] for V = total assets, inventory or cash, and
= ln[(∑it =1Vi total assets 0 ) + 1] for V = capital expenditure, acquisition, R&D
or reduction in LT debt
other sources = ln[(∑ti =1 (total sources of funds i − primary capital) total assets 0 ) + 1]

13

We also repeat the analysis without the log transformation using the quantile (median) regression approach. The
results are similar to the logarithmic results discussed below.
14
We exclude those IPOs where the value of the total asset prior to the IPO is less than 5% of the total proceeds
(2.9% of the sample) from the following regressions. Including these IPOs in the regressions yields similar results.

12

and t = 1, 2, 3, 4 years after the IPO. Total sources of funds include internally generated cash flows from
the firm’s continuing operations as well as other sources of funds from investment and financing
activities. 15 16
Table IV presents estimates of Equation (1), omitting the country and year fixed effects as well as
the coefficient on total assets for the sake of brevity. The coefficients on primary capital raised in the IPO
and on other sources of capital are mostly positive and significantly different from zero. In contrast, the
coefficients on the value of secondary shares sold are generally small and statistically insignificant from
zero. While it is not surprising that the coefficients on secondary capital sales are zero given that the
revenues from these sales do not belong to the firm, they do suggest that the results are picking up a true,
rather than a spurious relation between new capital and investment.
Comparing the coefficients between those on new capital from the equity offering with those
from other sources of capital, which is primarily internally-generated, makes it possible to draw
inferences about the underlying reasons for the equity offering. In other words, differences in coefficients
are likely to reflect differences in propensities to use alternative sources of capital for alternative uses.
The results in Table IV indicate that the coefficients on primary capital raised in equity offerings are
substantially larger than the corresponding coefficients for the other sources of capital for two years in the
equations estimating the changes in capital expenditures and up to four years in R&D, and cash. These
findings suggest that the funds raised in an IPO are more likely to be used for investments in new capital
and research. In addition, the coefficients on changes in cash holdings suggest that new capital raised is
more likely to be saved as cash than are internally generated funds.
In contrast, the coefficients on acquisitions and on long-term debt reductions are larger on
internally-generated capital than on new capital. This pattern indicates debt reductions and acquisitions

15

Specifically, total sources of funds is the sum of funds from operations, sale of property, plant and equipment,
long term debt issuances, and sale of common and preferred stock. This variable is available In WorldScope. In
Compustat Xpressfeed, this variable needs to be constructed from the component variables.
16
We have also estimated this equations including firm age as another independent variable with similar results.
This variable is only available for approximately 1/3 of the sample, so we choose to report the results without this
variable in the equation.

13

are more likely to be paid for by internally-generated than new capital. This result differ from Pagano,
Panetta, and Zingales (1998), who suggest that capital raised in IPOs tends to be used to pay off longterm debt. Overall, the comparisons between the estimated uses of internally-generated and new capital
are consistent with the view that capital raised in IPOs is used to fund new investments.
There is a consistent pattern between the coefficients for the equations representing different time
horizons used in computing the dependent variables. For the equations representing changes in
expenditures on inventory, capital expenditures, acquisitions and R&D, the coefficients on primary
capital are generally increasing over time. This pattern suggests that the capital raised is not used all at
once but rather partially saved and used in the future. Consistent with this pattern is the fact that the
corresponding coefficients on changes in cash holdings have the opposite pattern. These coefficients
decrease with the time horizon of the dependent variables, suggesting that firms initially hold the capital
as cash and pay it down over time.
A useful way to compare the effects of new capital across different uses is to calculate from each
equation the change in the accounting variable implied from a dollar increase in new capital. This value
provides a consistent way of comparing the relative importance of alternative uses of the cash raised. 17
We also report the implied changes from a dollar increase in other sources as a benchmark. The results of
these calculations are also presented in Table IV. For the total assets variable, the implied change from a
dollar increase in primary capital is close to one for one year after the IPO, which is not surprising since
the book value of assets mechanically increases dollar for dollar whenever new capital is raised. 18
Nonetheless, the fact that the implied change in assets for a dollar raised is close to a dollar suggests that
the specification we use is picking up real rather than spurious effects.

17

The calculations are based on a median-sized firm in 1996 in US. For example, the dollar changes in inventory
for t = 1 is calculated as follows: Median primary capital is 24, median secondary capital is 0, median total sources
is 33.9 and median total assets prior to IPO are 24.4. (All units are in $US mil). Using these inputs together with
coefficients from table IV yields 0.00742 as the predicted value of the log transformation, implying a predicted
change of 0.182 in inventory. Then we add one to median primary capital and repeat the above procedure, which
results in a predicted change of 0.199 in inventory. The difference in the two predicted changes represents the dollar
changes in inventory for 1 unit increase in primary capital, which is given by 0.017.
18
If some of the new capital were used to pay off debt, then increase in total assets may be less than one for one.

14

For the other variables, the implied change per dollar raised is the largest for the change in cash
holdings. These estimates imply that a large fraction of each dollar raised is kept in cash holdings; in year
one, firms hold 106.7 cents in cash for every dollar they raise, decreasing over time to 88.8 cents when
changes are computed over four years. While the numbers are somewhat difficult to take literally, as the
model predicts that the expected change in spending is more than $1 for every dollar raised, they do
suggest that firms keep a substantial fraction of the funds raised as cash, for at least four years after the
IPO. This finding is consistent with the view that one of the motivations for going public could be to time
the market so as to take advantage of a high valuation.
In contrast, implied changes in investment variables increase over time. In the first year after the
IPO, it implies that for every dollar raised, R&D increases by 18.8 cents, capital expenditures by 7.3
cents, inventory by 1.7 cents, and acquisitions by 2.9 cents. Over a three-year horizon, R&D rises by 64.6
cents, capital expenditures by 17.9 cents, inventory by 2.2 cents, and acquisitions by 3.8 cents. This
effect is likely due to firms spending cash acquired in the IPO over a several year time period. The
relative use of the funds seems clear; by far the largest fraction of money raised in the IPO is used to fund
R&D and capital expenditures, although firms still hold on to much of the cash they raised. A much
smaller fraction is used to increase inventories and engage in acquisitions. Moreover, implied changes
incurred by a dollar increase in internally-generated capital are generally smaller than those incurred by
new capital, except for acquisitions and debt reduction. All these results are consistent with the demand
for an infusion of new capital to fund investments being an important motivation for IPOs.

IV. Capital-Raising as a Motivation for Seasoned Equity Offers

Equity is also issued in seasoned equity offers by firms that are already publicly-traded. Potential
motivations for these offers have been much discussed in the corporate finance literature. The tradeoff
theory suggests that firms should issue equity to fund investments when their leverage ratio is higher than
their target ratio, while the pecking order theory predicts that when equity offers occur, they will be used
to fund investments as a last source of financing. In contrast, market-timing arguments predict that firms
15

will issue equity to take advantage of high stock prices. These arguments are not mutually inconsistent; it
is likely that some equity offers could occur for each reason. It is even possible that overvaluation could
cause additional investment, as is suggested in the model of Shleifer and Vishny (2003). 19

Yet, there has been little empirical work documenting the extent to which demand for investment
and mispricing can explain why firms issue equity. More specifically, if equity offerings are used to fund
investments, we do not know which type of investments they typically fund, and which tend to be funded
from internally-generated capital. This section applies the methods discussed above for IPOs to a large
sample of SEOs with the goal of addressing these questions.
A. Univariate Analysis of Increases in Investments across SEO Offer Types

Table V presents the means and medians of normalized increases for the seven accounting
variables, broken down by SEO offer type. For each category, the secondary-only offerings coincide with
the significantly smaller growth rates for each of the seven variables than either primary or combined
offers. This pattern is consistent with the primary offerings raising capital for investments, as well as to
increase liquidity through increasing cash and decreasing long-term debt. Perhaps surprisingly, the
combined offerings tend to have larger growth rates than the primary-only ones for each variable except
R&D. This difference is potentially due to a failure of the univariate statistics to control adequately for
other factors. We next attempt to control for such factors in a multivariate setting.
B. Multivariate Analysis of Changes in Accounting Variables across SEO Offer Types

Table VI presents estimates of an equation predicting changes in each of the seven accounting
variables following SEOs, using the specification presented in Equation (1). As with IPOs, the
specification includes primary and secondary capital separately, funds from other sources of capital, as
well as a control for firm size and dummies for country and year.
The results for SEOs are similar to IPOs in two respects. First, the value of primary issues is
positively correlated with most of the variables except for debt reduction, whereas proceeds from
secondary shares are mostly unrelated to these variables. Second, proceeds from primary capital are
19

These authors focus their discussion on mergers, but the same argument could be applied to any investment.

16

mainly used in R&D and held as cash, while internally generated capital is used for acquisitions and debt
reductions.
However, the effect of fresh capital on cash holdings seems to be substantially smaller in SEOs
than in IPOs. For example, in Table VI, the change in cash holdings implied by a dollar increase in
primary capital in SEO is 62.1 cents for year one and 46.8 cents for year four. In comparison, the
corresponding implied changes for IPOs from Table IV are 106.7 cents and 88.8 cents. This difference
suggests that market timing motivations may be more apparent in IPOs than in SEOs, consistent with the
time series evidence reported in Table I.
The implied increase following a dollar increase in other sources of funds is the largest for
reductions in long-term debt. Moreover, the implied increase in long-term debt reduction incurred for a
marginal dollar of internally generated funds is much larger than that incurred by a marginal dollar raised
in a seasoned equity offering. This pattern is broadly consistent with Pulvino and Tarhan (2003), who
show that a dollar increase in internally generated cash flows has larger effect on debt reduction than on
increases in investment.

V. Market Timing as a Motivation for Seasoned Equity Offers

In the previous two sections, we have argued that demand for capital for investments appears to
be an important motivation for issuing public equity. We also documented that equity-issuing firms hold
on to cash they raise for some time, especially after the IPOs, consistent with these firms timing the
market. In this section, we examine this possibility in a more direct manner by relating Tobin’s q to the
proportion of secondary shares sold in SEOs and the sensitivity of investment to primary shares. We
restrict the tests in this section to SEOs since the tests require information on Tobin’s q prior to the equity
offering.
A. Tobin’s q and the Proportion of Secondary Shares Offered

The distinction between primary and secondary sales of equity makes it possible to examine
alternative theories of equity issuance. Primary share issuance should be observed when the firm has a
17

demand for capital, while secondary issuances should coincide with a high demand on the part of the
managers for liquidity. 20 In addition, if a firm’s stock is overvalued, Baker and Wurgler (2000) argue that
managers have incentives to issue more of it, while if the stock is undervalued, managers will, at least at
the margin, choose sources of financing other than equity. 21
The Baker and Wurgler argument also has predictions for the type of equity offering. If a firm is
issuing equity because managers feel the stock is overvalued, then the difference between the current
stock price and true value represents rents transferred from investors to the selling shareholders. In
primary issues, these rents are shared by all shareholders; however, when the firm issues secondary
shares, they are kept by the selling shareholders. Since managers themselves presumably are one of the
selling shareholders, we expect to observe the fraction of shares made up of secondary shares to be higher
when the motivation for the sale is that the stock is overvalued.
We now examine this hypothesis empirically. As a measure of valuation, we rely on Tobin’s q,
estimated by the book value of assets minus book value of equity plus market value equity over the book
value of assets as of the closest fiscal year end prior to the SEO announcement. However, there are likely
to be factors that cause rational deviations of observed q from 1. For example, the presence of intangible
assets, or a book value of assets that substantially deviates from its market value can affect q, even if the
market values the firm correctly. We follow Blanchard, Rhee, and Summers (1993) and estimate an
equation predicting expected q as a function of a number of accounting variables.
One statistical issue when estimating q cross-sectionally is that q is bounded below by 0, but not
bounded above. Thus if we were to use q as the dependent variable, the residuals would likely be skewed
and not normally distributed. In addition, the regression coefficients would in large part be determined by

20

Information on the identity of the seller of secondary shares is only available for about 20% of the sample. In
what follows, we are assuming that at least some of the shares sold belong to the firm’s managers.
21
Baker and Wurgler (2000) is only one of a number of studies supporting this view. Perhaps the most telling piece
of evidence is that in their survey of CFOs of public corporations, Graham and Harvey (2001) find that two-thirds
identify the amount to which their stock is overvalued or undervalued as an important consideration in the decision
to issue equity. See Baker, Ruback, and Wurgler (2004) for a survey and discussion of this literature.

18

a few observations with very large q’s. As a partial correction for this problem, we use the log of q rather
than its level as the dependent variable in the first-stage regression. We estimate the following model:
−1
⎛ salesit
ln[Qi ] = α + ∑ β t ⎜⎜
t = −3
⎝ asset it

⎞ −1 ⎛ salesit
⎟⎟ + ∑ γ t ⎜
⎜
⎠ t = −3 ⎝ salesi ( t −1)

⎞ −1 ⎛ op. incomeit
⎟ +∑δ t ⎜
⎟ t =−3 ⎜ asset
it
⎝
⎠

⎞ −1 ⎛ dividend it
⎟⎟ + ∑ φt ⎜⎜
⎠ t = −3 ⎝ priceit

⎞ −1 ⎛ R & Dit
⎟⎟ + ∑ λt ⎜⎜
⎠ t =−3 ⎝ asset it

⎞
⎟⎟ + ε i
⎠

The estimation results are given by;
= 0.51 - 0.24(s/a)-1 + 0.14(s/a)-2 + 0.10(s/a)-3+ 0.09(s-1/s-2) + 0.01(s-2/s-3) + 0.14(s-3/s-4) + 0.22(i/a)-1+ 0.29(i/a)-2
(11.39) (-3.66)
(1.54)
(1.27)
(1.40)
(0.25)
(3.69)
(1.08)
(1.12)
+ 0.22(i/a)-3 - 6.70(d/p)-1 - 1.10(d/p)-2 - 0.07(d/p)-3+0.28(R&D/a)-1 + 1.55(R&D/a)-2 + 1.28(R&D/a)-3
(0.63)
(-6.27)
(-1.44)
(-1.41)
(1.51)
(3.37)
(2.87)

where t-stats for each coefficient is reported in the parenthesis with an R2 value of 0.348.
Fitted values from this regression represent estimates of expected log q’s, conditional on the
factors in the regression specification. Residuals from this regression come from a number of sources,
including model misspecification. However, one important factor that will make up the regression
residual is any potential misvaluation of the security. Therefore, the residual from this regression is a
potential proxy for the level of overvaluation or undervaluation of the stock.
Table VII reports the results from regressing the proportion of secondary shares offered in SEOs
on fitted values of ln[q] and residual ln[q] as well as the raw ln[q]. In the first four columns, the main
regressors are raw ln[q]. Because raw q can also reflect rational valuations, we also regress the
proportion of secondary shares on the fitted ln[q] and residual ln[q] from the first stage regression in
columns (5) and (6). Columns (1) and (2) use the full sample that has information on q, while in columns
(3) and (4), the observations are restricted to be the same as in columns (5) and (6) where we require
enough information for the first stage estimation. Country and year fixed effects are included in all
specifications.
The results in Table VII indicate that the proportion of secondary shares is positively and
significantly related to both ln[q] and to the residuals from the first-stage regression. This finding appears
to be robust to choice of specification and is consistent with the view that firms are more likely to issue

19

secondary shares when their shares are relatively overvalued. Presumably, when stocks are overvalued,
insiders take advantage of the valuation and sell their shares in a secondary offering.

B. Tobin’s q and Cross Sectional Difference in Sensitivity of Investments to Fresh Capital
In addition to the type of offering, high valuations potentially affect the use of the proceeds from
the offering. To the extent that high valuations lead to equity offerings because of mispricing, we expect
the proceeds to be kept as cash or other liquid assets. Alternatively, if high valuations reflected by q’s
occur because of high investment opportunities, then we would expect the proceeds of equity offerings
from high q firms to be used primarily to fund investments.
To test this hypothesis, we first sort the sample of by q in each country, and divide each country
into three equal-sized terciles. We then interact dummies indicating whether the firm is in the high q
group, the medium q group, or the low q group with alternative sources of capital; proceeds raised from
primary shares and internally generated capital. The resulting estimates of this equation are presented in
Table VIII. Panel A contains coefficient estimates and t-statistics and Panel B reports the implied
changes in the dependent variables when primary capital or other sources of funds is increased by a
dollar. Panel B also provides p-values from comparing coefficients between primary capital and other
sources as well as between low q firms and high q firms. As before, all regressions include country and
year fixed effects as well as ln[total assets] and dummies for low q and high q firms, which are omitted
for the sake of brevity.
The results from Table VIII indicate that the effect of primary capital on subsequent investment
varies according to the level of q prior to the SEO. Firms with low q’s are more likely to use the funds
they raised in increasing inventory, capital expenditures, acquisitions and reducing long-term debt
compared to high q firms. In contrast, firms with high q’s are more likely to hold on to the cash they
raised than low q firms. These differences between high q firms and low q firms are mostly significant
for capital expenditures, debt reduction and cash holdings. For example, the implied increase in capital
expenditures by increasing primary capital by a dollar is 22.6 cents for low q firms but only 3.6 cents for
high q firms in the first year after the SEO. Over time this increases to 67.9 cents for low q firms but only
20

up to 16.4 cents for high q firms. On the other hand, cash holdings increase by 38.2 cents for low q firms
but up to 56.4 cents for high q firms in the first year after the SEO. Over 4 years this decreases to 23.1
cents for low q firms and 42.0 cents for high q firms, still almost twice as much as the low q firms.
These results suggest that the relative importance of market timing versus raising capital for
investment depends on the firm level Tobin’s q’s. High q firms appear to be more focused on timing the
market, whereas low q firms seem to be issuing seasoned equities to meet their demand for capital. This
finding also suggests that our estimate of q reflects valuation rather than investment opportunities, since
high q firms are less likely to invest out of marginal funds than are low q firms. 22

V. Conclusion

Public equity offerings are one of the most visible and most studied events in finance. Yet, the
basic question of why firms issue publicly-traded equity has received relatively little attention from the
empirical literature. We provide some evidence on this question, using a sample of 16,958 IPOs and
12,373 SEOs from 38 countries. We estimate the actual use of the funds raised in both initial and
seasoned offers. In doing so, we control explicitly for the type of shares issued. We also consider how a
measure of the firms’ over or undervaluation affects the issuance, both in terms of the types of shares
issued and the use of the proceeds.
Our results suggest that equity offers are used both to raise capital to finance investment, and also
to time equity markets to take advantage of high valuations. Our estimates indicate that new capital
raised in equity offerings is used to finance investments. They imply that R&D expenditures increase by
19 cents for a marginal dollar of capital raised in the first year following an IPO, and by 17 cents per
marginal dollar raised in the first year following an SEO. These figures increase to 85 cents per dollar
raised if the changes are computed over the four-year period following IPOs and 54 cents for the fouryear period following SEOs. We find similar relation, albeit smaller, for capital expenditures. These
22

Lian (2005) finds that SEO firms with intense insider trading prior to the issuance do not invest more but keep the
extra money in cash balances for years. This finding suggests that both the insider trades and the equity offerings
are motivated by the same thing, most likely high firm valuations.

21

estimated expenditures are substantially, and statistically significantly, larger than the comparable
numbers for a marginal dollar of internally-generated cash. They strongly suggest that one motive behind
the equity offer is to raise capital to finance this investment.
We also find evidence consistent with the view that some equity offers are made to take
advantage of high valuations. Firms keep much of the money they raise in the equity offer as cash in the
firm; this fraction is substantially higher when the firm has a high value of Tobin’s q, indicating that it is
potentially overvalued. In contrast, expenditures on investments are higher for low q firms than for high
q firms. In addition, SEOs done by firms with high value of q tend to have a higher fraction of secondary

shares, suggesting that insiders are taking advantage of the high valuation to sell some of their shares.
Overall, these results are consistent with view in which equity offers are sometimes used to finance
investment, and sometimes, when a firm is valued very highly by the market, to exploit the high valuation
both for the shareholders’ and managers’ benefits.
The ability of equity markets to provide financing for firms outside the U.S. and the U.K. has
been widely questioned (see La Porta et al. (1997)). Yet, we find that primary offerings are the
predominate form of equity offerings in most of the world especially for IPOs, and primary offerings
appear to be correlated with a number of factors measuring the demand for capital. These findings are at
least suggestive of the idea that firms around the world do in fact use equity markets to raise capital for
investment. The extent to which they do so, and the factors that determine across countries the
differences in equity markets are important issues not analyzed here, and of course would be good topics
for future research.

22

References

Asquith, Paul, and David W. Mullins, 1986, Equity Issues and Offering Dilution, Journal of Financial
Economics 15, 61-89.

Baker, Malcolm, Richard Ruback, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2004, Behavioral Corporate Finance: A Survey,
NBER Working Paper No. W10868.
Baker, Malcolm, Jeremy C. Stein and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2003, When Does the Market Matter? Stock Prices
and the Investment of Equity-Dependent Firms, Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol 118 Issue 3,
969 – 1005.
Baker, Malcolm and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2000, The Equity Shares in New Issues and Aggregate Stock
Returns, Journal of Finance 55, 2219-2257.
Barro, Robert J., 1990, The Stock Market and Investment, Review of Financial Studies III, 115–132.
Belke, Ansgar and Friedrich Schneider, 2003, Privatization in Austria: Some Theoretical Reasons and
First Results about the Privatization Proceeds, Privatization Experiences in the EU-Part II,
November 1-2, CESifo, Villa La Collina, Cadenabbia/Italy.
Blanchard, Olivier, Changyong Rhee, and Lawrence Summers, 1993, The Stock Market, Profit, and
Investment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics CVIII, 115–136.
Boutchkova, Maria K. and William L. Megginson, 2000, Privatization and the Rise of Global Capital
Markets, Financial Management Winter 2000, 31-76.
Chemmanur, Thomas J. and Paolo Fulghieri, 1999, A Theory of the Going Public Decision, Review of
Financial Studies 12, 249-279.

Fischer, Stanley, and Robert C. Merton, 1984, Macroeconomics and Finance: The Role of the Stock
Market, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy XXI, 57–108.
Graham, John, and Campbell Harvey, 2001, The Theory and Practice of Corporate Finance: Evidence
from the Field, Journal of Financial Economics Vol. 60 Issue 2/3, 187-243.
Greenwood, Robin, 2005, Aggregate Corporate Liquidity and Stock Returns, Working Paper, Harvard
Business School.
Jenkinson, Tim and Alexander Ljungqvist, 2001, Going Public: The Theory and Evidence on How
Companies Raise Equity Finance, 2nd Edition, Oxford University Press.
Keynes, John Maynard, 1936, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, London,
Macmillan.
La Porta, Rafael, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio, Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, Legal
Determinants of External Finance, Journal of Finance 52, 1131-1150.

23

Lian, Jie(Olivia), 2005, Insider Trading and Market Timing of Seasoned Equity Offerings, Working
Paper, University of Texas.
Loughran, Tim, and Jay Ritter, 1995, The New Issues Puzzle, Journal of Finance 50, 23-51.
Mello, A. S. and J. E. Parsons, 1998, Going Public and the Ownership Structure of the Firm, Journal of
Financial Economics 49, 79-109.

Pagano, Marco, Panetta, Fabio, and Luigi Zingales, 1998, Why Do Companies Go Public? An Empirical
Analysis, Journal of Finance 53, 27-64.
Pulvino, Todd, and Vefa Tarhan, 2003, Allocating a Dollar of Cash Flow: Investment, Financing, and
Distribution Decision Sensitivities, Working Paper.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 2003, Stock market driven acquisitions, Journal of Financial
Economics 70, 295-312.

Stein, Jeremy C., 1996, Rational Capital Budgeting in an Irrational World, Journal of Business LXIX,
429–455.
Zingales, Luigi, 1995, Insider Ownership and the Decision to Go Public, Review of Economic Studies 62,
425-448.

24

Table I
Sample Descriptive Statistics

This table presents the descriptive statistics for the equity offerings in the sample. Panels A-1 and A-2
present the number of IPOs and SEOs across different regions over time and Panels B-1 and B-2 report
the total amount of proceeds raised in IPOs and SEOs, respectively. The last row in each panel reports
the relative proportion of each region. The sample period is from 1990 to 2003.

Asia
Year (ex Japan)
1990
67
1991
317
1992
534
1993
717
1994
1,172
1995
1,090
1996
899
1997
223
1998
84
1999
135
2000
322
2001
209
2002
221
2003
254

Japan
3
55
17
83
135
166
139
131
76
95
189
142
109
106

Total
%

1,446
8.5

6,244
36.8

Asia
Year (ex Japan)
1990
9
1991
9
1992
25
1993
47
1994
82
1995
76
1996
56
1997
105
1998
49
1999
131
2000
152
2001
118
2002
124
2003
215
Total
%

1,198
9.7

Japan
1
9
28
66
89
172
83
80
222
223
147
209
237
1,566
12.7

Panel A-1: Number of IPOs
Australia
Cont’l
UK
Latin Am
& NZ
Europe
4
13
4
28
2
6
26
26
15
9
58
45
17
17
92
77
90
33
27
91
47
6
51
128
143
15
57
200
121
11
26
242
60
3
84
369
32
3
126
396
168
6
45
110
70
3
55
53
51
1
73
23
42
3
728
4.3

1,801
10.6

858
5.1

116
0.7

Panel A-2: Number of SEOs
Australia
Cont’l
UK
Latin Am
& NZ
Europe
20
3
3
44
3
6
4
32
2
9
3
72
5
13
106
111
21
4
70
95
18
2
87
117
24
5
137
84
24
1
156
95
7
5
123
77
4
17
207
248
3
34
152
272
8
38
95
224
11
12
91
288
10
128
1.0

1,392
11.3

1,624
13.1
25

158
1.3

US
152
299
410
523
445
461
668
449
247
395
313
70
64
51

Canada
3
2
4
169
161
126
198
202
131
88
102
30
1
1

Total
242
713
1,041
1,629
2,205
2,014
2,241
1,394
869
1,201
1,622
679
555
553

4,547
26.8

1,218
7.2

16,958
100.0

US
141
365
353
446
293
432
509
423
295
306
311
207
199
250

Canada
7
5
11
227
174
127
218
161
93
268
277
185
15
9

Total
181
435
445
841
853
911
1,185
1,022
776
1,136
1,438
1,123
915
1,112

4,530
36.6

1,777
14.4

12,373
100.0

Table I ⎯ Continued

Year
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003

Panel B-1: Total Amount of Proceeds (US$ mil) raised at IPOs
Asia
Australia
Cont’l
UK
Latin Am
US
Canada
(ex Japan) Japan
& NZ
Europe
1,193
832
23
448
4,245
70
3,001
3,657
196
1,522
201
587
10,506
43
3,821
396
1,533
774
1,278
509
16,471
71
4,524
3,606
909
3,366
567
1,663
19,600
2,916
9,436
6,298
2,433
4,252
4,323
2,100
15,005
2,114
7,822
7,385
1,206
10,786
2,318
717
21,844
886
6,262
5,435
1,165
9,903
5,467
944
32,688
1,691
7,845
2,174
1,094
10,955
5,566
1,157
23,693
2,717
1,645
2,148
209
15,093
5,328
44
19,341
1,278
7,129
5,152
1,226
25,893
3,853
383
42,751
438
5,123 10,854
1,336
34,847
6,534
692
32,866
1,283
5,920
4,180
453
5,578
1,769
1,813
22,265
531
4,794
2,204
506
3,084
3,539
122
11,813
1
4,418
4,221
2,221
254
2,856
81
6,734
1

Total
%

72,932
11.7

Year
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003

Asia
(ex Japan)
513
251
706
986
3,889
3,962
3,086
4,603
1,990
6,554
9,727
3,737
4,007
9,008

Total
%

58,543
9.4

14,509
2.3

126,754
20.4

43,598
7.0

10,812
1.7

279,822
45.1

14,038
2.3

Total
6,811
19,711
24,853
37,151
45,961
52,964
63,555
55,201
45,086
86,824
93,534
42,509
26,063
20,785
621,009
100.0

Panel B-2: Total Amount of Proceeds (US$ mil) raised at SEOs
Australia
Cont’l
Japan
UK
Latin Am
US
Canada
Total
& NZ
Europe
30
1,672
966
6,353
65
9,598
461
1,976
969
386
24,412
149
28,604
789
694
1,690
2,186
960
23,633
261
30,918
1,686
380
8,108
989
1,081
29,477
12,040
54,748
2,977
9,950
4,060
1,731
20,711
5,305
48,622
6,092
169
4,033
3,634
1,705
36,063
6,166
61,824
8,394
76
12,910
6,210
1,319
43,473
4,608
80,076
3,224
1,205
20,907
4,962
3,265
37,903
7,835
83,904
2,859
81
19,387
6,252
534
40,518
4,087
75,707
21,269
149
30,739
4,119
1,387
55,013
7,352 126,581
25,858
546
30,457 14,068
3,814
76,601
7,594 168,665
7,240
1,038
20,117 10,875
3,597
30,734
4,724
82,062
7,833
372
14,460
4,682
3,635
26,347
2,316
63,652
13,324
540
6,828
5,980
2,795
30,951
604
70,030

53,017 101,576
5.4
10.3

5,710
0.6

183,235
18.6

69,952
7.1

26

26,209
2.7

482,187
49.0

63,105
6.4

984,991
100.0

Table II
Distribution of IPO and SEO Offer Types

This table presents the distribution of IPO and SEO offer types across the regions in our sample. An IPO
or an SEO is characterized as primary only, secondary only or combined offering, according to the type(s)
of shares being sold. Panels A-1 and A-2 present the distribution based on the number of IPOs and SEOs
and Panels B-1 and B-2 provide breakdown according to the total proceeds raised. The relative
proportion of each offer type is reported in parentheses. The sample period is from 1990 to 2003.

Asia(ex Japan)
Japan
Australia & New Z
Continental Europe
UK
Latin Am
US
Canada

Panel A-1: Number of IPOs
Primary
Secondary
only issues
only issues
Number
%
Number
%
5,990
(95.9)
69
(1.1)
196
(13.6)
9
(0.6)
637
(87.5)
22
(3.0)
1,276
(70.8)
100
(5.6)
751
(87.5)
9
(1.0)
73
(62.9)
11
(9.5)
3,096
(68.1)
53
(1.2)
897
(73.6)
9
(0.7)

Total

12,916

Region

Region
Asia(ex Japan)
Japan
Australia & New Z
Continental Europe
UK
Latin Am
US
Canada
Total

(76.2)

282

(1.7)

Panel A-2: Number of SEOs
Primary
Secondary
only issues
only issues
Number
%
Number
%
689
(57.5)
482
(40.2)
1,011
(64.6)
416
(26.6)
100
(78.1)
25
(19.5)
791
(56.8)
514
(36.9)
1,382
(85.1)
195
(12.0)
110
(69.6)
24
(15.2)
2,086
(46.0)
634
(14.0)
1,337
(75.2)
19
(1.1)
7,506

(60.7)

2,309

27

(18.7)

Combined
issues
Number
%
185
(3.0)
1,241
(85.8)
69
(9.5)
425
(23.6)
98
(11.4)
32
(27.6)
1,398
(30.7)
312
(25.6)
3,760

(22.2)

Combined
issues
Number
%
27
(2.3)
139
(8.9)
3
(2.3)
87
(6.3)
47
(2.9)
24
(15.2)
1,810
(40.0)
421
(23.7)
2,558

(20.7)

Total issues
Number
6,244
1,446
728
1,801
858
116
4,547
1,218
16,958

Total issues
Number
1,198
1,566
128
1,392
1,624
158
4,530
1,777
12,373

Table II ⎯ Continued

Region

Panel B-1: Total Amount of Proceeds (US$ mil) raised at IPOs
Secondary
Combined (primary & secondary) issues
Total
Total
Total
only issues
primary
secondary
combined total
Primary
Secondary
issues
amount % amount
% amount %
amount
%
amount % amount %
amount
1,382 (1.9) 2,327 (3.2) 1,186 (1.6)
3,513 (4.8)
70,364 (96.5)
2,568 (3.5) 72,932
246 (0.4) 31,253 (53.4) 20,106 (34.3) 51,359 (87.7)
38,191 (65.2) 20,352 (34.8) 58,543
1,606 (11.1)
686 (4.7) 1,561 (10.8)
2,247 (15.5)
11,343 (78.2)
3,166 (21.8) 14,509
16,187 (12.8) 18,794 (14.8) 23,620 (18.6) 42,414 (33.5)
86,947 (68.6) 39,807 (31.4) 126,754
2,637 (6.0) 8,705 (20.0) 7,558 (17.3) 16,264 (37.3)
33,403 (76.6) 10,196 (23.4) 43,598
426 (3.9) 1,414 (13.1) 1,262 (11.7)
2,677 (24.8)
9,124 (84.4)
1,688 (15.6) 10,812
20,039 (7.2) 55,891 (20.0) 29,315 (10.5) 85,207 (30.5)
230,468 (82.4) 49,354 (17.6) 279,822
2 (0.0) 2,982 (21.2)
706 (5.0)
3,688 (26.3)
13,330 (95.0)
708 (5.0) 14,038

Asia(ex Japan)
Japan
Australia & NZ
Cont’l Europe
UK
Latin Am
US
Canada

Primary
only issues
amount
%
68,037 (93.3)
6,937 (11.9)
10,657 (73.4)
68,152 (53.8)
24,697 (56.6)
7,710 (71.3)
174,576 (62.4)
10,348 (73.7)

Total

371,115 (59.8) 42,526 (6.8) 122,054 (19.7) 85,314 (13.7) 207,368 (33.4)

Region

493,169 (79.4) 127,840 (20.6) 621,009

Panel B-2: Total Amount of Proceeds (US$ mil) raised at SEOs
Secondary
Combined (primary & secondary) issues
Total
Total
Total
only issues
primary
secondary
combined total
Primary
Secondary
issues
amount % amount
% amount %
amount
%
amount % amount %
amount
21,153 (39.9) 1,692 (3.2)
976 (1.8)
2,668 (5.0)
30,888 (58.3) 22,128 (41.7) 53,017
26,901 (26.5) 7,013 (6.9) 10,162 (10.0) 17,175 (16.9)
64,514 (63.5) 37,062 (36.5) 101,576
2,216 (38.8)
146 (2.6)
203 (3.6)
349 (6.1)
3,291 (57.6)
2,419 (42.4)
5,710
101,364 (55.3) 5,339 (2.9) 8,262 (4.5) 13,602 (7.4)
73,608 (40.2) 109,627 (59.8) 183,235
28,559 (40.8) 3,459
2,411
5,870
38,981 (55.7) 30,971 (44.3) 69,952
6,637
5,330 (20.3) 4,753 (18.1) 10,082 (38.5)
14,819 (56.5) 11,390 (43.5) 26,209
113,547 (23.5) 109,785 (22.8) 76,298 (15.8) 186,083 (38.6)
292,343 (60.6) 189,844 (39.4) 482,187
3,341
12,296 (19.5) 3,856 (6.1) 16,152 (25.6)
55,908 (88.6)
7,197 (11.4) 63,105

Asia(ex Japan)
Japan
Australia & NZ
Cont’l Europe
UK
Latin Am
US
Canada

Primary
only issues
amount
%
29,196 (55.1)
57,501 (56.6)
3,145 (55.1)
68,269 (37.3)
35,522 (50.8)
9,490 (36.2)
182,558 (37.9)
43,612 (69.1)

Total

429,293 (43.6) 303,717 (30.8) 145,060 (14.7) 106,921 (10.9) 251,981 (25.6)

28

574,352 (58.3) 410,639 (41.7) 984,991

Table III
Average Normalized Increases in Assets and Expenditures Following IPOs by Offer Type

This table presents the mean and median increases in assets and expenditures following an IPO. Increase
in assets (total assets, inventory, cash) is defined as ln[((Vt − V0 ) total assets 0 ) + 1] , and increase in
expenditures (CAPEX, acquisition, R&D, reduction in long term debt) is defined as

ln[(∑i =1Vi total assets 0 ) + 1] , where 0 denotes the fiscal year end just prior to the IPO and t denotes
t

number of years after year 0. t-statistics and Mann-Whitney z-statistics for comparisons of means and
medians between primary only and combined, and between combined and secondary only group are also
provided. Bold letters indicate statistical significance at less than 5%. The sample period for this table is
from 1990 to 2001.

Total

N
Mean
Median
Mann-Whitney
IPO offer type
IPO offer type
t-stat
IPO offer type
z-stat
prim sec comb prim sec comb prim v comb prim sec comb prim v comb
only only -ined only only -ined comb v sec only only -ined comb v sec

∆Total Assets 1
2
3
4

5,497
4,725
3,692
2,870

3,455 105 1,937 0.94 0.16
2,945 90 1,690 1.13 0.35
2,260 74 1,358 1.21 0.58
1,745 58 1,067 1.28 0.68

0.69 11.33 8.55 0.73 0.11
0.94 7.15 7.17 0.93 0.29
1.09 3.65 4.99 1.04 0.49
1.19 2.25 4.18 1.12 0.60

0.53
0.79
0.96
1.07

9.85
6.25
3.21
1.85

9.91
8.09
5.37
4.32

∆Inventory

1
2
3
4

5,348
4,575
3,579
2,774

3,352 100 1,896 0.07 0.03
2,847 86 1,642 0.16 0.06
2,194 72 1,313 0.22 0.08
1,694 52 1,028 0.27 0.12

0.06
0.13
0.18
0.22

3.29
3.39
3.67
3.11

2.11
2.80
2.71
2.11

0.01
0.04
0.07
0.10

0.01
0.01
0.03
0.03

0.01
0.03
0.05
0.07

1.34
1.47
1.93
1.95

1.40
2.46
2.40
1.81

∑CAPEX

1
2
3
4

5,043
4,271
3,292
2,536

3,300
2,783
2,116
1,622

96 1,647 0.19 0.09 0.16
83 1,405 0.40 0.17 0.37
68 1,108 0.56 0.29 0.54
53
861 0.69 0.40 0.69

3.96
2.67
1.00
0.09

3.46
4.94
4.60
4.09

0.11
0.26
0.39
0.52

0.06
0.13
0.22
0.31

0.10
0.26
0.42
0.56

1.63
0.17
-1.66
-2.39

5.19
6.58
5.69
4.69

∑Acquisition 1
2
3
4

4,124
3,401
2,640
2,088

2,735
2,237
1,705
1,340

65 1,324 0.07 0.02 0.08 -0.21 2.09 0.00 0.00
58 1,106 0.18 0.07 0.19 -0.77 2.25 0.00 0.00
47
888 0.27 0.14 0.26 0.32 1.79 0.00 0.00
36
712 0.33 0.12 0.33 0.23 2.28 0.00 0.01

0.00
0.00
0.03
0.07

-1.69
-2.79
-2.36
-3.23

1.34
2.80
2.12
1.61

∑R&D

1
2
3
4

2,797 1,827
2,392 1,541
1,880 1,162
1,464
869

38
35
33
27

∆Cash

1
2
3
4

∑LT Debt
Reduction

1
2
3
4

V

t

932
816
685
568

0.31
0.63
0.82
0.97

0.04
0.10
0.16
0.23

0.19
0.40
0.60
0.77

9.32
9.30
6.44
4.07

4.10
4.37
4.18
3.82

0.19
0.48
0.65
0.80

0.02
0.05
0.09
0.12

0.14
0.31
0.47
0.67

6.87
7.02
4.64
2.66

4.17
4.10
3.69
3.51

5,480
4,711
3,679
2,859

3,444 104 1,932 0.64 0.04
2,937 89 1,685 0.56 0.06
2,252 74 1,353 0.51 0.12
1,739 58 1,062 0.49 0.13

0.44
0.44
0.45
0.46

9.85
5.75
2.10
0.86

7.43
5.77
4.24
3.68

0.34
0.22
0.14
0.13

0.01
0.01
0.02
0.02

0.21
0.17
0.15
0.16

7.20
3.73
-0.16
-1.34

9.17
7.43
5.13
4.63

4,229
3,561
2,799
2,217

2,810
2,337
1,790
1,393

65 1,354 0.20 0.11 0.21 -0.67 2.82 0.07 0.03
54 1,170 0.31 0.18 0.29 1.44 2.19 0.16 0.08
45
964 0.45 0.27 0.40 2.35 1.74 0.25 0.13
35
789 0.59 0.35 0.50 3.05 1.48 0.35 0.21

0.09
0.16
0.24
0.32

-2.21
0.16
1.47
2.40

3.06
2.32
2.21
1.80

29

Table IV
The Effect of the Type of Capital on Subsequent Increases in Assets and Expenditures in IPOs

The dependent variable for asset-based variables (total assets, inventory, cash) is Y =
ln[((Vt − V0 ) total assets0 ) + 1] , and for expenditures (CAPEX, acquisition, R&D, reduction in long term
debt) is Y = ln[( ∑it =1Vi total assets 0 ) + 1] . Independent variables are primary capital, secondary capital,
other sources of funds, all of which are normalized by total assets, and ln[total assets]. All regressions
include year and country fixed effects. Coefficient for ln[total assets] and fixed effects are omitted for the
sake of brevity. Dollar changes are the implied change in the dependent variable when primary capital or
other sources of funds is increased by $1 (for a median-sized firm in 1996 in the U.S.) Bold letters
indicate statistical significance at 5%, using heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered by
industry (2 digit SIC). The sample period for this table is from 1990 to 2001.
⎡ ⎛ primary
Y = β 1 ln ⎢ ⎜⎜
⎣⎢ ⎝ total asset

0

⎡ ⎛ secondary
⎤
⎞
⎟⎟ + 1 ⎥ + β 2 ln ⎢ ⎜⎜
⎢⎣ ⎝ total asset
⎠
⎦⎥
⎡ primary
⎤
ln ⎢
+1⎥
⎣ total asset 0 ⎦

0

⎡ ⎛ other sources
⎤
⎞
⎟⎟ + 1 ⎥ + β 3 ln ⎢ ⎜⎜
⎢⎣ ⎝ total asset 0
⎠
⎦⎥

⎤
⎞
⎟⎟ + 1 ⎥ + β 4 ln [total assets
⎠
⎦⎥

⎡ secondary
⎤
ln ⎢
+1⎥
⎣ total asset 0 ⎦

⎡ other sources ⎤
ln ⎢
+1⎥
⎣ total asset 0
⎦

β2
t-stat
0.063 3.74
0.050 1.12
0.098 3.38
0.129 2.72

β3
t-stat β1= β2 β1= β3
0.259 15.64
0.00 0.00
0.387 13.99
0.00 0.00
0.519 17.37
0.00 0.06
0.596 11.40
0.00 0.34

p-value

0

] + FE

$ change
primary other
capital sources
1.028 0.372
0.841 0.351
0.682 0.342
0.598 0.362

+ε

R2
0.84
0.77
0.75
0.73

N
V
t
∆Total Assets 1 3,161
2 2,402
3 1,771
4 1,326

β1
t-stat
1.001 47.47
0.839 33.28
0.627 13.40
0.499
7.92

∆Inventory

1
2
3
4

3,093
2,348
1,736
1,305

0.034
0.034
0.043
0.012

1.96
1.03
0.77
0.19

-0.64
-0.82
-1.32
-0.74

0.023
0.051
0.103
0.131

2.40
4.30
4.24
4.03

0.08
0.19
0.15
0.57

0.45
0.51
0.24
0.03

0.017
0.016
0.022
0.006

0.016
0.022
0.033
0.037

0.07
0.11
0.18
0.19

∑CAPEX

1
2
3
4

3,137
2,375
1,750
1,309

0.131
0.244
0.239
0.175

6.12 -0.026 -1.02
6.59 -0.011 -0.19
5.30 -0.004 -0.05
3.64 0.007 0.10

0.057
0.120
0.216
0.287

4.40
7.41
9.05
7.71

0.00
0.00
0.03
0.12

0.00
0.00
0.60
0.04

0.073
0.155
0.179
0.143

0.044
0.069
0.099
0.119

0.19
0.33
0.39
0.43

∑Acquisition 1
2
3
4

3,016
2,225
1,624
1,198

0.054
0.091
0.056
0.017

2.53
2.89
1.11
0.29

-0.029
-0.050
-0.101
-0.037

-1.75
-1.28
-1.70
-0.46

0.077
0.156
0.222
0.254

4.96
5.17
5.58
3.86

0.02
0.04
0.13
0.68

0.11
0.07
0.00
0.00

0.029
0.053
0.038
0.013

0.058
0.084
0.092
0.097

0.13
0.20
0.25
0.27

∑R&D

1 1,956
2 1,452
3 1,042
4 758

0.299
0.523
0.723
0.861

8.60
8.37
8.08
6.63

0.001
0.030
0.094
0.110

0.01
0.40
0.95
0.65

0.033
0.050
0.059
0.090

4.63
3.48
2.01
2.17

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.188
0.388
0.646
0.848

0.029
0.034
0.032
0.044

0.48
0.54
0.53
0.54

∆Cash

1
2
3
4

3,152
2,395
1,766
1,322

0.981
0.824
0.758
0.725

57.98
21.06
14.07
8.42

0.116
0.172
0.253
0.225

3.73
3.54
3.85
2.19

0.144
0.214
0.246
0.268

6.94
8.05
8.86
11.25

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

1.067
0.894
0.894
0.888

0.219
0.210
0.176
0.166

0.79
0.66
0.58
0.54

∑LT Debt
Reduction

1
2
3
4

3,112 0.032
2,341 -0.007
1,728 -0.087
1,284 -0.159

1.54
-0.29
-2.50
-3.76

-0.073
-0.150
-0.242
-0.331

-3.01
-3.47
-3.16
-3.25

0.105
0.140
0.230
0.296

4.80
5.12
7.12
6.36

0.00
0.01
0.05
0.05

0.01 0.018
0.00 -0.004
0.00 -0.057
0.00 -0.113

0.082
0.074
0.092
0.107

0.15
0.18
0.23
0.29

-0.016
-0.046
-0.080
-0.055

30

Table V
Average Normalized Increases in Assets and Expenditures Following SEOs by Offer Type

This table presents the mean and median increases in assets and expenditures following an IPO. Increase
in assets (total assets, inventory, cash) is defined as ln[((Vt − V0 ) total assets 0 ) + 1] , and increase in
expenditures (CAPEX, acquisition, R&D, reduction in long term debt) is defined as

ln[(∑i =1Vi total assets 0 ) + 1] , where 0 denotes the fiscal year end just prior to the IPO and t denotes
t

number of years after year 0. t-statistics and Mann-Whitney z-statistics for comparisons of means and
medians between primary only and combined, and between combined and secondary only group are also
provided. Bold letters indicate statistical significance at less than 5%. The sample period for this table is
from 1990 to 2001.

Total

N
Mean
Median
Mann-Whitney
IPO offer type
IPO offer type
t-stat
IPO offer type
z-stat
prim sec comb prim sec comb prim v comb prim sec comb prim v comb
only only -ined only only -ined comb v sec only only -ined comb v sec

∆Total Assets 1
2
3
4

6,457
5,185
3,884
2,967

3,529 1,193 1,735 0.48 0.26
2,873 928 1,384 0.63 0.41
2,192 686 1,006 0.72 0.51
1,735 524
708 0.79 0.61

0.66
0.90
1.01
1.10

-10.77
-11.57
-9.42
-7.78

20.45
17.86
14.12
11.20

0.34
0.50
0.60
0.67

0.14
0.29
0.40
0.50

0.53
0.79
0.93
1.00

-13.09
-13.58
-11.07
-8.69

23.77
19.41
15.15
11.42

∆Inventory

1
2
3
4

6,083
4,959
3,730
2,795

3,321 1,105 1,657 0.04 0.03
2,733 877 1,349 0.08 0.06
2,090 657
983 0.12 0.09
1,619 485
691 0.15 0.12

0.07
0.13
0.17
0.21

-6.72
-6.93
-5.30
-3.91

7.63
8.63
7.05
5.79

0.01
0.02
0.03
0.05

0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04

0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08

-8.19
-7.43
-5.41
-4.89

6.84
6.03
5.42
4.69

∑CAPEX

1
2
3
4

6,024
4,784
3,569
2,703

3,269 1,083 1,672 0.14 0.10
2,627 832 1,325 0.29 0.21
1,978 621
970 0.43 0.30
1,550 470
683 0.54 0.39

0.16
0.34
0.49
0.61

-3.97
-5.07
-3.70
-2.94

8.74
10.29
10.21
8.43

0.08
0.18
0.30
0.40

0.07
0.15
0.23
0.32

0.10
0.24
0.37
0.47

-7.62 11.01
-7.37 11.70
-5.60 10.50
-3.95 7.76

∑Acquisition 1
2
3
4

5,381
4,283
3,193
2,394

2,871
2,313
1,741
1,361

918 1,592 0.11 0.05 0.10 1.14 6.20 0.00
708 1,262 0.18 0.11 0.20 -2.17 6.32 0.00
529
923 0.22 0.16 0.26 -2.27 4.72 0.02
384
649 0.26 0.20 0.31 -2.40 3.62 0.04

0.00
0.01
0.03
0.04

0.00
0.02
0.05
0.07

-1.57
-4.03
-2.70
-2.23

3.34
4.54
2.81
2.23

∑R&D

1
2
3
4

3,186 1,616
2,495 1,280
1,837
938
1,346
716

531 1,039 0.14 0.05 0.13
398
817 0.29 0.11 0.27
299
600 0.37 0.16 0.37
232
398 0.44 0.22 0.40

1.57
2.05
2.12
3.22

6.12
5.34
3.82
1.28

∆Cash

1
2
3
4

6,431
5,167
3,866
2,953

3,514 1,187 1,730 0.18 0.06
2,864 923 1,380 0.16 0.08
2,183 681 1,002 0.15 0.08
1,728 520
705 0.16 0.11

∑LT Debt
Reduction

1
2
3
4

5,457
4,339
3,234
2,453

2,898
2,324
1,761
1,402

V

t

1.12
1.07
0.30
1.19

8.84
8.60
6.94
4.51

0.05
0.12
0.17
0.22

0.02
0.04
0.07
0.10

0.05
0.12
0.14
0.12

0.26
0.24
0.23
0.24

-7.07
-5.63
-4.59
-3.87

15.37
9.93
7.44
5.29

0.04
0.03
0.03
0.04

0.01
0.01
0.01
0.03

0.10
0.06
0.06
0.06

-8.31 17.08
-5.78 9.84
-5.19 7.60
-3.64 4.85

934 1,625 0.11 0.09 0.15
717 1,298 0.20 0.17 0.25
527
946 0.30 0.27 0.37
392
659 0.40 0.34 0.49

-5.92
-4.21
-3.94
-3.66

6.74
4.98
4.16
4.39

0.03
0.09
0.16
0.23

0.02
0.08
0.14
0.19

0.04
0.09
0.19
0.28

-2.97
-1.30
-2.21
-2.61

31

4.63
2.55
2.67
3.72

Table VI
The Effect of the Type of Capital on Subsequent Increases in Assets and Expenditures in SEOs

The dependent variable for asset-based variables (total assets, inventory, cash) is Y =
ln[((Vt − V0 ) total assets0 ) + 1] , and for expenditures (CAPEX, acquisition, R&D, reduction in long term
debt) is Y = ln[( ∑it =1Vi total assets 0 ) + 1] . Independent variables are primary capital, secondary capital,
other sources of funds, all of which are normalized by total assets, and ln[total assets]. All regressions
include year and country fixed effects. Coefficient for ln[total assets] and fixed effects are omitted for the
sake of brevity. Dollar changes are the implied change in the dependent variable when primary capital or
other sources of funds is increased by $1 (for a median-sized firm in 1996 in the U.S.) Bold letters
indicate statistical significance at 5%, using heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered by
industry (2 digit SIC). The sample period for this table is from 1990 to 2001.
⎡ ⎛ primary
Y = β 1 ln ⎢ ⎜⎜
⎣⎢ ⎝ total asset

0

⎡ ⎛ secondary
⎤
⎞
⎟⎟ + 1 ⎥ + β 2 ln ⎢ ⎜⎜
⎢⎣ ⎝ total asset
⎠
⎦⎥
⎡ primary
⎤
ln ⎢
+1⎥
⎣ total asset 0 ⎦

0

⎡ ⎛ other sources
⎤
⎞
⎟⎟ + 1 ⎥ + β 3 ln ⎢ ⎜⎜
⎢⎣ ⎝ total asset 0
⎠
⎦⎥

⎤
⎞
⎟⎟ + 1 ⎥ + β 4 ln [total assets
⎠
⎦⎥

⎡ secondary
⎤
ln ⎢
+1⎥
⎣ total asset 0 ⎦

⎡ other sources ⎤
ln ⎢
+1⎥
⎣ total asset 0
⎦

β2
t-stat
0.243 6.20
0.258 4.43
0.289 3.03
0.365 3.90

β3
t-stat β1= β2 β1= β3
0.363 11.86
0.00 0.00
0.527 14.12
0.00 0.00
0.631 13.74
0.00 0.59
0.26 0.10
0.673 15.95

p-value

0

] + FE

$ change
primary other
capital sources
0.967 0.314
0.902 0.364
0.864 0.377
0.900 0.368

+ε

R2
0.68
0.66
0.66
0.65

N
V
t
∆Total Assets 1 5,004
2 3,894
3 2,858
4 2,138

β1
t-stat
0.926 33.85
0.735 36.46
0.586 10.16
0.512
6.06

∆Inventory

1 4,842
2 3,797
3 2,788
4 2,086

0.056
0.068
0.080
0.163

2.26 0.006 0.22
2.42 -0.009 -0.20
1.83 0.030 0.45
2.62 0.064 1.00

0.019
0.051
0.091
0.097

4.27
3.20
4.00
3.71

0.07
0.12
0.47
0.33

0.14
0.50
0.80
0.29

0.047
0.057
0.072
0.156

0.013
0.024
0.033
0.029

0.09
0.12
0.18
0.20

∑CAPEX

1 4,987
2 3,877
3 2,841
4 2,129

0.069
0.167
0.178
0.200

4.25
3.82
4.37
3.04

0.000
0.024
0.046
0.075

0.00
0.48
0.56
0.65

0.114
0.182
0.272
0.323

3.67
4.28
5.49
6.71

0.08
0.07
0.10
0.26

0.15
0.83
0.23
0.19

0.059
0.157
0.196
0.248

0.081
0.097
0.121
0.125

0.20
0.30
0.39
0.45

∑Acquisition 1 4,834
2 3,750
3 2,731
4 2,019

0.135
0.142
0.113
0.092

3.07
2.97
2.70
1.76

-0.128
-0.057
-0.077
-0.064

-4.87
-1.45
-1.52
-0.99

0.160
0.217
0.247
0.259

6.66
6.49
6.37
6.46

0.00
0.01
0.01
0.06

0.44
0.01
0.00
0.00

0.124
0.142
0.127
0.110

0.122
0.122
0.112
0.097

0.22
0.28
0.29
0.31

∑R&D

1 2,744
2 2,077
3 1,482
4 1,064

0.200
0.374
0.518
0.594

4.81
7.07
6.69
7.75

0.037
0.042
0.158
0.251

1.01
0.50
1.23
1.56

0.012
0.025
0.046
0.089

1.52
1.62
1.87
2.72

0.03
0.02
0.08
0.12

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.166
0.304
0.441
0.535

0.008
0.011
0.016
0.025

0.36
0.44
0.44
0.42

∆Cash

1 4,992
2 3,886
3 2,851
4 2,132

0.619
0.425
0.357
0.375

19.87
8.67
11.20
4.85

0.242 14.41
0.166 10.68
0.177 3.86
0.290 4.14

0.121
0.175
0.219
0.221

5.10
5.72
6.68
5.28

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.40

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.06

0.621
0.425
0.397
0.468

0.101
0.098
0.098
0.086

0.52
0.37
0.36
0.33

∑LT Debt
Reduction

1 4,921
2 3,811
3 2,774
4 2,071

0.016
0.006
-0.013
-0.039

0.70
0.17
-0.33
-0.63

0.145
0.222
0.292
0.341

4.58
5.62
6.01
6.98

0.02
0.03
0.01
0.02

0.00 0.014
0.00 0.006
0.00 -0.016
0.00 -0.053

0.108
0.129
0.145
0.146

0.18
0.24
0.28
0.33

-0.087
-0.145
-0.201
-0.284

-3.22
-3.08
-3.46
-2.73

32

Table VII
The Relationship between Proportion of Secondary Shares Offered and Tobin’s q in SEOs

The dependent variable is the proportion of secondary shares offered in SEOs. ln[q] is the logarithm of book value of assets minus book
value of equity plus market value equity over book value of assets as of the closest fiscal year end prior to the SEO announcement. Fitted
ln[q] and residual ln[q] are based on the following first stage estimation;
−1
⎛ salesit
ln[qi ] = α + ∑ β t ⎜⎜
t = −3
⎝ asset it

⎞ −1 ⎛ salesit
⎟⎟ + ∑ γ t ⎜
⎜
⎠ t = −3 ⎝ salesi ( t −1)

⎞ −1 ⎛ op. incomeit
⎟ + ∑δ t ⎜
⎟ t = −3 ⎜ asset
it
⎝
⎠

⎞ −1 ⎛ dividend it
⎟⎟ + ∑ φt ⎜⎜
⎠ t = −3 ⎝ priceit

⎞ −1 ⎛ R & Dit
⎟⎟ + ∑ λt ⎜⎜
⎠ t = −3 ⎝ asset it

⎞
⎟⎟ + ε i
⎠

Columns (1) and (2) use the full sample, and columns (3) through (6) are restricted to those observations that have enough information for
the first stage estimation. We use heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered by industry (2 digit SIC).The sample period is from
1990 to 2003.

ln[q]

(1)

(2)

0.037**
(2.507)

0.091***
(6.853)

(3)
0.013
(0.521)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.086***
(3.455)

fitted ln[q]

-0.106***
(-3.059)

0.004
(0.101)

residual ln[q]

0.063**
(2.332)

0.115***
(4.712)

ln[total assets (US$ mil)]

0.063***
(10.152)

0.053***
(5.464)

0.049***
(5.226)

ln[total proceeds/total assets]

0.005
(0.690)

-0.016
(-0.923)

-0.015
(-0.890)

Country, Year fixed effects

Y/Y

Y/Y

Y/Y

Y/Y

Y/Y

Y/Y

R2

0.127

0.189

0.143

0.204

0.158

0.210

N

6,629

6,629

1,488

1,488

1,488

1,488

33

Table VIII
The Effect of the Type of Capital and Tobin’s q on Subsequent Increases in Assets and Expenditures in SEOs
The dependent variable for asset-based variables is Y = ln[((Vt − V 0 ) total assets 0 ) + 1] , and for expenditures is Y = ln[(∑ t Vt total assets 0 ) + 1] . The
i =1
independent variables are primary capital, other sources of funds, both of which are normalized by total assets and interacted with 3 dummy variables (LoQ,
MedQ and HiQ) reflecting the level of q’s in each country. Country and year fixed effects as well as ln[total assets], LoQ and HiQ are included in all
regressions(not reported). Panel A presents coefficients and t-stats using heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered by industry (2 digit SIC). Panel
B presents implied change in the dependent variable when primary capital or other sources of funds is increased by $1 and also p-values from comparing
coefficients. The sample period for this table is from 1990 to 2001.
⎡ primary
⎤
ln ⎢
+ 1⎥ * LoQ
⎣ total asset 0 ⎦

Panel A

⎡ other sources ⎤
ln ⎢
+ 1⎥ * LoQ
⎣ total asset 0
⎦

⎡ primary
⎤
ln ⎢
+ 1⎥ * MedQ
⎣ total asset 0 ⎦

⎡ other sources ⎤
ln ⎢
+ 1⎥ * MedQ
⎣ total asset 0
⎦

⎡ primary
⎤
ln ⎢
+ 1⎥ * HiQ
⎣ total asset 0 ⎦

⎡ other sources ⎤
ln ⎢
+ 1⎥ * HiQ
⎣ total asset 0
⎦

V
T
∆Total Assets 1
2
3
4

N
4,275
3,364
2,500
1,875

β
1.227
0.992
0.809
0.876

t-stat
12.60
9.72
8.39
4.61

β
0.467
0.620
0.662
0.669

t-stat
11.34
19.57
14.83
9.61

β
0.952
0.752
0.607
0.580

t-stat
25.52
14.06
7.19
3.36

β
0.512
0.666
0.742
0.723

t-stat
8.98
12.47
13.12
7.18

β
0.843
0.625
0.446
0.258

t-stat
32.91
24.53
6.31
2.95

β
0.364
0.476
0.545
0.665

t-stat
11.82
11.38
9.45
14.36

∆Inventory

1
2
3
4

4,144
3,283
2,441
1,830

0.214
0.227
0.239
0.302

2.50
2.00
1.69
1.55

0.016
0.043
0.052
0.065

0.56
1.84
1.83
2.30

0.077
0.064
0.039
0.087

3.72
2.04
0.77
1.22

0.028
0.074
0.109
0.132

2.75
2.54
2.13
2.32

0.032
0.068
0.052
0.088

1.79
1.97
0.94
0.90

0.014
0.050
0.076
0.092

2.13
2.79
3.27
3.19

∑CAPEX

1
2
3
4

4,265
3,356
2,491
1,869

0.245
0.380
0.426
0.560

5.83
8.27
6.43
5.83

0.212
0.281
0.356
0.352

4.75
5.84
6.98
6.69

0.098
0.119
0.159
0.245

2.59
2.04
2.00
2.30

0.157
0.241
0.336
0.376

3.71
3.58
4.17
4.88

0.046
0.119
0.151
0.121

2.43
2.73
2.72
1.20

0.089
0.131
0.233
0.317

3.80
4.05
5.54
5.92

∑Acquisition

1
2
3
4

4,140
3,249
2,396
1,771

0.278
0.219
0.170
0.218

5.12
2.41
1.90
1.64

0.241
0.279
0.316
0.343

7.97
9.46
6.31
4.77

0.283
0.222
0.278
0.398

5.61
4.26
4.19
5.99

0.294
0.307
0.324
0.281

9.00
8.10
8.11
5.43

0.132
0.073
0.069
0.014

2.94
1.97
1.52
0.18

0.132
0.159
0.179
0.215

4.43
4.91
3.81
4.53

∑R&D

1
2
3
4

2,290
1,763
1,274
912

0.062
0.180
0.376
0.556

1.46
2.35
2.35
2.30

-0.016
-0.025
-0.031
-0.032

-1.11
-1.77
-1.40
-0.94

0.090
0.188
0.390
0.597

2.52
3.33
3.89
3.83

-0.011
-0.005
0.030
0.111

-0.57
-0.26
1.01
2.22

0.156
0.332
0.492
0.557

3.75
3.94
5.08
5.22

-0.002
0.022
0.057
0.090

-0.19
0.85
1.35
2.00

∆Cash

1
2
3
4

4,271
3,362
2,499
1,873

0.396
0.203
0.191
0.198

3.63
2.69
3.08
2.78

0.011
0.056
0.061
0.066

0.43
2.77
3.31
4.12

0.454
0.323
0.288
0.365

8.05
7.01
3.70
3.15

0.073
0.129
0.236
0.243

2.54
6.12
3.45
2.91

0.606
0.463
0.348
0.318

17.84
6.51
7.11
3.18

0.152
0.219
0.231
0.269

5.94
7.03
6.89
5.21

∑LT Debt
Reduction

1
2
3
4

4,208
3,301
2,435
1,818

0.284
0.205
0.154
0.349

5.59
3.97
2.12
2.58

0.336
0.424
0.496
0.523

12.35
11.40
12.31
7.42

0.084
-0.016
0.034
0.051

2.53
-0.28
0.48
0.35

0.251
0.374
0.453
0.430

5.90
6.57
7.97
4.93

0.013
0.043
0.049
-0.012

0.92
1.10
0.84
-0.12

0.059
0.114
0.132
0.193

3.76
3.97
3.53
4.05

34

Table VIII ⎯ Continued

V
t
∆Total Assets 1
2
3
4

Lo Q
N
primary
other
4,275
1.244
0.39
3,364
1.136
0.44
2,500
0.988
0.41
1,875
1.204
0.37

Dollar Changes
Medium Q
primary
other
1.084
0.46
1.027
0.52
1.043
0.51
1.122
0.44

High Q
primary
other
1.015
0.40
0.937
0.41
0.859
0.42
0.643
0.48

p values from H0: βi = βj
primary vs. other
High Q vs. Low Q
Lo Q
High Q
primary
other
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.04
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.19
0.37
0.12
0.00
0.38
0.96
0.00
0.00

∆Inventory

1
2
3
4

4,144
3,283
2,441
1,830

0.198
0.207
0.221
0.290

0.01
0.02
0.02
0.03

0.069
0.059
0.037
0.087

0.02
0.04
0.04
0.04

0.025
0.053
0.044
0.081

0.01
0.02
0.03
0.02

0.05
0.07
0.15
0.19

0.30
0.56
0.64
0.97

0.03
0.17
0.21
0.30

0.94
0.77
0.30
0.21

∑CAPEX

1
2
3
4

4,265
3,356
2,491
1,869

0.226
0.373
0.467
0.679

0.16
0.17
0.20
0.17

0.090
0.121
0.192
0.336

0.11
0.14
0.16
0.16

0.036
0.105
0.166
0.164

0.06
0.07
0.10
0.13

0.42
0.02
0.32
0.08

0.11
0.84
0.25
0.11

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.01
0.00
0.02
0.53

∑Acquisition 1
2
3
4

4,140
3,249
2,396
1,771

0.294
0.243
0.215
0.294

0.21
0.19
0.20
0.19

0.296
0.248
0.365
0.542

0.24
0.19
0.17
0.12

0.116
0.068
0.078
0.017

0.11
0.09
0.08
0.08

0.55
0.47
0.14
0.45

0.99
0.01
0.05
0.01

0.02
0.13
0.26
0.18

0.02
0.02
0.06
0.15

∑R&D

1
2
3
4

2,290
1,763
1,274
912

0.053
0.142
0.307
0.492

-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01

0.076
0.151
0.333
0.582

-0.01
0.00
0.01
0.03

0.119
0.263
0.460
0.628

0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03

0.13
0.02
0.02
0.03

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.04
0.09
0.43
1.00

0.40
0.08
0.03
0.01

∆Cash

1
2
3
4

4,271
3,362
2,499
1,873

0.382
0.190
0.202
0.231

0.01
0.03
0.03
0.03

0.430
0.299
0.315
0.443

0.05
0.07
0.10
0.09

0.564
0.433
0.397
0.420

0.13
0.12
0.10
0.10

0.00
0.04
0.04
0.07

0.00
0.01
0.03
0.69

0.06
0.02
0.02
0.14

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

∑LT Debt
Reduction

1
2
3
4

4,208
3,301
2,435
1,818

0.084
-0.019
0.053
0.083

0.20
0.25
0.28
0.22

0.297
0.255
0.233
0.565

0.29
0.32
0.38
0.34

0.010
0.039
0.054
-0.014

0.04
0.06
0.06
0.07

0.34
0.01
0.00
0.35

0.00
0.07
0.30
0.10

0.00
0.01
0.29
0.04

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

35

Appendix Table I. Distribution of IPO Offer Types

This table presents the distribution of IPO and SEO offer types across the countries in our sample. An
IPO or an SEO is characterized as primary only, secondary only or combined offering, according to the
type(s) of shares being sold. Panels A-1 and A-2 present the distribution based on the number of IPOs and
SEOs and Panels B-1 and B-2 provide breakdown according to the total proceeds raised. The relative
proportion of each offer type is reported in parentheses. The sample period is from 1990 to 2003.
Region

Nation

Asia

Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Malaysia
Pakistan
Philippines
Singapore
South Korea
Taiwan
Thailand
Japan
Australia
New Zealand
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
UK
Turkey
Argentina
Bermuda
Brazil
Chile
Mexico
Canada
US

Pacific
Europe

Latin Am

North Am

Total

Panel A-1: Number of IPOs
Primary only
Secondary only
Number
%
number
%
432 (81.1)
2
(0.4)
3,582 (97.7)
53
(1.4)
148 (98.7)
1
(0.7)
388 (93.3)
7
(1.7)
177 (99.4)
1
(0.6)
57 (95.0)
275 (89.9)
3
(1.0)
280 (99.6)
454 (99.3)
2
(0.4)
197 (99.5)
196 (13.6)
9
(0.6)
602 (87.6)
20
(2.9)
35 (85.4)
2
(4.9)
28 (71.8)
2
(5.1)
29 (64.4)
1
(2.2)
31 (64.6)
2
(4.2)
29 (60.4)
4
(8.3)
387 (78.7)
37
(7.5)
256 (65.0)
7
(1.8)
126 (96.9)
18 (72.0)
77 (77.8)
68 (54.8)
10
(8.1)
36 (46.2)
6
(7.7)
73 (92.4)
7 (70.0)
3
(30.0)
21 (60.0)
8
(22.9)
53 (58.2)
11
(12.1)
26 (50.0)
8
(15.4)
751 (87.5)
9
(1.0)
11 (91.7)
1
(8.3)
6 (46.2)
4
(30.8)
14 (73.7)
10 (66.7)
2
(13.3)
14 (87.5)
1
(6.3)
29 (54.7)
4
(7.5)
897 (73.6)
9
(0.7)
3,096 (68.1)
53
(1.2)
12,916

(76.2)

282

(1.7)

Combined
number
%
99
(18.6)
30
(0.8)
1
(0.7)
21
(5.0)
3
28
1
1
1
1,241
65
4
9
15
15
15
68
131
4
7
22
46
36
6

(5.0)
(9.2)
(0.4)
(0.2)
(0.5)
(85.8)
(9.5)
(9.8)
(23.1)
(33.3)
(31.3)
(31.3)
(13.8)
(33.2)
(3.1)
(28.0)
(22.2)
(37.1)
(46.2)
(7.6)

6
27
18
98

(17.1)
(29.7)
(34.6)
(11.4)

3
5
3
1
20
312
1,398

(23.1)
(26.3)
(20.0)
(6.3)
(37.7)
(25.6)
(30.7)

3,760

(22.2)

Total issues
number
533
3,665
150
416
178
60
306
281
457
198
1,446
687
41
39
45
48
48
492
394
130
25
99
124
78
79
10
35
91
52
858
12
13
19
15
16
53
1,218
4,547
16,958

Appendix Table I ⎯ Continued

Region

Nation

Asia

Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Malaysia
Pakistan
Philippines
Singapore
South Korea
Taiwan
Thailand
Japan
Pacific
Australia
New Zealand
Europe
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
UK
Turkey
Latin Am Argentina
Bermuda
Brazil
Chile
Mexico
North Am Canada
US
Total

Panel A-2: Number of SEOs
Primary only
Secondary only
Number
%
number
%
269 (40.8)
381
(57.7)
199 (94.8)
9
(4.3)
11 (40.7)
16
(59.3)
17 (63.0)
10
(37.0)
1 (100.0)
3 (42.9)
3
(42.9)
77 (66.4)
32
(27.6)
57 (93.4)
4
(6.6)
44 (60.3)
23
(31.5)
11 (68.8)
4
(25.0)
1,011 (64.6)
416
(26.6)
94 (80.3)
20
(17.1)
6 (54.5)
5
(45.5)
13 (54.2)
11
(45.8)
23 (62.2)
8
(21.6)
66 (79.5)
17
(20.5)
34 (56.7)
22
(36.7)
113 (48.5)
111
(47.6)
116 (65.2)
55
(30.9)
9 (60.0)
5
(33.3)
68 (73.1)
18
(19.4)
28 (50.0)
9
(16.1)
24 (46.2)
23
(44.2)
63 (52.1)
46
(38.0)
139 (85.8)
22
(13.6)
10 (71.4)
4
(28.6)
15 (25.9)
41
(70.7)
47 (37.9)
70
(56.5)
20 (27.0)
48
(64.9)
1,382 (85.1)
195
(12.0)
3 (37.5)
4
(50.0)
6 (50.0)
3
(25.0)
13 (61.9)
5
(23.8)
40 (85.1)
6
(12.8)
18 (94.7)
1
(5.3)
33 (55.9)
9
(15.3)
1,337 (75.2)
19
(1.1)
2,086 (46.0)
634
(14.0)
7,506

(60.7)

2,309

37

(18.7)

Combined
number
%
10
(1.5)
2
(1.0)

1
7

(14.3)
(6.0)

6
1
139
3

(8.2)
(6.3)
(8.9)
(2.6)

6

(16.2)

4
9
7
1
7
19
5
12
1

(6.7)
(3.9)
(3.9)
(6.7)
(7.5)
(33.9)
(9.6)
(9.9)
(0.6)

2
7
6
47
1
3
3
1

(3.4)
(5.6)
(8.1)
(2.9)
(12.5)
(25.0)
(14.3)
(2.1)

17
421
1,810

(28.8)
(23.7)
(40.0)

Total issues
number
660
210
27
27
1
7
116
61
73
16
1,566
117
11
24
37
83
60
233
178
15
93
56
52
121
162
14
58
124
74
1,624
8
12
21
47
19
59
1,777
4,530

2,558

(20.7)

12,373

Appendix Table I ⎯ Continued
Region
Asia

Nation

Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Malaysia
Pakistan
Philippines
Singapore
South Korea
Taiwan
Thailand
Japan
Pacific
Australia
New Zealand
Europe
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
UK
Turkey
Latin Am Argentina
Bermuda
Brazil
Chile
Mexico
North Am Canada
US
Total

Primary
only offerings
amount %
11,121 (85.7)
6,479 (94.0)
5,418 (90.6)
3,294 (74.7)
628 (88.2)
1,723 (94.5)
4,756 (87.7)
18,550 (99.8)
11,421 (99.5)
4,648 (99.9)
6,937 (11.9)
9,846 (73.8)
811 (69.4)
1,140 (57.5)
3,345 (58.8)
1,323 (49.9)
960 (41.7)
7,890 (46.3)
16,851 (51.8)
3,057 (97.3)
456 (45.9)
1,912 (66.0)
4,173 (43.7)
5,484 (39.3)
1,794 (71.0)
583 (72.5)
3,208 (41.3)
7,378 (74.2)
8,240 (65.5)
24,697 (56.6)
359 (93.0)
346 (44.1)
2,518 (82.2)
538 (38.1)
1,365 (90.6)
2,942 (72.7)
10,348 (73.7)
174,576 (62.4)
371,115 (59.8)

Panel B-1: Total Amount of Proceeds (US$ mil) raised at IPOs
Secondary
Combined (primary & secondary) offerings
only offerings
primary
secondary
combined total
amount %
amount %
amount %
amount %
63 (0.5)
1,240 (9.6)
551 (4.2)
1,791 (13.8)
93 (1.3)
147 (2.1)
171 (2.5)
318 (4.6)
155 (2.6)
343 (5.7)
66 (1.1)
410 (6.8)
631 (14.3)
241 (5.5)
244 (5.5)
485 (11.0)
84 (11.8)
66 (3.6)
35 (1.9)
101 (5.5)
303 (5.6)
271 (5.0)
94 (1.7)
365 (6.7)
10 (0.1)
24 (0.1)
35 (0.2)
53 (0.5)
4 (0.0)
1 (0.0)
5 (0.0)
4 (0.1)
1 (0.0)
4 (0.1)
246 (0.4) 31,253 (53.4) 20,106 (34.3)
51,359 (87.7)
1,477 (11.1)
647 (4.9) 1,370 (10.3)
2,018 (15.1)
128 (11.0)
39 (3.3)
190 (16.3)
229 (19.6)
417 (21.0)
229 (11.6)
197 (9.9)
426 (21.5)
1,610 (28.3)
445 (7.8)
289 (5.1)
734 (12.9)
88 (3.3)
457 (17.2)
786 (29.6)
1,243 (46.8)
366 (15.9)
491 (21.3)
484 (21.0)
976 (42.4)
3,069 (18.0)
1,478 (8.7) 4,588 (26.9)
6,066 (35.6)
917 (2.8)
5,736 (17.6) 9,029 (27.8)
14,765 (45.4)
57 (1.8)
29 (0.9)
86 (2.7)
362 (36.5)
175 (17.6)
537 (54.1)
704 (24.3)
282 (9.7)
986 (34.0)
1,621 (17.0)
2,076 (21.7) 1,685 (17.6)
3,761 (39.4)
2,197 (15.7)
3,790 (27.1) 2,500 (17.9)
6,290 (45.0)
554 (21.9)
180 (7.1)
734 (29.0)
221 (27.5)
2,984 (38.4)
609 (7.8)
964 (12.4)
1,573 (20.3)
710 (7.1)
893 (9.0)
962 (9.7)
1,854 (18.7)
1,960 (15.6)
914 (7.3) 1,469 (11.7)
2,382 (18.9)
2,637 (6.0)
8,705 (20.0) 7,558 (17.3)
16,264 (37.3)
27 (7.0)
84 (10.7)
251 (32.0)
103 (13.1)
354 (45.2)
230 (7.5)
314 (10.3)
544 (17.8)
212 (15.0)
312 (22.1)
349 (24.7)
661 (46.8)
6 (0.4)
117 (7.8)
19 (1.2)
135 (9.0)
124 (3.1)
505 (12.5)
477 (11.8)
982 (24.3)
2 (0.0)
2,982 (21.2)
706 (5.0)
3,688 (26.3)
20,039 (7.2) 55,891 (20.0) 29,315 (10.5)
85,207 (30.5)
42,526 (6.8) 122,054 (19.7) 85,314 (13.7) 207,368 (33.4)

38

Total
Total
Total
Primary
Secondary
issues
amount %
amount %
amount
12,361 (95.3)
614 (4.7) 12,976
6,626 (96.2)
264 (3.8)
6,889
5,762 (96.3)
222 (3.7)
5,983
3,534 (80.2)
875 (19.8)
4,409
628 (88.2)
84 (11.8)
711
1,790 (98.1)
35 (1.9)
1,824
5,027 (92.7)
397 (7.3)
5,424
18,560 (99.9)
24 (0.1) 18,585
11,425 (99.5)
54 (0.5) 11,479
4,651 (100.0)
1 (0.0)
4,652
38,191 (65.2) 20,352 (34.8) 58,543
10,493 (78.7)
2,848 (21.3) 13,341
850 (72.7)
319 (27.3)
1,168
1,370 (69.1)
614 (30.9)
1,984
3,790 (66.6)
1,899 (33.4)
5,689
1,780 (67.1)
874 (32.9)
2,654
1,452 (63.1)
850 (36.9)
2,302
9,368 (55.0)
7,656 (45.0) 17,025
22,587 (69.4)
9,946 (30.6) 32,533
3,114 (99.1)
29 (0.9)
3,143
818 (82.4)
175 (17.6)
993
2,615 (90.3)
282 (9.7)
2,898
6,248 (65.4)
3,307 (34.6)
9,555
9,274 (66.4)
4,697 (33.6) 13,971
2,348 (92.9)
180 (7.1)
2,528
583 (72.5)
221 (27.5)
805
3,817 (49.1)
3,949 (50.9)
7,765
8,271 (83.2)
1,672 (16.8)
9,943
9,154 (72.8)
3,429 (27.2) 12,583
33,403 (76.6) 10,196 (23.4) 43,598
359 (93.0)
27 (7.0)
385
597 (76.2)
187 (23.8)
783
2,748 (89.7)
314 (10.3)
3,062
850 (60.2)
562 (39.8)
1,412
1,482 (98.4)
24 (1.6)
1,506
3,447 (85.1)
602 (14.9)
4,049
13,330 (95.0)
708 (5.0) 14,038
230,468 (82.4) 49,354 (17.6) 279,822
493,169 (79.4) 127,840 (20.6) 621,009

Appendix Table I ⎯ Continued
Region
Asia

Nation

Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Malaysia
Pakistan
Philippines
Singapore
South Korea
Taiwan
Thailand
Japan
Pacific
Australia
New Zealand
Europe
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
UK
Turkey
Latin Am Argentina
Bermuda
Brazil
Chile
Mexico
North Am Canada
US
Total

Panel B-2: Total Amount of Proceeds (US$ mil) raised at SEOs
Primary
Secondary
Combined (primary & secondary) offerings
only offerings only offerings
primary
secondary
combined total
amount %
amount %
amount %
amount %
amount %
3,773 (21.6) 12,915 (73.8)
506 (2.9)
309 (1.8)
815 (4.7)
3,980 (90.4)
413 (9.4)
2 (0.0)
5 (0.1)
7 (0.2)
685 (43.2)
901 (56.8)
547 (59.3)
376 (40.7)
100 (100.0)
28 (8.1)
210 (61.0)
35 (10.3)
71 (20.6)
106 (30.9)
3,553 (65.2)
1,391 (25.5)
308 (5.7)
196 (3.6)
504 (9.3)
6,236 (87.5)
887 (12.5)
9,649 (66.7)
3,845 (26.6)
610 (4.2)
365 (2.5)
975 (6.7)
644 (57.6)
214 (19.1)
231 (20.6)
30 (2.7)
261 (23.3)
57,501 (56.6) 26,901 (26.5)
7,013 (6.9) 10,162 (10.0)
17,175 (16.9)
2,932 (56.4)
1,921 (36.9)
146 (2.8)
203 (3.9)
349 (6.7)
213 (41.9)
296 (58.1)
576 (41.2)
822 (58.8)
1,510 (39.6)
1,885 (49.5)
264 (6.9)
151 (4.0)
415 (10.9)
1,607 (60.9)
1,031 (39.1)
2,987 (45.5)
2,894 (44.1)
227 (3.5)
457 (7.0)
684 (10.4)
7,868 (22.3) 27,012 (76.4)
319 (0.9)
136 (0.4)
455 (1.3)
13,264 (49.1) 12,862 (47.6)
285 (1.1)
599 (2.2)
884 (3.3)
277 (53.4)
200 (38.5)
24 (4.6)
18 (3.4)
42 (8.0)
1,740 (47.5)
1,238 (33.8)
233 (6.3)
456 (12.4)
689 (18.8)
1,728 (37.9)
1,001 (22.0)
1,194 (26.2)
632 (13.9)
1,826 (40.1)
4,262 (55.8)
2,280 (29.9)
491 (6.4)
600 (7.9)
1,091 (14.3)
18,485 (48.1) 18,377 (47.8)
495 (1.3) 1,053 (2.7)
1,548 (4.0)
5,462 (75.2)
1,771 (24.4)
12 (0.2)
15 (0.2)
27 (0.4)
155 (16.2)
805 (83.8)
5,674 (43.3)
6,930 (52.9)
192 (1.5)
303 (2.3)
496 (3.8)
1,378 (14.9)
7,314 (79.0)
305 (3.3)
266 (2.9)
571 (6.2)
1,226 (5.9) 14,654 (70.7)
1,285 (6.2) 3,566 (17.2)
4,851 (23.4)
35,522 (50.8) 28,559 (40.8)
3,459 (4.9) 2,411 (3.4)
5,870 (8.4)
69 (18.0)
290 (75.5)
14
11
25
741 (61.5)
90 (7.5)
136 (11.3)
239 (19.8)
375 (31.1)
3,285 (33.9)
2,425 (25.0)
2,469 (25.5) 1,517 (15.6)
3,985 (41.1)
1,613 (18.1)
3,544 (39.7)
1,732 (19.4) 2,044 (22.9)
3,776 (42.3)
524 (85.9)
86 (14.1)
3,326 (57.7)
493 (8.6)
993 (17.2)
953 (16.5)
1,946 (33.8)
43,612 (69.1)
3,341 (5.3) 12,296 (19.5) 3,856 (6.1)
16,152 (25.6)
182,558 (37.9) 113,547 (23.5) 109,785 (22.8) 76,298 (15.8) 186,083 (38.6)
429,293 (43.6) 303,717 (30.8) 145,060 (14.7) 106,921 (10.9) 251,981 (25.6)

39

Total
Total
Total
Primary
Secondary
issues
amount %
amount %
amount
4,279 (24.4) 13,224 (75.6) 17,504
3,982 (90.5)
419 (9.5)
4,401
685 (43.2)
901 (56.8)
1,587
547 (59.3)
376 (40.7)
923
100 (100.0)
100
63 (18.4)
280 (81.6)
344
3,862 (70.9)
1,587 (29.1)
5,449
6,236 (87.5)
887 (12.5)
7,123
10,259 (70.9)
4,210 (29.1) 14,468
875 (78.2)
244 (21.8)
1,119
64,514 (63.5) 37,062 (36.5) 101,576
3,078 (59.2)
2,124 (40.8)
5,202
213 (41.9)
296 (58.1)
508
576 (41.2)
822 (58.8)
1,398
1,774 (46.6)
2,036 (53.4)
3,809
1,607 (60.9)
1,031 (39.1)
2,638
3,214 (49.0)
3,350 (51.0)
6,564
8,187 (23.2) 27,148 (76.8) 35,335
13,549 (50.2) 13,461 (49.8) 27,010
301 (58.0)
218 (42.0)
519
1,973 (53.8)
1,694 (46.2)
3,667
2,922 (64.2)
1,633 (35.8)
4,555
4,753 (62.3)
2,880 (37.7)
7,633
18,979 (49.4) 19,431 (50.6) 38,410
5,475 (75.4)
1,785 (24.6)
7,260
155 (16.2)
805 (83.8)
960
5,866 (44.8)
7,233 (55.2) 13,100
1,683 (18.2)
7,579 (81.8)
9,263
2,511 (12.1) 18,220 (87.9) 20,731
38,981 (55.7) 30,971 (44.3) 69,952
83 (21.7)
301 (78.3)
384
877 (72.7)
329 (27.3)
1,206
5,754 (59.3)
3,942 (40.7)
9,695
3,345 (37.4)
5,588 (62.6)
8,933
524 (85.9)
86 (14.1)
610
4,319 (74.9)
1,446 (25.1)
5,765
55,908 (88.6)
7,197 (11.4) 63,105
292,343 (60.6) 189,844 (39.4) 482,187
574,352 (58.3) 410,639 (41.7) 984,991

