NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FOREIGN SUBSIDIZATION AND EXCESS CAPACITY
Bruce A. Blonigen
Wesley W. Wilson
Working Paper 11798
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11798

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2005

This research was supported by NSF grant 0416854. We thank Emma Aisbett, Joshua Aizenmann,
Menzie Chinn, Ronald Davies, Charles Engel, Robert Feenstra, Ann Harrison, Maria Muniagurria,
Maury Obstfeld, Aris Protopapadakis, Andrew Rose, Kathryn Russ, Bob Staiger, and seminar participants
at the Santa Cruz Center for International Studies conference, the University of California-Berkeley
and the University of Wisconsin-Madison for helpful comments. We also thank Laura Kerr- Valentic,
Anson Soderbery and Paul Thoma for excellent research assistance, and Benjamin Liebman and Chad
Bown for sharing data with us. Any remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2005 by Bruce A. Blonigen and Wesley W. Wilson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Foreign Subsidization and Excess Capacity
Bruce A. Blonigen and Wesley W. Wilson
NBER Working Paper No. 11798
November 2005, Revised November 2007
JEL No. F13, L11
ABSTRACT
The U.S. steel industry has long held that foreign subsidization and excess capacity has led to its
long-run demise, yet no one has formally examined this hypothesis. In this paper, we incorporate
foreign subsidization considerations into a model based on Staiger and Wolak’s (1992)
cyclical-dumping framework and illustrate testable implications of both cyclical excess capacity and
structural excess capacity stemming from foreign subsidization. We then use detailed product- and
foreign country-level data on steel exports to the U.S. market from 1979 through 2002 to estimate
these excess capacity effects. The results provide strong evidence of both cyclical and structural
excess capacity effects for exports to the U.S. market. However, the effects are confined to such a
narrow range of country-product combinations that it is unlikely that such effects were a significant
factor in the fortunes of U.S. steel firms over the past decades.
Bruce A. Blonigen
Department of Economics
University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403
and NBER
bruceb@uoregon.edu
Wesley W. Wilson
Department of Economics
University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403
wwilson@uoregon.edu

"I take this action to give our domestic steel industry an opportunity to
adjust to surges in foreign imports, recognizing the harm from 50
years of foreign government intervention in the global steel market,
which has resulted in bankruptcies, serious dislocation, and job loss."
(President George W. Bush in press statement announcing new
Safeguard measures on imported steel, March 5, 2002)
1. Introduction
For decades, the U.S. steel industry has long held that distortionary policies of
foreign governments have led to its long-run demise. The main argument, as described and
developed by Howell et al. (1988), is that foreign government subsidies cause foreign
producers to have excess capacities. High protective trade barriers in foreign countries allow
the foreign producers to sell at high prices in their own market and then dump the excess on
the U.S. The understandable reaction of the U.S. government is to erect antidumping and
countervailing duty laws, safeguard actions, etc., to protect the U.S. industry from such
behavior. (Mastel, 1999)
Most economists have dismissed the effect of foreign subsidization and excess
capacity and, instead, point to other factors as responsible for the long-run decline in
employment in U.S. steel. For example, Oster (1982) documents the slow adoption of new
technologies by the U.S. steel industry. A related trend has been the rise of minimill steel
production, which uses scrap metal in a steel production process that is indisputably lower
cost than integrated mills, but has historically produced lower quality steel.1 Crandall (1996),
Moore (1996), and Tornell (1996) have argued that minimill production may be more
important for explaining the decline of large integrated steel producers in the U.S. than
imports. Alternatively, Tornell (1996) provides a model and evidence suggesting that
powerful labor unions have been able to appropriate rents to such an extent that U.S. steel
1

Over time, minimill production has successively innovated into making increasingly higher-quality steel
products which likely puts even more pressure on traditional integrated steel mills.

2

firms have rationally disinvested over time. Finally, economists have suggested a familiar
political theme to the steel industry’s history of trade protection. Lenway et al. (1996) and
Morck et al. (2001) find evidence that the firms that lobby for protection are typically larger,
less efficient, less innovative, pay higher wages, and habitually seek protection versus firms
that do not lobby. A natural conclusion is that trade protection is not to prevent unfair
competition, but rather the result of rent-seeking activities by less-efficient and noncompetitive firms.

Rather than simply dismiss the steel industry’s arguments, this paper considers
excess capacity effects and examines whether the data support that such effects occur
and, if so, are having a significant effect on the U.S. steel industry. In addressing this
issue, we find it is important to distinguish between cyclical excess capacity and
structural excess capacity. A model of cyclical excess capacity is developed by Staiger
and Wolak (1992) in which a foreign monopolist supplies its own protected home market,
but may also export to a competitive market. The foreign monopolist is assumed to have
two costs – production and capacity. The export price lies above the (short-run)
production costs, but below the total (long-run) production plus capacity costs. Capacity
decisions are made before the production decision, and the foreign firm’s domestic market
experiences random demand shocks. This can lead to short-run (or cyclical) excess capacity
in low demand periods that is then sold at market-clearing prices in the competitive export
market and provides an explanation for rational cyclical dumping by the foreign firm.
Foreign subsidization is not modeled in the Staiger and Wolak framework and, thus,
obviously not a necessary element for cyclical excess capacity effects. We modify the model
to consider the effects of subsidization by a foreign government and demonstrate that foreign
subsidization leads foreign firms to invest in more capacity than without subsidization. This

3

increases the likelihood and/or increases the volume of their exports to the U.S. market. We
term this the structural excess capacity effect. We also demonstrate that such foreign
subsidization can exacerbate cyclical excess capacity effects.
To our knowledge, there are only a few studies that have empirically tested for
positive export supply responses to negative domestic demand shocks (i.e., cyclical excess
capacity effects)2, and none that have formally tested for the effects of foreign subsidization
(structural excess capacity effects).3 The latter hypothesis is difficult to examine due to data
availability on foreign subsidization programs. However, the U.S. steel industry has filed
hundreds of countervailing duty (CVD) investigations to identify and quantify the effects of
foreign government subsidization against a fairly exhaustive list of relevant steel products
and foreign country sources over the past decades. As a part of these CVD investigations, the
relevant U.S. agencies publicly document a history of all foreign government subsidization
practices in each case. They also provide estimates of the value of each subsidy program as a
percent of the firm’s export sales and determine which ones are significant enough to cause
injury to the domestic industry. These data provide a unique opportunity to directly estimate
the effects of purported foreign subsidy programs on foreign exports to the U.S. market.
We test for both cyclical and structural excess-capacity-related effects using data on
exports of 37 different steel products from 22 different foreign countries to the U.S. market

2

The most closely related empirical literature are papers that examine whether export supply increases
when domestic industries have excess capacity during low-domestic-demand periods. For example,
Dunlevy (1980) finds that “export sales are inversely related to the pressure on domestic capacity” (p. 131)
in an examination of aggregate export behavior for the U.S. and the United Kingdom. Yamawaki (1984)
finds evidence in support of the hypothesis that Japanese steel export prices are lower in periods of excess
capacity. Crowley (2006) develops a model where firms dump into export into foreign markets when home
demand is low and shows that the foreign government improves foreign welfare in such situations with an
antidumping duty (AD). Her empirical analysis shows that the U.S. government agencies are more likely
to rule affirmatively when foreign demand is weak. She does not test directly for cyclical dumping effects
from negative home demand shocks.
3
Howell et al. (1988) and U.S. countervailing duty (CVD) investigations provide figures on purported
foreign subsidies in the steel industry, but does not examine how such subsidies affect market outcomes,
particularly the supply of steel to the U.S. market.

4

from 1979 through 2002. Our statistical estimates provide evidence for cyclical excess
capacity effects on exports to the U.S. markets. We also find statistical evidence of
structural excess capacity effects -- foreign subsidization significantly increases export
volumes to the U.S. Importantly, however, we find these excess capacity effects to be quite
isolated in exports to the U.S. steel market. We find such effects only for less-developed
country sources in our data, particularly the Latin American countries of Argentina, Brazil,
and Venezuela, which account for a small share of U.S. steel consumption. The very narrow
scope of these excess capacity effects in the U.S. steel market make it unlikely to be a
significant source of the U.S. steelmakers troubles over the past few decades.
The paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, we present a simple version of

the Staiger and Wolak (1992) model to illustrate cyclical excess capacity effects on steel
exports to the U.S. market. We then extend the model to draw out structural excess
capacity implications of foreign subsidization. Section 3 discusses the detailed data on
foreign subsidization that has come out of hundreds of U.S. CVD steel cases for the past
few decades and whether an initial look at the data suggests that foreign subsidization
may significantly impact the U.S. steel market. Sections 4 and 5 describe the statistical
approach we use to examine our excess-capacity hypotheses and present our results,
respectively.

2. Conceptual Framework
This section presents a simple version of the cyclical-dumping model in Staiger and
Wolak (1992) and shows how demand shocks in the foreign firm’s domestic market (foreign
demand) can lead to cyclical dumping of excess capacity into the U.S. (export) market. We
then introduce foreign subsidies into the model and illustrate how foreign subsidization leads

5

to testable implications about the probability and magnitude of exports, as well as the
responsiveness of foreign export supply to the U.S. market to foreign demand shocks.
Following Staiger and Wolak (1992), there is a foreign firm which is a monopolist in
its own domestic market, but which may also sell products to the export (hereinafter, the
U.S.) market. The demand function in the foreign firm’s own market is a simple linear
function of price, wherein the intercept (α) is an i.i.d. random variable. That is, demand is
given by Q F = α − P F , where QF and PF are quantity and price for the foreign market,
respectively. In the U.S. market, the foreign firm is a price-taker facing an exogenouslygiven price.4 Short-run marginal costs (c) are constant until capacity is reached, at which
point marginal costs are infinite.5 Capacity costs are assumed to be increasing in capacity
and represented by a simple quadratic function, η0 K + η1 K 2 , where η0 ,η1 >0.6
The timing of decisions is as follows. The foreign firm first makes its capacity
decision before the demand shock is realized. After the demand shock is realized, the foreign
firm chooses how much to produce and sell in its own domestic market and export to the U.S.
market.

2.1. Capacity Choice
Capacity decisions are made prior to the realization of the foreign firm’s domestic
demand level. Modeling of the capacity decision is based then on expected profits, with an

4

The assumption of an exogenously-given U.S. price differs from Staiger and Wolak (1992), which
assumes that the U.S. price is determined through market competition between the foreign firm and a
competitive fringe in the U.S. market. As discussed below, the very small market shares of individual
foreign-country import sources in the U.S. steel market (i.e., the foreign firm is a fringe player in the U.S.
market) makes the assumption of an exogenously-determined U.S. price from the perspective of the foreign
firm a reasonable one. Such an assumption also makes the model much easier to solve and describe.
5
We make this assumption for simplicity, but would obtain similar implications for increasing marginal
costs, provided such costs approach infinity as production nears capacity.
6
This is a second modification of the Staiger and Wolak set-up, which assumed linear capacity costs. This
treatment allows for closed-form solutions.

6

expected value of the demand level defined by α e . Expected profits are maximized with
choices of the capacity level (K) and the domestic output level (QF) and the export level (QE).
That is, the firm solves the following expected profit maximization problem:

Max Eπ = (α e − Q F )Q F − cQ F + ( PUS − c)QUS − η0 K − η1 K 2

K , Q F , QUS

(1)

subject to K ≥ Q + Q .
F

US

The optimal domestic output and export levels chosen at this stage are planned levels that can
be changed after demand is realized in the foreign firm’s market. In contrast, we assume that
the optimal capacity choice chosen in this stage cannot be changed after demand is realized.
We initially focus on the case where the U.S. price is large enough to warrant sales
given capacity i.e., PUS − c > 0, but not so large as to warrant capacity investment in its own
right; i.e., PUS − c −η0 < 0. 7 This assumption means that the foreign firm will not build
capacity intended for production and sales to the U.S. market given expected foreign demand.
This follows assumptions in Staiger and Wolak (1992) and the steel industry’s arguments that
these foreign suppliers would not export to the U.S. under normal circumstances. The
optimal capacity decision in this case, K*, equates marginal revenue with (long-run) marginal
costs defined by production costs and marginal capacity costs, yielding the following
condition:
*

K * = QF =

(α e − c −η0 )

(2(1 + η1 ))

.

(2)

As would be expected, capacity and, hence, expected output increases in the expected
demand intercept, and falls with increases in production costs and capacity costs.

7

As we discuss later, one effect of subsidies can be to affect the capacity from a case in which the firm
does not consider the US market in its investment decisions to a case where it does. This is developed and
discussed later.

7

Figure 1 depicts the optimal capacity decision under these assumptions, where the
price is below long-run marginal costs (production plus capacity costs – c+η0), but above
marginal production costs (c). Long-run marginal costs intersect with expected marginal
revenue at point A, yielding an optimal capacity of K*.

2.2. Production and Export Decision
In the second period, the foreign demand parameter is realized (which we note as α ),
and the foreign firm maximizes current profits by choosing the level of output in its own
domestic market (QF) and exports to the U.S. market (QUS), given it’s optimal capacity choice
in the first period (denoted as K*). In this case, the capacity decision is made and the demand
shock is realized. Profits are defined by:

Max
π = (α − Q F )Q F − cQ F + ( PUS − c)QUS subject to Q F + QUS ≤ K *,
F
US

Q ,Q

(3)

Solving (3), it is easy to see (and show) that the foreign firm’s output is determined
by selling all of the output that can be produced given capacity in its domestic market (i.e.,
*

Q F = K * ) or by allocating capacity between its domestic market and the U.S. market (i.e.,
*

QF =

α − PUS
2

*

*

and QUS = K * − Q F = K * −

α − PUS
2

). For realizations of the demand

parameter greater or equal to the expected demand ( α e ≤ α ) it is clear that all production
will be sold in the foreign market with no export sales. However, for low enough realizations
of demand below expected demand, the firm may divert export sales to the U.S. market.
Such export sales would be considered dumping under a cost-based definition as the U.S.

8

price is below the firm’s long-run marginal costs, and this is then what we call cyclical
excess capacity (or cyclical dumping) effects.8
Figure 2 depicts outcomes for various foreign demand realizations. MRExpected in
Figure 2 represents the marginal revenue schedule when the realized foreign market demand
exactly equals the expected value (α=αe) and the equilibrium production occurs at point A.
Note that the equilibrium occurs at an intersection point above the constant marginal costs of
production (c), since the firm must also cover per-unit capacity costs which are not shown
explicitly in the Figure 2. Given our assumptions on the firm’s marginal costs relative to the
U.S. price, the firm sells all its production to its own foreign market in this case and none to
the U.S. market.
Now consider other possible demand realizations. For any demand realizations
where the associated foreign marginal revenue schedule is above marginal revenue in the
export market (PUS) out to the given capacity (K*), it is clear that the foreign firm sells all
production into the foreign market. This is true for both MRHigh and MRExpected in the figure.
For a low enough demand realization, represented by MRLow, the marginal revenue in the
foreign market is below the marginal revenue from sales in the U.S. market after point D, and
the firm optimally ships dumped exports (represented by the distance between points C and
D) to the U.S. market, while selling the remaining production (distance between the vertical
axis and point D) to the foreign market. Thus, while the U.S. price cannot cover both
production and long-run capacity costs on its own, the firm will rationally choose to sell into
the U.S. market in the short-run for unexpectedly low demand realizations.

8

We note that such export behavior would also be considered dumping under a price-based definition in
this model, provided the equilibrium foreign price is above the U.S. price.

9

2.3. Government Subsidies
We now consider how government subsidization affects the firm’s choices and
market outcomes in this model. We assume government subsidization comes in the form of
capacity subsidization and specifically model such a subsidy (s>0) as entering the capacity
cost term in the following manner: (η0 − s ) K + η1 K 2 .9 This simple setup illustrates that
subsidies directly reduce capacity costs. The resulting objective functions and equilibrium
solutions are the same as above after substituting η0-s for η0. It is straightforward then to
show that capacity is increasing in the level of the subsidy. If the subsidy is large enough
such that PUS − c − (η0 − s ) > 0 then the original capacity decision results in planned exports
(sales to the US). This is depicted in Figure 3, where the subsidization drives the capacity
choice out to KS* (from a non-subsidized capacity of KNS*), such that exports to the U.S. will
occur even when realized foreign demand equals expected demand. In this case, the firm
would export the production represented by the distance between E and F for a realized
demand equal to the expected demand (MRExpected schedule). This is then what we term a
structural excess capacity effect on U.S. exports from this foreign market.
Interestingly, the model shows that foreign subsidization (the source of structural
excess capacity) can also exacerbate the cyclical excess capacity effects. In comparing
demand shocks around KNS* (no subsidization) to KS* (subsidization) in Figure 3, the range
of foreign demand realizations where the firm would be serving only the foreign firm’s own
market is much smaller in the case of subsidization. Thus, there will be greater range of

9

Many of the foreign subsidization programs found in CVD investigations are connected with capacity
costs, such as equity infusions to rescue failing firms. However, export and production subsidies are also
considered as well in CVD investigations. Fortunately for our purposes, hypotheses about the effects of
subsidization on exports are qualitatively unaffected by modeling capacity subsidization, as we do here, or
by modeling foreign subsidization as a per-unit subsidy on sales to the export market that would effectively
increase the price the foreign firm receives in the export market (PUS + s) or as a production subsidy that
effectively lowers production costs (c-s).

10

demand shocks that affect export supply in the model and, hence, a higher probability of
cyclical excess capacity effects for the U.S. market. This is our third excess capacity
hypothesis that we explore more below in our empirical analysis – foreign subsidization can
exacerbate cyclical excess capacity effects.
An important assumption in our analysis to this point is that the foreign firm’s costs
relative to the U.S. price of steel would not warrant the firm building initial capacity to serve
the export market. This follows Staiger and Wolak’s assumptions and the contention of the
U.S. steel producers that these foreign producers are exporting due to excess capacity issues,
not an inherent comparative advantage in producing steel. We’ll term this the inefficient
foreign firm assumption. If one relaxes this assumption so that the foreign firm is efficient
enough to initially build capacity for the export market given expected demand, the model
would still predict that exports would be negatively related to foreign demand shocks.
However, excess capacity effects on exports would only apply to the additional amount of
exports from a negative demand shock beyond the “normal” supply of exports for an
expected foreign demand realization. Whether foreign subsidization would continue to
exacerbate cyclical excess capacity effects depends on how efficient the foreign firm is. If
the unsubsidized foreign firm is inefficient enough that it would stop exporting to the U.S.
market for high foreign demand realizations, then this effect would still remain in the model
as well. Finally, structural excess capacity effects would be unaffected by relaxing the
inefficient foreign firm assumption.
In summary, the model in this section provides three excess capacity effects that we
will explore in our empirical analysis. First, if foreign markets are protected, negative
foreign demand shocks will generate greater exports to the U.S. market even without any
subsidization by the foreign government. This is the cyclical excess capacity (or dumping)
hypothesis. Second, foreign subsidization will lead to greater exports to the U.S. market –

11

the structural excess capacity hypothesis. Finally, under certain conditions, foreign
subsidization will lead to larger cyclical excess capacity effects.
The next section provides information on foreign subsidization in the steel industry
uncovered by U.S. CVD investigations and a preliminary analysis of the structural excess
capacity hypothesis. This is followed by section 4, where we develop an empirical
specification based on this section’s modeling to examine the statistical evidence for all three
hypotheses.

3. U.S. countervailing duty investigations and information on foreign subsidization

Due to the potential effects of foreign subsidization on a domestic industry, the
U.S. and World Trade Organization statutes allow domestic industries to obtain relief
from imports that are subsidized by foreign governments through the use of CVD
protection. In these cases, an ad valorem subsidy rate is calculated that, once applied as a
CVD, is intended to offset the advantage gained in the domestic market by the exporting
foreign firms due to subsidization by their government. In the U.S., CVD calculations
are done by the International Trade Administration (ITA) of the U.S. Department of
Commerce with CVD determinations for each case published in the Federal Register.
These CVD determinations document all foreign subsidization programs related to the
products subject to the U.S. CVD investigation and provide an ad valorem subsidy rate
for each of these programs, as well as a total ad valorem subsidy rate which is the CVD if
the imports are found to be causing injury to the domestic industry.
The ITA determinations provide us with a wealth of information on foreign
subsidization, including histories of foreign subsidization programs with start and end
dates for various programs. These investigations consider an exhaustive list of programs

12

and report information on many programs listed by the U.S. petitioners, including those
for which no subsidization benefit was found. As we document below, the U.S. steel
industry has filed hundreds of CVD cases since 1980, many of which have been found to
have insufficient evidence of foreign subsidization or deemed too insignificant to be
injurious to the domestic industry. Thus, it is quite unlikely that there are any significant
foreign government programs subsidizing steel exports to the U.S. that have not been
examined by these CVD investigations.
While we have excellent information on the occurrence of foreign subsidization
of steel imports in the U.S., there is obvious measurement error in the ITA’s calculation
of the degree of foreign subsidization. The ITA’s methodology for calculating an ad
valorem subsidy rate is to add up the monetary value of subsidy afforded to the foreign
firm and divide this by a corresponding revenue stream. For example, if the subsidy is
connected with all of the firms exports (not just to the U.S.), it divides the subsidy benefit
by the total value of the firms’ exports. If it is a production subsidy, it divides by the
firms total sales, both domestic and foreign. Francois, Palmeter and Anspacher (1991)
discuss many of the economic problems with this methodology.10 Another significant
issue is the treatment of “non-recurring” subsidies, such as one-time equity infusions by a
foreign government to stop a firm from going bankrupt. Translating the effect of such an
event into an ad valorem subsidy that affects the market in subsequent years requires a
significant number of assumptions. Our data appendix describes these ITA procedures in

10

A related literature in the trade law area discusses the difference between a competitive-benefits
approach that focuses on the market advantage gained by the foreign firm from subsidization (i.e., an
economics-based approach) and a “cash-flow approach” that the ITA uses in its calculations. For example,
see Diamond (1990).

13

more detail, as well as our construction of a subsidy rate measure over time from
information in ITA CVD determinations.
As mentioned above, the U.S. steel industry has a substantial history of filing
CVD cases, with 289 cases filed on steel products from 1980 through 2002.11 The most
active periods were in the early 1980s leading up to the significant Voluntary Restraint
Agreements (VRAs) with virtually all significant importers beginning in 1985, a large
group of cases when these VRAs were allowed to expire in 1992, and significant activity
in the late 1990s and early 2000s prior to the steel safeguard actions imposed by the U.S.
in 2002.
Table 1 provides a more detailed look at U.S. CVD activity in steel products over
the 1980s and 1990s from a foreign country level. The first three columns report the
number of CVD cases by foreign country source and the number of “successful” cases
through either an affirmative decision by U.S. authorities or through a private suspension
agreement.12 There is substantial variation in the frequency with which countries are
investigated and the frequency with which they end in “successful” outcomes for the U.S.
steel industry. The primary activity has been against EC/EU countries, Korea, South
Africa, and the Latin American countries of Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico. Success
rates are generally much lower with respect to the EC/EU countries.13

11

Throughout the paper, we define “steel products” as those falling under Standard Industrial Classification
331, including steel mill products, pipes and tubes, and wire-related products. Our starting year is 1980, as
this was the first year under new AD and CVD rules that are associated with a large increase in subsequent
filing activity.
12
These “successful” cases do not include ones that were withdrawn in periods before comprehensive
VRAs were negotiated since it is not always clear whether the case was withdrawn due to the impending
VRA or a decision by the petitioners that the case would not be successful.
13
Interestingly, Japan was never subject to a CVD investigation in steel products during this period. China
likewise experienced no CVD investigation, but this is due to ITA’s ruling that such calculations are not
appropriate for non-market economies.

14

The next two columns of Table 1 provide average CVDs for affirmative cases and
for all non-suspended cases. As above, we assume a zero CVD for the non-affirmative
cases. To the extent that the ITA’s CVD calculations were a good measure of the
effective subsidization rates, these columns provide evidence for where foreign
subsidization is greatest. By these calculated rates, subsidization is more extensive in
Argentina, Brazil, Canada (though only for the few cases investigated), Italy, South
Africa, and Spain. In our statistical analysis below, we use the information on
government subsidization reported in these CVD cases to “directly” examine whether
such foreign subsidization increases exports into the U.S. steel market.
We can more specifically examine the efficacy of the structural excess capacity
hypothesis by looking at the extent of the U.S. steel market affected by the foreign
subsidization uncovered in ITA investigations. High subsidization rates may mean little
if it is only occurring for a small percentage of products. In the final two columns of
Table 1, we provide a snapshot of the percentage of each country’s exports of steel to the
U.S. market that are covered by a CVD as of 2002 and then the share of total U.S.
consumption accounted for by the foreign country’s exports of steel. Thus, multiplying
the two percentages together (in decimal form) provides a measure of the percent of the
total U.S. steel market affected by foreign subsidization by the particular foreign country.
For example, imports of steel from Canada account for 4.4% of the U.S. steel market in
2002 and 0.3% of these Canadian imports are subject to a CVD. Thus, the CVDs in place
as of 2002 indicate that 0.01% (0.003 × 0.044 × 100) of the U.S. steel market is affected
by Canadian subsidization of steel exports to the U.S. France, Germany and Italy have
the largest share of their U.S. exports affect by CVD orders and relatively large shares of

15

the U.S. market. But even the biggest impact – Germany – translates into just 0.34% of
the U.S. market affected by its subsidization. Totaling up across all these country sources
(which represents virtually all of the imports into the U.S.) provides an estimate that
1.32% of the U.S. market is affected by foreign subsidization.
To the extent that 2002 trade volumes are depressed by the presence of the CVD,
this 1.32% number may not be representative of the portion of the steel market that was
affected by foreign subsidization. As an alternative, we take the 1990 trade volumes of
the products with CVD orders in 2002 as a share of total 1990 U.S. steel market.
Virtually all the CVDs in place in 2002 became effective after the 1983-1992 VRA
period. Using 1990 trade volumes, the estimate is 2.61% of the total U.S. steel market
affected by foreign government subsidization, as revealed by the CVD investigations. As
a percent of imports only, not the total U.S. steel market, almost 13% of imports are
affected using the 1990 trade volumes.
We can also calculate an approximate trade-weighted CVD rate across all
imported U.S. steel mill products for 2002. For trade weights, we use product-level
import volumes reported in the American Iron and Steel Institute (AISI) Annual
Statistical Reports. We calculate a trade-weighted 2002 CVD rate for imported U.S. steel
mill products of 0.35% when using 2002 trade volumes, and 0.84% when using 1990
trade volumes.14
In summary, the data from U.S. CVD cases are not suggestive of large effects on
the U.S. steel market from foreign subsidization. The most generous numbers suggest
that 13% of imports are affected, translating into 2.6% of the total U.S. steel market with
14

The product categories reported in the AISI Annual Statistical Reprots are sometimes larger than that
covered by the U.S. CVD order. In this sense, the trade-weighted CVD we calculate will be an
overestimate.

16

an average trade-weighted CVD on imports of 0.84%. We next turn from a descriptive
approach of ITA’s calculations of CVD rates to a more formal statistical analysis of
whether excess capacity is prevalent in the foreign markets.

4. Empirical Specification and Data Description

In this section we develop an empirical specification based on the model in
section 2 to estimate cyclical and structural excess capacity effects, as well as describe
the data we use to examine our hypotheses.
4.1. Empirical Specification

Following the model in section 2, the empirical specification assumes each
foreign country is a fringe competitor with respect to the U.S. market. The second-to-last
column of Table 1 suggests that this is a reasonable assumption. Canada is the foreign
country with the largest U.S. market share at 4.4% in 2002. Brazil and Mexico are next
with less than 3%. Germany, Korea and Japan have a little more than 1%, and all other
countries have around 0.5% or less of the U.S. market.15 This assumption of fringe
competition simplifies the empirical analysis through the notion that each country acts as
a price-taker in the U.S. market and acts independently of import decisions by other
foreign suppliers to the U.S. market.
An important feature of the data available is fairly disaggregated product level
detail by country. As discussed more below and in the data appendix, we have U.S.
import data by country source for 37 different, but consistently-defined, steel product

15

While these are 2002 numbers, these market shares change very little over the previous two decades and
were, of course, much smaller before 1980.

17

categories. Identification of our coefficients of interest comes from substantial variation
in the data across country-product combinations.
Given these considerations, we estimate the following base empirical
specification, pooling observations over import source countries (i), products (j), and
years (t):
ln EX ijt = α + β1 ln USPijt + β 2 ln FDemit + β 3 ln Subsidyijt + β 4 ln TProtijt + ε ijt . (4)
We estimate this specification using data that is first-differenced by countryproduct combinations to control for unobserved heterogeneity along these dimensions
and as a way to address time series issues with some of our variables. We also include
separate product, country, and year dummies in this first-differenced specification.
Our dependent variable in (4), ln EXijt, denotes exports to the U.S. measured as
the log of net tons for product j from country i in year t. The first regressor, ln USPijt is a
measure of the logged real foreign currency price for product j available on the U.S.
market in year t. Given the small individual market shares of foreign countries in the U.S.
steel market noted in Table 1, we assume here (as in our theory) that the U.S. price is
taken exogenously by the exporters. Since the U.S. price must be translated into the
appropriate foreign currency and adjusted into real terms, this variable is country-specific,
as well as product- and year-specific. We expect a positive sign on this variable’s
coefficient since a higher realized price for their exports to the U.S. would make the
foreign firm (modeled in section 2 above) more likely to build capacity for exports to the
U.S. and/or divert current production to the U.S. market for a given realization of foreign
demand..

18

The variable ln FDemit is a primary focus variable and is constructed as a logged
measure of demand for steel products in the foreign market. We expect a negative
coefficient on this variable, as theoretically a higher demand in a foreign firm’s own
market leads to lower exports to the U.S. market. Such a result would be consistent with
the cyclical excess capacity (or cyclical dumping) hypothesis of Staiger and Wolak. We
use real industrial value added data taken from the World Bank’s World Development
Indicators to proxy for foreign demand for steel products since steel is an intermediate
input into most industrial activities.16 We also examine whether foreign subsidization
exacerbates any cyclical dumping effects by interacting the foreign demand variable with
our measure of foreign subsidization, which we describe next.
The term ln Subsidyijt is the log of 1 plus the ad valorem foreign government
subsidization rate that we construct from ITA determinations. A statistically significant
positive coefficient on this term would confirm a structural excess capacity effect of
foreign subsidization on U.S. steel markets. Due to concerns with how the ITA
calculates the magnitude of these ad valorem subsidy rates, we also examine the
sensitivity of our results when we instead use a simple dummy variable for the presence
of foreign subsidization.
The term ln TProtijt denotes a matrix of variables measuring special U.S. trade
protection programs that occurred during our sample, including CVDs, antidumping
duties, VRAs in the latter half of the 1980s, and safeguard tariffs. We assume that
standard ad valorem tariff rates are controlled for by year dummies included in the
regression. We add “1” to the CVD, antidumping duties and safeguard tariffs and log
16

Industrial production indexes or real GDP data give qualitatively identical results in our statistical
analysis. Real value added was not available for Taiwan and we use an industrial production index instead.
See our data appendix for further details.

19

them, whereas the VRA coverage is a binary variable. We expect the coefficients on
these trade protection variables to be negative.

4.2. Data

Our sample consists of 22 countries, 37 steel product categories, and years 1979
through 2002. These data dimensions were largely determined by data availability of
steel imports which we draw from yearly volumes of the American Iron and Steel
Institute’s (AISI’s) Annual Steel Report. The 22 countries are the historically largest
exporters of steel to the U.S. market. They include the countries listed in Table 1, as well
as Austria (1979-2000), Finland (1979-1999), and Greece (1979-1987) for which data do
not span the entire sample period.17 The strength of the AISI Annual Steel Reports is
reporting of data by consistent product categories throughout the sample period, ensuring
that virtually all steel products are covered in our sample.18 A few categories were
combined to provide consistency throughout and the data appendix provides a list of the
product categories covered.
Data on U.S. prices comes from producer price indexes published by the U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics and available from their website at:
http://www.bls.gov/ppi/home.htm. In unreported results, we alternatively used steel price
data obtained from Purchasing Magazine which yielded qualitatively identical results
17

All other countries’ observations span all years of the sample with the exception of South Africa, for
which the years 1987-1995 are not reported due to the anti-apartheid embargo imposed on that country.
We get qualitatively identical statistical results whether we include South Africa in the sample or not.
While we include China in our sample, the U.S. does not conduct CVD investigations for non-market
economies. However, we note that we get qualitatively identical statistical results whether we include
China in the sample or not.
18
An alternative would be to collect data by Harmonized Tariff System (HTS) codes down to even the 10digit level. However, HTS codes, especially for a highly-scrutinized sector such as steel, are changing on a
frequent basis, sometimes drastically. One would also have to concord the change from the TSUSA-based
system before 1989 in the U.S. to the HTS.

20

throughout all our regressions. The data appendix provides a concordance we construct
between our price series and the 37 steel product categories in our sample. We convert
steel prices into the foreign country’s currency by multiplying by an appropriate
exchange rate and convert into real terms using the country’s GDP deflator as provided
by the International Monetary Fund’s publication, International Financial Statistics.
Our measure of foreign subsidization was constructed from Federal Register
notices of ITA CVD decisions and is described in detail in our data appendix. Special
protection measures, such as CVDs, antidumping duties, VRAs, and safeguard tariffs also
come from Federal Register notices and publications of the USITC. The data appendix
has further details on sources and variable construction.

5. Empirical Results
Table 2 provides regression results based on estimating equation (4) for our sample of
22 countries and 37 products from 1979 through 2002. The F-test of joint significance of the
regressor matrix passes easily at the 1 percent confidence level across the various
specifications in Table 2, and our main regressors are generally of expected sign and
statistically significant at standard confidence levels. The coefficient estimates can be read as
elasticities since they are logged (with the exception of the VRA variable).

Column 1 of Table 2 provides results of our benchmark model. Statistical
evidence for cyclical, as well as structural, excess capacity effects is strong. The
coefficient on the foreign demand variables is -1.525 and statistically significant at the 1percent level, indicating that a 10% decline in the foreign demand variable is associated
with a 15.25% increase in exports to the U.S. market. This is confirmatory evidence for
cyclical excess capacity effects.

21

The case for structural excess capacity effects is supported by a positive and
statistically significant coefficient on our foreign subsidization variable. The coefficient
on this variable suggests that a 10% increase in the foreign subsidization rate of a steel
product increases its exports to the U.S. market by over 30%.
The control variables in the regression perform fairly well. As one would expect,
we find a positive coefficient on the export price variable, indicating that steel exports
increase to the U.S. when the foreign firms receive a higher price (in their own currency)
for their U.S. exports. The effects of antidumping duties and safeguard tariffs on foreign
exports to the U.S. are negative, as expected, and statistically significant with elasticities
of -1.648 and -1.480, respectively. CVDs are not estimated to have a significant impact
on exports though the associated coefficient is negative in sign as expected. The
coefficient on the VRA indicator variable is also negative as expected and statistically
significant, indicating that exports fall about 35% when subject to a VRA with the U.S.
during our sample.
In Column 2 of Table 2 we examine whether foreign subsidization exacerbates the
cyclical excess capacity effects by including a term that interacts the foreign demand
variable with an indicator variable for the presence of positive foreign subsidization. A
negative coefficient on this variable would indicate that the elasticity of exports to the
U.S. market is even more pronounced for negative demand shocks; i.e., that cyclical
dumping is even larger in magnitude. While the estimated coefficient on this interaction
term is negative, it is statistically insignificant.
In Column 3 of Table 2 we examine whether the cyclical dumping effect is
asymmetric and depends on whether foreign demand is generally in a high or low state.

22

Our simple model of cyclical dumping in section 2 would suggest that if foreign steel
producers are relatively inefficient and/or unsubsidized, we would see little to no
response of U.S. exports to foreign demand shocks if foreign demand was already at a
high level such that the foreign firm was serving its own market at full capacity. Foreign
producers with an inherent or government-induced comparative advantage in producing
steel are less likely to see any asymmetric response of exports to demand shocks in their
own foreign market. To examine this we include an interaction term between the foreign
demand variable and an indicator variable for whether foreign demand is above its trend.
The estimated coefficient is negative and statistically insignificant, suggesting no
asymmetric responses, consistent with the notion of foreign subsidized firms and/or ones
with an inherent comparative advantage.
Before turning to alternative specifications and samples, we comment on a
number of data and specification issues. First, our empirical specification does not
include any explicit controls for capital costs, which were clearly important in the model
we present in section 2. However, differencing our data by country-product
combinations controls for any time-invariant cost differences across these cross-sectional
units. In addition, we include separate product, country, and year fixed effects. In this
first-differenced specification, product fixed effects controls for any unobserved
differences in trends common to a particular steel product. Country fixed effects control
for unobserved differences in trends common to a country across all its steel products.
And year effects control for any macroeconomic shocks. To the extent that changes in
capital costs for country-product combinations can be decomposed into these fixed
effects in an additively separable way, we have fully accounted for such changes.

23

One may be concerned with data measurement issues with regard to our key
variables. We proxy for foreign demand with real industrial value added, though we get
qualitatively identical results when we use industrial production indexes or real GDP
measures reported in the International Monetary Fund’s International Financial Statistics.
We prefer the data on real industrial value added since data for industrial production
indexes are missing for a significant number of observations in our sample and because
real GDP measures include economic activity in many sectors, such as services, that
hardly consume any steel at all.
As our data appendix describes in more detail, there are measurement issues with
our subsidy variable, particularly the measured magnitude of the subsidies. In addition,
subsidy programs that start before a CVD case in our sample are clearly documented,
whereas ending dates for programs that continue past the CVD case are not. Besides
unintended measurement issues one could also worry that the size of the subsidy rates
may be biased by political, rather than economic, considerations. Thus, as an alternative
to our subsidy rate variable we construct a dummy variable that takes the value of “1”
when a foreign subsidization program begins for a country-product combination and “0”
otherwise. We are the most confident about the information on when a foreign subsidy
program begins and it seems much more difficult to fabricate such information for
political reasons on the part of the ITA. In unreported results, we find that the coefficient
estimated on this subsidy dummy variable is significantly positive at the 1% level and
indicates a 34% increase in exports to the U.S., ceteris paribus. Coefficient estimates of
other regressors are qualitatively identical regardless of which subsidy variable we use
throughout our analysis.

24

5.1. Examining subsets of countries and products

As section 3 documents, U.S. CVD investigations brought by the steel industry
have targeted certain products and countries. In this section, we examine the extent to
which there are differences in excess capacity effects across subsamples of our data. For
each of these investigations we construct a dummy variable indicating a particular
subsample of the data and then interact this dummy variable with all our main control
regressors. Table 3 shows the coefficient estimates for our key excess capacity variables
for the different subsamples, as well as an F-test of statistical difference between the two
subsamples’ estimates.
The first sample split we examine is between products which were subject to
significant U.S. CVD investigations and those that were rarely, if ever, investigated.
Steel products in the “high CVD activity” category include hot-rolled bars, plates, coldrolled and hot-rolled sheet and strip, and wire rods. We would expect excess capacity
effects to be larger for high CVD activity products if these are the types of products that
are heavily subsidized and protected by all foreign governments. However, as reported in
Table 3, there are no statistical differences for the coefficient estimates on our foreign
demand or subsidy variables, our respective measures of cyclical and structural excess
capacity effects, across high and low CVD activity products.
We next split our sample into non-OECD countries and OECD countries.
Inherent efficiencies in steel production and/or the extent of government subsidization
may systematically differ across these two sets of countries. Results in Table 3 show that
while there are no statistical differences between these two sets of countries with respect

25

to cyclical dumping effects, structural excess capacity effects from foreign subsidization
are limited to only the non-OECD countries in our sample.
In fact, as shown in the last set of results in Table 3, both cyclical and structural
excess capacity effects can be shown to be limited to only three countries in the sample,
the South American countries of Argentina, Brazil, and Venezuela. The coefficients on
the foreign demand and subsidy variables for these three countries are large in magnitude
and statistically significant, while the coefficients on these variables for all other 19
countries in our sample are very close to zero in magnitude and statistically insignificant.
As shown in Table 1, these three South American countries accounted for just 3.6% of
U.S. consumption of steel in 2002. We have tried a variety of other sample splits with
various country groupings, none with these stark results.
Thus, while we have estimated statistically significant excess capacity effects for
our entire sample, they are apparently driven by a very narrow group of foreign country
sources that are a small part of the U.S. market. This is consistent with our analysis of
the CVD activity shown in Table in section 3 earlier. Taken together, it is difficult to
imagine that excess capacity effects have had a significant role in the fortune of U.S. steel
firms.
There are a few remaining issues that may affect interpretation of our results.
First, our subsidy variable is constructed from information stemming from all CVD cases,
regardless of the outcome of the case. Interestingly, we do not find any statistical
differences in the subsidy effect whether the outcome of the related CVD case is an
affirmative decision, negative decision, withdrawal of petition, or suspension due to an
agreement amongst the various firms and the ITA. A second concern may be the impact

26

of export markets other than the U.S. Taking the U.S. steel industry defenders at their
word, this should not be a concern as the U.S. is the only significant market that is
relatively open to steel imports. However, to the extent the rise or fall of other export
market availability impacts our countries and products similarly, our inclusion of year
dummies should control for these effects.

6. Conclusions

The U.S. steel industry has been the largest user of special U.S. trade protection
laws by a wide margin. Their justification is that such laws are necessary to protect them
from foreign producers that enjoy protected markets with significant government
subsidization, leading to substantial dumping of excess capacity into the relatively open
U.S. market. This paper takes these claims seriously and confronts them with the data.
We use a unique database on U.S. imports of 37 different steel products across 22
different foreign country sources from 1979 through 2002 to examine the evidence for
both short-run cyclical excess capacity effects on exports to the U.S. market, as well as
long-run structural excess capacity effects stemming from foreign subsidization. We
find statistical evidence for both effects. However, examination of subsamples of our
data reveals that these effects are limited to a very small set of foreign export sources that
account for a small share of the U.S. steel market. Thus, we conclude it is unlikely that
these excess capacity effects have been a significant factor in the U.S. steel industry’s
performance over the past decades.

27

References

Crandall, Robert W. (1996). “From Competitiveness to Competition: The Threat of
Minimills to National Steel Companies,” Resources Policy, Vol. 22(1-2), 107-18.
Crowley, Meredith A. (May 2006) “Antidumping Policy Under Imperfect Competition:
Theory and Evidence,” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper.
Diamond, Richard D. (1990). “A Search for Economic and Financial Principles in the
Administration of U.S. Countervailing Duty Law,” Law and Policy in International
Business, Vol. 21: 507-607.
Dunlevy, James A. (1980). “A Test of the Capacity Pressure Hypothesis Within a
Simultaneous Equations Model of Export Performance,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, Vol. 62(1): 131-5.
Francois, Joseph F., N. David Palmeter, and Jeffrey C. Anspacher. (1991). “Conceptual
and Procedural Biases in the Administration of the Countervailing Duty Law,” in Richard
Boltuck and Robert E. Litan (Eds.), Down in the Dumps: Administration of the Unfair
Trade Laws. Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution, 95-136.
Howell, Thomas R., William A. Noellert, Jesse G. Krier, and Alan W. Wolf. (1988). Steel
and the State: Government Intervention and Steel’s Structural Crisis. London and
Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Lenway, Stefanie, Randall Morck and Bernhard Yeung. (1996). “Rent Seeking,
Protectionism and Innovation in the American Steel Industry,” Economic Journal, Vol.
106(435): 410-21.
Mastel, Greg. (1999). “The U.S. Steel Industry and Antidumping Law,” Challenge, Vol.
42(3): 84-94.
Moore, Michael O. (1996). “The Rise and Fall of Big Steel’s Influence on U.S. Trade
Policy,” in Anne O. Krueger (Ed.), The Political Economy of Trade Protection. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press for National Bureau of Economic Research, 15-34.
Morck, Randall, Jungsywan Sepanski and Bernhard Yeung. (2001). “Habitual and
Occasional Lobbyers in the US Steel Industry: An EM Algorithm Pooling Approach,”
Economic Inquiry, Vol. 39(3): 365-78.
Oster, Sharon. (1982). “The Diffusion of Innovation Among Steel Firms: The Basic
Oxygen Furnace,” Bell Journal of Economics, Vol. 13(1): 45-56.
Staiger, Robert W., and Frank A. Wolak. (1992). “The Effect of Domestic Antidumping
Law in the Presence of Foreign Monopoly,” Journal of International Economics, vol. 32:
265-87.

28

Tornell, Aaron. (1997). “Rational Atrophy: The U.S. Steel Industry,” NBER Working
Paper No. 6084.
Yamawaki, Hideki. (1984). “Market Structure, Capacity Expansion, and Pricing: A
Model Applied to the Japanese Iron and Steel Industry,” International Journal of
Industrial Organization, Vol. 2(1): 29-62.

29

Table 1: Statistics on U.S. Steel Countervailing Duty (CVD) Cases, 1980-2003.

Country
Argentina
Australia
Belgium-Luxembourg
Brazil
Canada
China
France
Germany
Italy
Japan
Korea
Mexico
Netherlands
South Africa
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom
Taiwan
Venezuela

U.S. Steel
CVD Cases,
1980-2003
9
1
21
34
4
0
22
19
23
0
21
8
5
18
19
6
15
4
12

CVD Cases
Ruled
Affirmative
7
0
2
8
3
0
4
4
8
0
12
3
0
12
9
2
3
0
1

CVD Cases
Suspended
1
0
0
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0

Average CVD
for
Affirmative
Case
11.83
na
3.93
21.77
39.89
na
12.6
8.39
13.47
na
2.41
9.37
na
7.73
20.58
6.52
8.97
na
0.78

Average CVD
for all nonsuspended
cases
10.52
0
0.37
6.15
29.92
na
2.29
1.77
4.68
na
1.38
3.52
0
5.15
9.75
2.17
1.79
0
0.07

Country's
Percent of
Total U.S.
Consumption
of Steel Mill
Products,
2002
0.3
0.6
0.5
2.9
4.4
0.6
0.5
1.1
0.3
1.2
1.4
2.8
0.5
0.3
0.3
0.1
0.4
0.3
0.4

Percent of
Country's
Steel Mill
Imports
Affected by
CVD Orders,
2002
0.0
0.0
6.0
5.0
0.3
0.0
51.9
30.7
61.7
0.0
17.2
1.2
0.0
23.6
0.4
0.0
0.6
0.0
0.0

Notes: Data for the first five columns come from Federal Register notices and were compiled by Chad Bown at Brandeis University, which are available online
at http://www.brandeis.edu/~cbown/global_ad/. Data for the final two columns come from authors’ calculations using the 2002 American Iron and Steel Institute
Annual Statistical Report.

30

Table 2: OLS Estimates of Foreign Export Steel Supply, 1979-2002
Subsidy Dummy
and Foreign
Base
Demand
Specification
Interaction

Ln (U.S. Price)
Ln (Foreign Demand)
Ln (1 + Subsidy Rate)

0.647***
(0.126)
-1.525***
(0.456)
3.168**
(1.310)

Subsidy Dummy* Ln (Foreign
Demand)

0.647***
(0.126)
-1.468***
(0.481)
3.161**
(1.308)

Ln (1 + CV Duty)
VRA Dummy Variable
Ln (1 + Safeguard Tariff Rate)
Constant
Year Fixed Effects
Country Fixed Effects
Product Fixed Effects

0.646***
(0.126)
-1.604***
(0.549)
3.159**
(1.310)

-0.397
(0.871)

Ln (Foreign Demand) * Dummy
for Demand Above Trend
Ln (1 +AD Duty)

High Versus
Low Foreign
Demand

-1.648***
(0.523)
-1.048
(0.903)
-0.438***
(0.092)
-1.480*
(0.758)
0.315**
(0.135)

-1.648***
(0.523)
-1.043
(0.902)
-0.438***
(0.092)
-1.488*
(0.758)
0.313**
(0.135)

0.174
(0.626)
-1.645***
(0.523)
-1.044
(0.903)
-0.438***
(0.092)
-1.474*
(0.757)
0.314**
(0.135)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

F-Statistic
4.84
4.78
4.77
(p-value)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
R-squared
0.03
0.03
0.03
Number of Observations
17120
17120
17120
Notes: Dependent variable is the natural logarithm of 1+ U.S. imports of steel product
from foreign country. All variables are first-differenced by country-product combination.
Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *** indicates significance at the 1% level, **
indicates significance at the 5% level, and * indicates significance at the 10% level.

31

Table 3: Exploring Differences in Excess Capacity Effects across Various Subsamples
Cyclical Excess Capacity
Coefficient on
Foreign
Demand
Variable
High CVD Activity vs. Low Activity CVD Products
High-Activity CVD Products

Low-Activity CVD Products
Non-OECD vs OECD Countries
Non-OECD Countries

OECD Countries

F-Statistic for
Difference
across
Subsamples

-1.48*

Rest of the Sample

Coefficient on
Subsidy
Variable

F-Statistic for
Difference
across
Subsamples

3.15**

(pval=0.084)

0.01

(pval=0.046)

0.00

-1.55***

(pval=0.940)

3.07*

(pval=0.972)

(pval=0.001)

(pval=0.093)

-1.71***

4.36**

(pval=0.003)

0.26

(pval=0.011)

5.63**

-1.27*

(pval=0.608)

-0.65

(pval=0.018)

(pval=0.057)

South American Countries vs. Rest of the Sample
South American Countries

Structural Excess Capacity

(pval=0.601)

-2.38***

4.65**

(pval=0.003)

9.97***

(pval=0.015)

5.57**

-0.57

(pval=0.003)

0.51

(pval=0.018)

(pval=0.276)

(pval=0.686)

Notes: These are coefficient estimates for selected variables from specifications running the base model in Column 1 of Table 2 with
interactions terms for all main regressors to identify subsample differences. *** indicates significance at the 1% level, ** indicates
significance at the 5% level, and * indicates significance at the 10% level.

32

Figure 1: Capacity decisions by a foreign monopolist

$

e
α

DExpected
A

MC=c + η0+ η1K

c + η0
P

US

c

MR Expected

K*

33

K

Figure 2: Optimal Foreign Firm Output and Dumping

$

B

A
P US

D

C

MRHigh

c

MR Expected
MRLow
K*
Dumped Exports

34

K

Figure 3: Optimal Firm Output, Dumping, and Subsidies

$

A
P

US

C

D

E

F
B

c

MR Expected
MR Low
K*
NS

35

K*
S

K

Data Appendix

The following provides greater detail on our data sources and variable construction.
Data on Foreign Exports to the U.S. (Dependent Variable)
Collected from American Iron and Steel Institute’s (AISI’s) Annual Statistical Report,
various volumes. We collect these data by the product categories reported in this source.
However, for consistency over time, we combined a few product categories. In particular,
all “plate” categories were combined, including “Plates – in coils” and “Plates – cut
lengths”. A number of categories, including ”galvanized”, “other metallic coated” and
“electrical” were combined into a “Sheets & strip – Other” category. Likewise, a number
of pipe categories, including “Stainless pipe and tubing”, “Nonclassified pipe & tubing”,
“Structural pipe & tubing”, and “Pipe for piling”, were combined into an “Other pipe and
tubing” category. See table A.1 below for a list of our 37 product categories. The 22
countries included in our sample are those listed in Table 1 of the paper, as well as
Austria (1979-2000), Finland (1979-1999), and Greece (1979-1987) for which data do
not span the entire sample period. We are also missing observations for most of the pipe
and tubing categories before 1982. These steel import data are reported in net tons and
we use the log of the sum of the variable + “1” as our dependent variable.
Real U.S. Steel Price in Exporter’s Currency (Independent Variable)
As mentioned in the text, we primarily rely on Producer Price Indexes from the Bureau of
Labor Statistics (BLS) for our data on steel prices. For a robustness check we also use
steel price data from Purchasing Magazine provided by Benjamin Liebman at St.
Joseph’s University. The following table concords our steel product categories to the
steel price series we have available from these two sources.
Table A.1: Concordance for our product-level U.S. price data
Steel Purchasing Price
Product Code (pcode)
BLS Price Index
Index 5
1 – (Rigid) Conduit
PCU331111331111B
Average Price Series
2 – Barbed Wire
PCU3311113311119
Average Price Series
3 – Bars, Cold-finished
PCU331111331111F
Average Price Series
4 – Bars, Hot-rolled
PCU3311113311117
Average Price Series
5 – Bars, Shapes Under 3 In.
Footnote 1
Average Price Series
6 – Black Plate
PCU3311113311117
Hot-rolled Plate Series
7 – Reinforcing Bar
PDU3312#425
Rebar Series
8 – Grinding Balls
PCU3311113311113
Average Price Series
9 – Ingots, Blooms, Billets, Slabs
PCU3311113311113
Average Price Series
10 – Line Pipe
PCU331111331111B
Average Price Series
11 – Mechanical Tubing
PCU331111331111B
Average Price Series
12 – Nails and Staples
PDU3315#2
Average Price Series
13 – Oil Country Goods
PCU331111331111B
Average Price Series
14 – Other Pipe and Tubing
PCU331111331111B
Average Price Series
15 – Pipe and Tube Fittings
PDU3498#
Average Price Series
16 – Plates
PCU3311113311117
Hot-rolled Plate Series

36

17 – Pressure Tubing
PCU331111331111B
Average Price Series
18 – Rail and Track Accessories
PDU3312#C/Footnote 2 Average Price Series
19 – Sashes and Frames
PCU3311113311117
Average Price Series
20 – Shapes, Cold-Formed
PCU331111331111D
Average Price Series
21 – Sheet Piling
PCU3311113311117
Average Price Series
22 – Sheet, Cold-rolled
PCU331111331111D
Average Price Series
23 – Sheet, Hot-rolled
PCU3311113311115
Hot-Rolled Sheet Series
24 – Sheets & Strip, Other
Footnote 3
Galv. Sheet Series
25 – Standard Pipe
PCU331111331111B
Average Price Series
26 – Strip, Cold-rolled
PCU331111331111D
Average Price Series
27 – Strip, Hot-rolled
PCU3311113311115
Hot-Rolled Sheet Series
28 – Struc. Shapes – Plain
PCU3311113311117
Wide Beams Series
29 – Struc. Shapes – Fab.
PCU3311113311117
Wide Beams Series
30 – Terne Plate (Tin Free)
PCU3311113311117
Hot-rolled Plate Series
31 – Tin Plate
PCU3311113311117
Hot-rolled Plate Series
32 – Wheels and Axles
PDU3312#C/Footnote 2 Average Price Series
33 – Wire – Nonmet. Coated
PCU3311113311119
Average Price Series
34 – Wire Rods
Footnote 4
Wire Rod Series
35 – Wire Rope
PCU3311113311119
Average Price Series
36 – Wire Strand
PCU3311113311119
Average Price Series
37 – Wire Fabric
PCU3311113311119
Average Price Series
1
Average of PCU3311113311117 and PCU331111331111F.
2
Used price series for “Blast furnaces and steel mill products – PDU3312#” for the years
after 1997 due to data availability.
3
Average of PCU331111331111D and PCU3311113311115.
4
PDU3312#219 for years before 1998 and PDU3312#21611 for years after 1997.
5
“Average price series” is a weighted average of price series for wire rod, hot-rolled
sheet, hot-rolled plate, galvanized sheet, rebar, and wide beams. Data for these price
series are only available from 1980 through 1999. They are monthly data and were
averaged on an annual basis.
In our statistical analysis we derive a price variable by multiplying these U.S. price series
by an exchange rate that converts into the foreign currency and then deflate using the
country’s GDP Deflator to convert into real terms. Finally, we log the variable.
Our primary source for the GDP deflator series for each country is the International
Monetary Fund’s International Financial Statistics, CD-ROM, June 2005.
Our exchange rate data (foreign currency per U.S. dollar) come from a few different
sources. For Argentina, Brazil, China, Greece, Korea, Mexico, Netherlands, South Africa,
Taiwan, we downloaded annual exchange rates through 1999 from the Economic History
Services website www.eh.net/hmit/exchangerates, which also gives conversion to new
currencies over time. We then added exchange rates from 2000-2002 using data from
Werner Antweiler’s PACIFIC Exchange Rate Services website: http://fx.sauder.ubc.ca/.
Full citation on for the Economic History Services information is:

37

Lawrence H. Officer, “Exchange rate between the United States dollar and forty other
countries, 1913-1999,” Economic History Services, EH.Net, 2002. URL:
www.eh.net/hmit/exchangerates.
For earlier years for China, Greece and Korea (1970-early80s) we use the IMF’s
International Financial Statistics data. For dates prior to 1984 for Taiwan, we use the
website, http://intl.econ.cuhk.edu.hk/exchange_rate_regime/index.php?cid=11, and for
years for Taiwan after 1999, we use Werner Antweiler’s PACIFIC Exchange Rate
Services website.
For Australia, Austria, Belgium (Lux), Canada, Germany, Finland, France, Italy, Japan,
Spain, Sweden and U.K., we use historical data from Werner Antweiler’s PACIFIC
Exchange Rate Services website: http://fx.sauder.ubc.ca/.
Foreign Demand for Steel as Proxied by Real Industrial Value Added (Independent
Variable)
Our source for this variable is the World Bank’s World Development Indicators (WDI).
The WDI database does not provide these data for Taiwan. Thus, we turn to official
statistics of the Taiwanese Directorate – General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics,
available online at: http://eng.dgbas.gov.tw/mp.asp?mp=2. We use an industrial
production index for the Taiwanese economy as a proxy for real value added. Our
paper’s qualitative results are robust to whether Taiwanese observations are included or
not.
Foreign Subsidization Rates (Independent Variable)
The Import Administration of the International Trade Administration (ITA) of the U.S.
Department of Commerce performs all subsidy rate calculations in CVD cases since 1980.
Their determinations for each case are published in the Federal Register and list all
foreign programs purported to directly or indirectly subsidize a product in a CVD case.
There is a wide variety of programs considered by the ITA, including grants, equity
infusions, debt forgiveness, loans at below-market interest rates, input subsidies, export
subsidies, and duty drawbacks on imported inputs. The most recently revised rules
followed for CVD investigations and subsidy rate calculations, as well as the original
statutes governing CVD investigations and remedies, can be found online at the ITA:
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/regs/index.html.

The basic methodology is the following. The ITA determines the cash benefit of the
subsidy connected with each program it considers and then divides this by a
corresponding revenue stream to determine an ad valorem subsidy rate. For example, if
the subsidy is connected with all of the firms exports (not just to the U.S.), it divides the
subsidy benefit by the total value of the firms’ exports. If it is a production subsidy, it
divides by the firms total sales, both domestic and foreign. The final subsidy rate for a
product and country source then totals the subsidy rates across the programs found to
provide subsidization.

38

Determination of the current cash value of continuous, or “recurring”, subsidy programs
is relatively easy. Determination of the current value of an infrequent, or “non-recurring”,
subsidy program, such as a one-time equity infusion by the government to allow a firm to
avoid bankruptcy a number of years prior to the current CVD case is obviously more
difficult. In these cases, the ITA uses the following formula to “allocate” the cash benefit
of such subsidies over time: Ak = {y/n + [y – y/n(k-1)d]} / (1+d), where Ak is the amount
of the subsidy benefit allocated to year k, y is the face value of the subsidy in the year it
occurred, n is the average useful life of renewable physical capital for an industry
(determined to be 15 years for steel plants), and d is the discount rate. The ITA’s official
regulations do not indicate the basis or rationale for this formula. Notable features of the
formula is that it assigns a declining value of the subsidy benefit as years pass and that
the benefit assigned to the last year (year n) is larger than y/n, the amount one would
assign to each year if the benefit were equally apportioned to each year of average useful
life of capital in the industry.
For the purposes of this paper, we use the information in the ITA determinations in the
following way to get measures of foreign subsidization over time for the products subject
to a CVD investigation. We create a subsidization rate measure by using the reported
subsidization rates for each program, as well as their starting and ending dates. If no
starting date is reported for a recurring subsidy program, we assume it was occurring at
the same rate for all prior years back to the beginning year of our sample, 1979. If the
program is recurring and still in place at the time of the CVD investigation, we assume it
continues on until the end of our sample. We update when there is a subsequent CVD
investigation of the same product and country combination. If a CVD case is suspended
in lieu of an agreement with the foreign government to suspend subsidization or
otherwise mitigate the effect of such subsidization on its exports to the U.S., we assume
that all subsidization has stopped. If CVDs are withdrawn or terminated due to the
voluntary export agreements that occurred with some countries in 1982 and virtually all
countries in 1985, we assume that subsidization continues. We assume all subsidization
is discontinued when a CVD is revoked by a sunset review. In some cases, the ITA
calculates subsidy rates for various foreign firms (not a simple country-wide rate). In
these cases, we create a weighted sum of the subsidy rates assuming the firms have equal
market share of the U.S. imports of the investigated product.
Products are matched to our dataset through reported Harmonized Tariff System (HTS)
codes accompanying the cases (Tariff System of the United States Annotated (TSUSA)
system prior to 1989). Often the CVD cases are defined narrowly enough that the
product is matched to just one product category in our dataset, though sometimes they
span multiple product categories. Sometimes a CVD product may be only a limited
subset of one of our product categories. We have no obvious way to determine the
portion of a product category that is covered by the CVD, so we simply assign the
subsidization rates to the entire product category. Finally, there are a small handful of
country-product combinations in our dataset where multiple CVD cases apply. In these
situations, we cumulate the subsidization rates across these cases for that country-product
combination in the years in which there is an overlap.

39

Antidumping and Countervailing Duty (AD//CVD) Rates (Independent Variable)
AD/CVD rate data were obtained from http://www.brandeis.edu/~cbown/global_ad/.
These data were then matched up to AISI product categories using an approximate
concordance in “Appendix D: Definitions of Certain Terms and Descriptions of Products
Subject to the Investigation” in Office of Industries, USITC. (April 1995) Steel
Semiannual Monitoring Report: Special Focus: U.S. Industry Conditions. Washington,
DC: USITC Publication 2878.

For AD rates, we assumed that the initial dumping margins remain until an order is
revoked. In other words, we do not adjust margins as administrative reviews occur. The
rationale is that dumping margins only change as companies must respond to the initial
dumping margin and raise prices. The impact on imports should be similar whether the
dumping margin is collected or not collected due to the firm raising prices. With CVD
rates, we adjusted these as they changed with administrative reviews.
The following rules governed how we recorded data on AD/CVD decisions (as well as
subsidy rates described above) into an annual observation: If the decision comes out prior
to August 1, it is applied as the rate for the entire year. If the decision comes out on Aug.
1 or later, it gets applied to the following year.
Often AD/CVD rates may only apply to part of the product category. Since we do not
have information on composition, we cannot prorate the AD/CVD rate. In a few
instances, a product category becomes subject to more than one AD/CVD rate. To
account for this, we sum the applicable rates. We add “1” to these variables and log for
our statistical analysis.
Safeguard Tariffs (Independent Variable)
Safeguard tariffs were placed on select steel products (primarily flat-rolled products, plate,
bar, rod, and fittings) effective March 20, 2002 by order of President Bush. Most
developing countries, as well as Canada and Mexico were exempted from these measures.
We use the USITC publication Steel: Monitoring Developments in the Domestic Industry
(Investigation No. TA-204-9) and Steel-Consuming Industries: Competitive Conditions
with Respect to Steel Safeguard Measures (Investigation No. 332-452) (Publication 3632,
September 2003), pp. 1-5 and 1-6, to determine safeguard tariff coverage across our
sample of countries and products. We add “1” and log this variable for our statistical
analysis

VRA coverage (product and country combinations) from 1983 through 1993
(Independent Variable)
We use Table 7 of Michael O. Moore’s National Bureau of Economic Research working
paper no. 4760, “Steel Protection in the 1980s: The Waning Influence of Big Steel?”,
June 1994, as well as, p. i of preface to Monthly Report on Selected Steel Industry Data:
Report to the Subcommittee on Ways and Means on Investigation Number 332-163 Under
Section 332 of the Tariff Act of 1930, published by the U.S. International Trade
Commission, February 1986, to determine whether a product category from a particular

40

foreign country import source was subject to a voluntary restraint agreement or not. This
variable is an indicator variable and is therefore not logged.
The following table provides summary statistics of these main variables in the base
specification of our statistical analysis.
Table A.1: Summary statistics of key variables in benchmark specification reported
in Column 1 of Table 2 in the text.
Variable (in logs and differenced
by country-product combination)

Mean

Standard
Deviation

Exports to U.S.

0.07

1.93

-11.68

11.67

U.S. price

-0.02

0.17

-2.13

0.94

Foreign demand (Real Industrial
Value Added)

0.03

0.05

-0.15

0.19

Subsidy rate

0.00

0.02

-0.57

0.29

Antidumping duty

0.02

0.04

-0.98

1.04

Countervailing duty

0.00

0.01

-0.32

0.67

Voluntary restraint agreement

0.00

0.28

-1.00

1.00

Safeguard tariff

0.00

0.02

0.00

0.26

41

Minimum Maximum

