                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     FROM THE CRADLE TO THE LABOR MARKET?
                 THE EFFECT OF BIRTH WEIGHT ON ADULT OUTCOMES

                                           Sandra E. Black
                                           Paul J. Devereux
                                           Kjell G. Salvanes

                                        Working Paper 11796
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w11796


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2005




Black and Devereux gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National Science Foundation and the
California Center for Population Research. Salvanes thanks the Norwegian Research council for financial
support. We thank Marianne Bitler, Anne Daltveit, Sue Dynarski, Kanika Kapur, Linda Loury, Per Magnus,
and Ole Martin Sundet for very useful discussions and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, Boston College, Brown University, UCD, Tufts, CEPR Upsala, Stockholm University,
Socialforskningsinstituttet Copenhagen, and COST Paris for helpful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2005 by Sandra E. Black, Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
From the Cradle to the Labor Market? The Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes
Sandra E. Black, Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes
NBER Working Paper No. 11796
November 2005
JEL No. J1, I1

                                           ABSTRACT

Lower birth weight babies have worse outcomes, both short-run in terms of one-year mortality rates
and longer run in terms of educational attainment and earnings. However, recent research has called
into question whether birth weight itself is important or whether it simply reflects other hard-to-
measure characteristics. By applying within twin techniques using a unique dataset from Norway,
we examine both short-run and long-run outcomes for the same cohorts. We find that birth weight
does matter; very small short-run fixed effect estimates can be misleading because longer-run effects
on outcomes such as height, IQ, earnings, and education are significant and similar in magnitude to
OLS estimates. Our estimates suggest that eliminating birth weight differences between socio-
economic groups would have sizeable effects on the later outcomes of children from poorer families.

Sandra E. Black
Department of Economics
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
sblack@econ.ucla.edu

Paul J. Devereux
Department of Economics
University College Dublin
devereux@ucd.ie

Kjell Salvanes
Department of Economics
Norwegian School of Economics
kjell@salvanes@nhh.no
                                           1. Introduction

        Lower birth weight babies have worse outcomes, both short-run in terms of one-

year mortality rates and longer run in terms of educational attainment and earnings.

However, recent research has called into question whether birth weight itself is important

or whether it simply reflects other hard-to-measure characteristics. If birth weight does

not matter in the long-run, can government policies targeting the welfare of children

through improved pre-natal care actually work?

        Governments have assumed that birth weight is important and have implemented

policies to improve the health of pregnant women in the hope that this will improve the

outcomes of their babies; consider, for example, the Women, Infants, and Children

Program (WIC) in the United States, a federally funded program that provides nutrition

counseling and supplemental food for pregnant women, new mothers, infants and

children under age five in order to prevent children's health problems and improve their

long-term health, growth and development. A key presumption underlying this type of

policy is that, by affecting children’s birth weight through improved nutritional intake in

utero, it will in turn affect the later health and ultimate success of the children. But is this

presumption valid? Likewise, the Irish Government has a target of reducing the gap in

low birth weight rates between the lowest and highest socio-economic group.1 However,

there is little evidence about whether being low birth weight (LBW) has a causal effect

on later outcomes.




1
 The Irish National Anti-Poverty Strategy (NAPS) is a 10-year government plan to reduce poverty. The
NAPS health targets aim to reduce health inequalities by meeting what are described as 3 key targets. One
of these targets is ‘To reduce the gap in low birth weight rates for children from the lowest and highest
socio-economic group by 10% by 2007.’


                                                                                                            3
           Despite this, birth weight is very commonly used as the outcome variable of

interest in studies of the effects of policy interventions such as welfare reform, health

insurance, and food stamps on infant welfare (for example, Currie and Gruber, 1996).

Likewise, birth weight is often used as an outcome variable in studies of the effects of

inputs to the infant health production function and analyses of the impact of maternal

behavior on infant health. (For example, Currie and Moretti, 2003 show that increased

maternal education leads to a lesser incidence of LBW.) Obviously, the degree to which

LBW has true causal effects on later outcomes is critical to the interpretation of the

results from this literature.

           The principal difficulty in determining the effects of LBW on later outcomes

arises because LBW is likely correlated with a range of socio-economic and genetic

characteristics of families and their children. For example, LBW infants are more likely

to be born to poor families; as a result, it is difficult to disentangle the effects of birth

weight from that of family income. Our approach is to use twin comparisons to

distinguish between LBW effects and the effects of other socio-economic and genetic

factors.

           We do this using a unique dataset on the population of births in Norway matched

with later outcomes. We advance the recent literature by using twin fixed effects on a

large sample of individuals and looking at both short- and long-run outcomes for the

same cohort of individuals. The current literature has examined the effects of low birth

weight using within-family and, most recently, within-twin estimates of the effect of birth

weight on both early outcomes (Almond et al 2005) and later outcomes (Berhman and

Rosenzweig 2004) separately. Almond et al suggest that cross-sectional estimates of the




                                                                                                4
effects of birth weight greatly overstate the true effects when they apply twin fixed

effects to administrative data and look at early outcomes such as one year mortality rates;

in contrast, Behrman and Rosenzweig, using self-reported outcomes data from a twins

survey, find exactly the opposite (the within-twin estimates are much larger than OLS

estimates) when they look at longer run outcomes such as education, height, and wages.

No research to date has studied both short-run and long-run outcomes for the same

cohorts. This paper fills this void in the literature.

        We find that birth weight does matter. Consistent with earlier work, we find that

twin fixed effects estimates of the effect of birth weight on short-run outcomes such as

one-year infant mortality are much smaller than their cross-sectional equivalents.

However, these short-run studies can be misleading, as we find that birth weight has a

significant effect on longer-run outcomes such as height, IQ at age 18, earnings, and

education, and the fixed effects estimates are similar in size to cross-sectional ones.

        When studying long-run outcomes, an important selection issue arises because

twin pairs that experience infant mortality are dropped from the analysis. Because, unlike

previous studies, we have information on individuals from birth to the labor market, we

can investigate the potential impacts of such bias. Our investigation concludes that

selection bias most likely leads to an understatement of the effects of birth weight on

adult outcomes.

        The paper unfolds as follows. Section 2 reviews the relevant literature, Sections 3

and 4 discuss our methodology and data. Section 5 presents our results and robustness

checks, and Section 6 focuses on the selection bias that arises when studying adult




                                                                                            5
outcomes. Section 7 addresses issues of generalizability, Section 8 discusses the

magnitudes of the estimates, and Section 9 concludes.



                                        2. Relevant Literature

         There is a long history of research across disciplines relating low birth weight to

poor health, cognitive deficits, and behavioral problems among young children, as well as

some evidence that this relationship persists for longer-term outcomes. For example, in

the medical literature, Barker (1995) finds evidence that fetal under-nutrition is related to

coronary heart disease later in life.2 In the economics literature, Currie and Hyson (1998)

find a relationship between birth weight and educational attainment, employment, wages,

and health status at age 23 and age 33. More recently, Case et al. (2004) show that,

controlling for family background measures, children with low birth weight and poorer

childhood health indicators have significantly lower educational attainment, poorer

health, and lower SES as adults. However, it is possible that there is no causal

relationship underlying these correlations, as low birth weight may be correlated with

many difficult-to-measure socio-economic background and genetic variables.

         Some recent papers take a sibling fixed effects approach that involves comparing

the outcomes of siblings who differ in birth weight. This approach conditions out any

characteristic that is family-specific and unchanging over time but is not robust to time-

varying unobserved characteristics, such as maternal smoking behavior and the quality of


2
  Typically, medical studies have limited data on longer-run outcomes and small sample sizes. For
example, Hack et al (1994) finds an effect of very low birth weights on school-age outcomes using 68
treatment children using across family comparisons and Hack et al (2002) compare 242 very low birth
weight young adults to 233 normal birth weight controls and find that the educational disadvantage
associated with very low birth weight persists into early adulthood. Recent work in the Norwegian medical
literature also finds a positive relationship between birth weight and adult outcomes. (Eide et al. (2005) and
Grjibovski et al. (2005)).


                                                                                                            6
pre-natal care received by the mother, which may vary across pregnancies. Also, siblings

share only about 50% of their genetic material so there may be genetic differences across

siblings that are correlated with birth weight.3

         Most recently, the literature has moved to within-twin variation to identify the

effects of birth weight on children’s outcomes. Both Conley, Strully, and Bennett (2003)

and Almond, Chay, and Lee (ACL, 2005) use U.S. data to identify the effects of birth

weight on short run health outcomes, including mortality. Almond et al. conclude that

the effects of low birth weight are substantially smaller than originally thought; Conley et

al. have estimates of similar magnitudes. However, neither of these studies is able to

look beyond short-run health outcomes.

         Behrman and Rosenzweig (BR, 2004) use a subset of the Minnesota Twin

Registry to do fixed effects using female monozygotic twins and examine the longer run

effects of birth weight. They find evidence that the heavier twin goes on to be taller, have

greater educational attainment, and have a higher wage, and the twin fixed effects

estimates are substantially larger than the cross-sectional ones. In contrast, they find no

evidence of effects on adult body mass index.

         The conflicting evidence on short-run versus long-run outcomes could be real or

could reflect the fact that BR do not have access to birth register data like that of ACL.

As a result, their sample sizes are small (804 cases) and, because of the numerous surveys

required, there is substantial attrition and item non-response that may not be random.


3
  Conley and Bennett (2000) take a sibling fixed effects approach using data from the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics (PSID). They find a negative association between LBW and timely high school
graduation. Currie and Moretti (2005) use sibling comparisons to investigate the effects of birth weight on
the birth weight of the child’s future children. They also show that among mothers that were siblings, the
women with the lower birth weight resided in a lower income zip code on average when she gave birth to
her own child years later.


                                                                                                              7
Also, their use of survey data means that their outcome variables are self-reported and,

unlike ACL, they do not have information on birth order of twins and cannot exclude

twin pairs with congenital defects. In this paper, we use administrative data linked to

birth records; with this, we can study both short and long run outcomes using large

nationally representative samples that contain both administrative records of later

outcomes as well as all the birth information contained in the birth register. Our sample

also differs from BR in that we study both men and women and analyze more recent

cohorts (1967-81 compared to their 1936-55 cohorts). As such, the technology of birth

and social conditions growing up should be more similar to those in the present day.



                                       3. Conceptual Framework

         Following ACL, let

                   yijk = α + βbwijk + x jk ' γ + f jk + ε ijk           (1)

where subscript i refers to the child, j refers to the mother, and k refers to birth. yijk is

then the outcome of child j born to mother i in birth k, bwijk is birth weight, x jk is a

vector of mother- and birth-specific variables (for example, mother’s education, the year

of birth), f jk refers to unobservables that are mother- and birth-specific (for example, the

quality of pre-natal care, genetic factors), and ε ijk is an idiosyncratic error term assumed

independent of all other terms in the equation.4

         The parameter of interest is β -- the effect of birth weight on the outcome

variable holding constant all observed and unobserved mother- and birth-specific


4
 In our estimation, we also include variables that may vary at the individual level within birth, such as the
birth order of the twin and the sex of each child.


                                                                                                                8
variables. Note that this is likely to be the policy relevant parameter as policies aimed at

increasing birth weight cannot influence fixed mother-specific characteristics such as

genetics and typically will not affect other mother- and birth-specific characteristics such

as maternal education or the timing of the birth.

       Cross-sectional estimation of equation (1) by OLS will generally lead to biased

estimates of β because of the presence of elements of x jk and f jk that influence both

birth weight and child outcomes (for example, genetics or maternal education).

Therefore, we take a twin fixed effect approach to estimation. That is, our sample is

composed of twin pairs and we included dummy variables for each birth in the

regression. Denoting the first-born twin as “1”, and the second-born as “2”, this can be

written in differences as follows:

                yi1k − yi 2 k = β (bwi1k − bwi 2 k ) + (ε i1k − ε i1k ) (2)

Given the assumption that ε ijk is independent of bwijk , the twin fixed effects estimator of

β is obviously consistent. This assumption is more likely to hold in the case of

monozygotic twins (who are genetically identical) than with fraternal twins (who on

average share about 50% of genes). Our full sample contains both monozygotic and

fraternal twins. While the medical literature suggests that adult health outcomes among

fraternal twins are similar to those among identical twins (Christensen et al. 1995 and

Duffy 1993), we are able to assess the seriousness of the assumption that the relationship

is the same by first examining the subset of same-sex twin pairs, which contain a larger




                                                                                                9
fraction of identical twins, and then examining a subset of twins for whom we have

information on zygosity.5



Why Does Birth Weight Differ Within Twin Pairs?

         Low birth weight can arise either because of short gestational length (pre-term

delivery) or because of low fetal growth rate, commonly known as intrauterine growth

retardation (IUGR). When we look within twin pairs, gestation length is the same and

differences in birth weight arise solely due to differences in fetal growth rates.6

         Given that gestation is the same among twins, evidence suggests that much of the

difference is birthweight is due to differences in nutritional intake.7 In the case where

there are two placentas (called dichorionic, including all fraternal twins and about 30% of

identical twins), nutritional differences can arise because one twin is better positioned in

the womb. Among single-placenta (monochorionic) twins, nutritional differences are

related to the location of the attachment of the two umbilical cords to the placenta and the

placement of the fetus within the placenta. (Bryan 1992, Phillips 1993). Hence, since

there are no genetic differences, birth weight differences within monozygotic twin pairs

appear to come primarily from differences in nutritional intake.8




5
  We ultimately conclude that the results do not vary between monozygotic and dizygotic twins, consistent
with genetic differences not playing a large part in birth weight differences among same-sex twin pairs.
6
  While there are rare cases of twins who are not born at the same time, these twins are not included in our
sample.
7
  Because twins have the same gestation, we cannot examine the effect of being pre-term (gestation less
than 37 weeks) on outcomes. We did, however, verify that there were no significant differences in the
effects of birth weight on later outcomes between pre-term and full-term babies. For 1-year mortality, birth
weight is more important for pre-term twin pairs. About 35 percent of twins are born pre-term in our
sample.
8
  There is an extensive medical literature examining the determinants of birth weight differences (called
discordance) among twins. See Blickstein and Kalish (2003) for a summary.


                                                                                                         10
        To the extent the differences in birth weight among twins results from these

random environmental differences in the womb, twin differences is an excellent approach

for studying the effects of birth weight on child outcomes. Of course, among fraternal

twins, genetic differences may also play a role in determining birth weight.



                                                 4. Data

        Our primary data source is the birth records for all Norwegian births over the

period 1967 to 1997 obtained from the Medical Birth Registry of Norway. All births,

including those born outside of a hospital, are included as long as the gestation period

was at least 16 weeks.9 The birth records contain information on year and month of birth,

birth weight, gestational length, age of mother, and a range of variables describing infant

health at birth including APGAR scores, malformations at birth, and infant mortality

(defined as those who die within the first year).10 APGAR scores are a composite index

of a child’s health at birth and take into account Activity (and muscle tone), Pulse (heart

rate), Grimace (reflex irritability), Appearance (skin coloration), and Respiration

(breathing rate and effort). Each component is worth up to 2 points for a maximum of

10.11 We are also able to identify twin births and the birth order of twins but cannot

distinguish between fraternal and monozygotic twins.

        Using unique personal identifiers, we match these birth files to the Norwegian

Registry Data, a linked administrative dataset that covers the entire population of

Norwegians aged 16-74 in the 1986-2002 period, and is a collection of different

9
  The data also include stillbirths, which constitute approximately 15 per 1000 births. We exclude these
from the sample.
10
   Malformations are coded according to the international medical standard (ICD8).
11
   This measure was developed in 1952. Babies with a score above 7 for the 5-minute APGAR score are
considered to be in good health.


                                                                                                           11
administrative registers such as the education register, family register, and the tax and

earnings register. These data are maintained by Statistics Norway and provide

information about educational attainment, labor market status, earnings, and a set of

demographic variables (age, gender) as well as information on families.12 When

considering educational attainment, we use all individuals aged at least 21 in 2002 and

use as our dependent variable a binary indicator for whether the person has at least 12

years of education.13

         Another source of data is the Norwegian military records from 1984 to 2005

which contains information on height, weight, and IQ. In Norway, military service is

compulsory for every able young man. Before entering the service, their medical and

psychological suitability is assessed; this occurs for the great majority between their 18th

and 20th birthday.14 For the cohorts of men born from 1967 up to 1987, we have

information on height, weight, and Body Mass Index (BMI), all of which were measured

as part of the medical examination.15

         We also have a composite score from three speeded IQ tests -- arithmetic, word

similarities, and figures (see Sundet et al. 2004, 2005, Thrane, 1977 for details). The

arithmetic test is quite similar to the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS) (Sundet

12
   Our measure of educational attainment is reported by the educational establishment directly to Statistics
Norway, thereby minimizing any measurement error due to misreporting. The educational register started
in 1970; for parents who completed their education before then we use information from the 1970 Census.
Thus the register data are used for all children and for all parents who had any education after 1970. Census
data are self reported but the information is considered to be very accurate; there are no spikes or changes
in the education data from the early to the later cohorts. See Møen, Salvanes and Sørensen (2003) for a
description of these data.
13
   While we describe this as high school completion, in Norway many individuals with 12 years of
education obtain vocational rather than academic qualifications.
14
   Of the men in the 1967-1987 cohorts, 1.2 % percent died before 1 year and 0.9 percent died between 1
year of age and registering with the military at about age 18. About 1 percent of the sample of eligible men
had emigrated before age 18, and 1.4% of the men were exempted because they were permanently disabled.
An additional 6.2 percent are missing for a variety of reasons including foreign citizenship and missing
observations. See Eide et al. (2005) for more details.
15
   BMI is calculated as kilograms divided by meters squared.


                                                                                                          12
et al., 2005, Cronbach, 1964). The word test is similar to the vocabulary test in WAIS,

and the figures test is similar to the Raven Progressive Matrix test (Cronbach, 1964). The

composite IQ test score is an unweighted mean of the three subtests. The IQ score is

reported in stanine (Standard Nine) units.16 We match these data with our other data files

and use the height, BMI, and test score data as outcome variables for men.

         Our final dataset is a survey of twins born from 1967 through 1979 that contains

information on zygosity and can be matched to the administrative data. The survey

includes information on twin pairs that were intact at age 3 and was collected in two

waves, one in 1992 and one in 1997. This is the only survey we use that is based on

voluntarily self-reported information. As a result, we only have zygosity information for

surviving twin pairs who completed the survey questionnaire.17



Labor Market Outcomes

         We look at both the earnings of all labor market participants and the earnings of

full-time employees. Earnings are measured as total pension-qualifying earnings reported

in the tax registry. These are not topcoded and include labor earnings, taxable sick

benefits, unemployment benefits, parental leave payments, and pensions. We restrict

attention to individuals aged at least 21 who are not in full time education. In this group,



16
   Stanine units are a method of standardizing raw scores into a nine point standard scale with a normal
distribution, a mean of 5, and a standard deviation of 2. A scale is created with nine intervals, each interval
representing half of a standard deviation. The 5th stanine straddles the midpoint of the distribution,
covering the middle 20% of scores. Stanine 6, 7, 8, and 9 cover the top end of the distribution and 4, 3, 2,
and 1 fall below the mid-point with lower scores. For scores expressed in stanines, normalizing will put
4% of the sample in the first stanine, 7% in the second, and so on through 12%, 17%, 20%, 17%, 12%, 7%,
and 4%. This method of standardization assumes that whatever ability the test measures is evenly
distributed around a central peak
17
   Zygosity assignment is based on questionnaire items about co-twin similarity during childhood. These
classification techniques are considered to have very high rate of correct classification (greater than 96%).
See Harris, Magnus, and Tambs (2002) for more details.


                                                                                                            13
about 86% of both men and women have positive earnings. Given this high level of

participation, our first outcome is log(earnings) conditional on having non-zero earnings.

        Since the results for this variable encompass effects on both wage rates and hours

worked, we also study the earnings of individuals who have a strong attachment to the

labor market and work full-time (defined as 30+ hours per week). To identify this group,

we use the fact that our dataset identifies individuals who are employed and working full

time at one particular point in the year (in the 2nd quarter in the years 86-95, and in the 4th

quarter thereafter).18 We label these individuals as full-time workers and estimate the

earnings regressions separately for this group. About 63% of male participants and 46%

of female participants in our sample are employed full time over this period.



Sample and Summary Statistics

        When we analyze infant mortality and the 5 minute APGAR score, we use birth

data from the entire 1967-1997 period. However, for the other outcomes, we cannot use

data from the later part of this period because we need to observe individuals as adults.

The ranges of cohorts that we can use differ by outcome and are reported in the tables

and in the results section.

        We drop twin pairs for which gestation length is unknown (about 4% of cases).

We also dropped twin pairs where one or both of the twins were born with a congenital

defect (approximately 2.1%). One argument for using the within-twin and within-same-

sex-twin approaches is to make the two children as similar as possible with the exception

of their birth weight. Congenital defects suggest an underlying difference between the


18
 An individual is labeled as employed if currently working with a firm, on temporary layoff, on up to two
weeks of sickness absence, or on maternity leave.


                                                                                                       14
twins. Results without dropping these individuals were slightly stronger for mortality but

quite similar for the later outcomes.19

        Tables 1 and 2 present summary statistics for our sample.20 Statistics are broken

down into twin and non-twin samples in Columns 1 and 2 and the twin sample is reduced

to same-sex twin pairs by sex in Columns 3 and 4.

        When estimating the effect of birth weight on high school graduation and

earnings, we are limited to using the birth data from the earliest period in our sample

(1967-1981) so individuals are aged at least 21 when the outcome is measured. Summary

statistics from this period are presented in Table 2 (the outcomes from the military data –

height, BMI, and IQ – come from cohorts up to 1987). However, we know that over the

entire time period, fertility and infant mortality have been changing. In Figure 1, we see

that the rate of twin births relative to all births was roughly constant up until the late

1980s; with the advent of fertility treatments, the incidence of twins rose. Figure 2

provides further evidence of this phenomenon; we see that, as of the late 1980s, the

fraction of twin births that are same sex is declining. The increase we observe in the

incidence of opposite sex twins, who cannot be identical, is consistent with fertility

treatments having a larger effect on the incidence of fraternal twins. In addition, infant

mortality has declined; see Figures 3 and 4. We discuss the implications of these changes

for our results in Section 6, when we consider selection of individuals into our samples.




19
   When analyzing later outcomes, we also tried adding controls for the 5-minute APGAR score and an
indicator for whether there were complications at birth. Adding these controls had a negligible effect on
birth weight estimates, suggesting that the birth weight effects are not picking up unobserved health
differences between twins.
20
   Note that we are missing observations on APGAR scores for the earliest years in our sample. APGAR
scores became available in 1977.


                                                                                                        15
Differences between Heavier and Lighter Twins

         There is substantial variation in birth weight within twin pairs; 21% of the

variation in birth weight is within-twin. Figure 5 shows the distribution of the within-

twin pair differences in birth weight.

         A simple comparison of means between heavier and lighter same sex twins for the

early sample period (1967-81) presents a preview of our results. (See Table 3.) The

average difference in birth weight between heavier and lighter twins is about 320 grams,

with the lighter twin being more likely to be LBW by a margin of .44 to .26. If birth

weight matters, we would expect there to be commensurate average differences between

heavier and lighter twins in the outcome variables. Average mortality is slightly lower

for the lighter twins, suggesting increased birth weight does not reduce mortality.

However, there is evidence of differences in later outcomes that favor heavier twins. For

example, the heavier twin has a higher probability of finishing at least 12 years of

schooling and is, on average, almost a centimeter taller as a young adult.

         More formally, we can look at the Wald estimates, calculated as the average

difference in outcome between heavier and lighter twins divided by the average

difference in log birth weight between heavier and lighter twins. While this approach is

obviously less efficient than the twin fixed effects we will do later, it is a useful “first

pass” as it is less parametric (as it just compares differences in means) and is less

susceptible to measurement error.21 The Wald estimates are presented in Column 3 of




21
  Unlike fixed effects, the Wald estimator is consistent as the number of twin pairs goes to infinity even in
the presence of measurement error in birth weight.


                                                                                                           16
Table 3.22 They demonstrate a statistically insignificant effect of birth weight on

mortality but positive and statistically significant effects on 5 minute APGAR score, high

school graduation, height, BMI, and ability. The earnings estimates are positive but

statistically insignificant. These results are quite suggestive and preview our ultimate

conclusions based on twin fixed effects analysis.



                                                     5. Results

Choice of Birth Weight Variable

         In the literature, different variants of birth weight have been used as the primary

variable of interest. These include birth weight, log(birth weight), fetal growth (defined

as birth weight divided by weeks gestation), and an indicator for low birth weight (<2500

grams). Given that there is no obvious choice a priori, we have examined the explanatory

power of these variables in the twin fixed effects regressions. The resulting R2 statistics

from the within regression with the various dependent variables and each variant of birth

weight run separately are presented in Appendix Table 1. They indicate that log(birth

weight) provides the best fit for all outcome variables. Thus, we use this variable in our

analysis. The other two continuous measures perform quite similarly to each other.23 It is

interesting to note that the LBW indicator fits most poorly for all outcomes. This suggests




22
   The Wald estimator can be implemented with covariates by instrumenting log birth weight with an
indicator variable for whether the person is the heavier twin. Including covariates has a negligible effect on
the estimates.
23
   Estimates are very similar when either of the other two continuous measures are used. To demonstrate
this, we have included the results for all three variants for the basic specifications in Appendix Table 2.


                                                                                                           17
that using cutoffs such as <2500 grams as the variable of interest may not be appropriate

for this type of analysis.24



OLS and Fixed Effects Estimates

         We first examine the sample of all twins and compare the results when we use

pooled OLS versus a twins fixed-effect estimation strategy. The control variables we use

in the OLS estimation are year- and month-of-birth dummies, indicators for mother’s

education (one for each year), indicators for birth order (which is known to be correlated

with birth weight and also a strong predictor of outcomes in Norway, see Black,

Devereux, and Salvanes 2005a), indicators for mother’s year of birth (one for each year

to allow for the fact that age of mother at birth may have independent effects on child

outcomes), and an indicator for the sex of the child. With twin fixed effects, all controls

are differenced out except the indicators for sex and birth order (either 1st born or 2nd born

twin).

         Table 4 presents these results. Each coefficient represents the results from a

separate regression. We present the results in approximate chronological order so that

outcomes measured earlier in the life-cycle come first.



Short Run Outcomes: Mortality and 5-Minute APGAR Score

         We begin by carrying out an analysis similar to Almond et al. using 5 minute

APGAR scores and one year mortality (per 1000 births) as our outcomes. For mortality,

the pooled OLS coefficient of -279 implies that a 10 percent increase in birth weight

24
   We have tried including both log(birth weight) and an indicator for LBW (<2500 grams) in the same
specifications. The continuous measure dominates for all outcomes and the effect of LBW is always
statistically insignificant and often has the wrong sign.


                                                                                                       18
would reduce one-year mortality by approximately 28 deaths per 1000 births. The fixed

effects coefficient of -41 is statistically significant but only one fifth the size of the OLS

coefficient. Similarly, when we look at 5 Minute APGAR scores as our outcome, we find

a large OLS estimate but a much smaller fixed effects estimate. When we use linear

measures of birth weight, our estimates are almost exactly identical to the estimates of

Almond et al. for the U.S., suggesting that the infant health production function may be

similar in the U.S. and Norway.25 (See Appendix Table 2.)



Height, BMI, and IQ at age 18-20 for Men

         As discussed earlier, we also have information on height, weight, and IQ test

scores for draft age men. Because individuals are at least 18 when they take the test and

our latest test date is in 2005, all men come from the 1967-1987 cohorts. To take account

of the fact that men take the test in different years and at different ages, we add dummies

for the test year to the controls used earlier.

         Table 4 shows the strong positive effects of birth weight on height, BMI, and IQ.

Height is measured in centimeters so the OLS estimate suggests that a 10 percent increase

in birth weight translates into about .75 extra centimeters of height at around age 18, and

an increase in BMI of around .06.26 Fixed effects estimates are quite similar, with a 10%

increase in birth weight leading to a .57 centimeter increase in height and a .10 increase

25
   Because infant mortality is a rare outcome, estimated derivatives may be sensitive to functional form.
When we assume other functional forms and estimate logit or probit equations instead of linear probability
models, we get very different marginal effects (smaller by a factor of 6) in the pooled estimation. Marginal
effects from a fixed effects conditional logit model are also very different from the linear twin fixed effects
estimates (not very surprising given the selection problem induced by the fact that the logit only includes
cases in which one twin lives and one twin dies). Given the sensitivity to functional form, one is left
questioning the credibility of twin fixed effects estimates in the case of these rare events. It is reassuring,
however, that the fixed effects estimates are similar to the Wald estimates for the full period.
26
   There is an extensive literature suggesting that height is a useful indicator of health, both in developed as
well as developing nations. See Strauss and Thomas (1998) for references.


                                                                                                             19
in BMI. Our IQ measure is on a scale from one to nine; the estimated fixed effects

coefficient of 0.62 suggests that an increase in birth weight by 10 percent will increase

the score by .06 (about 1/20th of a stanine). For all three variables, fixed effects estimates

are similar in magnitude to cross-sectional ones.

         Given that BMI is an ambiguous health measure, as health may be adversely

affected if BMI is too high (so men are overweight) or BMI is too low (so men are

underweight), we have used the Center for Disease Control (CDC) cutoffs for overweight

(BMI greater than or equal to 25 – 11% of the twins sample) and underweight (BMI less

than 18.5 – 8% of the twins sample) to analyze the effect of birth weight on the

probability of being in either of these two groups. The fixed effects estimates show that

increased birth weight significantly increases the probability of being overweight but

significantly decreases the probability of being underweight.27



Educational Attainment

         We find that the within twin estimates of the effect of birth weight on education

are similar to the OLS estimates and statistically significant.28 The magnitude implies

that an increase in birth weight of 10 percent increases the probability of high school

completion by a bit less than 1 percentage point. This suggests that, although OLS




27
   Compared to Behrman and Rosenzweig (2004), we find smaller effects of birth weight on height and
larger effects of birth weight on BMI. The estimates are not directly comparable as theirs are for middle-
aged women while ours are for young men.
28
   We also tried looking at completed years of education of individuals aged 25 or more. However, this
required us to substantially reduce our sample size. As a result, although the results were consistent with
the conclusions derived from the high school graduate results, standard errors were too large to make any
independent inference.


                                                                                                          20
estimates greatly overestimate the effect of birth weight on mortality, the relationship

between birth weight and later education remains strong.29



Labor Market Outcomes

         To maximize efficiency, we use all observations on individuals in the 1986-2002

panel, provided they are aged at least 21. We exclude observations from any year in

which the relevant dependent variable is missing for either twin i.e. in the earnings

regressions each twin must have positive earnings in a particular year for it to be

included. Because we have people from many different cohorts, individuals are in the

panel for different sets of years and at different ages. Therefore, as before, we control for

cohort effects. Also, we augment the previous specification by adding indicator variables

for the panel year. This takes account of cyclical effects on earnings etc.

         The standard errors are adjusted to take account of the fact that there are multiple

observations on individuals. To make this more tractable in the fixed effects case, we

implement the fixed effects by first calculating twin differences for each year. This

washes out the twin fixed effect and leaves one observation per twin pair per year.30

         The estimates imply that the OLS and fixed effects estimates are similar; both

suggest that an extra 10 percent of birth weight raises earnings by about 1%. Given the

return to education in Norway has been estimated to be about 4% for men (Black et al.




29
   Unlike with mortality, logit and probit marginal effects for high school graduation are very close to those
from the linear probability model. However, fixed effects logit marginal effects are larger than the fixed
effects linear probability model estimates. The Wald estimates in Table 3 apply a more non-parametric
approach and find estimates that are also a little larger than the fixed effects estimates.
30
   Some individuals are present in more periods than others and, hence, have greater weight in estimation.
We have verified that if we weight each individual equally in estimation, we get similar but less precisely
estimated coefficients. None of our conclusions change.


                                                                                                           21
2005b), this suggests that 10% more birth weight is about as valuable in the labor market

as a quarter of a year of education.



Same-Sex Twins

       One concern with this estimation is that we may be comparing fraternal twins

who are not genetically identical and may have different optimal birth weights; as a

result, differences in birth weight would not reflect deviations from the optimum that

result from nutritional differences. To investigate this issue, we first split our sample

into same-sex twin pairs. While this sample is not limited to monozygotic twins, by

eliminating opposite-sex twin pairs (which are clearly not monozygotic), the sample now

contains a larger fraction of identical twin births. Table 5 reports fixed effects estimates

for all twins and all same-sex twin pairs. The estimates are very similar in both samples,

suggesting the there are not large differences in estimates by zygosity.



Monozygotic Twins

       While we don’t observe zygosity for all twins in our sample, we do observe it for

a subset of the twins born between 1967-1979 who completed the twins questionnaire

described in section 4. We can thereby see how our results differ when we isolate

monozygotic twins from all same-sex twins. These results are in further columns of

Table 5. Because the twins who complete the questionnaire are a selected sample, we

present results for (1) all same-sex twin pairs in the 1967-1979 cohorts, (2) all same-sex

twin pairs who complete the survey, and (3) all monozygotic twin pairs known from the




                                                                                            22
survey.31 Looking at the last 2 columns of Table 5, it is interesting to note that estimates

for monozygotic twins are almost identical to those for all same-sex twins who complete

the survey, consistent with the idea that underlying genetic differences are not important

determinants of birth weight differences among same-sex twin pairs. It is also interesting

to note that our results are somewhat different from the results when we use our full

administrative sample (that does not rely on any information being obtained from the

individual), suggesting that there may be some selection as to who chooses to complete

these twin surveys.32 Given that the results for monozygotic twins are so similar to those

for all same-sex twins, we will continue to stress the results using the twin samples from

the large administrative data samples.



Differences by Gender

        We next separate the administrative data on same-sex twins by gender and report

twin fixed effects estimates in Table 6. For both men and women, there are significant

effects of birth weight on one-year mortality and 5-minute APGAR score. Note that the

magnitudes of these effects are similar for both men and women, and are similar to the

magnitudes from the full sample of twins in Table 4.

        There are, however, differences by gender for the later outcomes. Among men,

birth weight has no statistically significant effect on educational attainment but a

significant effect on earnings. For women, the opposite is true, as birth weight has a

significant effect on educational attainment but not on earnings. Of course, the earnings

31
   We are unable to look at 1-year mortality (because questionnaires were mailed only to twin pairs that
were intact at age 3) and 5 minute APGAR scores (because we only have data on APGAR after 1977 and
sample sizes are inadequate).
32
   Comparing estimates for all same-sex twins, and same-sex twins for the 1967-1979 period, it also
appears that the effects of birth weight on height, BMI, and IQ get larger over the sample period.


                                                                                                       23
of women in our sample are particularly prone to selection problems due to non-

participation and this may be partly responsible for this result.33



Heterogeneous Effects across the Birth Weight Distribution

        While using the natural log of birth weight does allow for non-linear effects, it is

possible to allow the effects of birth weight to be more flexible. Figures 6-11 do this

graphically. For example, Figure 6 illustrates the differences between the OLS estimates

for mortality and those with the twin fixed effects across the birth weight distribution by

presenting the average 1-year mortality rate (per thousand births) by birth weight, both

with and without twin fixed effects. It is clear that not only are the twin fixed effects

estimates much smaller than the OLS, but there is also evidence of significant

nonlinearities in the relationship. In particular, increased body mass has a negative effect

on mortality at low birth weights but little discernable effect at weights above 1500

grams. This is also true of the 5 minute APGAR score, as seen in Figure 7.

        Figure 8 demonstrates that, unlike with mortality and the 5 minute APGAR score,

OLS and twin fixed effects estimates for height are very similar. Once again, there is

some evidence of a non-linear relationship with the positive relationship between birth

weight and height flattening out after about 1500 grams. The equivalent figures for BMI

(Figure 9), ability (Figure 10), and high school graduation (Figure 11) show once again

that OLS and fixed effects estimates are very similar across the distribution. In all cases,

there is a hint of more positive effects at very low weights. However, there is little




33
  In contrast, Behrman and Rosenzweig (2004) find very large effects of fetal growth on female earnings
(twin fixed effects estimates are about 6 times as large as their OLS estimates).


                                                                                                      24
evidence of strong non-linearities. In all figures, the estimates are noisy at very low and

very high weights, reflecting the paucity of data in these regions.

         An alternative approach to allow for non-linearities is to estimate the effect of

birth weight for these outcomes allowing for splines in birth weight with less than 1500,

1500-2500, and 2500 or more as the cutoffs. These results are presented in Table 7 for

the full sample. (Appendix Tables 3a and 3b present the results when we break the

sample by sex.) It is clear there are substantial non-linearities in mortality and the 5

minute APGAR score, with a large marginal benefit for additional grams among very low

birth weight babies in terms of both these outcomes. However, as was suggested by

Figures 6-11, there is less evidence of significant non-linearities in later outcomes.



                         6. Selection into the Later Outcomes Sample

         When looking at the effect of birth weight on later outcomes, we are inherently

only including those individuals for whom we observe later outcomes. In particular,

individuals who did not live are not included in our sample. To the extent that birth

weight affects mortality, this may bias our results estimating the effect of birth weight on

later outcomes. Given that there is evidence that selection into the sample may be

changing over time (See Figures 3 and 4 for evidence of declining infant mortality rates

over time), it is important to understand how it may be affecting our results.34 Note that,

unlike previous twin studies of later outcomes, we observe birth characteristics of twin

pairs that are subsequently impacted by infant mortality.


34
  We have estimated the effect of birth weight on mortality separately for the sample used in our analysis
of later outcomes. These results are presented in Appendix Table 4 and are similar to those from the full
sample period.



                                                                                                         25
        Though it is inherently impossible to know what the effects of birth weight would

have been on the later outcomes of the individuals we do not observe, we do think about

this selection from a number of perspectives. If there are heterogeneous effects of birth

weight across twin pairs, and if there is a positive correlation between the effects of birth

weight on early and later outcomes, we would expect that twin pairs that experience

mortality are pairs for which birth weight would also be disproportionately important for

later outcomes. This reasoning suggests that early mortality will tend to reduce the

estimated effect of birth weight on later outcomes.

        Beginning in 1977, we observe the 5-minute APGAR score for all individuals

(even those who subsequently die in infancy). As a check, we separately estimate the

relationship between birth weight and APGAR for the full sample and the sample of twin

pairs where both twins live; when we do this using twin fixed effects, we find that log

birth weight has a significantly larger positive effect on the APGAR score for the full

sample of twin births. The difference is large -- .35 (.07) for the full sample, versus .19

(.06) for the sample without mortality. If this relationship is also true of other, later

outcomes, then we may be underestimating the true effect of birth weight on later

outcomes by a substantial amount.

        Finally, a formal approach to the missing data problem is to model the probability

that a twin pair will experience mortality within the first year and hence attrit from the

later outcomes sample. We allow the probability of attrition to depend on the variables

that are always observed which we denote as xit (which includes all the usual control

variables plus the birth weight of each twin and indicator variables for whether each twin

is LBW), but do not allow dependence on the variables that are missing for some units




                                                                                              26
(the later outcomes). The estimation of the model is carried out in two steps. In the first

stage, we estimate a probit model that conditions the probability of attrition on xit. The

predicted probabilities from the probit model are used to form weights and these weights

are used to weight the observations in the twin fixed effects estimation in the second step.

The weights are equal to the inverse of the probability of not attriting due to mortality in

the first year.35 When we do this reweighting, we again find that our estimates are likely

underestimating the true effect of birth weight on later outcomes.36



                                          7. External Validity

         While using within twin variation allows us to credibly identify the causal effect

of birth weight on later outcomes, the question as to how generalizable these results are to

the general population of births remains.

         From Table 1, we can see that there are substantial differences between twin and

singleton births. Not surprisingly, non-twins are on average heavier, with only 3 percent

classified as low birth weight (less than 2500 grams), while 33 percent of twins are low

birth weight. Gestation is also longer for singletons, with the average at 39.8 weeks

versus 36.9 for twins. Five minute APGAR scores are also higher, there are a lower

fraction with complications, and the one-year mortality rate is only 6 per 1000 births as

opposed to 31 for twins. Parental education is similar for both groups but the mothers of

twins tend to be older.

35
  This is referred to as Missing at Random (Little and Rubin, 1987). The argument is that there is nothing
in the data that suggests that units that drop out are systematically different from units who do not drop out
once we condition on all observed variables. This model has some intuitive appeal. Consider a unit that
drops out in the first year with values of the observed variables equal to X it = xit . The Missing at
Random assumption implies that for our best guess of the value of the missing later outcome variables, we
should look at values of the later outcomes for units with the exact same values of xit.
36
   The differences between the weighted and unweighted estimates are not large being of the order of 3-5%.


                                                                                                            27
         One of the most notable differences is that twins come disproportionately from

the lower part of the birth weight distribution; this can be seen in Figure 12, which shows

the distribution of birth weight for twins and non-twins. The question then becomes, are

the outcomes of twins and singletons similar controlling for birth weight? To examine

this, we have graphed the relationship between birth weight and mortality, 5-minute

APGAR score, education, height, BMI, and IQ for the sample of twins and non-twins.

(See Figures 6-11.) It is interesting to note that the twins and non-twins actually have

quite similar outcomes conditional on birth weight, suggesting that our results may be

generalizable to the rest of the population.37 This is consistent with findings in the

medical literature that suggest that the primary cause of disparities in outcomes between

twins and singletons is due to differences in size at birth. Allen (1995) notes that, in a

sample of pre-term births, no differences were present between twins and singletons with

respect to neurodevelopmental outcomes at 18 months from due date, after adjusting for

confounding social, obstetric and neonatal factors (including birth weight).38



                                            8. Magnitudes

         While we find that birth weight effects for later outcomes are statistically

significant and similar in magnitude to cross-sectional relationships, it is difficult to

determine whether these are big effects without reference to specific policy scenarios.




37
   Of course, we cannot rule out the possibility that twins and singletons have very different causal
relationships between birth weight and outcomes but that they are subject to different confounding factors
that happen to cancel each other out so that the cross-sectional profiles are similar.
38
   Differences were only found when they examined pre-term infants with birth weights of <800 grams,
suggesting greater vulnerability of twins born at the limit of viability. See also Hoffman and Bennett
(1990).


                                                                                                         28
        One such scenario is the WIC program in the United States. Earlier work by

Kowaleski-Jones and Duncan (2002) estimated the effect of WIC participation by a

pregnant woman to be about a 7.5 percent increase in child birth weight.39 Using this

estimate, we can translate this increased birth weight into the effect of WIC on longer run

outcomes. Based on our estimates, a 7.5 percent increase in birth weight among men

would lead to a half a centimetre increase in height, a .05 stanine increase in IQ, and a 1.8

percent increase in earnings (or a 1.1 percent increase in full-time earnings), while among

women it would lead to a one percentage point increase in high school completion.

        Another scenario is the Irish Government’s policy of reducing disparities in birth

weight across socio-economic groups. In the United States, the average difference in birth

weight between children of college graduate women and high school dropout women is

about 200 grams. Our estimates suggest that if this disparity was eliminated by increasing

the birth weight of the children of high school dropouts, the effects on male children of

high school dropouts would be substantial. Earnings of male children would rise by about

2%, full time earnings would rise by about 1%, height would rise by about half a

centimeter, and IQ would rise by 1/25th of a standard deviation. For female children, the

proportion completing high school would increase by about .01. Thus, our estimates

suggest that interventions to reduce socio-economic disparities in birth weight may have

sizeable impacts on adult outcomes.40


39
   They use the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth and apply a sibling fixed effects approach,
identifying off of mothers who participated in WIC during one pregnancy but not during the other one.
40
   Currie and Moretti (2003) find that one year of extra maternal education reduces the probability of
having a low birth weight child by 1 percentage point from a baseline of about 5 percent of children being
born LBW. When we use a LBW indicator as our birth weight variable, the fixed effects estimates imply
that 1 year of maternal education increases male earnings by approximately .067 percent and has an even
smaller effect on annual earnings of full time workers. For men, fixed effect estimates imply one year of
education increases height by .01 centimeters. Likewise, for women, one year of education increases the
probability of graduating high school by .0004. Overall, these numbers suggest that the impact of one extra


                                                                                                        29
                                             9. Conclusions

         In this paper, we have examined the effect of birth weight on adult outcomes

using within-twin variation in birth weight to control for other, often unobservable,

parental and environment factors. Consistent with the recent literature, we find little if

any relationship between birth weight and 1-year mortality, and OLS estimates greatly

overestimate the true causal relationship. However, conclusions drawn from these results

can be misleading, for we find a significant impact of birth weight on later outcomes of

children, including height, BMI, and IQ, all at age 18, education, and earnings. In

contrast with infant mortality, twin fixed effects estimates of the effects of birth weight

for the later outcomes are similar in size to OLS estimates. Additionally, we find that the

relationship is fairly linear, suggesting that earlier work using indicators for low birth

weight (<2500 grams) may be misspecified.

         Given that there are clearly long-run effects of birth weight differences, a natural

question for future work is how investments of parents and society interact with birth

weight to determine these effects. For example, parents with more resources may be

better able to mitigate the negative effects of being born smaller.41 We have found no

statistically significant differences in the effects of birth weight by mother’s education,

by family income, or by birth order of the children. However, this in part reflects the

smaller sample sizes that arise when disaggregating the sample and so this area remains

an important avenue for future research.


year of maternal education coming through birth weight on later outcomes is very small. However,
magnitudes may be larger if we had estimates of the effects of maternal education on a more continuous
measure of birth weight, as our evidence suggests there is little effect of the 2500 gram cut-off on longer
run outcomes.
41
  There is some evidence of this in the cross-sectional and sibling fixed effects context, but not controlling
for twin fixed effects. See Loughran et al (2004) for one example.


                                                                                                              30
                                          References

Allen, M.C. (1995), “Factors Affecting Developmental Outcome” in Multiple Pregnancy:
       Epidemiology, Gestation & Perinatal Outcome. Keith, Papiernik, Keith, and
       Luke, eds. Parthenon Publishing: New York.

Almond Douglas, Kenneth Y. Chay and David S. Lee (2005), “The Costs of Low Birth
     Weight”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3).

Barker, D. J. (1995), “Fetal Origin of Coronary Hearth Disease“, British Medical
       Journal, Vol. 317, 171-174.

Behrman Jere R., and Mark R. Rosenzweig (2004), “Returns to Birth weight”, Review of
      Economics and Statistics, May, 86(2), 586-601.

Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes (2005a), “The More the
       Merrier? The Effects of Family Size and Birth Order on Children’s Education”,
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, May.

Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes (2005b), “Why the Apple
       doesn’t Fall Far: Understanding Intergenerational Transmission of Education”,
       American Economic Review, March.

Blickstein, Isaac and Robin B. Kalish, (2003). “Birthweight Discordance in Multiple
       Pregnancy.” Twin Research, Volume 6, Number 6, pp. 526-531.

Bryan, Elizabeth (1992), Twins and Higher Order Births: A Guide to their Nature and
       Nurture, London, UK: Edward Arnold, 1992).

Case, Anne, Angela Fertig, and Christina Paxson (2004), “The Lasting Impact of
       Childhood Health and Circumstance.” Princeton Center for Health and Wellbeing
       Working Paper, April.

Christensen K, J.W. Vaupel, N. V. Holm, A.J. Yashin (1995). “Mortality Among Twins
       After Age 6: Fetal Origions Hypothesis Versus Twin Method.” British Medical
       Journal Vol. 319, 432-36.

Conley, Dalton, and Neil G. Bennett (2000), “Is Biology Destiny? Birth Weight and Life
      Chances”, American Sociological Review, 65 (June), 458-467.

Conley, Dalton, Kate Strully, and Neil G. Bennett (2003), “A Pound of Flesh or Just
      Proxy? Using Twin Differences to Estimate the Effect of Birth Weight on
      (Literal) Life Chances”, mimeo.

Cronbach, L. J. (1964), Essentials of psychological testing, 2.nd ed. London: Harper and
      Row.



                                                                                       31
Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber (1996). “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of
        Recent Changes in the Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women.” Journal of
        Political Economy, Vol 104, No 6, pp. 1263-1296.

Currie, Janet, and Rosemary Hyson (1998), “Is the Impact of Health Shocks Cushioned
        by Socio-Economic Status? The Case of Low Birth weight”, mimeo.

Currie, Janet, and Enrico Moretti (2003), “Mother’s education and the Intergenerational
        Transmission of Human Capital: Evidence from College Openings,” Quarterly
        Journal of Economics, CXVIII, 1495-1532.

Currie, Janet, and Enrico Moretti (2005), “Biology as Destiny? Short and Long-Run
        Determinants of Inter-Generational Transmission of Birth Weight”, NBER
        Working Paper #11567.

Duffy, D.L. (1993). “Twin Studies in Medical Research.” Lancet Vol 341, 1418-19.

Eide, Martha G., Nina Øyen, Rolv Skjærven, Stein Tore Nilsen, Tor Bjerkedal and
       Grethe S. Tell (2005). ”Size at Birth and Gestational Age as Predictors of Adult
       Height and Weight, “ Epidemiology, Vol. 16 (2), 175-181.

Grjibovski, A. M., J. H. Harris and P. Magnus (2005). “Birthweight and adult health in a
       population-based sample of Norwegian twins,” Twin Results and Human
       Genetics, Vol. 8(2), 148-155.

Hack, Maureen, Daniel J. Flannery, Mark Schluchter, Lydia Cartar, Elaine Borawski, and
      Nancy Klein (2002). “Outcomes in Young Adulthood for Very-Low-Birth weight
      Infants.” New England Journal of Medicine, Volume 246, Number 3, January 17,
      2002, 149-157.

Hack, Maureen, H. Gerry Taylor, Nancy Klein, Robert Eiben, Christopher
      Schatschneider, and Nori Mercuri-Minich (1994) “School-Age Outcomes in
      Children with Birth Weights under 750 grams.” New England Journal of
      Medicine, Volume 331: 753-759. Number 12.

Harris, Jennifer R., Per Magnus, and Kristian Tambs (2002). “The Norwegian Institute
        of Public Health Twin Panel: A Description of the Sample and Program of
        Research.” Twin Research, Volume 5, Number 5, October, pp. 415-423.

Hoffman, E.L. and F.C. Bennett (1990). “Birth Weight Less than 800 Grams: Changing
      Outcomes and Influences of Gender and Gestation Number.” Pediatrics, 86, 27.

Keith, Louis G., Emile Papiernik, Donald M. Keith, and Barbara Luke, editors. (1995)
       Multiple Pregnancy: Epidemiology, Gestation, & Perinatal Outcome. Parthenon
       Publishing: New York.



                                                                                          32
Kowaleski-Jones, Lori and Greg J. Duncan (2002). “Effects of Participation in the WIC
      Program on Birthweight: Evidence from the National Longitudinal Survey of
      Youth.” Journal of Public Health, May. Vol 92, Number 5.

Little R.J.A. and D.B. Rubin (1987). Statistical Analysis with Missing Data. Wiley.
        Chichester.

Loughran, David S., Ashlesha Datar, and M. Rebecca Kilburn (2004). “The Interactive
      Effect of Birth Weight and Parental Investment on Child Test Scores.” RAND
      Labor and Population Working Paper # WR-168.

Møen, Jarle, Kjell G. Salvanes and Erik Ø. Sørensen. (2003). “Documentation of the
      Linked Empoyer-Employee Data Base at the Norwegian School of Economics.”
      Mimeo, The Norwegian School of Economics and Business Administration.

Phillips, D.I.W. (1993). “Twin Studies in Medical Research : Can They Tell Us whether
        Diseases are Genetically Determined? Lancet Vol. 334, 1008-9.

Strauss, John and Duncan Thomas. (1998) “Health, Nutrition, and Economic
       Development.” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 36, No. 2 (June) 766-817.

Sundet, Martin Jon, Dag G. Barlaug, and Tore M. Torjussen
       (2004), "The End of the Flynn Effect? A Study of Secular Trends in Mean
       Intelligence Test Scores of Norwegian Conscripts During Half a Century",
       Intelligence, 32, 349-362.

Sundet, Jon Martin, Kristian Tambs, Jennifer R. Harris, Per Magnus, and Tore M.
       Torjussen (2005), “Resolving the genetic and environmental sources of the
       correlation between height and intelligence: A study of nearly 2600 Norwegian
       male twin pairs. Twin Research and Human Genetics, Vol 8(4), 1-5.

Thrane, Vidkunn Coucheron (1977), Evneprøving av utskrivingspliktige i Norge 1950-
       53. Arbeidsrapport nr. 26, INAS.




                                                                                       33
                                              Figure 1
                                 Fraction of Twin Births Out of All Births
0.018


0.016


0.014


0.012


 0.01


0.008


0.006


0.004


0.002


    0
   1967   1969   1971   1973   1975   1977   1979   1981   1983   1985   1987   1989   1991   1993   1995   1997




                                                                                                                   34
                                                   Figure 2
                               Fraction of Twin Births That Are Same Sex Twins

0.76


0.74


0.72


 0.7


0.68


0.66


0.64


0.62


 0.6


0.58


0.56
  1967   1969   1971   1973   1975   1977   1979   1981   1983   1985   1987   1989   1991   1993   1995   1997




                                                                                                                  35
                                                 Figure 3
                                           One-Year Mortality Rates
                                              Per 1000 Births
16



14



12



10



 8



 6



 4



 2



 0
 1967   1969   1971   1973   1975   1977    1979   1981   1983   1985   1987   1989   1991   1993   1995   1997




                                                                                                                  36
                                               Figure 4
                                      Mortality Rates by Twin Status
                                            per 1000 births
80


70


60


50


40


30


20


10


 0
 1967   1969   1971   1973   1975   1977   1979     1981       1983    1985       1987   1989   1991   1993   1995   1997


                                              twin mortality      non-twin mortality




                                                                                                                            37
                                                                   Figure 5
                                            Distribution of Differences in Birth Weight of Twins

30




25   23.92




20           18.78



                     15.02
15

                             12.25


10                                   8.79
                                             7.12


 5                                                  4.42
                                                           3.39
                                                                  1.93   1.6
                                                                                1.06
                                                                                       0.6    0.37   0.25   0.16   0.14   0.07   0.05   0.02   0.05
 0
     100     200     300     400     500     600    700    800    900    1000   1100   1200   1300   1400   1500   1600   1700   1800   1900   2000
                                                      Difference in Birth Weight Between Twins (Grams)




                                                                                                                                                      38
                                              Mortality (per 1000 births)




                        0
                            100
                                  200
                                        300
                                                  400
                                                          500
                                                                 600
                                                                            700
                                                                                  800
                                                                                        900
                 50
                    0                                                                         1000
                 70
                    0
                 90
                    0
                11
                   00
                13
                   00
                15
                   00
                17
                   00
                19
                   00
                21
                   00
                23
                   00
                25
                   00
                27
                   00
                29
                   00
                31
                   00
                33
                   00




     non-twin
                35
                   00
                                                                                                                Figure 6




                37
                   00




     twin
                39
                   00
                41
                   00
                43
                                                                                                     Mortality Rate by Birth Weight




                   00
     twin FE

                45
                   00
                47
                   00
                49
                   00
                51
                   00
                53
                   00
                55
                   00
                57
                   00
                59
                   00
                61
                   00
                63
                   00
                66
                  00




39
                                                             Figure 7
                                                      5 Minute Apgar Score
                                                         by Birth Weight

12



10



 8



 6



 4



 2



 0
   0


         0


               0

                     00


                            00


                                   00


                                          00


                                                 00


                                                        00


                                                               00


                                                                       00


                                                                                00


                                                                                       00


                                                                                              00


                                                                                                     00


                                                                                                            00


                                                                                                                   00


                                                                                                                          00


                                                                                                                                 00


                                                                                                                                        00
 50


       70


             90

                   11


                          13


                                 15


                                        17


                                               19


                                                      21


                                                             23


                                                                     25


                                                                              27


                                                                                     29


                                                                                            31


                                                                                                   33


                                                                                                          35


                                                                                                                 37


                                                                                                                        39


                                                                                                                               41


                                                                                                                                      43
                                                                     Grams

                                                         non twins          twins     twin fe




                                                                                                                                             40
                                                        Figure 8
                                                 Height by Birth Weight

190


185


180


175


170


165


160


155


150


145


140
  700   900   1100   1300   1500   1700   1900   2100   2300      2500    2700   2900   3100   3300   3500   3700   3900   4100   4300


                                                        nontwin          twin     twin-FE




                                                                                                                                         41
                                                        Figure 9
                                                   BMI by Birth Weight

30




25




20




15




10




 5




 0
 700   900   1100   1300   1500   1700   1900   2100   2300       2500    2700   2900   3100   3300   3500   3700   3900   4100   4300


                                                       non-twin          twin    twin-FE




                                                                                                                                         42
                                                           Figure 10
                                                      IQ by Birth Weight

8



7



6



5



4



3



2



1



0
700   900   1100   1300   1500   1700   1900   2100    2300      2500    2700   2900   3100   3300   3500   3700   3900   4100   4300


                                                      non-twin          twin    twin-FE




                                                                                                                                        43
                                                         Figure 11
                                          High School Graduation by Birth Weight

 1


0.9


0.8


0.7


0.6


0.5


0.4


0.3


0.2


0.1


 0
  700   900   1100   1300   1500   1700   1900   2100   2300   2500   2700     2900    3100     3300   3500   3700   3900   4100   4300   4500


                                                          non-twin      twin          twin-FE




                                                                                                                                                 44
                               0%
                                    1%
                                         2%
                                              3%
                                                   4%
                                                        5%
                                                             6%
                                                                  7%
                                                                       8%
                           0                                                9%
                         200
                         400
                         600
                         800
                        1000
                        1200
                        1400
                        1600
                        1800
                        2000
                        2200
                        2400
                        2600
                        2800
                        3000
                        3200




     nontwins
                Grams
                        3400
                        3600




     twins
                                                                                           Figure 12




                        3800
                        4000
                        4200
                                                                                 Distribution of Birth Weight




                        4400
                        4600
                        4800
                        5000
                        5200
                        5400
                        5600
                        5800
                        6000
                        6200
                        6400




45
                                                   Table 1
                                            Summary Statistics
                                           Full Period (1967-1997)
                                                Non-twins     Twins             Same Sex        Same Sex
                                                 Sample       Sample             Twins           Twins
                                                                                  Male           Female

Child’s Characteristics
Infant Birth Weight
   Mean                                             3528            2598            2594            2540
                                                   (558)           (613)           (639)           (600)
   Median                                           3540            2660            2660            2600
   25th percentile                                  3210            2250            2240            2200
   10th percentile                                  2880            1800            1750            1750
   5th percentile                                   2640            1470            1380            1430
   1st percentile                                   1860             820             760             800
Fraction low birth weight (<2500                     .03             .33             .33             .36
Grams)                                              (.17)           (.47)           (.47)           (.48)
Gestation in weeks                                 39.83           36.90           36.62           37.02
                                                   (2.17)          (3.18)          (3.30)          (3.20)
Fetal Growth                                       88.46           69.83           70.14           68.05
                                                  (13.07)         (13.81)         (14.38)         (13.48)
Fraction Female                                      .49             .50              0               1
                                                    (.50)           (.50)
Fraction with Complications                          .31             .49            .49             .49
                                                    (.46)           (.50)          (.50)           (.50)
1 Year mortality rate (per 1000 births)             6.23           31.13           41.20           28.11
                                                  (78.69)        (173.67)        (198.75)        (165.30)
5 minute APGAR score                                9.29            9.01           8.95            9.01
                                                    (.75)          (1.10)         (1.19)          (1.10)
Mother’s Characteristics
Education                                         11.43           11.53           11.55            11.53
                                                  (2.56)          (2.62)          (2.60)          (2.63)
Age                                               26.66           28.09           27.84            27.76
                                                  (5.23)          (5.11)          (5.11)          (5.18)
N                                               1,595,233         33,346          11,530          11,276
      APGAR scores are only available after 1977; as a result, we have APGAR scores for 959,518 nontwins,
      21,708 twins, 7,540 same-sex male twins, and 7,243 same-sex female twins. Standard deviations in
      parentheses.
      Fetal Growth is calculated as birth weight divided by weeks gestation.




                                                                                                            46
                                          Table 2
                      Summary Statistics for Early Period (1967-1981)
                                            Non-twins          Twins        Same Sex     Same Sex
Child’s Characteristics                                                     Male Twins   Female Twins
Infant Birth Weight
   Mean                                         3511             2607            2650        2531
                                               (549)            (616)           (643)       (602)
   Median                                       3520             2660            2670        2590
   25th percentile                              3200             2250            2250        2180
   10th percentile                              2870             1810            1750        1740
   5th percentile                               2630             1480            1380        1440
   1st percentile                               1900              860             810         810
Fraction low birth weight (<2500                 .03              .33             .32         .38
Grams)                                          (.17)            (.47)           (.47)       (.48)
Gestation in weeks                             39.89            37.30           37.07       37.37
                                               (2.16)           (3.28)          (3.38)      (3.32)
Fetal Growth                                   87.92            69.33           69.75       67.18
                                              (12.85)          (13.78)         (14.35)     (13.38)
Fraction Female                                  .49              .50              0           1
                                                (.50)            (.50)
Fraction with Complications                      .24              .44            .44          .43
                                                (.43)            (.50)          (.50)        (.50)
1 Year mortality rate (per 1000                 8.10            46.03          59.72        41.94
births)                                       (89.63)         (209.55)        (236.98)     (200.47)
5 Minute APGAR Score                            9.40             9.03           8.95         9.01
                                                (.78)           (1.19)         (1.26)       (1.19)
Percentage Completing High School                .73              .73            .73          .75
                                                (.45)            (.43)          (.44)        (.44)
Earnings Data
Earnings                                     260,132          257,092         300,639      210,709
                                            (367,588)        (138,950)       (149,416)    (108,849)
Earnings for Full Time Workers               311,616          307,463         337,016      262,239
                                            (159,583)        (123,373)       (133,156)    (149,416)
Military Data
Height (Male Sample)                          179.96              -            179.33         -
                                              (6.51)                           (6.57)
BMI (Male Sample)                             22.50               -            21.84          -
                                              (3.38)                           (2.90)
IQ (Male Sample)                               5.20               -             5.06          -
                                              (1.79)                           (1.82)
Mother’s Characteristics
Education                                     10.76            10.69           10.77        10.69
                                              (2.53)           (2.59)          (2.62)       (2.58)
Age                                           25.80            27.07           26.88        26.78
                                              (5.27)           (5.22)          (5.23)       (5.30)
N                                            813,497           14,882          5,074        5,198
Military Sample includes cohorts up to 1987. Standard deviations in parentheses.



                                                                                                  47
                                              Table 3
                                 Summary Statistics: Same Sex Twins
                                          Early Sample

                                                      Heavier              Lighter           Wald Estimates
                                                                                             [standard errors]
Infant Birth Weight
   Mean                                                2732                 2412
                                                       (615)                (585)
   Median                                              2800                 2470
   25th percentile                                     2390                 2070
   10th percentile                                     1940                 1630
   5th percentile                                      1580                 1320
   1st percentile                                       910                  780
Fraction low birth weight (<2500                        .26                  .44
Grams)                                                 (.44)                (.50)
Fetal Growth                                           72.74                64.25
                                                      (13.30)              (13.12)
Fraction with Complications                             .43                  .45
                                                       (.49)                (.50)
Ln(Birth Weight)                                        .97                  .84
                                                       (.28)                (.30)
Outcomes:
1 Year mortality rate (per 1000 births)               51.27                  47.69                  27.68
                                                     (220.57)              (213.14)                [21.10]
5 minute APGAR score*                                   9.01                  8.96                  .36**
                                                      (1.11)                (1.16)                   [.11]
Height (Males only)                                   179.67                178.99                 5.61**
                                                      (6.57)                (6.56)                   [.75]
BMI (Males only)                                       21.90                 21.77                 1.05**
                                                      (2.89)                (2.86)                   [.40]
Ability (Males only)                                    5.10                  5.04                  .49**
                                                      (1.81)                (1.82)                   [.24]
High School Graduation Rate                             .75                   .73                   .16**
                                                       (.43)                 (.44)                   [.05]
Ln(Earnings)                                           11.96                 11.95                    .08
                                                       (.86)                 (.86)                   [.11]
Ln(Earnings) for Full Time Workers                     12.28                 12.27                    .11
                                                       (.51)                 (.52)                   [.08]
N                                                                 10,064
    Standard deviations in parentheses. Wald estimates are the difference in outcome divided by the difference
    in ln(birth weight).
    * APGAR scores are only available for 2,364 twins in the early period so we report APGAR scores and
    Wald estimate calculated using the full 1977-1997 period that they are available.
                                               Table 4
                                         Regression Results
                                           Twins Sample
                                  Coefficient on Ln(Birth Weight)
Dependent Variable:
                                                     OLS                                    FE

1-Year Mortality                                 -279.16**                              -41.15**
N=33,346                                           (9.11)                                (7.64)

5 minute APGAR score                               1.46**                                 .35**
N=21,574                                            (.06)                                  (.07)

Height (Males Only)                                7.51**                                 5.69**
N=5,388                                             (.55)                                  (.56)

BMI (Males Only)                                    .59**                                 1.12**
N=5,378                                              (.23)                                 (.30)

   Underweight                                      -.08**                                -.11**
   N=5,378                                           (.02)                                 (.04)

   Overweight                                         .03                                 .10**
   N=5,378                                           (.02)                                 (.04

IQ (Males Only)                                     .49**                                 .62**
N=4,926                                              (.14)                                 (.18)

High School Completion                              .08**                                 .09**
N=13,472                                             (.02)                                 (.04)

Ln(Earnings)                                        .10**                                  .09*
N=34,788                                             (.03)                                 (.05)
  (5,858 Twin Pairs)

Ln(Earnings) FT                                     .07**                                 .10**
N=16,214                                             (.02)                                 (.04)
  (3,893 Twin Pairs)
The control variables we use in the OLS estimation are year- and month-of-birth dummies, indicators for
mother’s education (one for each year), indicators for birth order, indicators for mother’s year of birth, and
an indicator for the sex of the child. Twin fixed effects regressions include indicators for sex and birth order
of the twin (either 1st born or 2nd born twin). Both cross-sectional and fixed effects regressions for height,
BMI, and IQ also include indicator variables for the year the boy was tested by the military.
Standard errors in parentheses.
** denotes statistically significant at the 5% level
* denotes statistically significant at the 10% level




                                                                                                            49
                                            Table 5
                           Fixed Effects Results for ln(Birth Weight)
                            All Twins     All Same-Sex All Same-Sex                     Same-Sex        Monozygotic
                                              Twins           Twins                     Twins in          Twins
                                                           1967-1979                     Survey
1-Year Mortality            -41.15**        -39.99**          14.03                        --                      --
                              (7.64)          (9.46)         (16.48)
                             [33,346]       [22,806]         [9,120]

5 minute APGAR                 .35**               .38**                  --                 --                    --
score                           (.07)               (.08)
                              [21,574]            [14,682]

Height (Males                     --               5.69**              4.20**             3.79**              4.14**
Only)                                               (.56)               (.71)              (.83)               (.64)
                                                   [5,388]             [3,558]            [2,700]             [1,376]

BMI (Males Only)                  --               1.12**               .59*                .37                 .43
                                                    (.30)               (.35)              (.39)               (.37)
                                                   [5,378]             [3,552]            [2,696]             [1,372]

IQ (Males Only)                   --                .62**                .37                .20                 .22
                                                     (.18)              (.23)              (.27)               (.30)
                                                   [4,926]             [3,332]            [2,538]             [1,312]

High School                    .09**                .10**               .10**              .08*                 .09
Completion                      (.04)                (.04)               (.04)             (.05)               (.06)
                              [13,472]             [9,248]             [8,180]            [6,634]             [3,466]

Ln(Earnings)                    .09*                 .09                 .08                .07                .05
                                (.05)               (.06)               (.06)              (.07)              (.09)
                              [34,788]            [24,088]            [23,760]           [20,255]           [10,290]
                            [5,858 twin         [4,060 twin         [3,819 twin        [3,104 twin        [1,606 twin
                               pairs]              pairs]              pairs]             pairs]             pairs]

Ln(Earnings) FT                .10**               .12**               .12**              .10**                .09
                                (.04)               (.05)               (.05)              (.05)              (.05)
                              [16,214]            [11,712]            [11,623]           [10,033]           [5,201]
                            [3,893 twin         [2,730 twin         [2,656 twin        [2,231 twin        [1,169 twin
                               pairs]              pairs]              pairs]             pairs]             pairs]
The control variables we use include indicators for sex and birth order of the twin (either 1st born or 2nd
born twin). Regressions for height, BMI, and IQ also include indicator variables for the year the boy was
tested by the military.
Twin pairs that experienced infant mortality are not in the survey universe. APGAR scores are only
available from 1977 so estimates from the 1967-1979 period are not reported.
Standard errors in parentheses. Number of observations in square parentheses.
** denotes statistically significant at the 5% level
* denotes statistically significant at the 10% level


                                                                                                              50
                                               Table 6
                                    Twin Fixed Effects Results
                                     Same Sex Twins Sample
                                               By Sex
                                  Coefficient on Ln(Birth Weight)
Dependent Variable:
                                                    Males                                Females

1-Year Mortality                                  -34.40**                               -45.77**
                                                   (14.08)                                (12.59)

5 minute APGAR score                                .35**                                  .42**
N=7,490                                              (.11)                                  (.11)

High School Completion                                .06                                  .13**
                                                     (.06)                                  (.05)

Ln(Earnings)                                        .24**                                   -.05
                                                     (.08)                                 (.10)

Ln(Earnings) FT                                     .15**                                   .06
                                                     (.07)                                 (.06)

Twin fixed effects regressions include an indicator for birth order of the twin (either 1st born or 2nd born
twin).
Standard errors in parentheses.
** denotes statistically significant at the 5% level
* denotes statistically significant at the 10% level




                                                                                                               51
                                                                        Table 7
                                                            Fixed Effects Regression Results
                                                                   All Twins Sample
                                1-Year             5 minute     High School     Height        BMI                   IQ      Ln(Earn)     Ln(Earn)
                               Mortality           APGAR        Completion      (Males       (Males               (Males                   FT
                                                     score                       Only)        Only)                Only)
Splines:

BW<1500                       -260.45**             1.36**               .26             6.25**           1.79    1.11       -0.45        0.41*
                               (22.94)               (.20)              (.17)            (2.39)          (1.28)   (.80)      (.33)        (.22)

1500<BW<2500                      4.17                 .04               .05             2.67**          .69**    .47**      .08*          .05
                                 (6.73)               (.06)             (.03)             (.50)           (.27)    (.16)     (.04)        (.03)

BW>2500                           -4.62              .08**               .02             1.86**           .22      .07        .03          .01
                                 (4.30)               (.04)             (.02)             (.29)          (.16)    (.09)      (.03)        (.02)

N                                33,346             21,574             13,472             5,388          5,378    4,926      34,788       16,214
                                                                                                                           (5848 Twin   (3893 Twin
                                                                                                                              Pairs)       Pairs)
Regressions include indicators for sex and birth order of the twin (either 1st born or 2nd born twin).
Standard errors in parentheses.
** denotes statistically significant at the 5% level
* denotes statistically significant at the 10% level




                                                                                                                                                  52
                                                     Appendix Table 1
                                                      Goodness of Fit
                 (Within R-Square Statistics for Various Measures of Birth Weight with Twin Fixed Effects)
Dependent Variable:          1-Year        5 minute        HS        Earnings    Earnings     Height       BMI                                              IQ
                            Mortality      APGAR        Graduation                 (F/T)
                                             score

Birth Weight                             .0031            .0260              .0018           .0425            .0576           .0426         .0187         .0087

Ln(Birth Weight)                         .0043            .0271              .0019           .0425            .0579           .0443         .0197         .0101

Fetal Growth                             .0032            .0259              .0018           .0425            .0576           .0430         .0187         .0088

Indicator for <2500 grams                .0027            .0250              .0016           .0424            .0570           .0144         .0156         .0056

Numbers represents the Within R-Squared Statistics from a twin fixed effects regression with all twins including controls for birth order, sex, and the indicated
measure of birth weight.




                                                                                                                                                                 53
                                                   Appendix Table 2
                                                   Regression Results
                                                   All Twins Sample
Dependent                  Ln(Birth Weight)                   Birth Weight                      Fetal Growth
Variable:
                           OLS             FE              OLS               FE              OLS              FE

1-Year Mortality        -279.16**       -41.15**        -103.39**          -9.67**         -4.29**          -.41**
N=33,346                  (9.11)         (7.64)           (3.92)            (3.16)          (.17)            (.12)

5 minute APGAR            1.46**         .35**            .57**             .11**           .023**          .004**
score                      (.06)          (.07)            (.02)             (.03)           (.001)          (.001)
N=21,574

Height (Males             7.51**         5.69**           3.08**           2.18**            .15**          .08**
Only)                      (.55)          (.56)            (.21)            (.22)             (.01)          (.01)
N=5,388

BMI (Males Only)           .59**         1.12**           .23**             .39**           .015**          .015**
N=5,378                     (.23)         (.30)            (.09)             (.12)           (.004)          (.004)

IQ (Males Only)            .49**          .62**           .18**             .21**           .01**           .008**
N=4,926                     (.14)          (.18)           (.06)             (.07)          (.002)           (.003)

High School                .08**          .09**           .03**             .03**           .002**         .0012**
Completion                  (.02)          (.04)           (.01)             (.01)          (.0003)         (.0005)
N=13,472

Ln(Earnings)               .10**          .09*            .04**             .04*            .002**         .0014*
N=34,788                    (.03)         (.05)            (.01)            (.02)           (.0004)        (.0008)
(5,858 Twin Pairs)

Ln(Earnings) FT            .07**          .10**           .03**             .03**           .001**         .0012**
N=16,214                    (.02)          (.04)           (.01)            (.016)          (.0003)         (.0006)
(3,893 Twin Pairs)
      The control variables we use in the OLS estimation are year- and month-of-birth dummies, indicators for
      mother’s education (one for each year), indicators for birth order , indicators for mother’s year of birth, and
      an indicator for the sex of the child. Twin fixed effects regressions include indicators for sex and birth order
      of the twin (either 1st born or 2nd born twin). Both cross-sectional and fixed effects regressions for height,
      BMI, and IQ also include indicator variables for the year the boy was tested by the military.
      Standard errors in parentheses.
      ** denotes statistically significant at the 5% level
      * denotes statistically significant at the 10% level




                                                                                                                   54
                                      Appendix Table 3a
                                Fixed Effects Regression Results
                                  Men-Same Sex Twins Sample
                         1-Year      5 minute       High         Ln(Earn)                        Ln(Earn) FT
                        Mortality    APGAR         School
                                       score     Completion
Splines:

BW<1500                 -188.96**           .93**             .47*                .17                .21
                          (39.90)            (.33)            (.27)              (.24)              (.23)

1500<BW<2500                3.75            -.01              -.01               .11*               .11*
                          (12.91)           (.10)             (.05)              (.07)              (.05)

BW>2500                   -3.34             .15**              .02               .08*                .02
                          (8.12)             (.07)            (.03)              (.04)              (.03)

N                         11,530            7,490             4,486            12,057               7,520
                                                                            (1990 Pairs)         (1537 Pairs)
Regressions include indicators for birth order of the twin (either 1st born or 2nd born twin).
Standard errors in parentheses.
** denotes statistically significant at the 5% level
* denotes statistically significant at the 10% level

                                      Appendix Table 3b
                                Fixed Effects Regression Results
                                Female-Same Sex Twins Sample
                         1-Year      5 minute       High         Ln(Earn)                        Ln(Earn) FT
                        Mortality    APGAR         School
                                       score     Completion
Splines:

BW<1500                 -341.87**           .97**              .09               -1.02              1.57*
                          (37.41)            (.35)            (.22)              (.72)              (.68)

1500<BW<2500               17.01             .13              .08*                .05               -.01
                          (10.46)           (.10)             (.04)              (.07)              (.04)

BW>2500                   -9.81             .13*               .03               -.04                .01
                          (7.71)            (.07)             (.03)              (.05)              (.04)

N                         11,276            7,192             4,762            12,031                4192
                                                                            (2070 Pairs)         (1193 Pairs)
Regressions include indicators for birth order of the twin (either 1st born or 2nd born twin). Standard errors
in parentheses.
** denotes statistically significant at the 5% level
* denotes statistically significant at the 10% level



                                                                                                            55
                                    Appendix Table 4
                         Regression Results: One Year Mortality
                                    All Twins Sample
                                Early Period (1967-1981)
               (Mortality is measured as number of deaths per 1000 births)

                                                  OLS                                       FE

Birth weight                                   -146.45**                                   -1.99
                                                 (6.35)                                   (5.31)

Ln(Birth weight)                               -390.13**                                  -9.54
                                                (13.42)                                  (12.98)

Fetal Growth                                    -5.96**                                    -.06
                                                 (.28)                                    (.20)

N                                                                   14,882
The control variables we use in the OLS estimation are year- and month-of-birth dummies, indicators for
mother’s education (one for each year), indicators for birth order , indicators for mother’s year of birth, and
an indicator for the sex of the child. Twin fixed effects regressions include indicators for sex and birth order
of the twin (either 1st born or 2nd born twin).
Standard errors in parentheses.
** denotes statistically significant at the 5% level
* denotes statistically significant at the 10% level




                                                                                                            56
