NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES HAZARDOUS WASTE MATTER?
EVIDENCE FROM THE HOUSING MARKET
AND THE SUPERFUND PROGRAM
Michael Greenstone
Justin Gallagher
Working Paper 11790
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11790
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2005

We thank Daron Acemoglu, David Autor, Maureen Cropper, Esther Duflo, Dick Eckhaus, Alex Farrell, Don
Fullerton, Ted Gayer, Jon Gruber, Jon Guryan, Joe Gyourko, Paul Joskow, Matthew Kahn, David Lee, Jim
Poterba, Katherine Probst, Bernard Salanie, Randall Walsh, Rob Williams, and especially Ted Gayer for
insightful comments. The paper also benefited from the comments of seminar participants at ASSA, BYU,
UC-Berkeley, UC-Davis, UC-Santa Barbara, CEMFI, Colorado, Columbia, HEC Montreal, Kentucky, LSE,
MIT, NBER, Rand, Resources for the Future, SITE, Stanford, Syracuse, Texas, and UCLA. Leila Agha,
Brian Goodness, Elizabeth Greenwood, Rose Kontak, William Li, and Jonathan Ursprung provided
outstanding research assistance. We especially thank Katherine Probst for generously sharing data on the
costs of Superfund clean-ups. Funding from the Center for Integrating Statistical and Environmental Science
at the University of Chicago and the Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research at MIT is
gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Michael Greenstone and Justin Gallagher. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Does Hazardous Waste Matter? Evidence from the Housing Market and the Superfund Program
Michael Greenstone and Justin Gallagher
NBER Working Paper No. 11790
November 2005
JEL No. H4, Q51, Q53, R5, R2, I18
ABSTRACT
Approximately $30 billion (2000$) has been spent on Superfund clean-ups of hazardous waste sites,
and remediation efforts are incomplete at roughly half of the 1,500 Superfund sites. This study
estimates the effect of Superfund clean-ups on local housing price appreciation. We compare housing
price growth in the areas surrounding the first 400 hazardous waste sites to be cleaned up through
the Superfund program to the areas surrounding the 290 sites that narrowly missed qualifying for
these clean-ups. We cannot reject that the clean-ups had no effect on local housing price growth,
nearly two decades after these sites became eligible for them. This finding is robust to a series of
specification checks, including the application of a quasi-experimental regression discontinuity
design based on knowledge of the selection rule. Overall, the preferred estimates suggest that the
benefits of Superfund clean-ups as measured through the housing market are substantially lower than
the $43 million mean cost of Superfund clean-ups.
Michael Greenstone
MIT, Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive, E52-359
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
mgreenst@mit.edu

Justin Gallagher
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, MC 3880
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
justing@econ.berkeley.edu

Introduction
The estimation of individuals’ valuations of environmental amenities with revealed preference
methods has been an active area of research for more than three decades. Numerous theoretical models
outlining revealed preference methods to recover economically well defined measures of willingness to
pay have been developed. In principle, these methods can be used in a variety of settings, including
housing markets, recreational choices, health outcomes, and the consumption of goods designed to protect
individuals against adverse environmentally-induced outcomes.1 The application of these approaches,
however, is often accompanied by seemingly valid concerns about misspecification that undermine the
credibility of any findings. Consequently, many are skeptical that markets can be used to determine
individuals’ valuation of environmental amenities. Further, the increasing reliance on stated preference
techniques to value environmental amenities is surely related to dissatisfaction with the performance of
revealed preference techniques. 2
Hazardous waste sites are an example of an environmental disamenity that provokes great public
concern. The 1980 Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act, which
became known as Superfund, aims to address this concern. The Act gave the EPA the right to initiate
remedial clean-ups at sites where a release or significant threat of a release of a hazardous substance
poses an imminent and substantial danger to public welfare and the environment. Since the passage of the
Superfund legislation, more than 1,500 sites have been placed on the National Priorities List (NPL),
qualifying those sites for federally financed remediation. As of 2000, approximately $30 billion (2000$)
has been spent on clean-ups, and remediation efforts are incomplete at roughly half of the sites. Despite
these past and future expenditures, there has not been a systematic accounting of the benefits of
Superfund clean-ups of hazardous waste sites. As a result, Superfund is a controversial program.3
This paper estimates the effect of Superfund sponsored clean-ups of hazardous waste sites on
1

See Freeman (2003) and Champ, Boyle, and Brown (2003) for reviews.
See Hanemann (1994)) and Diamond and Hausman (1994) for discussions of stated preference techniques.
3
In March 1995 in Congressional testimony, Katherine Probst of Resources for the Future said, “Although the
program has been in existence for over 14 years, we still know very little about the benefits of site cleanup or about
the associated costs.” At the same hearing, John Shanahan of the Heritage Foundation said, “Superfund…is widely
regarded as a wasteful and ineffective program in dire need of substantive reform.”
2

housing price appreciation in areas surrounding the sites. The empirical challenge is that the evolution of
housing prices proximate to the Superfund sites in the absence of the clean-ups is unknown. The
development of a valid counterfactual is likely to be especially challenging, because the sites assigned to
the NPL are the most polluted ones in the US. Thus, it seems reasonable to assume that prices in these
areas are determined by a different process than prices in the remainder of the country for reasons
unrelated to the clean-ups. For example, what would have happened to housing prices in Love Canal, NY,
in the absence of the famous clean-up there?
To solve this problem, we implement a quasi-experiment based on knowledge of the selection
rule that the EPA used to develop the first NPL. Nearly 15,000 sites were referred to the EPA as potential
NPL sites in 1980-1, but the EPA’s budget could only accommodate 400 clean-ups. Consequently, they
initially winnowed the list to the 690 worst sites and then developed the Hazardous Ranking System
(HRS). The HRS was used to assign each site a score from 0 to 100 based on the risk it posed, with 100
being the most dangerous. The EPA placed the 400 sites with HRS scores exceeding 28.5 on the initial
NPL in 1983, making them eligible for Superfund remedial clean-ups.
Our empirical strategy exploits this selection process by focusing on the areas surrounding the
690 hazardous waste sites that were finalists for the initial NPL. We compare the evolution of residential
property values in the areas near sites that had initial HRS scores exceeding 28.5 to the areas proximate to
sites that had HRS scores below the 28.5 threshold. The assumption is that the evolution of housing
prices in the areas surrounding the sites with scores below 28.5 form a valid counterfactual for price
appreciation in areas near sites with HRS scores above the threshold. We also implement a quasiexperimental regression discontinuity design (Cook and Campbell 1979) to focus the comparisons in the
“neighborhood” of the cut-off.
The implementation of this HRS based research design suggests that the placement of a
hazardous waste site on the NPL is associated with economically small and statistically indistinguishable
from zero gains in residential property values. This finding holds whether the growth in housing prices is
measured 7 or 17 years after the sites’ placement on the NP. Moreover, it is robust to a variety of
specification checks, including the regression discontinuity approach. The validity of these results is
2

further supported by the finding that observable ex-ante determinants of housing price appreciation are
well balanced among census tracts containing sites with HRS scores above and below 28.5, especially
near the cut-off. Overall, these findings suggest that the mean benefits of a Superfund clean-up as
measured through the housing market are substantially lower than the $43 million mean cost of a
Superfund clean-up.
A few other results from the HRS research design are noteworthy. There is little evidence that a
site’s placement on the NPL causes an immediate decline in rental rates or housing prices, which
undermines the popular stigma hypothesis (e.g., Harris 1999). Additionally, we cannot reject that the
clean-ups fail to cause changes in the fractions of minorities, children or other demographic
characteristics of the population in the areas surrounding the sites.4 Finally, there is modest evidence that
the clean-ups are associated with population increases in the census tracts containing the sites.
The conventional hedonic approach uses ordinary least squares to estimate the effect of a site’s
placement on the NPL on housing price appreciation. The basis of this approach is a comparison of the
areas surrounding NPL sites with the remainder of the US. In contrast to the HRS research design, the
conventional approach produces estimates that suggest that gains in property values exceed the mean
costs of clean-up. However, these regressions also produce a number of puzzling results that undermine
confidence in the approach’s validity. Further, the ex-ante determinants of changes in housing prices
differ dramatically between areas surrounding NPL sites and the rest of the country. These latter findings
underscore the importance of the HRS research design as a potential solution to the misspecification
problems that have plagued the conventional implementation of the hedonic approach in other settings
and appear to undermine it here.
In addition to the availability of the HRS research design, this study has two other appealing
features. First to conduct the study, we assembled the most comprehensive data file ever compiled by the
EPA or other researchers on the Superfund program and its effects.

4

The resulting database has

See Banzhaf and Walsh (2005) and Cameron and McConnaha (2005) for evidence of migration induced by
environmental changes in other contexts.

3

information on all Superfund hazardous waste sites, the sites that narrowly missed placement on the initial
NPL, and census-tract level housing prices for 1980, 1990, and 2000. The data file also contains a wealth
of information about the hazardous waste sites, including their precise location, HRS scores, expected and
actual (when remediation is complete) costs of clean-up, size in acres, and dates they achieved various
milestones (including completion of remediation). Consequently, this study is a substantial departure
from the previous Superfund/hazardous waste site hedonic literature, which is entirely comprised of
examinations of a single site or handful of them.5
Second, we utilize consumers’ reveled preferences and assume that they transmit their valuations
of the clean-ups through the housing market. If the housing market is operating correctly, price changes
will capture the health and aesthetic benefits of clean-ups. Further, hedonic theory can be used to relate
the results to the theoretically correct welfare measure of willingness to pay. Thus, this approach frees us
from a relying on state preference techniques or the notoriously poor laboratory estimates of risk to
human health associated with the thousands of chemicals present at the sites and assumptions about the
correct value of a statistical life.6
The paper proceeds as follows. Section I provides background on the Superfund program and
how its initial implementation provides a research design that may allow for credible estimation of the
effects of Superfund clean-ups on price appreciation. Section II reviews the hedonic method theoretically
and empirically and uses it to provide an economic interpretation for the results from the HRS research
design. Section III details the data sources and provides some summary statistics. Sections IV and V
reports on the econometric methods and empirical findings, respectively. Section VI interprets the results
and discusses the policy implications, while VII concludes.

I. The Superfund Program and a New Research Design
5

A partial list of previous Superfund/hazardous waste site hedonic studies includes Schmalensee et al. (1975), Smith
and Michael (1990), Kohlhase (1991), Kiel (1995), Gayer Hamilton, and Viscusi (2000, 2002), Kiel and Zabel
(2001), McCluskey and Rausser (2003), Ihlanfeldt and Taylor (2004), Messer et al. (2004), and Farrell (2004).
6
Viscusi and Hamilton (1999) use EPA provided estimates of the probability of cancer cases at a subsample of sites
and find that at the median site expenditure the average cost per cancer case averted by the clean-up exceeds $6
billion.

4

A. History and Broad Program Goals
Before the regulation of the disposal of hazardous wastes by the Toxic Substances Control and
Resource Conservation and Recovery Acts of 1976, industrial firms frequently disposed of wastes by
burying them in the ground. Love Canal, NY is perhaps the most infamous example of these disposal
practices. Throughout the 1940s and 1950s, this area was a landfill for industrial waste and more than
21,000 tons of chemical wastes were ultimately deposited there. The landfill closed in the early 1950s
and over the next two decades a community developed in that area. In the 1970s, Love Canal residents
began to complain of high rates of health problems, such as cancer, birth defects, miscarriages, and skin
ailments.7 After New York state investigators found high concentrations of dangerous chemicals in the
air and soil, concerns about the safety of this area prompted President Carter to declare a state of
emergency that led to the relocation of the 900 residents of this area. The Love Canal incident helped to
galvanize support for addressing the legacy of industrial waste and this led to the creation of the
Superfund program in 1980.
The centerpiece of the Superfund program, and this paper’s focus, is the long-run remediation of
hazardous waste sites.8 These multi-year remediation efforts aim to reduce permanently the serious, but
not imminently life-threatening, dangers caused by hazardous substances. As of 2000, roughly 1,500
sites have been placed on the NPL and thereby chosen for these long-run clean-ups. The next subsection
describes the selection process, which forms the basis of our research design.

B. Site Assessment & Superfund Clean-Ups Processes
As of 1996, more than 40,000 hazardous waste sites had been referred to the EPA for possible
inclusion on the NPL. The EPA follows a multi-step process to determine which of these sites pose the
greatest danger to humans and the environment. The assessment process involves determining which
7

EPA (2000) claims that 56% of the children born in Love Canal between 1974 and 1978 had birth defects.
The Superfund program also funds immediate removals. These clean-ups are responses to environmental
emergencies and are generally short-term actions aimed at diminishing an immediate threat. Examples of such
actions including cleaning up waste spilled from containers and constructing fences around dangerous sites. These
actions are not intended to remediate the underlying environmental problem and account for a small proportion of
Superfund activities. Importantly, they are administered at hazardous waste sites that are and are not on the NPL.
8

5

hazardous chemicals are present at the site and the overall risk level.
The final step of the assessment process is the application of the Hazardous Ranking System
(HRS), which is reserved for the most dangerous sites. The EPA developed the HRS in 1982 as a
standardized approach to quantify and compare the human health and environmental risk among sites to
identify the ones that pose the greatest threat. The original HRS evaluated the risk for exposure to
chemical pollutants along three migration ‘pathways’: groundwater, surface water, and air.9 The toxicity
and concentration of chemicals, the likelihood of exposure and proximity to humans, and the population
that could be affected are the major determinants of risk along each pathway. The non-human impact that
chemicals may have is considered during the process of evaluating the site but plays a minor role in
determining the HRS score.
The HRS produces a score for each site that ranges from 0 to 100, with 100 being the highest
level of risk. From 1982-1995, the EPA assigned all hazardous waste sites with a HRS score of 28.5 or
greater to the NPL.10 These sites are the only ones that are eligible for Superfund remedial clean-up. The
Data Appendix provides further details on the determination of HRS test scores.
Once a site is placed on the NPL, it generally takes many years until clean-up is complete. The
first step is a further study of the extent of the environmental problem and how best to remedy it. This
assessment is summarized in the Record of Decision (ROD), which also outlines the clean-up actions that
are planned for the site. The site receives the “construction complete” designation once the physical
construction of all clean-up remedies is complete, the immediate threats to health have been removed, and
the long-run threats are “under control.” The final step is the site’s deletion from the NPL.

9

In 1990, the EPA revised the HRS test so that it also considers soil as an additional pathway.
In 1980 every state received the right to place one site on the NPL without the site having to score at or above
28.5 on the HRS test. As of 2003, 38 states have used their exception. It is unknown whether these sites would
have received a HRS score above 28.5.
In 1995 the criteria for placement on the NPL were altered so that a site must have a HRS score greater than 28.5
and the governor of the state in which the site is located must approve the placement. There are currently a number
of potential NPL sites with HRS scores greater than 28.5 that have not been proposed for NPL placement due to
known state political opposition. We do not know the precise number of these sites because our Freedom of
Information Act request for information about these sites was denied by the EPA.
10

6

C. 1982 HRS Scores as the Basis of a New Research Design
This paper’s goal is to obtain reliable estimates of the effect of Superfund sponsored clean-ups of
hazardous waste sites on housing price appreciation in areas surrounding the sites.

The empirical

challenge is that NPL sites are the most polluted in the US, so the evolution of housing prices near these
sites may not be comparable to that of the remainder of the US, even conditional on observable
covariates. To avoid confounding the effects of the clean-ups with unobserved variables, it is necessary
to develop a valid counterfactual for the evolution of property values at Superfund sites in the absence of
those sites’ placement on the NPL and eventual clean-up.
A feature of the initial NPL assignment process that has not been noted previously by researchers
may provide a credible solution to the likely omitted variables problem. In the first year after the
legislation’s passage in 1980, 14,697 sites were referred to the EPA and investigated as potential
candidates for remedial action. Through the assessment process, the EPA winnowed this list to the 690
most dangerous sites. Although the Superfund legislation directed the EPA to develop a NPL of “at
least” 400 sites (Section 105(8)(B) of CERCLA), budgetary considerations caused the EPA to set a goal
of placing exactly 400 sites on the NPL.
The EPA developed the HRS to determine scientifically the 400 out of the 690 sites that posed
the greatest risk. Pressured to initiate the clean-ups quickly, the EPA developed the HRS in about a year.
The HRS test was applied to the 690 worst sites, and their scores were ordered from highest to lowest. A
score of 28.5 divided numbers 400 and 401, so the initial NPL published in September 1983 was limited
to sites with HRS scores exceeding 28.5.11
The central role of the HRS score provides a compelling basis for a research design that compares
outcomes at sites with initial scores above and below the 28.5 cut-off for at least three reasons. First, it is
unlikely that sites’ HRS scores were manipulated to affect their placement on the NPL, because the 28.5
threshold was established after the testing of the 690 sites was completed. The HRS scores therefore
11

Exactly 400 of the sites on the initial NPL had HRS scores exceeding 28.5. The original Superfund legislation
gave each state the right to place one site on the NPL without going through the usual evaluation process. Six of
these “state priority sites” were included on the original NPL released in 1983. Thus, the original list contained the
400 sites with HRS scores exceeding 28.5 and the 6 state exceptions. See the Data Appendix for further details.

7

reflected the EPA’s assessment of the human health and environmental risks posed by each site and were
not based on the expected costs or benefits of clean-up.
Second, the HRS scores were noisy measures of risk, so it is possible that true risks were similar
above and below the threshold. This noisiness was a consequence of the scientific uncertainty about the
health consequences of exposure to the tens of thousands of chemicals present at these sites.12 Further,
the threshold was not selected based on evidence that HRS scores below 28.5 sites posed little risk to
health. In fact, the Federal Register specifically reported that the “EPA has not made a determination that
sites scoring less than 28.50 do not present a significant risk to human health, welfare, or the
environment” (Federal Register 1984, Section IV) and that a more informative test would require “greater
time and funds” (EPA 1982).13
Third, the selection rule that determined the placement on the NPL is a highly nonlinear function
of the HRS score. This naturally lends itself to a comparison of outcomes at sites “near” the 28.5 cut-off.
If the unobservables are similar around the regulatory threshold, then a comparison of these sites will
control for all omitted factors correlated with the outcomes. This test has the features of a quasiexperimental regression-discontinuity design (Cook and Campbell 1979).14
An additional feature of the analysis is that an initial score above 28.5 is highly correlated with
eventual NPL status but is not a perfect predictor of it. This is because some sites were rescored, with the

12

A recent summary of Superfund’s history makes this point. “At the inception of EPA’s Superfund program, there
was much to be learned about industrial wastes and their potential for causing public health problems. Before this
problem could be addressed on the program level, the types of wastes most often found at sites needed to be
determined, and their health effects studied. Identifying and quantifying risks to health and the environment for the
extremely broad range of conditions, chemicals, and threats at uncontrolled hazardous wastes sites posed formidable
problems. Many of these problems stemmed from the lack of information concerning the toxicities of the over
65,000 different industrial chemicals listed as having been in commercial production since 1945” (EPA 2000, p. 32).
13
One way to measure the crude nature of the initial HRS test is by the detail of the guidelines used for determining
the HRS score. The guidelines used to develop the initial HRS sites were collected in a 30 page manual. Today, the
analogous manual is more than 500 pages.
14
The research design of comparing sites with HRS scores “near” the 28.5 is unlikely to be valid for sites that
received an initial HRS score after 1982. This is because once the 28.5 cut-off was set, the HRS testers were
encouraged to minimize testing costs and simply determine whether a site exceeded the threshold. Consequently,
testers generally stop scoring pathways once enough pathways are scored to produce a score above the threshold.
When only some of the pathways are scored, the full HRS score is unknown and the quasi-experimental regression
discontinuity design is inappropriate.

8

later scores determining whether they ended up on the NPL.15 The subsequent analysis uses an indicator
variable for whether a site’s initial (i.e., 1982) HRS score was above 28.5 as an instrumental variable for
whether a site was on the NPL in to purge the potentially endogenous variation in NPL status.
Finally, it important to emphasize that sites that failed to qualify for the NPL were ineligible for
Superfund remediations.

We investigated whether these sites were cleaned-up under state or local

programs and found that they were frequently left untouched. Among the sites that were targeted by these
programs, a typical solution was to put a fence around the site and place signs indicating the presence of
health hazards. The point is that the remediation activities at NPL sites drastically exceeded the clean-up
activities at non-NPL sites both in scope and cost.

II. The Hedonic Method and How It Can Be Used to Interpret the HRS Research Design Results
A. The Hedonic Method and Its Econometric Identification Problems
An explicit market for a clean local environment does not exist. The hedonic price method is
commonly used to estimate the economic value of non-market amenities like environmental quality to
individuals. It is based on the insight that the utility associated with the consumption of a differentiated
product, such as housing, is determined by the utility associated with the good’s characteristics. For
example, hedonic theory predicts that an economic bad, such as proximity to a hazardous waste site, will
be negatively correlated with housing prices, holding all other characteristics constant. This section
reviews the hedonic method and describes the econometric identification problems associated with its
implementation.
Economists have estimated the association between housing prices and environmental amenities
at least since Ridker (1967) and Ridker and Henning (1967). However, Rosen (1974) and Freeman
(1974) were the first to give this correlation an economic interpretation. In the Rosen formulation, a
differentiated good can be described by a vector of its characteristics, Q = (q1, q2,…, qn). In the case of a
15

As an example, 144 sites with initial scores above 28.5 were rescored and this led to 7 sites receiving revised
scores below the cut-off. Further, complaints by citizens and others led to rescoring at a number of sites below the
cut-off. Although there has been substantial research on the question of which sites on the NPL are cleaned-up first
(see, e.g., Sigman 2001), we are unaware of any research on the determinants of a site being rescored.

9

house, these characteristics may include structural attributes (e.g., number of bedrooms), neighborhood
public services (e.g., local school quality), and local environmental amenities (e.g., distance from a
hazardous waste site). Thus, the price of the ith house can be written as:
(1)

Pi = P(q1, q2,…, qn).

The partial derivative of P(•) with respect to the nth characteristic, ∂P/∂qn, is referred to as the marginal
implicit price. It is the marginal price of the nth characteristic implicit in the overall price of the house.
In a competitive market, the locus between housing prices and a characteristic, or the hedonic
price schedule (HPS), is determined by the equilibrium interactions of consumers and producers.16 In the
hedonic model, the HPS is formed by tangencies between consumers’ bid and suppliers’ offer functions.
The gradient of the implicit price function with respect to the health risk associated with proximity to
hazardous waste sites gives the equilibrium differential that compensates individuals for accepting the
increased health risk. Put another way, areas with elevated health risks must have lower housing prices to
attract potential homeowners and the HPS reveals the price that allocates individuals across locations. In
principle, the price differential associated with proximity to hazardous waste sites reflects both
individuals’ valuations of the greater health risk and any effect on neighborhood aesthetics.17
At each point on the HPS, the marginal price of a housing characteristic is equal to an
individual’s marginal willingness to pay (MWTP) for that characteristic and an individual supplier’s
marginal cost of producing it. Since the HPS reveals the MWTP at a given point, it can be used to infer
the welfare effects of a marginal change in a characteristic. The overall slope of the HPS provides an
estimate of the average MWTP across all consumers. In principle, the hedonic method can also be used
to recover individuals’ demand or MWTP functions, which would be of tremendous practical importance
because these functions allow for the calculation of the welfare effects of nonmarginal changes.18
Our focus is limited to the successful estimation of equation (1), which is the foundation for
16

See Rosen (1974), Freeman (1993), and Palmquist (1991) for details.
The hedonic approach cannot account for aesthetic benefits that accrue to nonresidents that, for example, engage
in recreational activities near the site. The health effects approach has this same limitation.
18
Rosen (1974) proposed a 2-step approach for estimating the MWTP function, as well as the supply curve. In
recent work, Ekeland, Heckman and Nesheim (2004) outline the assumptions necessary to identify the demand (and
supply) functions in an additive version of the hedonic model with data from a single market.
17

10

welfare calculations of both marginal and non-marginal changes. Consistent estimation may be difficult
since it is likely that there are unobserved factors that covary with both proximity to hazardous waste sites
and housing prices. Although this possibility cannot be directly tested, it is notable that proximity to a
hazardous waste site is associated with a number of important observable predictors of housing prices.
For example compared to the rest of the country, areas with hazardous waste sites nearby tend to have
lower population densities and mobile homes comprise a higher proportion of the housing stock.
Consequently, cross-sectional estimates of the association between housing prices and proximity
to a hazardous waste site may be severely biased due to omitted variables.19 In fact, the cross-sectional
estimation of the HPS has exhibited signs of misspecification in a number of other settings, including the
relationships between land prices and school quality, total suspended particulates air pollution, and
climate variables (Black 1999; Deschenes and Greenstone 2004; Chay and Greenstone 2005).20 Small
(1975) recognized the consequences of the misspecification of equation (1) just one year after publication
of the Rosen and Freeman papers:
I have entirely avoided…the important question of whether the empirical difficulties,
especially correlation between pollution and unmeasured neighborhood characteristics,
are so overwhelming as to render the entire method useless. I hope that…future work can
proceed to solving these practical problems….The degree of attention devoted to this
[problem]…is what will really determine whether the method stands or falls…” [p. 107].
Rosen himself recognized the problem and expressed skepticism that the hedonic method could be
implemented successfully in a cross-sectional setting.21 Yet, in the intervening years, this problem of
misspecification has received little attention from empirical researchers. One of this paper’s aims is to
demonstrate that it may be possible to obtain reliable hedonic estimates with a credible research design.

B. Using Hedonic Theory to Interpret the Results from the 1982 HRS Research Design

19

Incorrect choice of functional form is an alternative source of misspecification of the HPS. See Halvorsen and
Pollakowski (1981) and Cropper et al. (1988) for discussions of this issue.
20
Similar problems arise when estimating compensating wage differentials for job characteristics, such as the risk of
injury or death. The regression-adjusted association between wages and many job amenities is weak and often has a
counterintuitive sign (Smith 1979; Black and Kneisner 2003).
21
Rosen (1986) wrote, “It is clear that nothing can be learned about the structure of preferences in a single crosssection…” (p. 658), and “On the empirical side of these questions, the greatest potential for further progress rests in
developing more suitable sources of data on the nature of selection and matching…” (p. 688).

11

The hedonic model describes a market in equilibrium and is most readily conceived of in a crosssectional setting.

However, our research design assesses the effect of Superfund remediations of

hazardous waste sites nearly two decades after the release of the NPL. Consequently, this subsection
discusses the interpretation of the estimable parameters from the HRS research design.22
To fix thoughts, define R as the monetary value of the stream of services provided by a house
over a period of time, or the rental rate. We assume R is a function of an index of individuals’ disutility
associated with living near a hazardous waste site. The index is denoted as H and is a function of the
expected health risks and any aesthetic disamenities. ∂R/ ∂H < 0, because, for example, individuals’
willingness to pay to rent a house is decreasing in the health risk associated with residing in it.
Now, consider how H changes for individuals that live near a hazardous waste site placed on the
initial NPL as the site progresses through the different stages of the Superfund process:
(2)
H0 = Index Before Superfund Program Initiated (e.g., 1980)
H1 = Index After Site Placed on the NPL
H2 = Index Once ROD Published/Clean-Up is Initiated
H3 = Index Once “Construction Complete” or Deleted from NPL.
Notably, the clean-up process is slow.

For example, the median time between NPL listing and

achievement of the construction complete milestone is more than 12 years.
It seems reasonable to presume that H0 > H3 so that R(H3) > R(H0), because clean-ups reduce the
health risks and likely increase the aesthetic value of proximity to the site. It is not evident whether H1
and H2 are greater than, less than, or equal to H0. It is frequently argued that the announcement that a site
is eligible for Superfund remediation causes H to increase, because placement on the NPL may cause
residents to revise upwards their expectation of the health risk. 23 24
22

An alternative valuation approach is to place a monetary value on any health improvements associated with the
cleaning-up of a hazardous waste site. This approach involves four non-trivial steps. Specifically, it entails the
determination of: the toxics present at each site and the pathways where they are found (e.g., air, soil, ground water);
the health risks associated with toxic and pathway pair (this is especially difficult because there have been more than
65,000 chemicals in production in the US since World War II and due to the infeasibility of testing of humans due to
valid ethical concerns); knowledge about the size of the affected population and their pathway-specific exposure
(see Hamilton and Viscusi 1999 on the associated challenges); and willingness to pay to avoid mortality (Viscusi
1993; Ashenfelter and Greenstone 2004a, 2004b). In light of the substantial scientific, empirical, and data quality
concerns with each of these steps, our view is that at present this approach is unlikely to produce credible estimates
of the benefits of Superfund clean-ups. Further by its very nature, it cannot account for any aesthetic benefits.
23
The stigma hypothesis is a related idea. It states that even after remediation individuals will assume incorrectly
that properties near Superfund sites have an elevated health risk, relative to risk beliefs before its placement on the

12

We can now write the constant dollar mean price of houses in the vicinity of the hazardous waste
sites considered for placement on the initial NPL. We begin with the price of houses with HRS scores
exceeding 28.5 (measured after the NPL listing):
(3)

∞

HRS > 28.5
Pt

=

∑

1(Ht = H1) δt R(H1) + 1(Ht = H2) δt R(H2) + 1(Ht = H3) δt R(H3).

t =0

In this equation, the indicator variables 1(·) equal 1 when the enclosed statement is true in period t and δ
is a discount factor based on the rate of time preference. The equation demonstrates that upon placement
HRS > 28.5

on the NPL, P t

reflects the expected evolution of H throughout the clean-up process. Further, it is

evident that it varies with the stage of the Superfund clean-up at the time (i.e., t) that it is observed. For
HRS > 28.5

example, [P t

HRS > 28.5

| Ht = H3] > [P t

| Ht = H1] because the years of relatively low rental rates have

passed.
The constant dollar mean price of houses located near the hazardous waste sites with HRS scores
below 28.5 is:
HRS < 28.5

(4) P t

∞

=

∑

δt R(H0).

t =0

We assume that H is unchanged for the sites that narrowly missed being placed on the NPL due to HRS
scores below 28.5. If this assumption is valid (if, for example, these sites are never cleaned up), then
HRS < 28.5

Pt

is identical in all periods.

It is now possible to define local residents’ mean willingness to pay for the listing of an existing
hazardous waste site on the initial NPL. This quantity is the difference between (3) and (4). It should be
measured immediately after the sites are placed on the NPL so that measurement is among a fixed set of
individuals’ bid functions. Further, this timing of the measurement will ensure that it will account for the
influence of the NPL listing on the value of housing services in all potentially affected years. Formally,
we define the theoretically correct measure of willingness to pay (WTP) as:

NPL. Thus, there is a permanent negative effect on property values. Harris (1999) provides a review of the stigma
literature.
24
McCluskey and Rausser (2003) and Messer, Schulze, Hackett, Cameron, and McClelland (2004) provide evidence
that prices decline immediately after the announcement that a local site has been placed on the NPL. The intuition is
that residents knew that proximity to the site was undesirable but had underestimated the risks.

13

HRS > 28.5

(5) ∆WTP = [P t

HRS < 28.5

- Pt

| t = October 1983].

∆WTP must be measured in October 1983, because this is immediately subsequent to the release of the
initial NPL. Notice, ∆WTP depends on the time required to complete each stage of the clean-up, the
discount rate, and the change in H at each stage. If H1, H2 < H0, then the sign of ∆WTP is ambiguous.
Since data from 1983 are unavailable and our data on housing prices come from the decennial
censuses, we estimate:
HRS > 28.5

(6) ∆1990 or 2000 = [P t

HRS < 28.5

- Pt

| t = 1990 or 2000].

This is the mean difference in housing prices near NPL and non-NPL sites measured in either 1990 or
2000. The difference between (5) and (6) is that the latter is measured either 7 or 17 years later than the
former.
This delay in measuring the difference in housing prices is likely to causes ∆1990 or 2000 to exceed
the preferred measure of ∆WTP for two reasons. First, many of the low rental rate years where Ht = H1
have passed by 1990 and 2000.

Second, enough time has elapsed between NPL listing and the

observation on prices so that individuals can sort in response to the NPL listing and/or clean-up. Thus,
efforts to estimate willingness to pay functions are unlikely to be convincing, leaving successful
estimation of the HPS as the empirical goal. Further, Superfund remediations intend to cause large
changes in environmental quality. The fact that the HPS is weakly greater than each individual’s relevant
bid function combined with the non-marginal nature of the clean-ups is another reason that ∆1990 or 2000 is
likely to be an overestimate of ∆WTP.

III. Data Sources and Summary Statistics
A. Data Sources
To implement the analysis, we constructed the most comprehensive data file ever compiled on the
Superfund program. The data file contains detailed information on all hazardous waste sites placed on the
NPL by 2000, as well as the hazardous waste sites with 1982 HRS scores below 28.5. We also compiled
housing price, housing characteristic, and neighborhood demographic information for the areas
surrounding these sites.
14

These data come from Geolytics’s Neighborhood Change Database, which includes information
from the 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses. Importantly, the 1980 data predate the publication of the
first NPL in 1983. We use these data to form a panel of census tracts based on 2000 census tract
boundaries, which are drawn so that they include approximately 4,000 people in 2000. Census tracts are
the smallest geographic unit that can be matched across the 1970-2000 Censuses.25 We restrict the
analysis to the 48,246 out of the 65,443 2000 census tracts that have non-missing housing price data in
1980 (before the Superfund legislation was passed), 1990, and 2000.
We spent considerable effort collecting precise location data (e.g., longitude and latitude) for each
of the NPL sites and hazardous waste sites with initial HRS scores below 28.5. This information was
used to place these sites in unique census tracts. We also used GIS software to identify the census tracts
that share a border with the tracts with the sites. Additionally, we create separate observations for the
portion of tracts that fall within circles of varying radii (e.g., 1, 2, and 3 miles) around the sites. The
subsequent analysis tests for price effects in all three of these groupings of tracts. The Data Appendix
provides further details on how we defined these groups of tracts.
The 1982 HRS composite scores are a crucial component of the analysis. We collected these
scores for the 690 hazardous waste sites considered for placement on the initial NPL from various issues
of the Federal Register. We also obtained the groundwater, surface water, and air pathway scores from
the same source.
We collected a number of other variables for the NPL sites. Various issues of the Federal
Register were used to determine the dates of NPL listing. The EPA provided us with a data file that
reports the dates of release of the ROD, initiation of clean-up, completion of remediation (i.e.,
construction complete), and deletion from the NPL for sites that achieved these milestones. We also
collected data on the expected costs of clean-up before remediation was initiated and estimates of the
actual costs for the sites that reached the construction complete stage.26
25

27

We obtained information on

See the Data Appendix for a description of how 1980 and 1990 census tracts were adjusted to fit 2000 census tract
boundaries.
26
The EPA divides some sites into separate operating units and issues separate RODs for them. We calculated the
cost variables as the sum across all operating units. Further, we reserved the construction complete designation for

15

the on the size (measured in acres) of the NPL hazardous waste sites from the RODs. See the Data
Appendix for more details on these variables and our sources.

B. Summary Statistics
The analysis is conducted with two data samples. We refer to the first as the “All NPL Sample,”
and it includes the 1,398 hazardous waste sites in the 50 US states and the District of Columbia that were
placed on the NPL by January 1, 2000. The second is labeled the “1982 HRS Sample,” and it is
comprised of the hazardous waste sites tested for inclusion on the initial NPL, regardless of their eventual
NPL status.28
Table 1 presents summary statistics on the hazardous waste sites in these samples. The entries in
column (1) are from the All NPL Sample and are limited to sites in a census tract for which there is nonmissing housing price data in 1980, 1990, and 2000. After these sample restrictions, there are 985 sites,
which is more than 70% of the sites placed on the NPL by 2000. Columns (2) and (3) report data from
the 1982 HRS Sample. The column (2) entries are based on the 487 sites that we placed in a census tract
with complete housing price data. Column (3) reports on the remaining 189 sites located in census tracts
with incomplete housing price data (generally due to missing 1980 data). The 14 sites located outside of
the continental United States were dropped from the sample.
Panel A reports on the timing of the sites’ placement on the NPL. Column (1) reveals that about
75% of all NPL sites received this designation in the 1980s. Together, columns (2) and (3) demonstrate
that 443 of the 676 sites in the 1982 HRS sample eventually were placed on the NPL. This number
exceeds the 400 sites that Congress set as an explicit goal, because, as we have discussed, some sites with
initial scores below 28.5 were rescored and then received scores above the threshold. Most of this

sites where the EPA declared remediation to be complete at all operating units.
27
We measure actual cost as the sum of government outlays and estimates of the costs of the remediation that were
paid for by non-governmental responsible parties across. The actual outlays by these parties are unavailable to the
public and the EPA, so these parties’ estimated outlays come from EPA engineers’ estimates of the costs of
completing the required remediation. See the Data Appendix for further details. Probst and Konisky (2001) provide
a comprehensive accounting of past costs on Superfund remediations and detailed projections about future costs.
28
Federal facilities were prohibited from inclusion on the NPL until 1984. Consequently, the 1982 HRS sample
does not contain any federal facilities.

16

rescoring occurred in the 1986-1989 period. Panel B provides mean HRS scores, conditioned on scores
above and below 28.5. Notably, the means are similar across the columns.
Panel C reports on the size of the hazardous waste sites measured in acres. This variable is only
available for NPL sites since it is derived from the RODs. In the three columns, the median site size
ranges between 25 and 35 acres. The means are substantially larger due to a few very large sites. The
modest size of most sites suggests that any expected effects on property values may be confined to
relatively small geographic areas.
Panel D provides evidence on the time required for the achievement of the clean-up milestones.
The median time until the different milestones are achieved is reported, rather than the mean, because
many sites have not reached all of the milestones yet. As an example, only 16 of the NPL sites in column
(2) received either the construction complete or deleted designation by 1990. Thus, when we measure the
effect of NPL status on 1990 housing prices, this effect will almost entirely be driven by sites where
remediation activities are unfinished. By 2000, the number of sites in the construction complete/deleted
category in this column had increased dramatically to 198. In column (1), the numbers of sites that were
construction complete by 2000 (1990) is 478 (22).
Panel E reports the expected costs of clean-up for NPL sites. This information was obtained from
the sites’ RODs and provides a measure of the expected costs (2000 $’s) of the clean-up before any
remediation activities have begun.29 They include all costs expected to be incurred during the active
clean-up phase, as well as the expected costs during the operation and maintenance phase that is
subsequent to the assignment of the construction complete designation.
In the All NPL Sample, the estimated cost data is available for 753 of the 985 NPL sites. The
mean and median expected costs of clean-up are $28.3 million and $11 million. The larger mean reflects
the high cost of a few clean-ups—for example, the 95th percentile expected cost is $89.6 million. In the
1982 HRS Sample in column (2), the mean and median are $27.5 million and $15.0 million.
The final panel reports estimated and actual costs for the subsample of construction complete

29

All monetary figures are reported in 2000 $’s, unless otherwise noted.

17

sites where both cost measures are available. To the best of our knowledge, the estimated and actual cost
data have not been brought together before. The conventional wisdom is that the actual costs greatly
exceed the estimated costs of clean-up, and this table provides the first opportunity to test this view. The
data support the conventional wisdom as the mean actual costs are 35%-55% higher than the mean
expected costs across the three columns. The findings are similar for median actual and expected costs.
A comparison of columns (2) and (3) across the panels reveals that the sites with and without
complete housing price data are similar on a number of dimensions. For example, the mean HRS scores
conditional on scoring above and below 28.5 are remarkably similar. Further, the median size and
various cost variables are comparable in the two columns. Consequently, it seems reasonable to conclude
that the sites without complete housing price data are similar to the column (2) sites, suggesting the
subsequent results may be representative for the entire 1982 HRS Sample.
Additionally, the sites in column (1) are similar to the sites in column (2) and (3) in size and the
two cost variables. The mean HRS scores are a few points lower, but this comparison is not meaningful
due to the changes in the test over time and changes in the how the scoring was conducted.30 Overall, the
similarity of the column (1) sites with the other sites suggests that it may be reasonable to assume that the
results from the application of the HRS research design to the 1982 HRS sample are informative about the
effects of the other Superfund clean-ups.
We now graphically summarize some other features of the two samples. Figure 1 displays the
geographic distribution of the 985 hazardous waste sites in the All NPL Sample. There are NPL sites in
45 of the 48 continental states, demonstrating that Superfund is genuinely a national program. The
highest proportion of sites, however, is in the Northeast and Midwest (i.e., the “Rust Belt”) that reflects
the historical concentration of heavy industry in these regions.
Figures 2A and 2B present the geographic distribution of the 1982 HRS sample. Figure 2A
displays the distribution of sites with 1982 HRS scores exceeding 28.5, while those with scores below this

30

Further once the 28.5 cut-off was set, the HRS testers were encouraged to minimize testing costs and simply
determine whether a site exceeded the threshold. Consequently, testers generally stop scoring pathways once
enough pathways are scored to produce a score above the threshold.

18

threshold are depicted in 2B. The sites in both categories are spread throughout the United States, but the
below 28.5 sites are in fewer states. For example, there are not any below 28.5 sites in Minnesota,
Florida, and Delaware. The unequal distribution of sites across the country in these two groups is a
potential problem for identification in the presence of local shocks, which are a major feature of the
housing market. To mitigate concerns about these shocks, we emphasize econometric models that include
state fixed effects for changes in housing prices.
Figure 3 reports the distribution of HRS scores among the 487 sites in the 1982 HRS Sample.
The figure is a histogram where the bins are 4 HRS points wide. The distribution looks approximately
normal, with the modal bin covering the 36.5-40.5 range. Importantly, 227 sites have HRS scores
between 16.5 and 40.5. This set is centered on the regulatory threshold of 28.5 that determines placement
on the NPL and constitutes the regression discontinuity sample that we exploit in the subsequent analysis.
Figure 4 plots the mean estimated costs of remediation by 4-unit intervals (solid line), along with
the fraction of sites in each interval with non-missing cost data (dotted line). The vertical line denotes the
28.5 threshold. The non-zero mean costs below the threshold are calculated from the sites that received a
score greater than 28.5 upon rescoring and later made it onto the NPL.

The estimated costs of

remediation appear to be increasing in the HRS score. This finding suggests that despite its widely
acknowledged noisiness, the 1982 HRS scores may be informative about relative risks.

In the

neighborhood of 28.5, however, estimated costs are roughly constant, providing some evidence that risks
are roughly equal among the sites in the regression discontinuity sample.

IV. Econometric Methods
A. Least Squares Estimation with Data from the Entire U.S.
Here, we discuss a conventional econometric approach to estimating the relationship between
housing prices and NPL listing. This approach is laid out in the following system of equations:
(7)

yc2000 = θ 1(NPLc2000) + Xc1980′β + εc2000,

(8)

1(NPLc2000) = Xc1980′Π + ηc2000,

where yc2000 is the log of the median property value in census tract c in 2000.
19

The indicator

variable 1(NPLc2000) equals 1 only for observations from census tracts that contain a hazardous waste site
that has been placed on the NPL by 2000. Thus, this variable takes on a value of 1 for any of the
Superfund sites in column (1) of Table 1, not just those that were on the initial NPL list. The vector Xc1980
includes determinants of housing prices measured in 1980, and εc2000 and ηc2000 are the unobservable
determinants of housing prices and NPL status, respectively. We are also interested in the effect of NPL
status in 1990, and the year 1990 versions of these equations are directly analogous.
A few features of the X vector are noteworthy. First, we restrict this vector to 1980 values of the
variables to avoid confounding the effect of NPL status with “post-treatment” changes in these variables
that may be due to NPL status. Second, we include the 1980 value of the dependent variable, yc80 in
Xc1980, to adjust for permanent differences in housing prices across tracts and the possibility of mean
reversion in housing prices. See the Data Appendix for the full set of covariates.
Third in many applications of Rosen’s model, the vector of controls, denoted by X, is limited to
housing and neighborhood characteristics (e.g., number of bedrooms, school quality, and air quality).
Income and other similar variables are generally excluded on the grounds that they are “demand shifters”
and are needed to obtain consistent estimates of the MWTP function. The exclusion restriction is invalid
however if individuals treat wealthy neighbors as an amenity (or disamenity). In the subsequent analysis,
we are agnostic about which variables belong in the X vector and report estimates that are adjusted for
different combinations of the variables available in the Census data.
The coefficient θ measures the effect of NPL status on 2000 property values after controlling for
1980 mean property values and the other covariates. It tests for differential housing price appreciation in
census tracts with sites placed on the NPL. If there are unobserved permanent or transitory determinants
of housing prices that covary with NPL status, then the least squares estimator of θ will be biased. More
formally, consistent estimation of θ requires E[εc2000ηc2000] = 0. To account for local shocks to housing
markets, we emphasize results from specifications that include a full set of state fixed effects.
Ultimately, the conventional approach described in this subsection relies on a comparison of NPL
sites to the rest of the country. Its validity rests on the assumption that linear adjustment controls for all
determinants of housing price growth between census tracts with and without a NPL site, besides the
20

effect of the site’s placement on the NPL.

B. A Quasi-Experimental Approach based on the 1982 HRS Research Design
Here, we discuss our preferred identification strategy that has two key differences with the one
described above. First, we limit the sample to the subset of census tracts containing the 487 sites that
were considered for placement on the initial NPL and have complete housing price data. Thus, all
observations are from census tracts with hazardous waste sites that were judged to be among the nation’s
most dangerous by the EPA in 1982. If, for example, the β’s differ across tracts with and without
hazardous waste sites or there are differential trends in housing prices in tracts with and without these
sites, then this approach is more likely to produce consistent estimates. Second, we use a two-stage least
squares (2SLS) strategy to account for the possibility of endogenous rescoring of sites.
More formally, we replace equation (8) with:
(9)

1(NPLc2000) = Xc1980′Π + δ 1(HRSc82 > 28.5) + ηc2000,

where 1(HRSc82 > 28.5) serves as an instrumental variable. This indicator function equals 1 for census
tracts with a site that has a 1982 HRS score exceeding the 28.5 threshold. We then substitute the
predicted value of 1(NPLc2000) from the estimation of equation (9) in the fitting of (7) to obtain θ2SLS. In
this 2SLS framework, θ2SLS is identified from the variation in NPL status that is due to a site having a
1982 HRS score that exceeds 28.5.
For θ2SLS to provide a consistent estimate of the HPS gradient, the instrumental variable must
affect the probability of NPL listing, without having a direct effect on housing prices. The next section
will demonstrate that the first condition clearly holds. The second condition requires that the unobserved
determinants of 2000 housing prices are orthogonal to the portion of the nonlinear function of the 1982
HRS score that is not explained by Xc1980. In the simplest case, the 2SLS estimator is consistent if
E[1(HRSc82 > 28.5) εc2000] = 0.
We also obtain 2SLS estimates another way that allows for the possibility that E[1(HRSc82 >
28.5) εc2000] ≠ 0 over the entire 1982 HRS sample. In particular, we exploit the regression discontinuity
design implicit in the 1(•) function that determines NPL eligibility in three separate ways. In the first
21

approach, a quadratic in the 1982 HRS score is included in Xc1980 to partial out any correlation between
residual housing prices and the indicator for a 1982 HRS score exceeding 28.5. This approach does not
require that the determinants of housing prices are constant across the range of 1982 HRS scores. Instead,
it relies on the plausible assumption that residual determinants of housing price growth do not change
discontinuously at HRS scores just above 28.5.
The second regression discontinuity approach involves implementing our 2SLS estimator on the
regression discontinuity sample of 227 census tracts. Recall, this sample is limited to tracts with sites that
have 1982 HRS scores between 16.5 and 40.5. Here, the identifying assumption is that all else is held
equal in the “neighborhood” of the regulatory threshold. More formally, it is E[1(HRSc82 > 28.5)
εc2000|16.5 < 1982 HRS < 40.5] = 0. Recall, the HRS score is a nonlinear function of the ground water,
surface water, and air migration pathway scores. The third regression discontinuity method exploits
knowledge of this function by including the individual pathway scores in the vector Xc1980. All of these
regression discontinuity approaches are demanding of the data and this will be reflected in the sampling
errors.

V. Empirical Results
A. Balancing of Observable Covariates
This subsection examines the quality of the comparisons that underlie the subsequent least
squares and quasi-experimental 2SLS estimates of the effect of NPL status on housing price growth. We
begin by examining whether NPL status and the 1(HRSc82 > 28.5) instrumental variable are orthogonal to
the observable predictors of housing prices. Formal tests for the presence of omitted variables bias are as
always unavailable, but it seems reasonable to presume that research designs that balance the observable
covariates across NPL status or 1(HRSc82 > 28.5) may suffer from smaller omitted variables bias. First,
these designs may be more likely to balance the unobservables (Altonji, Elder, and Taber 2000). Second
if the observables are balanced, then consistent inference does not depend on functional form assumptions
on the relations between the observable confounders and housing prices. Estimators that misspecify these
functional forms (e.g., linear regression adjustment when the conditional expectations function is
22

nonlinear) will be biased.
Table 2 shows the association of NPL status and 1(HRSc82 > 28.5) with potential determinants of
housing price growth measured in 1980. Column (1) reports the means of the variables listed in the row
headings in the 985 census tracts with NPL hazardous waste sites and complete housing price data.
Column (2) displays the means in the 41,989 census tracts that neither contain a NPL site nor share a
border with a tract containing one. Columns (3) and (4) report on the means in the 181 and 306 census
tracts with hazardous waste sites with 1982 HRS scores below and above the 28.5 threshold, respectively.
Columns (5) and (6) repeat this exercise for the 90 and 137 tracts below and above the regulatory
threshold in the regression discontinuity sample. The remaining columns report p-values from tests that
the means in pairs of the first six columns are equal. P-values less than 0.01 are denoted in bold.
Column (7) compares the means in columns (1) and (2) to explore the possibility of confounding
in the least square approach. The entries indicate that 1980 housing prices are more than 20% lower in
tracts with a NPL site. Among the potential determinants of housing prices, the hypothesis of equal
means can be rejected at the 1% level for 9 of the 11 demographic and economic variables, 7 of 11 of the
housing characteristics, and 3 of the 4 geographic regions. Specifically, the tracts with NPL sites are less
densely populated (e.g., due to locations in industrial parts of urban areas and rural areas) and have lower
household incomes. One variable that seems to capture this is that the fraction of the housing stock that is
comprised of mobile homes is more than 80% greater (0.0862 versus 0.0473) in these tracts.
Additionally, the fraction of Blacks and Hispanics is greater in tracts without NPL sites, which
undermines “environmental justice” claims in this context. Due to the confounding of NPL status with
these other determinants of housing price growth, it may be reasonable to assume that least squares
estimation of equation (7) will produce biased estimates of the effect of NPL status.
Column (8) compares the tracts with hazardous wastes that have 1982 HRS scores below and
above the 28.5 regulatory threshold. It is immediately evident that by narrowing the focus to these tracts,
the differences in the potential determinants of housing prices are greatly mitigated. For example, the
population density and percentage of mobile homes are well balanced. One important difference that
remains is that the mean housing price in 1980 is roughly 16% higher in tracts with HRS scores above
23

28.5. Overall, the entries suggest that the above and below 28.5 comparison reduces the confounding of
NPL status.
Column (9) repeats this analysis in the regression discontinuity sample. Notably, the difference
in 1980 housing prices is reduced to 10% and is no longer statistically significant at conventional levels
(p-value = 0.084). With respect to the other determinants of 2000 housing prices, the findings are
remarkable in that the hypothesis of equal means cannot be rejected at the 1% level for any of these
variables. The differences in the means are substantially reduced for many of the variables, so this result
is not simply due to the smaller sample (and larger sampling errors). This finding suggests that estimates
of the effect of NPL status on housing price growth from the regression discontinuity sample may be of
especial interest.
There is not enough room to present the results here, but there are substantial differences in the
geographic distribution of sites across states in both the above and below 28.5 (i.e., columns 3 and 4) and
regression discontinuity (i.e., columns 5 and 6) comparisons. It is likely that this is due to the small
samples in each state. The dramatic differences in state-level trends in housing prices in the 1980s and
1990s suggest that this is a potential source of bias. Consequently, we will emphasize specifications that
include state fixed effects to control for state-level shocks to housing prices.

B. Least Squares Estimates from the All NPL Sample
Table 3 presents the first large-scale effort to test the effect of Superfund clean-ups on property
value appreciation rates. Specifically, it reports the regression results from fitting 4 least squares versions
of equation (7) for both 1990 and 2000 housing prices. The sample size is 42,974 in all regressions. In
Panel A, 746 (985) observations in 1990 (2000) are from census tracts that contain a hazardous waste site
that had been on the NPL at any time prior to 1990 (2000).31 In addition to tracts with incomplete
housing price data from 1980 – 2000, tracts that share a border with tracts containing NPL sites (unless

31

For tracts that include multiple NPL sites, the observation from that tract is repeated in the data file for each site.
Thus, there would be 2 identical observations for a tract that contains two NPL sites. The 746 (985) NPL sites in
1990 (2000) are located in 682 (892) individual tracts.

24

they also contain a NPL site) are dropped from the sample since Superfund clean-ups may affect housing
prices in adjacent tracts.
The possibility of price effects in adjacent tracts is investigated in Panel B. Here, the observation
from each tract with a NPL site is replaced with the average of all variables across the census tracts that
share a border with the tract containing the NPL site and have complete housing price data. Further, the
individual observations on the adjacent tracts are excluded from the sample as in Panel A. The remainder
of the sample is comprised of observations on the 41,989 tracts with complete housing price data that
neither have a NPL site nor are adjacent to a tract with a NPL site.
In principle, the price effects in adjacent tracts could be positive or negative.

The most

straightforward possibilities are that a site’s remediation would cause property values in adjacent tracts to
increase or leave them unaffected (if, for example, any health benefits are limited to the tract containing
the site). If housing markets are small and segmented, however, it is possible that a Superfund clean-up
would induce migration from the adjacent tracts to the tract containing the sites and that this dynamic
would lead to lower housing prices in the adjacent tracts. In the polar case, the NPL designation and
subsequent clean-up would reallocate housing values within the segmented market and have no overall
effect on housing values.
The dependent variables are underlined in the first column. The entries report the coefficient and
heteroskedastic-consistent standard error on the NPL indicator. All specifications control for the natural
log of the mean housing price in 1980, so the reported parameter should be interpreted as the growth in
housing prices in tracts with a NPL site (or its neighbors), relative to tracts without NPL sites. The exact
covariates in each specification are noted in the row headings at the bottom of the table and are described
in more detail in the Data Appendix.
The Panel A results show that this least squares approach finds a positive association between
NPL listing and housing price increases. Specifically, the estimates in the first row indicate that median
housing prices grew by 9.8% to 16.4% (measured in ln points) more in tracts with a site placed on the
NPL from 1980 to 1990. All of these estimates would easily be judged statistically significant by
conventional criteria. The column (4) estimate of 9.8% is the most reliable one, because it is adjusted for
25

all unobserved state-level determinants of price growth. Recall, Table 1 demonstrated that remediation
activities had been initiated at less than half of these sites and only 22 sites were construction complete by
1990. Thus, these findings appear to contradict the popular “stigma” hypothesis (see, e.g., Harris 1999)
that a site’s placement on the NPL causes housing prices to decline. We investigate this issue further
below.
The next row repeats this exercise for the period from 1980 to 2000. Here, the estimated effect of
the presence of a NPL site within a tract’s boundaries is associated with a 4.0% to 7.3% increase in the
growth of house prices depending on the specification. Notably, the standard errors on the 2000 estimates
are about half the size of the 1990 ones.
Panel B explores the growth of housing prices in the census tracts that are adjacent to the tracts
containing the NPL sites. All of the estimates are statistically different from zero and imply that the
placement of a site on the NPL is associated with a positive effect on the growth of housing prices in
neighboring tracts. The column (4) specification indicates 10.8% and 8.8% gains by 1990 and 2000,
respectively. 32
It is possible to use the Table 3 estimates to do a crude cost-benefit calculation. The 1980 mean
of aggregate property values in tracts with NPL sites is roughly $77 million. The multiplication of this
value by the 2000 own tract, column (4) point estimate of 0.066 implies that housing prices were roughly
$5 million higher in these tracts in 2000 due to the NPL designation. The 1980 mean of aggregate
property values in adjacent tracts is $638 million and an analogous calculation suggests that the NPL
designation led to a mean increase in property values of roughly $56 million. Setting aside the legal costs
associated with collecting the funds from private parties and deadweight loss of public funds, the $61
million mean increase in property values per site appears larger than our estimate of the mean actual costs

32

The subsequent sections are focused on the subset of hazardous waste sites that were tested in 1982 for inclusion
on the initial NPL. Consequently, it is relevant to contrast the subsequent estimates with those from the Table 3
approach. When the set of tracts with NPL sites is limited to those that were tested in 1982, the column 4
specification in Table 3 produces point estimates (standard errors) of 0.063 (0.025) and 0.057 (0.013) for 1990 and
2000. The analogous 1990 and 2000 adjacent census tract results are 0.080 (0.016) and 0.073 (0.012). Overall,
these estimates are quite similar to those in Table 3 for the full set of NPL sites.

26

of clean-ups of about $40 million per site.33
Before drawing any definitive conclusions or policy implications, however, it is worth
emphasizing that three features of the evidence presented so far suggest that the Table 3 estimates may be
unreliable. First, Table 2 demonstrated that NPL status is confounded by many variables. Second, 7 of
the 8 adjacent tract point estimates exceed the own census tract estimates. In light of these tracts’ small
size (recall, the median size of a site is 29 acres), it seems unlikely that NPL status would have a larger
effect in the adjacent tracts. Third, all of the 2000 own tract and adjacent point estimates are smaller than
the 1990 point estimates from the same specifications. This finding is puzzling, because remediation was
complete at only 22 of the NPL sites by 1990. In contrast, the clean-ups had been completed at nearly
half of the sites by 2000.
The next section begins our presentation of the results from the 1982 HRS research design. This
design mitigates many of the concerns about omitted variables bias that plague the least squares approach.

C. Is the 1(HRSc82 > 28.5) a Valid Instrumental Variable for NPL Status?
This section presents evidence on the first-stage relationship between the 1(HRSc82 > 28.5)
indicator and NPL status, as well as some suggestive evidence on the validity of the exclusion restriction.
Figure 5 plots the bivariate relation between the probability of 1990 (Panel A) and 2000 (Panel B) NPL
status and the 1982 HRS score among the 487 sites in the 1982 HRS sample. The plots are done
separately for sites above and below the 28.5 threshold and come from the estimation of nonparametric
regressions that use Cleveland’s (1979) tricube weighting function and a bandwidth of 0.5.34 Thus, they
represent a moving average of the probability of NPL status across 1982 HRS scores. The data points
represent the mean probabilities in the same 4-unit intervals of the HRS score as in Figures 3 and 4.

33

Our estimates of the mean actual costs of clean-ups are calculated in the following manner. Panel F of Table 1
indicates that among fully remediated sites the actual costs of clean-up exceed the expected costs by roughly 40%
among all NPL sites. We then multiply the mean expected costs of clean (calculated among all sites) of $28.3
million by 1.4, which gives our estimated mean actual cost of $40 million. The comparable figure for the column
(2) NPL sites, which are the focus of the subsequent analysis, is $43 million.
34
The smoothed scatterplots are qualitatively similar with a rectangular weighting function (i.e., equal weighting)
and alternative bandwidths.

27

The figures present dramatic evidence that a HRS score above 28.5 is a powerful predictor of
NPL status in 1990 and 2000. Virtually all sites with initial scores greater than 28.5 are on the NPL. The
figures also reveal that some sites below 28.5 made it on to the NPL (due to rescoring) and that this
probability is increasing in the initial HRS score and over time.
Panel A of Table 4 reports on the statistical analog to these figures from the estimation of linear
probability versions of equation (9) for NPL status in 1990 and 2000. This is a test of the “first-stage”
relationship in our two-stage least squares approach. In the first five columns, the sample is comprised of
the full 1982 HRS Sample. The controls in the first four columns are identical to those in the four
specifications in Table 3. In the fifth column, the 1982 HRS score and its square are added to the column
(4) specification so that the estimates are adjusted for a smooth function of the “running” variable. Thus,
the specification tests for a discontinuity in the probability of NPL status at the regulatory threshold of
28.5. In column (6), the controls are the same as in column (4), and the sample is the regression
discontinuity sample that is comprised of the 227 sites with 1982 HRS scores between 16.5 and 40.5.
These specifications and samples are repeated throughout the remainder of paper.
The results confirm the visual impression that a 1982 HRS score above 28.5 increases the
probability that a site is placed on the NPL. The point estimates imply a higher probability ranging
between 61% and 86%, depending on the year and specification. Overall, these findings reveal a
powerful first-stage relationship suggesting that weak instrument concerns are not relevant here (Staiger
and Stock 1997).
Panel B of Table 4 presents an informal test of the validity of the research design. In the first row
of the panel, the dependent variable is the natural log of 1980 mean housing prices and the sample is
again comprised of the 1982 HRS sample. In the second row, the dependent variable and the covariates
for each observation are calculated as the mean across the census tracts that share a border with the tract
containing the hazardous waste site. The specifications are identical to those in the upper panel (except,
of course, they do not control for 1980 prices). The table reports the coefficient and standard error on
1(HRSc82 > 28.5) from five regressions.
These Panel B regressions test for differential 1980 housing prices above and below the threshold
28

after adjustment for observed covariates. This is an important test, because 1980 housing prices are not
balanced across the values of 1(HRSc82 > 28.5) in the full 1982 HRS sample and residual housing prices
may be an important predictor of the growth in housing prices. Evidence of significant differences would
undermine the validity of this research design.
After adjustment for the housing characteristics, the point estimate on the above 28.5 indicator is
small both economically and statistically in the own census tract regressions. In columns (3) – (6), the
estimates range from -0.010 to 0.001 and the largest t-statistic is 0.55. The adjacent census tract results
suggest that a HRS score exceeding 28.5 is virtually uncorrelated with adjusted 1980 housing prices.
Figure 6 allows for a graphical investigation of this test. It plots the results from nonparametric
regressions between 1980 residual housing prices after adjustment for the column (4) covariates (except
the indicator for a HRS score above 28.5) and the 1982 HRS scores. These plots are done separately for
sites above and below the threshold and again use Cleveland’s (1979) tricube weighting function and a
bandwidth of 0.5. The qualitative findings are unaffected by reasonable alternatives for the weighting
function and the bandwidth. In Panel A, the 1982 HRS sample is used, whereas Panel B employs the
regression discontinuity sample.35
There is little evidence of a relationship between the 1982 HRS score and 1980 residual housing
prices in either figure. Importantly, there are only modest differences in residual housing prices just
above and below the regulatory threshold. Along with the findings in Tables 2 and 4, these plots support
the validity of this paper’s quasi-experimental approach.

D. Quasi-Experimental Estimates of NPL Status on Housing Prices
Table 5 presents 2SLS estimates of the effect of NPL status on housing prices in 1990 and 2000.
In Panel A the observations are from the census tracts containing the 487 hazardous waste sites in the
35

Figure 6 is intended to provide a qualitative graphical exploration of the regression results. The relationship
between housing prices and 1982 HRS scores cannot be exactly inferred from this graph, because the HRS score has
not been adjusted for the column (4) covariates. This same caveat applies to the subsequent Figures 7, 8, and 9.
However, the meaningfulness of this graph is supported by Table 2’s finding that the covariates are well balanced
among sites with 1982 HRS scores above and below the regulatory threshold, especially in the regression
discontinuity sample.

29

1982 HRS sample. In Panel B each observation is comprised of the average of all variables across tracts
that share a border with these tracts. The 6 combinations of samples and control variables are identical to
those in Panel A of Table 4.
These Panel A results suggest that a site’s placement on the NPL has little impact on the growth
of property values in its own census tract, relative to tracts with sites that narrowly missed placement on
the NPL. The 1990 and 2000 point estimates range from -0.6% to 6.6%. However, they all have
associated t-statistics less than 2.
The most reliable specifications are presented in columns (4) – (6). The column (4) specification
controls for state fixed effects in housing price growth and produces smaller point estimates than the
identical specification in Table 3. However, the imprecision of the estimates means that the 95%
confidence intervals of these estimates overlap. The regression discontinuity specifications in columns
(5) and (6) may be the least subject to omitted variables bias concerns, so it is notable that they produce
the smallest point estimates. These two specifications are demanding of the data and this is reflected in
the larger standard errors.36
Panel B presents the adjacent tract results. The column (4) specification produces economically
small point estimates that are estimated more precisely. Specifically, the 1990 and 2000 point estimates
(standard errors) are -0.006 (0.027) and 0.012 (0.022), respectively.

Notably, the 95% confidence

intervals of these estimates do not overlap with the Table 3 estimates from the identical specification.
The regression discontinuity estimates are also small and the null of zero cannot be rejected at anything
approaching conventional levels. Overall, these quasi-experimental results suggest that a site’s placement
on the NPL does not affect housing prices in neighboring census tracts either positively or negatively. In
this respect they contrast sharply with the adjacent tract results from the least squares approach in Table 3.

36

Probst and Konisky (2001) find that approximately 14.5% of RODs ultimately receive a “no further action”
classification from the EPA. This classification was applied when removal activities were sufficient to remove the
environmental risk and/or the risk naturally dissipated. This is potentially relevant for our analysis for the sites
where the EPA classified every ROD for every operating unit as “no further action,” because these sites are not
standard NPL sites in that no remediation activities took place at them. There are 11 of these sites in the 1982 HRS
sample. The own census tract regression results are virtually identical to those in Panel A of Table 5 when the tracts
containing these 11 sites are dropped from the sample.

30

Figures 7 and 8 provide an opportunity to better understand the source of these regression results.
They are constructed identically to Figure 6 and plot the nonparametric regressions of 2000 residual
housing prices (after adjustment for the column (4) covariates) against the 1982 HRS Score in the 1982
HRS (Panel A) and Regression Discontinuity (Panel B) samples. The figures are for the own and
adjacent census tract housing prices, respectively, and are the graphical version of the reduced form
relationship between housing price growth and the instrument.
These graphs confirm that there is little association between 2000 residual housing prices and the
1982 HRS score. A comparison of the plots at the regulatory threshold is of especial interest in light of
the large jump in the probability of placement on the NPL there. In all four of these plots the moving
averages from the left and right are virtually equal at the threshold.
One potentially troublesome issue with the approach thus far is the arbitrary nature of census tract
boundaries with respect to the location of the hazardous waste sites. Although there is no a priori reason
to believe that it is likely, it is possible that the houses affected by the clean-ups fall predominantly
outside the sites’ tracts and the adjacent tracts. To explore this possibility, we obtained the exact
longitude and latitude of all the hazardous waste sites in the 1982 HRS sample and used GIS software to
draw circles around them with radii of 1, 2, and 3 miles. We then calculated the means of all variables as
the weighted average across the portion of tracts that fall within the relevant circle around the hazardous
waste sites. The weight is the fraction of the tract’s area within the relevant circle multiplied by the
tract’s 1980 population. To place the size of these circles in some context, the 1980 aggregate values of
the housing stock in the three circles are roughly $300, $755, and $1,410 million (2000 $’s).
Appendix Table 1 reports results from the application of the 6 2SLS specifications used in
Table 5 to these data sets. None of the 36 point estimates presented would be judged to be statistically
different from zero by conventional criteria. In both the 1 and 2 mile panels, the 95% confidence interval
of the column (4) estimate lies below the housing price appreciation rate necessary for the clean-ups to
surpass our estimated cost of the clean-ups of $43 million in this sample. Overall, this table confirms that

31

a site’s receipt of the NPL designation appears to have little effect on the growth of local housing prices.37
Table 6 presents the results from a series of other specification checks, all of which return to
using census tracts, rather than circles around a site, as the unit of observation. For conciseness, we only
present estimates from the column (1) specification and the three most robust specifications (i.e., columns
4, 5, and 6) from Table 5. We also limit the table to the 2000 own census tract results. We focus on the
2000 own census tract data, because it is more likely that we will find an effect with them since more
clean-ups are completed in 2000 and the data come from the houses in closest proximity to the sites.
Consequently, a continued failure to find an effect of NPL status will further undermine the view that
NPL status affects local property values.
Each of the specification checks is reported in a separate panel. Panel A reports the results from
the addition of the individual pathway scores to the vector Xc1980 of controls in all six specifications. This
is the third regression discontinuity style approach. In Panel B, we add the 1970 values of the covariates
(including the natural log of 1970 housing prices) to the Table 5 specification to adjust for mean reversion
or pre-existing trends. The 1970 data is available for a subset of counties, so the sample sizes decline to
353 in columns (1) – (3) and 157 in (4). Panel C adds the 2000 value of the covariates. These variables
are potentially endogenous, because they may be affected by the clean-ups. To isolate the effect of NPL
status on land values (rather than housing values), however, it may be appropriate to adjust for these
variables.
The results in the first three panels of Table 6 continue to suggest that the NPL designation has
little effect on the growth of property values between 1980 and 2000. The adjustment for the individual
pathway scores generally reduces the point estimates and causes the standard errors to increase. The
addition of the 1970 and 2000 covariates also tends to reduce the point estimates. All 12 of these
estimates have an associated t-statistic less than 1.1.38
37

A limitation of this GIS approach is that street address level data on housing prices and the covariates is
unavailable. Consequently, we assign a census tract’s average to the portion of the tract that falls within the circle,
which is equivalent to assuming that there is no heterogeneity in housing prices or other variables within a tract.
38
It is possible that the least expensive houses within a tract are the ones closest to the NPL site. If this is the case,
the site’s remediation could lead to zero growth in median house prices but substantial growth in mean prices. A
test of this possibility by using mean housing prices as the dependent variable does not affect our qualitative

32

Panel D tests whether the effect of the NPL designation differs in census tracts with a population
density exceeding 1,588 per square mile, which is the top quartile among tracts in this sample.
The intuition is that the price response to clean-ups may be greater in higher density tracts where there are
fewer undeveloped plots of land to build new houses.39 Specifically, the specification now includes an
indicator for these tracts and the additional variable of interest, which is the interaction of this indicator
and the indicator for 2000 NPL status. The latter variable is treated as endogenous and instrumented with
the interaction of indicators for tracts with a population density exceeding 1,588 and sites with a HRS
score exceeding 28.5. Two of the estimates of the interaction are positive and two are negative. None of
them would be judged to be statistically different from zero by conventional criteria.40
Panel E follows a similar approach, except that its focus is on tracts where it is most likely that
the hazardous waste site has contaminated local drinking water supplies. These tracts are defined as those
where the site’s groundwater pathway score exceeds 28.5 and the tract is in the top half of the distribution
of mean household well water usage (i.e., more than 11.8% of households use well water). It seems
reasonable to suppose that tracts where households rely on contaminated water may place a higher value
on clean-ups. Here, the point estimates on the interaction are in the relatively narrow range of -0.007 to
0.024, although individually they are poorly determined.41 42

conclusions. In fact, the results from the most reliable specifications (i.e., those reported in Table 6) are virtually
identical to those for models for median house prices. Similarly, the results are practically unchanged when the
dependent variable is the difference between the ln of 2000 (or 1990) and 1980 housing prices.
39
Davis (2004) finds a 13% house price response to the outbreak of a cancer cluster in Churchill County, Nevada,
which has a population density of 5 people per square mile. The relevance for this paper is that it clearly contradicts
the view that the house prices do not respond to changes in environmental goods (or other public goods) in regions
with plentiful undeveloped land. This is consistent with the notion that there is a fixed amount of land (i.e., a
vertical supply curve of land). Nevertheless, we present the Panel D results to explore this issue in our setting.
40
The results are qualitatively similar when we test whether the effect of the NPL designation differs in tracts
located in counties in the top quartile of county population density.
41
Of the 122 tracts with a population density exceeding 1,588, 72 have a HRS score exceeding 28.5 and 79 have
sites placed on the NPL by 2000. Among the 204 tracts that qualify as potentially having contaminated drinking
water, 164 have HRS scores exceeding 28.5 and 170 have sites that had been placed on the NPL by 2000.
42
We would have liked to test whether the effects of clean-ups differed for large sites or ones where the estimated
costs of clean-up are high (so called “mega” sites). The size and estimated cost data are only available for NPL
sites, so it is impossible to include a main effect for these characteristics. Since these characteristics are likely to
have a direct effect on housing price appreciation, we cannot conduct meaningful tests of these hypotheses.

33

E. Quasi-Experimental Estimates of Stages of Superfund Clean-Ups on Rental Rates
We now turn to using the 1990 and 2000 ln median rental rates as the outcome variable. Rental
units account for roughly 20% of all housing units and generally differ on observable characteristics from
owner occupied homes, so the results may not be indicative of the overall housing market. The appeal of
this outcome is that rental rates are a flow measure, so we can abstract from the problem that individuals’
expectations about the length of time until the completion of the clean-up are unknown. Consequently,
we can test whether the impact of the clean-ups on the value of local housing services varies at different
stages of Superfund clean-ups.43
Table 7 presents separate 2SLS estimates of the effect of the different stages of the remediation
process on 1990 and 2000 rental rates.

The three endogenous variables are independent indicator

variables for tracts that contain a site that by 1990/2000: is on the NPL but a ROD has not been issued;
has a ROD and/or clean-up has been initiated but not completed; or, has been designated construction
complete or deleted from the NPL. The three instruments are the interaction of the 1(HRSc82 > 28.5)
variable with the indicators for these three stages of the NPL process. The table reports the point
estimates and their standard errors, along with the p-value from a F-test that the three point estimates are
equal. The number of sites in each category and the mean HRS score is also listed in brackets.
The sites in the “NPL Only” category have been on the NPL for 7 (17) years by 1990 (2000), but
the EPA had not developed a remediation plan yet. It seems reasonable to presume that individuals have
had enough time to use the NPL listing to update their expectation of the risk associated with proximity to
the site. In both the 1990 (2000) regressions, 3 (2) of the 4 point estimates are positive for this group.
The large standard errors, especially in the regression discontinuity specifications, make definitive
conclusions unjustified. However, the results in this table (along with results from analogous housing
price regressions44) fail to lend much credence to the conventional wisdom that a site’s placement on the
43

Viscusi and Hamilton (1999) find evidence that decisions about the timing of clean-ups of NPL sites are
associated with local measures of political activism. Other researchers have found less decisive evidence on the
relationship between local community’s characteristics and EPA decisions on the timing of clean-ups (Hird 1993,
1994; Zimmerman 1993; Gupta et al., 1995 and 1996).
44
We also estimated a version of these models for housing prices. The column (2) “NPL Only” parameter estimates
(standard errors) for 1990 and 2000 are 0.018 (0.067) and 0.015 (0.065), respectively.

34

NPL leads to an immediate reduction in the value of housing services near the site.
The 2000 results for the “Construction Complete or NPL Deletion” category are noteworthy. The
point estimates from the more reliable specifications range from -0.043 to 0.046 and zero cannot be
rejected for any of them. This finding is telling, because these sites have been fully remediated and yet
there seems to be little effect on the growth of rental rates.45
The null hypothesis of equality of the three parameters cannot be rejected at conventional levels
in any of the specifications. The imprecision of the estimates helps to explain this finding, but their rank
ordering is also surprising. In three of the four 2000 specifications, the point estimate on the “NPL Only”
indicator is either equal to or exceeds the “Construction Complete or NPL Deletion” one.
A possible explanation for the small housing price effects in Tables 5 and 6 is that gains near sites
where clean-ups are complete are obscured by declines at sites where the clean-ups are not complete or
have not been initiated. The Table 7 findings undermine this explanation. Overall, this table lends further
support to the view that Superfund clean-ups had small effects on the value of local housing services.

F. Quasi-Experimental Estimates of the Effect of NPL Status on Total Population and Demographics
Table 8 presents 2SLS estimates for a series of housing supply, population, and demographic
variables measured in 2000. We continue to focus on the tracts containing the hazardous waste sites. The
intent is to determine whether individuals sort in response to changes in local environmental amenities, or
specifically the Superfund clean-ups. We report the parameter estimate and standard errors on the
dummy for NPL status by 2000. As in the earlier analysis, this variable is instrumented with an indicator
for a HRS score above 28.5.
The first specification simply adjusts for the 1980 value of the dependent variable. The column
(2) specification adds state fixed effects. The column (3) specification adds a quadratic in the 1982 HRS
score and in column (4) the smaller regression discontinuity sample is used. To keep the interpretation
45

The point estimates (standard errors) for the “Construction Complete or NPL Deletion” indicator from the
columns (2), (3), and (4) specifications in the 2000 housing price analogs to the Table 7 regressions are 0.063
(0.029), 0.016 (0.060), and 0.038 (0.040). Thus, these regressions also fail to provide much evidence that Superfund
clean-ups have a substantial impact on housing prices.

35

simple, the estimates are not adjusted for the wide range of housing characteristics, economic conditions
and demographics as was done in the price and rental rate regressions.
Panel A tests for an association between NPL status and growth in the total number of housing
units and population. The results provide mixed evidence on total housing units. There is modest
evidence of a relative increase in population in the tracts with NPL sites. The estimates in the regression
discontinuity specifications are poorly determined, but the point estimates are similar to those in the other
specifications. Figure 9 provides an opportunity to examine the population results graphically. It is
evident that tracts with HRS scores exceeding 28.5 have higher population growth but there is only weak
evidence of a discontinuous jump in population growth at the regulatory threshold.
Panels B and C examine whether the NPL designation is associated with sorting or migration that
leads to changes in the income and demographic characteristics of local residents.

The first two

specifications suggest that household income increased more in NPL tracts and that the fraction of
households receiving public assistance declined. The regression discontinuity specifications, however,
are less supportive of this conclusion. It appears that the fraction of Blacks or Hispanics did not change in
a meaningful way. Although the clean-up of Superfund sites is intended to reduce environmental risks for
local residents, especially children, the fraction of the population under the age of 6 is unchanged.

VI. Interpretation and Policy Implications
This paper’s primary finding is that the NPL designation and eventual clean-up of hazardous
waste sites have small effects on the value of housing services in the areas proximate to these sites. In
light of the substantial resources devoted to these clean-ups and the claims of large health benefits, this
finding may be considered surprising. Here, we review two explanations both of which are consistent
with the results.
First, there may be heterogeneity in individuals’ valuations of the risks associated with proximity
to hazardous waste sites and the individuals that choose to live near these sites may have a low
willingness to pay to avoid the associated health risks.

This could be the case either because of

differences in income or heterogeneity in preferences. In this case, the paper’s estimate would be
36

uninformative about the population average willingness to pay. It is important to note, however, that
from a policy perspective the crucial parameter is the willingness to pay of the population that lives near
these sites and this is the parameter that the paper has estimated.
Second, individuals may have imperfect information. This imperfect information could take the
form of ignorance about proximity to sites or unawareness of the reduction in health risks associated with
clean-ups. It is unlikely that individuals are unaware of the sites, because local newspapers often provide
extensive coverage when a site is placed on the NPL (or even considered for placement) and/or when
remediation is completed. Further, at least a few states (e.g., Alaska and Arizona) require home sellers to
disclose whether there are hazardous waste sites in close proximity.
Alternatively, it seems plausible that individuals do not perfectly understand the health benefits of
Superfund clean-ups. As discussed above, scientists are actively studying the health consequences of
exposure to the thousands of toxics present at Superfund sites, but laboratory evidence on the human
(rather than mouse or rat) health effects of these toxics will not be available any time soon since scientific
review boards reasonably place many safeguards on the study of human health. Put another way, the
scientific uncertainty surrounding the toxics at many Superfund sites makes it difficult for individuals to
correctly assess the health benefits of clean-ups.46 A related possibility is that regardless of the clean-ups’
effectiveness at reducing health risks, individuals do not believe that they mitigate risk.
These two explanations have very different policy implications. The former suggests that society
devotes too many resources to these clean-ups and that it may be prudent to consider less expensive
options. For example, a policy of erecting fences around the sites and posting signs that warn about the
potential health risks would be cheaper. Alternatively if the goal is to transfer resources to the people that
live in polluted parts of the country, the results suggest that society should identify projects that are more

46

One caveat to this line of reasoning is that although there is uncertainty about the magnitude of the benefits of
clean-ups, it is not evident why individuals would incorrectly assume they are small rather than large. It is possible
that some individuals have difficulty assessing low probability events (e.g., a small increase in the probability of
contracting cancer) and just assume that the clean-ups induce no change in risk. However, if this is a mistake, it is
unclear why all individuals would make it. Markets allow for heterogeneity in beliefs and presumably the
individuals that believe that clean-ups have large health benefits would purchase houses from the individuals that
believe the opposite.

37

valuable to individuals living in these areas. Of course, cash transfers are one such option, although they
may not be politically desirable or feasible.47
The latter explanation suggests that the benefits of these clean-ups may be substantially larger
than suggested by this paper’s results. However, this possibility cannot be assessed without reliable
estimates on the health benefits of these clean-ups. This is an important area for future research.

VII. Conclusions
This study has estimated the effect of Superfund clean-ups of hazardous waste sites on local
housing price appreciation. The basis of the analysis is a comparison of housing price growth in the areas
surrounding the first 400 hazardous waste sites to be cleaned up through the Superfund program to the
areas surrounding the 290 sites that narrowly missed qualifying for the initial Superfund clean-ups. Using
the most comprehensive data file on Superfund ever compiled by the EPA or other researchers, we cannot
reject that the clean-ups had no effect on housing price growth, nearly two decades after these sites
became eligible for them. This finding is robust to a series of specification checks, including the
application of a quasi-experimental regression discontinuity design based on knowledge of the exact
selection rule. Overall, the preferred quasi-experimental estimates suggest that the benefits of Superfund
clean-ups as measured through the housing market are substantially lower than $43 million, which is our
best estimate of the mean costs of a Superfund clean-up.
More broadly, this paper contributes to a growing body of research (Black 1999; Chay and
Greenstone 2005) which suggests that it is possible to identify research designs that mitigate the
confounding that has historically undermined the credibility of conventional hedonic approaches to
valuing non-market goods. In this respect, it suggests that there may be more opportunities to use
markets to value environmental goods than is commonly accepted.
47

If the paper’s estimates that housing prices are unaffected by the NPL designation are correct and there aren’t any
health benefits, then the social cost of the Superfund program is simply the deadweight loss associated with the
collection of public funds. In this case, the program could be viewed as primarily consisting of a transfer from
taxpayers to EPA personnel, lawyers, environmental engineers, and other individuals and companies involved in the
remediation of Superfund hazardous waste sites. Whether transfers to these groups are more preferable than
transfers to individuals that live near hazardous waste sites is a political decision.

38

DATA APPENDIX
I. Covariates in Housing Price and Rental Rate Regressions
The following are the control variables used in the housing price and rental rate regressions. They are
listed by the categories indicated in the row headings at the bottom of these tables. All of the variables
are measured in 1980 and are measured at the census tract level (or are the mean across sets of census
tracts, for example tracts that share a border with a tract containing a hazardous waste site).
1980 Ln House Price
ln mean value of owner occupied housing units in 1980 (note: the median is unavailable in 1980)
1980 Housing Characteristics
total housing units
% of total housing units (rental and owner occupied) that are occupied
# housing units owner occupied
% of owner occupied housing units with 0 bedrooms
% of owner occupied housing units with 1 bedroom
% of owner occupied housing units with 2 bedrooms
% of owner occupied housing units with 3 bedrooms
% of owner occupied housing units with 4 bedrooms
% of owner occupied housing units with 5 or more bedrooms
% of owner occupied housing units that are detached
% of owner occupied housing units that are attached
% of owner occupied housing units that are mobile homes
% of owner occupied house built within last year
% of owner occupied house built 2 to 5 years ago
% of owner occupied house built 6 to 10 years ago
% of owner occupied house built 10 to 20 years ago
% of owner occupied house built 20 to 30 years ago
% of owner occupied house built 30 to 40 years ago
% of owner occupied house built more than 40 years ago
% of all housing units without a full kitchen
% of all housing units that have no heating or rely on a fire, stove, or portable heater
% of all housing units without air conditioning
% of all housing units without a full bathroom
Note: In the rental regressions in Table 7, the owner occupied variables are replaced with renter occupied
versions of the variables. For example, the first variable is replaced with the “% of renter occupied
housing units with 0 bedrooms.”
1980 Economic Conditions
mean household income
% of households with income below poverty line
unemployment rate
% of households that receive some form of public assistance
1980 Demographics
population density
% of population Black
% of population Hispanic
39

% of population under age 18
% of population 65 or older
% of population foreign born
% of households headed by females
% of households residing in same house as 5 years ago
% of individuals aged 16-19 that are high school drop outs
% of population over 25 that failed to complete high school
% of population over 25 that have a BA or better (i.e., at least 16 years of education)
II. Assignment of HRS Scores
The HRS test scores each pathway from 0 to 100, where higher scores indicate greater risk.48 49
The individual pathway scores are calculated using a method that considers characteristics of the site as
being included in one of three categories: waste characteristics, likelihood of release, and target
characteristics. The final pathway score is a multiplicative function of the scores in these three categories.
The logic is, for example, that if twice as many people are thought to be affected via a pathway then the
pathway score should be twice as large.
The final HRS score is calculated using the following equation:
(1) HRS Score = [(S2gw + S2sw + S2a) / 3] ½,
where Sgw, Ssw, and Sa, denote the ground water migration, surface water migration, and air migration
pathway scores, respectively. As equation (1) indicates, the final score is the square root of the average of
the squared individual pathway scores. It is evident that the effect of an individual pathway on the total
HRS score is proportional to the pathway score.
It is important to note that HRS scores can’t be interpreted as strict cardinal measures of risk. A
number of EPA studies have tested how well the HRS represents the underlying risk levels based on
cancer and non-cancer risks.50 The EPA has concluded that the HRS test (at least from the late 1980s
version) is an ordinal test but sites with scores within 2 points of each pose roughly comparable risks to
human health (EPA 1991).51
III. Primary Samples
We have two primary samples. The first sample includes sites that were placed on the National
Priority List (NPL) before January 1, 2000. There are 1,398 sites in this sample. The second sample is
all sites that were tested between 1980 and 1982 for inclusion on the initial National Priority List
announced on September 8, 1983.
A. All NPL Sample
The All NPL sample includes NPL sites located in the 50 US states and the District of Columbia
that were placed on the NPL before January 1, 2000. Although there are NPL sites located in US
territories such as Puerto Rico, they are not included in the sample because the census data from these
areas differs from the data for the remainder of the country. Further, the sample is limited to sites that
48

See the EPA’s Hazard Ranking System Guidance Manual for further details on the determination of the HRS
score.
49
The capping of individual pathways and of attributes within each pathway is one limiting characteristic of the test.
There is a maximum value for most scores within each pathway category. Also, if the final pathway score is greater
than 100 then this score is reduced to 100. The capping of individual pathways creates a loss of precision of the test
since all pathway scores of 100 have the same effect on the final HRS score but may represent different magnitudes
of risk.
50
See Brody (1998) for a list of EPA studies that have examined this issue.
51
The EPA states that the early 1980s version of the HRS test should not be viewed as a measure of “absolute risk”,
but that “the HRS does distinguish relative risks among sites and does identify sites that appear to present a
significant risk to public health, welfare, or the environment” (Federal Register 1984).

40

were listed on the NPL before January 1, 2000 to ensure that site listing occurred before any data
collection for the 2000 census.
B. 1982 HRS Sample
The second sample consists of sites tested for inclusion on the initial NPL published on
September 8, 1983. 690 sites were tested for inclusion on this list. As noted in the text, not all sites
tested between 1980 and 1982 were placed on the first NPL list due to initial HRS scores below 28.5.
Additionally, 12 sites proposed for the NPL on December 30, 1982 were not listed on the first
NPL which was issued on September 8, 1983. Specifically, 418 sites were proposed for the NPL, but 406
sites were listed. The difference between the proposed list and the final list is due mostly to the rescoring
of sites. The EPA received 343 comments on 217 sites (all of which were proposed NPL sites) that led to
score changes in 156 sites. Revised scores for 5 of these sites fell below 28.5. These sites were dropped
from the proposed list. Also not included on the 1983 NPL are 7 more sites. These 7 sites were
considered “still under consideration” and did not have final rescores available as of September 8, 1983.
Here is a detailed explanation of the difference between the 1982 proposed list and the first NPL
issued in 1983:
(1) Included on the 1982 proposed list and not on 1983 final list
a. Sites with a revised HRS score below 28.5:
1. Crittenden County Landfill (Marion, AR)
2. Flynn Lumber (Caldwell, ID)
3. Parrot Road (New Haven, IN)
4. Phillips Chemical (Beatrice, NE)
5. Van Dale Junkyard (Marietta, OH)
b. Sites “still under consideration”:
1. Clare Water Supply (Clare, MI)
2. Electravoice (Buchanan, MI)
3. Littlefield Township Dump (Oden, MI)
4. Whitehall Wells (Whitehall, MI)
5. Kingman Airport Industrial Area (Kingman, AZ)
6. Airco (Calvert City, KY)
7. Bayou Sorrel (Bayou Sorrel, LA)
c. State priority sites that were dropped:
1. Plastifax (Gulfport, MS)
d. Sites cleaned up by the responsible party before the 1983 NPL:
1. Gratiot Co Golf Course (St. Louis, MI)
e. Sites split into two separate sites:
1. Vestal Water Supply (Vestal, NY)
(2) Included on the 1983 final list but not on the 1982 proposed list
a. Two separate sites, formally Vestal Water Supply:
1. Vestal 1-1 (Vestal, NY)
2. Vestal 4-2 (Vestal, NY)
b. Site identified and tested after the 1982 proposed list:
1. Times Beach (Times Beach, MO)
Note that 5 of the 7 “still under consideration” sites (Airco, Bayou, Clare, Electravoice, and
Whitehall Wells) were later added to the NPL. All five sites had score changes (3 revised upward, 2
revised downward). Two sites (Littlefield, Kingman) were never listed on the NPL. These sites would
have had scores that dropped below 28.5.
Changes to site status for the sites in (1)c-(1)e, (2)a, and (2)b above did affect our sample.
Gratiot Co Golf Course (1)d was remediated before publication of the final NPL and therefore dropped
from our sample. The original Vestal Water Supply (1)e split into 2 sites, with Vestal 4-2 retaining all of
the original attributes of the site. We therefore considered Vestal 4-2 as a continuation of the original site.
41

Vestal 1-1 is not included in our sample as there is no 1982 score associated with this site. Likewise
Times Beach (2)b is not included in our sample since there is no 1982 score. Plastifax (1)c received a
1982 score that would not have qualified the site for remediation. The site remains in the sample as
would any other site that scored below 28.5.
As a reminder, we instrument for NPL status with 1982 HRS scores to purge the estimates of
NPL status on housing price appreciation of the influence of the potentially endogenous decision to
rescore sites.
IV. Site Size Variable
The size of site is collected from EPA documentation on the site. Note, there are two sources for
the "actual physical size" of a superfund site. Both sources are from the EPA's on-line Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Information System (CERCLIS) Database. One is
extracted from the Fact Sheet and the other from the Site Narrative. They differ for numerous sites and in
these cases we used the average of the two sources. If only one was available we used that one.
In some cases the site size provided in CERCLIS refers to the area of source of the contamination
and not the size of the site. There are relatively few sites that are described this way. To maintain
consistency in how we interpret a site’s size we excluded these data from our primary data file and
indicated the ‘actual-size’ as missing. Further, there are some sites for which there is no size data
available in CERCLIS. In some of these cases, we were able to obtain site size from the original HRS
scoring sheets, which we obtained from the EPA docket center via a Freedom of Information Request.
Finally, sometimes the source of contamination is described as being just one part of the entire
site. For example, the description for superfund site “NJD980505424” says that there is a 57 acre landfill
on 144 acres of property. For this site and others described similarly, we considered the physical size of
the site to be 57 acres.
V. Details on the Determination of Construction Complete Status
The Construction Complete variable was created by the EPA to gauge progress on remediating
NPL sites. The EPA first began using this designation in 1990. However, it is evident from the remedial
action site histories and a construction complete data file we received from the EPA that construction
complete definitions were retroactively assigned to pre-1990 sites. Importantly, a site does not receive
the construction complete designation until remediation is complete (besides operation and maintenance)
at all of its operating units.
There are 4 sites in our samples which have been deleted but for which no Construction Complete
dates are provided. The site ids for these sites are ARD059636456, KSD007241656, MND000686071,
and WID990829475. These sites were all deleted between 1990 and 2000. Since construction complete
is a precursor for deletion, we assign these sites a construction complete date 1 year prior to the deletion
date. Table 1 reveals that on average deletions occur about 1 year before deletion.
VI. Measures of Expected and Actual Remediation Costs
We collected data on the expected and actual costs of remediation at each Superfund site in our
samples. Here, we describe the differences in these measures of costs and how they were calculated.
A. Expected (Estimated) Costs
Each site’s expected cost is calculated as the sum of the “estimated costs” reported in the first
Record of Decision (ROD) for each operating unit associated with the site. Each ROD evaluates possible
remedial action plans and selects one that satisfies all relevant national and state requirements for human
health and the natural environment. RODs are issued for NPL sites only, so expected costs are
unavailable for sites that fail to make it onto the NPL. These data were unavailable in a few RODs and
some sites were still without RODs by 2000.
Estimated costs include both the remedial action cost and where available the discounted
operations and management cost for the selected remedy. The projected time period for these operation
42

and management costs is usually 20-30 years.
Many sites have multiple “operating units” or completely separate sections of the site with
different RODs. We include estimated costs from each “operating unit” that has a separate ROD.
Savannah Silver Site is the site with the greatest number of operating units in our sample with at least 73.
Many of these operating units do not yet have a published ROD with an estimated cost. The vast majority
of sites—approximately 90%—have 3 or less operating units.
Note that the Savannah Silver Site highlights a limitation of the expected cost data. Many sites
listed on the National Priority List have Records of Decision and expected costs available for some, but
not all of the operating units at the site. To guard against the possibility of under-estimating the expected
costs at a site we emphasize expected cost data from those sites that are construction complete. It is clear
that all Records of Decision would be published for these sites.
Occasionally the ROD(s) for a site are updated or amended and this frequently leads to revisions
in the estimated costs field. These revisions are not included as part of the expected costs presented in
this paper. Thus, this paper’s reported expected costs are projections of the total costs of site remediation
before any clean-up activities have been initiated. (Interestingly, the amended mean expected costs of
remediation are nearly identical to the mean expected costs reported in the paper.)
B. Actual Costs
The actual cost data presented in this paper is our best effort to calculate the actual amount spent
on remedial action at each site by the EPA, state governments, and responsible parties. As will be
explained in greater detail below, the actual cost data comes from 2 sources. The first source is a
complete history of all EPA costs summarized by year and site. These data are from the IFMS database
and were provided to us by the financial/accounting department at the federal EPA office. The second
source is a document called Enforcement 3, also obtained from the accounting department of the national
EPA, which estimates all potential responsible party (i.e. private party) costs for each NPL site. These
potential responsible party (PRP) costs are estimates by EPA engineers of remedial action expenses paid
directly by companies and individuals. These costs are not reimbursements to the EPA or another party
for work that was already completed. Note that private companies are not required to disclose the actual
amount of money spent on remediation efforts. Thus, the actual cost data used in this paper is the sum of
the EPA actual costs and the PRP estimated costs.
Before explaining in greater detail the data sources used, we note that we explored two other data
sources for actual cost information but found both of them to be of unacceptably low quality. The first
source was a data file sent to us by the National EPA office that reportedly included all available actual
cost data on NPL sites. However, inspection of this file revealed numerous instances of sites with actual
cost amounts of 1, 0, and negative dollar amounts. Our hypothesis is that these data include money
reimbursed to the EPA by states and potential responsible parties. This could account for the negative
and zero dollar amounts for sites that clearly had remedial action. We are uncertain as to what might
explain the arbitrarily low dollar amounts (1, 2, etc.) other than data error. The second source of data we
explored using is the “actual cost” figures listed for some NPL sites on the EPA’s Superfund website
(CERCLIS). On inspection of these cost figures we again found 1, 0, and negative dollar amounts.
Apart from the obvious concerns with the other potential actual cost data sources there are several
advantages of the data provided to us by the financial office of the EPA. First, the costs are all listed by
site by year. This allows us to convert all cost expenditures to year 2000 $’s. Second, the EPA actual
cost data include both ‘direct’ and ‘indirect’ costs for each site. Direct costs include remedial action and
operations and management costs. Indirect costs are the EPA’s estimate of the portion of the Superfund
program costs (personnel wages, travel costs to inspect the sites, etc.) that are attributed to each site.
Third, by including EPA estimates for additional Potential Responsible Party costs, we have a more
complete accounting of the total costs to remediate each site.
A challenge regarding the actual cost data is to determine whether we have accounted for all costs
paid by state governments. Initial Superfund legislation required that state governments pay for at least
10% of the remedial costs and all of the operations and management costs for sites located in their state.
43

The Federal EPA does not track state costs. Conversations with federal EPA personnel have indicated
that it is often the case that the Federal EPA pays for the work done at the sites and that the states then
reimburse the EPA. This interpretation would be consistent with the fact that the EPA actual cost data
file tracks operations and management costs—costs technically supposed to be covered by the states.
Although we are not convinced that we have accounted for all state costs, our conversations with
individual states and the federal EPA have not identified an appealing alternative method to measure
these costs.
VII. Matching of 2000 Census Tracts to 1980 and 1990 Censuses
The census tract is used as the unit of analysis, because it is the smallest aggregation of data that
is available in the 1980, 1990 and 2000 US Census. As noted in the text, year 2000 census tract
boundaries are fixed so that the size and location of the census tract is the same for the 1980 and 1990
census data. The fixed census tract data boundaries were provided by Geolytics, a private company.
Information on how the 1980 and 1990 census tracts were adjusted to fit the 2000 census tract boundaries
can be found on their website at: www.geolytics.com. An outline of their approach is as follows.
Geolytics mapped 1990 census tracts into 2000 census tracts using block level data. Their
documentation states, “The basic methodology was to use the smaller blocks to determine the populationweighted proportion of a 1990 tract that was later redefined as part of a 2000 tract.”52 A 1990 street
coverage file was used to weight populations of 1990 blocks included in 2000 census tracts when the
1990 blocks were split among multiple census tracts. The assumption is that local streets and roads
served as a proxy for where populations were located. Block level data for 1980 were unavailable. This
complicated the mapping of 1980 tracts into 1990 tracts. However, the correspondence between 1980
tracts and 1990 blocks is “very good”. As such “splitting a 1980 tract into 1990 tracts had to be done
spatially, meaning based solely on the 1990 block to 1980 tract correspondence.”53
VIII. Placement of Hazardous Waste Sites in 2000 Census Tracts
There are 2 types of hazardous waste sites in our sample—those that were eventually listed on the
National Priority List (NPL) and those that have never been listed on the NPL. Each of these hazardous
waste sites was assigned to a single census tract. The remainder of this section describes the separate
procedures we used to determine the year 2000 census tract of location for NPL and non-NPL hazardous
waste sites.
For the NPL sites, latitude and longitude coordinates are available on the EPA’s CERCLIS web
site. These coordinates were spot checked against their addresses and site descriptive information. GIS
Arc Map software was then used to place these sites in a single census tract.
It is more difficult to place the hazardous waste sites that have never been on the NPL in a single
census tract. Our first attempt was to place these sites using a comprehensive file provided to us by the
EPA that contained latitude and longitude coordinates for non-NPL sites. However, upon inspection of
this file we found numerous errors. Many of our sample sites were placed in different cities, counties,
states, or zip codes from the EPA address descriptions provided in CERCLIS and the Federal Register.
In light of the unreliable latitude and longitude data, we used several methods to place these sites.
Those sites with complete street address information were placed using a program that converts street
addresses to latitude and longitude coordinates. These coordinates were then placed in a census tract
using GIS Arc Map software.
Those non-NPL sites with missing or incomplete addresses were the most difficult sites to place.
We requested original Hazardous Ranking System (HRS) documents on all of these sites from the Federal
Register. The HRS documents are the first comprehensive documents prepared for each site. These

52

Appendix J: Description of Tract Remapping Methodology of Geolytics Data Users’ Guide for Neighborhood
Change Database (1970-2000), page J3.
53
Ibid, page J4.

44

documents often contain more detailed descriptive information on the sites. Some HRS documents also
contain maps showing a site’s location in the surrounding community. Many of these sites could be
placed by hand using the more detailed descriptive and location information contained in the HRS
documents and an electronic US Census map.
We called regional and state EPA officials regarding all non-NPL sites that we were unable to
place with certainty using either CERCLIS information or the HRS scoring packages. For each of these
sites, we located someone with first hand knowledge of the site’s location or who was able to provide us
with either a map of the site, a more complete address, or more accurate latitude longitude coordinates.
Through these efforts, we placed all non-NPL sites in individual census tracts.
VIII. Neighbor Samples
We use two approaches to define the set of houses outside each site’s tract that may be affected
by the clean-up. We refer to these sets of houses as “neighbors.”
The first approach defines the neighbors as all census tracts that share a border with the tract that
contains the site. GIS software was used to find each primary census tract and extract the identity of its
adjacent neighbors. In the 1982 HRS sample, the maximum number of neighboring census tracts is 21
and the median is 7. The population of each adjacent census tract was used to weight the housing price,
housing characteristics, and demographic variables for each tract when calculating the mean adjacent
neighbor values.
The second approach defines neighbors based on circles of varying radii around the exact location
of the site. GIS software is used to draw a circle around the point representing the site (generally the
center of the site, but sometimes the point associated with the street address). For example in the 1 mile
sample, the GIS program draws circles with radii of 1 mile around each of the sites. For a given site, data
from all census tracts that fall within its 1-mile radius circle are used to calculate the mean housing values
and housing and demographic characteristics. To calculate these weighted means, each census tract
within the circle is weighted by the product of its population and the portion of its total area that falls
within the circle. The maximum number of census tracts included in the 1 mile ring for a site is 37 and
the median is 3. For the 2 mile ring the maximum number of neighbor sites is 80, with a median of 5.

45

REFERENCES
Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber, “Selection on Observed and Unobserved
Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools,” NBER Working Paper No. 7831, 2000.
Ashenfelter, Orley and Michael Greenstone, “Using Mandated Speed Limits to Measure the Value of a
Statistical Life,” Journal of Political Economy, CXII (Feb. 2004), S226-S268.
----, “Estimating the Value of a Statistical Life: The Importance of Omitted Variables and Publication
Bias,” American Economic Review, XCIV (May 2004), 454-60.
Banzhaf, H. Spencer and Randall P. Walsh, “Do People Vote with Their Feet: An Empirical Test of
Environmental Gentrification,” Mimeograph, 2005.
Black, Dan A. and Thomas J. Kneisner, “On the Measurement of Job Risk in Hedonic Wage Models,”
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, XXVII (Dec. 2003), 205-20.
Black, Sandra, “Do Better Schools Matter? Parental Valuation of Elementary Education,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, CXIV (May 1999), 577-99.
Brody, Thomas M., “Investing in Cleanup: A New Look at Decision Criteria for the Comparison and
Management of Risk,” Dissertation, Northwestern University, 1998.
Cameron, Trudy Ann and Ian T. McConnaha, “Evidence of Environmental Migration,” Mimeograph,
2005.
Champ, Patricia A., Kevin J. Boyle and Thomas C. Brown, eds., A Primer on Nonmarket Valuation,
(Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2003).
Chay, Kenneth Y., and Michael Greenstone, “Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence from the Housing
Market,” Journal of Political Economy, CXIII (Apr. 2005), 376-424.
Cleveland, William S., “Robust Locally Weighted Regression and Smoothing Scatterplots,” Journal of
the American Statistical Association, LXXIV (Dec. 1979), 829-36.
Cook, Thomas D., and Donald T. Campbell, Quasi-Experimentation: Design and Analysis Issues for
Field Settings, (Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin, 1979).
Cropper, Maureen L., Leland B. Deck, and Kenneth E. McConnell, “On the Choice of Functional Form
for Hedonic Price Functions,” Review of Economics and Statistics, LXX (Nov. 1988), 668-75.
Davis, Lucas, “The Effect of Health Risk on Housing Values: Evidence from a Cancer Cluster,”
American Economics Review, XCIV (Dec. 2004), 1693-1704.
Deschenes, Olivier and Michael Greenstone, “The Economic Impacts of Climate Change: Evidence from
Agricultural Profits and Random Fluctuations in Weather,” NBER Working Paper No. 10663, 2004.
Diamond, Peter A. and Jerry A. Hausman, “Contingent Valuation: Is Some Number Better Than No
Number?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, VIII (Autumn 1994), 45-64.
Ekeland, Ivar, James J. Heckman, and Lars Nesheim, “Identification and Estimation of Hedonic Models,”
46

Journal of Political Economy, CXII (Feb. 2004), S60-S109.
Environmental Protection Agency, Superfund: 20 Years of Protecting Human Health and the
Environment, “http://www.epa.gov/superfund/action/20years/index.htm,” 2000.
Farrell, Alex, “A Partial Benefit-Cost Test of NPL Site Remediation: Benefit Transfer with Met-Analytic
Hedonic Data,” Mimeograph, University of California, Berkeley, 2004.
Federal Register Rules and Regulations, National Oil and Hazardous Substance Contingency Plan; The
National Priorities List; Amendment, Various Issues.
Federal Register Rules and Regulations, Section IV, “Process for Establishing the National Priorities
List,” XLIX (September 21, 1984), 37070-82.
Freeman, A Myrick, III, “On Estimating Air Pollution Control Benefits from Land Value Studies, Journal
of Environmental Economics and Management, I (May 1974), 74-83.
----, The Measurement of Environmental and Resource Values, (Washington, DC: Resources for the
Future, 2003).
Gayer, Ted, James T. Hamilton, and W. Kip Viscusi, “Private Values of Risk Tradeoffs at Superfund
Sites: Housing Market Evidence on Learning about Risk,” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
LXXXII (Aug. 2000), 439-51.
----, “The Market Value of Reducing Cancer Risk: Hedonic Housing Prices with Changing Information,”
Southern Economic Journal, LXIX (Oct. 2002), 266-89.
Gupta, Shreekant, George Van Houtven, and Maureen Cropper, “Do Benefits and Costs Matter in
Environmental Regulation? An Analysis of EPA Decisions under Superfund,” Analyzing Superfund:
Economics, Science, Law, Richard L. Revesz and Richard B. Stewart eds., (Washington, DC:
Resources for the Future, 1995).
----, “Paying for Permanence: An Economic Analysis of EPA’s Cleanup Decisions at Superfund Sites,”
RAND Journal of Economics, XXVII (Autumn 1996), 563-82.
Halvorsen, Robert and Henry O. Pollakowski, “Choice of Functional Form for Hedonic Price Equations,”
Journal of Urban Economics, X (Jul. 1981), 37-49.
Hamilton, James T. and W. Kip Viscusi, Calculating Risks: The Spatial and Political Dimensions of
Hazardous Waste Policy, (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1999).
Hanemann, W. Michael, “Valuing the Environment through Contingent Valuation,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, VIII (Autumn 1994), 19-43.
Harris, John D., “Property Values, Stigma, and Superfund,” Environmental Protection Agency,
“http://www.epa.gov/superfund/programs/recycle/property.htm,” 1999.
Hird, John, “Environmental Policy and Equity: The Case of Superfund,” Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management, XII (Spring 1993), 323-43.
----, Superfund: the Political Economy of Environmental Risk, (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University
47

Press, 1994).
Ihlanfeldt, Keith R. and Laura O. Taylor, “Externality Effects of Small-Scale Hazardous Waste Sites:
Evidence from Urban Commercial Property Markets,” XLVII (January 2004), 117-39.
Kiel, Katherine A., “Measuring the Impact of the Discovery and Cleaning of Identified Hazardous Waste
Sites on House Values,” Land Economics, LXXI (Nov. 1995), 428-35.
Kiel, Katherine A. and Jeffery Zabel, “Estimating the Economic Benefits of Cleaning Up Superfund
Sites: The Case of Woburn, Massachusetts,” The Journal of Real Estate Finance & Economics, XXII
(Mar. 2001), 163-84.
Kohlhase, Janet E., “The Impact of Toxic Waste Sites on Housing Values,” Journal of Urban Economics,
XXX (Jul. 1991), 1-26.
McCluskey, Jill J. and Gordon C. Rausser, “Hazardous Waste Sites and Housing Appreciation Rates,”
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, XLV (Jul. 2003), 166-176.
Messer, Kent, William Schulze, Katherine Hackett, Trudy Cameron, and Gary McClelland, “Stigma: The
Psychology and Economics of Superfund,” Working Paper, 2004.
Michaels, R. Gregory and V. Kerry Smith, “Market Segmentation and Valuing Amenities with Hedonic
Models: The Case of Hazardous Waste Sites,” Journal of Urban Economics, XXVIII (Sep. 1990),
223-42.
Palmquist, Raymond B., “Hedonic Methods,” Measuring the Demand for Environmental Quality, John
Bardon and Charles Kolstad eds., (Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers, 1991).
Probst, Katherine N. and David M. Konisky, Superfund’s Future: What Will It Cost?, (Washington, DC:
Resources for the Future, 2001).
Ridker, Ronald, The Economic Cost of Air Pollution, (New York, NY: Prager, 1967).
---- and J.A. Henning, “The Determinants of Residential Property Values with Special Reference to Air
Pollution,” Review of Economics and Statistics, XLIX (May 1967), 246-57.
Rosen, Sherwin, “Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in Pure Competition,”
Journal of Political Economy, LXXXII (Jan. 1974), 34-55.
----, “The Theory of Equalizing Differences,” Handbook of Labor Economics, Orley Ashenfelter and
Richard Layard, eds., (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1986).
Schmalensee, Richard, Ramachandra Ramanathan, Wolfhard Ramm, and Dennis Smallwood, Measuring
External Effects of Solid Waste Management, (Washington DC: Environmental Protection Agency,
1975).
Sigman, Hilary, “The Pace of Progress at Superfund Sites: Policy Goals and Interest Group Influence,”
Journal of Law and Economics, XLIV (Apr. 2001), 315-44.
Small, Kenneth A., “Air Pollution and Property Values: A Further Comment,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, LVII (Feb. 1975), 105-7.
48

Smith, Robert S., “Compensating Wage Differentials and Public Policy: A Review,” Industrial and Labor
Relations Review, XXXII (Apr. 1979), 339-52.
Staiger, Douglas and James H. Stock, “Instrumental Variables with Weak Instruments,” Econometrica,
LXV (May 1997), 557-86.
Viscusi, W. Kip, “The Value of Risks to Life and Health,” Journal of Economic Literature, XXXI (Dec.
1993), 1912 –46.
---- and James T. Hamilton, “Are Risk Regulators Rational? Evidence from Hazardous Waste Cleanup
Decisions,” American Economic Review, LXXXIX (Sep. 1999), 1010-27.
Zimmerman, Rae, “Social Equality and Environmental Risk,” Risk Analysis, XIII (Dec. 1993), 649-66.

49

Table 1: Summary Statistics on the Superfund Program
All NPL Sites w/
1982 HRS Sites w/ 1982 HRS Sites w/
non-Missing House
non-Missing
Missing House
Price Data
House Price Data
Price Data
(1)
(2)
(3)
Number of Sites
985
487
189
1982 HRS Score Above 28.5
-----306
95
A. Timing of Placement on NPL
Total
985
332
111
# 1981-1985
406
312
97
# 1986-1989
340
14
9
# 1990-1994
166
4
3
# 1995-1999
73
2
2
B. HRS Information
Mean Scores | HRS > 28.5
41.89
44.47
43.23
Mean Scores | HRS < 28.5
15.54
16.50
----C. Size of Site (in acres)
Number of sites with size data
920
310
97
Mean (Median)
1,186 (29)
334 (25)
10,507 (35)
Maximum
195,200
42,560
405,760
D. Stages of Clean-Up for NPL Sites
Median Years from NPL Listing Until:
ROD Issued
4.3
4.3
-----Clean-Up Initiated
5.8
6.8
-----Construction Complete
12.1
11.5
-----Deleted from NPL
12.8
12.5
-----1990 Status Among Sites NPL by 1990
NPL Only
394
100
31
ROD Issued or Clean-up Initiated
335
210
68
Construction Complete or Deleted
22
16
7
2000 Status Among Sites NPL by 2000
NPL Only
137
15
3
ROD Issued or Clean-up Initiated
370
119
33
Construction Complete or Deleted
478
198
75
E. Expected Costs of Remediation (Millions of 2000 $’s)
# Sites with Nonmissing Costs
753
293
95
Mean (Median)
$28.3 ($11.0)
$27.5 ($15.0)
$29.6 ($11.5)
95th Percentile
$89.6
$95.3
$146.0
F. Actual and Expected Costs Conditional on Construction Complete (Millions of 2000 $’s)
Sites w/ Both Costs Nonmissing
477
203
69
Mean (Median) Expected Costs
$15.5 ($7.8)
$20.6 ($9.7)
$17.3 ($7.3)
Mean (Median) Actual Costs
$21.6 ($11.6)
$32.0 ($16.2)
$23.3 ($8.9)
Notes: All dollar figures are in 2000 $’s. Column (1) includes information for sites placed on the NPL
before 12/31/99. The estimated cost information is calculated as the sum across the first Record of
Decisions for each operating unit associated with a site. See the Data Appendix for further details.

Table 2: Mean Census Tract Characteristics by Categories of the 1982 HRS Score
NPL Site
by 2000
(1)

No NPL Site
by 2000
(2)

# Census Tracts
985
41,989
Superfund Clean-up Activities
Ever NPL by 1990
0.7576
----Ever NPL by 2000
1.0000
----Housing Prices
1980 Mean
58,058
69,904
1990 Median
100,102
99,552
2000 Median
139,066
151,712
Neighbor Housing Prices
1980 Mean
61,124
----1990 Median
101,011
----2000 Median
143,805
----Demographics & Economic Characteristics
Population Density
1,406
5,786
% Black
0.0914
0.1207
% Hispanic
0.0515
0.0739
% Under 18
0.2940
0.2779
% Female Head HH
0.1617
0.1934
% Same House 5 Yrs Ago
0.5442
0.5127
% > 25 No HS Diploma
0.3425
0.3144
% > 25 BA or Better
0.1390
0.1767
% < Poverty Line
0.1056
0.1141
% Public Assistance
0.0736
0.0773
Household Income
20,344
21,526
Housing Characteristics
Total Housing Units
1,392
1,350
% Mobile Homes
0.0862
0.0473
% Owner Occupied
0.6821
0.6125
% 0-2 Bedrooms
0.4480
0.4722
% 3-4 Bedrooms
0.5246
0.5015
% Built Last 5 Years
0.1434
0.1543
% Built Last 10 Years
0.2833
0.2874

HRS < 28.5

HRS > 28.5
(4)

HRS > 16.5
& < 28.5
(5)

HRS > 28.5
& < 40.5
(6)

P-Value
(1) vs. (2)
(7)

P-Value
(3) vs. (4)
(8)

P-Value
(5) vs. (6)
(9)

(3)
181

306

90

137

-----

-----

-----

0.1271
0.1602

0.9902
0.9902

0.2222
0.2667

0.9854
0.9854

---------

0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000

45,027
80,185
115,479

52,137
96,752
135,436

46,135
84,461
117,528

50,648
91,611
123,503

0.000
0.839
0.000

0.000
0.005
0.001

0.084
0.433
0.449

49,324
85,476
122,337

62,711
98,743
140,841

48,735
85,793
122,776

54,078
88,743
131,125

-------------

0.038
0.009
0.002

0.047
0.653
0.277

1,670
0.1126
0.0443
0.2932
0.1879
0.6025
0.4053
0.1003
0.1139
0.0885
19,635

1,157
0.0713
0.0424
0.2936
0.1576
0.5623
0.3429
0.1377
0.1005
0.0745
20,869

1,361
0.0819
0.0309
0.2885
0.1639
0.5854
0.3881
0.1092
0.1072
0.0805
19,812

1,151
0.0844
0.0300
0.2934
0.1664
0.5655
0.3533
0.1343
0.1115
0.0755
20,301

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.003
0.083
0.000

0.067
0.037
0.841
0.958
0.017
0.001
0.000
0.000
0.109
0.041
0.013

0.570
0.926
0.928
0.568
0.862
0.244
0.060
0.036
0.716
0.578
0.486

1,357
0.0813
0.6792
0.4691
0.5098
0.1185
0.2370

1,353
0.0785
0.6800
0.4439
0.5284
0.1404
0.2814

1,367
0.0944
0.6942
0.4671
0.5089
0.1366
0.2673

1,319
0.0787
0.6730
0.4496
0.5199
0.1397
0.2758

0.040
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.006
0.501

0.951
0.792
0.959
0.103
0.209
0.050
0.012

0.575
0.285
0.344
0.417
0.586
0.844
0.723

% No Air Conditioning
0.4904
0.4220
0.5058
0.4800
0.5157
0.5103
0.253
0.870
0.000
% with Zero Full Baths
0.0254
0.0229
0.0315
0.0259
0.0339
0.0290
0.011
0.089
0.386
% Units Detached
0.8764
0.8773
0.8585
0.8908
0.8545
0.8897
0.868
0.050
0.107
% Units Attached
0.0374
0.0754
0.0603
0.0307
0.0511
0.0317
0.040
0.297
0.000
Geographic Distribution Across Census Regions
% Northeast
0.3797
0.2116
0.3315
0.4771
0.3889
0.4234
0.6063
0.0000
0.0014
% Midwest
0.2183
0.2320
0.3481
0.2255
0.3222
0.2847
0.3016
0.5507
0.0044
% South
0.2355
0.3227
0.2155
0.1928
0.1889
0.2044
0.5519
0.7744
0.0000
% West
0.1665
0.2337
0.1050
0.1046
0.1000
0.0876
0.9890
0.7565
0.0000
Notes: Columns (1) - (6) report the means of the variables listed in the row headings across the groups of census tracts listed at the top of the columns. In all of
these columns, the sample restriction that the census tract must have nonmissing house price data in 1980, 1990, and 2000 is added. Columns (7)-(9) report the
p-values from tests that the means in different sets of the subsamples are equal. The Panel title “Neighbor Housing Price” reports the mean housing prices in all
tracts that share a border with the tract containing the hazardous waste site. All other entries in the table refer to characteristics of the tract where the site is
located. P-values less than .01 are denoted in bold. For the air conditioning and bath questions, the numerator is year round housing units and the denominator is
all housing units. For all other variables in the “Housing Characteristics” category, the denominator is all housing units.

Table 3: Estimates of the Association Between the Presence of a NPL Hazardous Waste Site and the ln of
Median Census Tract Housing Prices, 1990 and 2000
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

A. Own Census Tract
ln (1990 Median Price)
1(NPL Status by 1990)

0.123
(0.023)

0.155
(0.021)

0.164
(0.020)

0.098
(0.018)

0.040
(0.012)

0.046
(0.011)

0.073
(0.010)

0.066
(0.009)

B. Adjacent Census Tracts
0.157
0.149
ln (1990 Median Price)
1(NPL Status by 1990)
(0.018) (0.016)

0.173
(0.014)

0.108
(0.011)

0.092
(0.009)

0.088
(0.008)

ln (2000 Median Price)
1(NPL Status by 2000)

ln (2000 Median Price)
1(NPL Status by 2000)

0.041
(0.011)

0.061
(0.010)

1980 Prices
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
1980 Housing Char’s
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
1980 Economic Conditions
No
No
Yes
Yes
1980 Demographics
No
No
Yes
Yes
State Fixed Effects
No
No
No
Yes
Notes: The table reports results from 16 separate regressions where the unit
of observation is a census tract. The sample size is 42,974 in all regressions.
In Panel A, 746 (985) observations in 1990 (2000) are from census tracts that
contain a hazardous waste site that had been on the NPL at any time prior to
observation on housing prices. In Panel B, the observations from tracts
containing the NPL sites are replaced with observations comprised of
averages of all variables across the census tracts with complete housing price
data that share a border with the tracts containing the sites. The dependent
variables are underlined in the first column. The entries report the coefficient
and heteroskedastic-consistent standard error (in parentheses) on the NPL
indicator. The controls are listed in the row headings at the bottom of the
table. See the text and Data Appendix for further details.

Table 4: Estimates of the First-Stage Relationship and an Informal Validity Test
(1)

(2)
(3)
(4)
A. First Stage:
Association Between Instrument and NPL Status
1(NPL Status by 1990)
1(1982 HRS Score > 28.5)

(5)

(6)

0.864
(0.026)

0.859
(0.027)

0.849
(0.028)

0.843
(0.031)

0.670
(0.063)

0.728
(0.057)

0.827
(0.029)

0.822
(0.029)

0.813
(0.030)

0.801
(0.034)

0.608
(0.066)

0.687
(0.060)

B. Informal Validity Test:
Association Between Instrument and ln (1980 Mean House Price)
Own Census Tract
1(1982 HRS Score > 28.5)
----0.035
0.001
-0.010
-0.004
----(0.027) (0.021) (0.018) (0.029)
Adjacent Census Tracts
1(1982 HRS Score > 28.5)
----0.039
0.016
0.010
-0.003
----(0.031) (0.026) (0.022) (0.039)

-0.008
(0.021)

1(NPL Status by 2000)
1(1982 HRS Score > 28.5)

0.023
(0.026)

1980 Prices (Panel A only)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
1980 Housing Char’s
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
1980 Economic Conditions
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
1980 Demographics
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
State Fixed Effects
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Quadratic in 1982 HRS Score
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Regression Discontinuity Sample
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Notes: The table reports results from 22 separate regressions. The sample size is 487 in all
regressions in columns (1)-(5), which is the number of sites that received 1982 HRS scores and are
located in census tracts with non-missing housing price data in 1980, 1990, and 2000. The regression
discontinuity sample in column (6) limits the sample to tracts (or neighbors of tracts) with sites with
initial HRS scores between 16.5 and 40.5 and totals 227 census tracts. In Panel A, the dependent
variables are indicators for whether the hazardous waste sites had been placed on the NPL by 1990
and 2000, respectively. In Panel B, the dependent variables are the ln of 1980 mean housing prices in
the tract with the hazardous waste site and the ln of the mean of the mean house price across the
census tracts that share a border with the tract containing the NPL site, respectively. The dependent
variables are underlined in the first column. The table reports the regression coefficient and
heteroskedastic consistent standard error (in parentheses) associated with the indicator variable for
whether the hazardous waste site received a 1982 HRS score exceeding 28.5. The controls are listed
in the row headings at the bottom of the table. See the text and Data Appendix for further details.

Table 5: Two-Stage Least Squares (2SLS) Estimates of the Effect of NPL Status on House Prices
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

A. Own Census Tract
1990
1(NPL Status by 1990)

2000
1(NPL Status by 2000)

0.034
(0.062)

0.066
(0.057)

0.064
(0.054)

0.020
(0.054)

-0.006
(0.122)

-0.006
(0.078)

0.037
(0.035)

0.043
(0.031)

0.056
(0.029)

0.047
(0.027)

0.007
(0.063)

0.027
(0.038)

B. Adjacent Census Tracts
1990
1(NPL Status by 1990)

2000
1(NPL Status by 2000)

0.068
(0.048)

0.060
(0.039)

0.012
(0.033)

-0.006
(0.027)

-0.005
(0.059)

-0.020
(0.044)

0.068
(0.035)

0.019
(0.029)

0.014
(0.025)

0.012
(0.022)

0.021
(0.054)

0.011
(0.035)

1980 Ln House Price
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
1980 Housing Char’s
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
1980 Economic Conditions
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
1980 Demographics
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
State Fixed Effects
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Quadratic in 1982 HRS Score
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Regression Discontinuity Sample
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Notes: The entries report the results from 24 separate regressions, where a census tract is the unit of
observation. The samples sizes are 487 in columns (1) through (5) and 227 in column (6). The 1990
and 2000 values of the ln (median house price) are the dependent variables. The variable of interest is
an indicator for NPL status and this variable is instrumented with an indicator for whether the tract
had a hazardous waste site with a 1982 HRS score exceeding 28.5. The entries are the regression
coefficient and heteroskedastic consistent standard errors (in parentheses) associated with the NPL
indicator. See the notes to Table 4, the text and the Data Appendix for further details.

Table 6: Further 2SLS Estimates of the Effect of NPL Status on 2000 House Prices
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

A. Add Controls for Ground Water, Surface Water, and Air Migration Pathway Scores
1(NPL Status by 2000)
-0.010
-0.022
0.013
0.000
(0.053)
(0.042) (0.063)
(0.068)

1(NPL Status by 2000)

B. Add Controls for 1970 Covariates
0.037
0.028
(0.037)
(0.033)

-0.036
(0.072)

0.037
(0.056)

1(NPL Status by 2000)

C. Add Controls for 2000 Covariates
0.037
0.022
(0.035)
(0.022)

-0.044
(0.056)

0.010
(0.033)

D. Does Effect of NPL Status Differ in Tracts in Top Quartile of Population Density?
1(NPL Status by 2000)
0.078
0.029
-0.001
0.045
(0.042)
(0.032) (0.066)
(0.048)
1(2000 NPL)*1(Top Quartile Density)

-0.062
(0.077)

0.064
(0.056)

0.060
(0.055)

-0.084
(0.097)

E. Does Effect of NPL Status Differ in Tracts where the Site has Substantially Polluted Ground
Water and Households Rely on Well Water?
1(NPL Status by 2000)
0.019
0.017
-0.002
0.018
(0.047)
(0.035) (0.079)
(0.053)
1(2000 NPL)*1(Possible Contaminated Water Supply)

-0.007
0.016
0.024
0.011
(0.065)
(0.057) (0.063)
(0.078)
1980 Ln House Price
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
1980 House Char’s, Econ Conditions, & Demog’s
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
State Fixed Effects
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Quadratic in 1982 HRS Score
No
No
Yes
No
Regression Discontinuity Sample
No
No
No
Yes
Notes: Each panel reports parameter estimates and standard errors from 4 separate regressions for 2000
housing prices. The panels differ from the Table 5 specifications in the following ways: A. adds controls
for the individual pathway scores that are used to calculate the HRS score; B. and C. add controls for the
1970 and 2000 values of the covariates, respectively; D. allows the effect of NPL status to differ in census
tracts in the top quartile of population density; and E. allows the effect of NPL status to differ in census
tracts where the site has substantially polluted groundwater (i.e., the groundwater pathway score exceeds
28.5) and well water is a significant source of water for households (i.e., the tract is in the top half of well
water usage, which is defined as more than 11.8% of households). The sample sizes in Panel B are 353
(cols 1-3) and 157 (col 4) and otherwise are as in Table 5. See the Notes to Table 5 and the text for
further details.

Table 7: 2SLS Estimates of Stages of Superfund Clean-ups on Rental Rates
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Ln (1990 Median Rental Rate)
1(NPL Only)
[100 Sites, Mean HRS = 40.8]

0.107
(0.064)

0.027
(0.063)

-0.016
(0.106)

0.034
(0.113)

1(ROD & Incomplete Remediation)
[210 Sites, Mean HRS = 44.5]

0.036
(0.048)

-0.013
(0.050)

-0.063
(0.094)

-0.063
(0.073)

1(Const Complete or NPL Deletion)
[16 Sites, Mean HRS = 35.3]

0.176
(0.111)

0.087
(0.105)

0.053
(0.132)

0.047
(0.135)

P-Value from F-Test of Equality
Ln (2000 Median Rental Rate)
1(NPL Only)
[15 Sites, Mean HRS = 36.2]

0.23

0.48

0.38

0.45

0.234
(0.133)

0.040
(0.067)

-0.044
(0.088)

-0.020
(0.126)

1(ROD & Incomplete Remediation)
[119 Sites, Mean HRS = 44.0]

0.184
(0.044)

0.012
(0.035)

-0.080
(0.068)

-0.129
(0.058)

1(Const Complete or NPL Deletion)
[198 Sites, Mean HRS = 42.1]

0.128
(0.039)

0.046
(0.032)

-0.043
(0.062)

-0.020
(0.049)

0.30

0.58

0.50

0.16

P-Value from F-Test of Equality

1980 Prices/Rental Rate
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
1980 Housing Char’s
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
1980 Economic Conditions
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
1980 Demographics
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
State Fixed Effects
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Quadratic in 1982 HRS Score
No
No
Yes
No
Regression Discontinuity Sample
No
No
No
Yes
Notes: Here, the indicator variable for NPL status has been replaced by three independent indicator
variables. They are equal to 1 for sites that by 1990 (2000) were placed on the NPL but no ROD had
been issued, issued a ROD but remediation was incomplete, and were “construction complete” or deleted
from the NPL, respectively. The instruments are the interactions of the indicator for a 1982 HRS score
above 28.5 and these three independent indicators. The table reports the instrumental variables parameter
estimates and heteroskedastic consistent standard errors for the three indicators of clean-up status. The
table also reports the p-value associated with a F-test that the three parameters are equal. The sample
sizes for 1990 (2000) are 484 (482), 480 (478), 480 (478), and 226 (224) in columns (1) - (4),
respectively. See the text and notes to Table 5 for further details.

Table 8: 2SLS Estimates of 2000 NPL Status on 2000 Population, Wealth, and Demographics
(1)

(2)

A. Housing Units and Population Outcomes
Total Housing Units
238
213
[1980 Mean: 1,354; 2000 -1980 Mean: 463]
(69)
(70)
Population
[1980 Mean: 3,756; 2000 -1980 Mean: 891]

614
(188)

491
(190)

B. Residents' Wealth Outcomes
4,923
3,736
Household Income
[1980 Mean: 20,410; 2000 – 1980 Mean: 36,471]
(1,757)
(1,951)

(3)

(4)

-154
(186)

64
(120)

221
(497)

403
(333)

-4,358
(4,151)

-90
(2,186)

% Public Assistance
[1980 Mean: 0.080; 2000 -1980 Mean: -0.003]

-0.016
(0.005)

-0.013
(0.006)

0.012
(0.013)

0.001
(0.008)

% BA or Better
[1980 Mean: 0.124; 2000 -1980 Mean: 0.083]

0.014
(0.011)

0.011
(0.012)

-0.000
(0.026)

0.001
(0.016)

C. Demographic/Environmental Justice Outcomes
-0.022
-0.026
% Black
[1980 Mean: 0.087; 2000 -1980 Mean: 0.026]
(0.012)
(0.014)

0.040
(0.031)

0.000
(0.018)

% Hispanic
[1980 Mean: 0.043; 2000 -1980 Mean: 0.036]

-0.001
(0.008)

-0.011
(0.009)

-0.018
(0.021)

-0.011
(0.014)

% Population Under Age 6
[1980 Mean: 0.086; 2000 -1980 Mean: -0.018]

-0.004
(0.002)

-0.002
(0.002)

0.001
(0.006)

0.001
(0.003)

1980 Dependent Variable
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
State Fixed Effects
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Quadratic in 1982 HRS Score
No
No
No
No
Reg Discontinuity Sample
No
No
Yes
Yes
Notes: The entries report the results from 32 separate instrumental variables regressions. The
dependent variables are the underlined entries in the first column and are measured in 2000.
The table reports the parameter and heteroskedastic consistent standard error associated with an
indicator variable that equals 1 for observations from tracts with a hazardous waste site that was
placed on the NPL by 2000. The indicator is instrumented with an indicator for whether the
hazardous waste site had a 1982 HRS score exceeding 28.5. There are 487 observations in the
columns (1) – (3) specifications and 227 in column (4). The entries in brackets are the mean of
the dependent variable in 1980 and the mean of the difference between the 2000 and 1980
values. See the text and Notes to Table 5 for further details.

Appendix Table 1: 2SLS Estimates of the Effect of NPL Status on House Prices
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

A. Houses within 1 Mile of Hazardous Waste Site
1990
1(NPL Status by 1990)
2000
1(NPL Status by 2000)

0.035
(0.053)

0.086
(0.048)

0.069
(0.044)

0.010
(0.042)

0.101
(0.087)

0.028
(0.070)

0.046
(0.034)

0.046
(0.029)

0.047
(0.027)

0.028
(0.025)

0.065
(0.060)

0.021
(0.036)

B. Houses within 2 Miles of Hazardous Waste Site
1990
1(NPL Status by 1990)
2000
1(NPL Status by 2000)

0.027
(0.048)

0.056
(0.043)

0.047
(0.039)

-0.009
(0.034)

0.007
(0.070)

-0.037
(0.057)

0.023
(0.032)

0.005
(0.029)

0.020
(0.026)

0.007
(0.023)

0.015
(0.052)

-0.007
(0.033)

C. Houses within 3 Miles of Hazardous Waste Site
1990
1(NPL Status by 1990)
2000
1(NPL Status by 2000)

0.063
(0.049)

0.060
(0.041)

0.038
(0.036)

-0.018
(0.029)

-0.033
(0.061)

-0.037
(0.049)

0.054
(0.038)

0.024
(0.031)

0.026
(0.026)

0.001
(0.021)

-0.032
(0.051)

-0.007
(0.034)

1980 Ln House Price
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
1980 House, Econ & Demog Vars
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
State Fixed Effects
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Quadratic in 1982 HRS Score
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Regression Discontinuity Sample
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Notes: The entries report the parameter estimate and heteroskedastic consistent standard error on NPL
indicators from 36 separate regressions. Here, the dependent variable and all controls are calculated
as the weighted average across the portion of tracts that fall within circles of radius 1 mile (Panel A),
2 miles (Panel B), and 3 miles (Panel C) around the hazardous waste sites with a 1982 HRS score.
The weight is the portion of the census tract that falls within the relevant circle multiplied by the
tract’s 1980 population. The sample sizes are 483 (columns 1-5) and 226 (column 6) in all Panels.
The 1980 aggregate values of the housing stock in the three circles are roughly $300, $755, and
$1,410 million (2000 $’s). See the text for further details.

Figure 1: Geographic Distribution of NPL Hazardous Waste Sites in the All NPL Sample

Notes: The All NPL sample is comprised of the 985 hazardous waste sites assigned to the NPL by January 1, 2000 that we placed in a census tract
with nonmissing housing price data in 1980, 1990, and 2000.

Figure 2: Geographic Distribution of Hazardous Waste Sites in the 1982 HRS Sample
A. Sites with 1982 HRS Scores Exceeding 28.5

B. Sites with 1982 HRS Scores Below 28.5

Notes: The 1982 HRS Sample is comprised of the 487 hazardous waste sites that were placed in a census
tract with nonmissing housing price data in 1980, 1990, and 2000. 306 (181) of these sites had 1982 HRS
scores above (below) 28.5.

Figure 3: Distribution of 1982 HRS Scores
70

60

Frequency

50

40

30

20

10

0
0-0.5 0.54.5

4.58.5

8.5- 12.5- 16.5- 20.5- 24.5- 28.5- 32.5- 36.5- 40.5- 44.5- 48.5- 52.5- 56.5- 60.5- 64.5- 68.5- 72.512.5 16.5 20.5 24.5 28.5 32.5 36.5 40.5 44.5 48.5 52.5 56.5 60.5 64.5 68.5 72.5 76.5
4 Unit Intervals of 1982 HRS Score

Notes: The figure displays the distribution of 1982 HRS scores among the 487 hazardous waste sites that were tested for placement on the NPL
after the passage of the Superfund legislation but before the announcement of the first NPL in 1983. The 188 sites with missing housing data in
1980, 1990, or 2000 are not included in the subsequent analysis and hence are excluded from this figure. The vertical line at 28.5 represents the
cut-off that determined eligibility for placement on the NPL.

Figure 4: Estimated Costs of Remediation from Initial Record of Decision, by 4 Unit Intervals of the 1982 HRS Score
1

90,000,000

0.9

80,000,000

0.8

70,000,000

0.7

60,000,000

0.6

50,000,000

0.5

40,000,000

0.4

30,000,000

0.3

20,000,000

0.2

10,000,000

0.1
0

00.
5
0.
54.
5
4.
58
8. .5
51
12 2.5
.5
-1
16 6.5
.5
-2
20 0.5
.5
-2
24 4.5
.5
-2
28 8.5
.5
-3
32 2.5
.5
-3
36 6.5
.5
-4
40 0.5
.5
-4
44 4.5
.5
-4
48 8.5
.5
-5
52 2.5
.5
-5
56 6.5
.5
-6
60 0.5
.5
-6
64 4.5
.5
-6
68 8.5
.5
-7
72 2.5
.5
-7
6.
5

0

Fraction Non-Missing

Estimated Costs of Remediation (2000 $'s)

100,000,000

4 Unit Intervals of 1982 HRS Score
Mean Estimated Costs 2000 $'s (Left Axis)

Fraction Non-missing (Right Axis)

Notes: The figure plots the mean estimated costs (full line) for complete remediation by 4-unit intervals of the sites’ 1982 HRS score. The
estimated costs are derived from each site’s first ROD. The dotted line represents the fraction of sites in each 4-unit interval with non-missing cost
data. The vertical line denotes the 28.5 threshold. See the text and Data Appendix for further details.

0

Probability of Placement on NPL by 1990
.1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9

1

Figure 5: Probability of Placement on the NPL by 1982 HRS Score
A. NPL Status by 1990

0

20

40
1982 HRS Score

60

80

60

80

0

Probability of Placement on NPL by 2000
.1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9

1

B. NPL Status by 2000

0

20

40
1982 HRS Score

Notes: Each figure plots the bivariate relation between the probability of 1990 (Panel A) and 2000 (Panel
B) NPL status and the 1982 HRS score among the 487 sites in the 1982 HRS sample. The plots are done
separately for sites above (dashed line) and below (full line) the 28.5 threshold and come from the
estimation of nonparametric regressions that use Cleveland’s (1979) tricube weighting function and a
bandwidth of 0.5. The data points present the mean probabilities in the same 4-unit intervals of the HRS
score as in Figures 3 and 4. See the text for further details.

-.2

-.15

1980 Residual House Prices
-.1 -.05 0
.05
.1

.15

.2

Figure 6: 1980 Residual House Prices After Adjustment for Column 4 Covariates
A. Full 1982 HRS Sample

0

20

40
1982 HRS Score

60

80

-.2

-.15

1980 Residual House Prices
-.1 -.05 0
.05
.1

.15

.2

B. Regression Discontinuity Sample

15

20

25
30
1982 HRS Score

35

40

Notes: Each figure plots the results from nonparametric regressions between 1980 residual housing prices
after adjustment for the covariates in the column (4) specification of Table 4 (except the indicator for a
HRS score above 28.5) and the 1982 HRS scores. The nonparametric regressions use Cleveland’s (1979)
tricube weighting function and a bandwidth of 0.5. These plots are done separately for sites above
(dashed line) and below (full line) the 28.5 threshold. The All NPL sample is used in Panel A, while
Panel B uses the regression discontinuity sample. The data points present the mean probabilities in the
same 4-unit intervals of the HRS score as in Figures 3 and 4. See the text for further details.

-.2

-.15

2000 Residual House Prices
.05 .1
-.1 -.05 0

.15

.2

Figure 7: Own Tract 2000 Residual House Prices After Adjustment for Column 4 Covariates
A. Full 1982 HRS Sample

20

0

40
1982 HRS Score

80

60

-.2

-.15

2000 Residual House Prices
.05 .1
-.1 -.05 0

.15

.2

B. Regression Discontinuity Sample

15

20

30
25
1982 HRS Score

35

40

Notes: Each figure plots the results from nonparametric regressions between own tract 2000 residual
housing prices after adjustment for the covariates in the column (4) specification of Table 5 (except the
indicator for a HRS score above 28.5) and the 1982 HRS scores. The nonparametric regressions use
Cleveland’s (1979) tricube weighting function and a bandwidth of 0.5. These plots are done separately
for sites above (dashed line) and below (full line) the 28.5 threshold. The All NPL sample is used in
Panel A, while Panel B uses the regression discontinuity sample. The data points present the mean
probabilities in the same 4-unit intervals of the HRS score as in Figures 3 and 4. See the text for further
details.

-.2

2000 Residual Adjacent Tract House Prices
-.15 -.1 -.05 0
.05 .1 .15
.2

Figure 8: Adjacent Tracts 2000 Residual House Prices After Adjustment for Column 4 Covariates
A. Full 1982 HRS Sample

20

0

40
1982 HRS Score

80

60

-.2

-.15

2000 Residual House Prices
.05 .1
-.1 -.05 0

.15

.2

B. Regression Discontinuity Sample

15

20

30
25
1982 HRS Score

35

40

Notes: Each figure plots the results from nonparametric regressions between adjacent tract 2000 residual
housing prices after adjustment for the covariates in the column (4) specification of Table 5 (except the
indicator for a HRS score above 28.5) and the 1982 HRS scores. The nonparametric regressions use
Cleveland’s (1979) tricube weighting function and a bandwidth of 0.5. These plots are done separately
for sites above (dashed line) and below (full line) the 28.5 threshold. The All NPL sample is used in
Panel A, while Panel B uses the regression discontinuity sample. The data points present the mean
probabilities in the same 4-unit intervals of the HRS score as in Figures 3 and 4. See the text for further
details.

-1000

2000 Residual Tract Population
250
0
-750 -500 -250

500

Figure 9: 2000 Residual Own Tract Population After Adjustment for Column 2 Covariates
A. Full 1982 HRS Sample

20

0

40
1982 HRS Score

80

60

-1000

2000 Residual Tract Population
250
0
-250
-500
-750

500

B. Regression Discontinuity Sample

15

20

30
25
1982 HRS Score

35

40

Notes: Each figure plots the results from nonparametric regressions between 2000 residual own tract
population after adjustment for the covariates in the column (4) specification of Table 8 (except the
indicator for a HRS score above 28.5) and the 1982 HRS scores. The nonparametric regressions use
Cleveland’s (1979) tricube weighting function and a bandwidth of 0.5. These plots are done separately
for sites above (dashed line) and below (full line) the 28.5 threshold. The All NPL sample is used in
Panel A, while Panel B uses the regression discontinuity sample. The data points present the mean
probabilities in the same 4-unit intervals of the HRS score as in Figures 3 and 4. See the text for further
details.

