                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              CHOICE AND COMPETITION IN LOCAL EDUCATION MARKETS

                                             Patrick Bayer
                                            Robert McMillan

                                          Working Paper 11802
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11802


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2005




We are grateful to Tim Bresnahan and Tom Nechyba for many valuable conversations about this research.
Thanks also to Pat Bajari, Steve Berry, Damon Clark, Dennis Epple, Fernando Ferreira, Caroline Hoxby,
Brian Jacob, Steve Rivkin, Jesse Rothstein, Kim Rueben, Holger Sieg, Doug Staiger, and Chris Timmins for
helpful discussions. Melissa Knox (UC Berkeley) provided outstanding research assistance. This research
was conducted at the California Census Research Data Center: our thanks to the CCRDC, and to Ritch Milby
in particular. Financial support for this project provided by the NSF under grant SES-0137289, the Public
Policy Institute of California, and SSHRC is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Patrick Bayer and Robert McMillan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Choice and Competition in Local Education Markets
Patrick Bayer and Robert McMillan
NBER Working Paper No. 11802
November 2005
JEL No. I20, H41, R21

                                             ABSTRACT

Prompted by widespread concerns about public school quality, a growing empirical literature has
measured the effects of greater choice on school performance. This paper contributes to that
literature in three ways. First, it makes the observation that the overall effect of greater choice, which
has been the focus of prior research, can be decomposed into demand and supply components:
knowing the relative sizes of the two is very relevant for policy. Second, using rich data from a large
metropolitan area, it provides a direct and intuitive measure of the competition each school faces.
This takes the form of a school-specific elasticity that measures the extent to which reductions in
school quality would lead to reductions in demand. Third, the paper provides evidence that these
elasticity measures are strongly related to school performance: a one-standard deviation increase in
the competitiveness of a school's local environment within the Bay Area leads to a 0.15 standard
deviation increase in average test scores. This positive correlation is robust and is consistent with
strong supply responsiveness on the part of public schools, of relevance to the broader school choice
debate.

Patrick Bayer
Department of Economics
Yale University
Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
and NBER
patrick.bayer@yale.edu

Robert McMillan
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
mcmillan@chass.utoronto.ca
1   INTRODUCTION

        Dissatisfaction with the quality of public education in the United States has prompted

considerable interest in reforms that increase choice and stimulate competition in the school

system. The standard notion, drawing on the theory of the firm, is that increasing the range of

options households can choose from forces incumbent public schools to compete more vigorously

– for market share, better students, and financial resources. In turn (continuing the firm analogy),

this should lead schools to better respond to the needs of students and their families, use available

resources more efficiently, and exert greater effort, thereby improving public school performance.

Because schools lack a strict profit motive, however, the extent to which public schools do

actually respond to increased competition has become a central empirical question in the

education literature.

        In prior work, numerous papers have examined the effects of greater choice on public

school performance, typically using across-metropolitan area variation in indices of public school

concentration or measures of private school availability.1 In so doing, this literature has grappled

with endogeneity problems related to the simultaneous determination of public school

performance and these measures of choice, in addition to omitted variable biases.2 The evidence

to emerge from this literature looking at the effect of increased choice on school performance is

mixed, ranging from little effect to a modest positive impact of increased choice on school

performance.3

        While the concepts of choice and competition are invariably linked in the broad policy

and academic debates about education reform, they are not synonymous from an economic




1
  See Belfield and Levin (2002) for an extensive review of forty one empirical studies in this literature.
2
  See Hoxby (1994, 2000), Figlio and Stone (1999), Jepsen (1999), Hanushek and Rivkin (2003), and
Rothstein (2003).
3
  Researchers have also examined the efficiency of public school spending using alternative research
designs. Barrow and Rouse (2004), for example, examine the efficiency of per pupil spending using
variation in state aid while Millimet and Rangaprasad (2005) explore the spatial autocorrelation in school
input decisions.


                                                    1
perspective.4 Choice in this context relates to the availability of schooling alternatives faced by

households, while the economic notion of competition is best captured by the residual5 elasticity

of demand that a school faces. Such an elasticity measures the extent to which a school’s

enrollment and resources are affected by a change in its performance: the greater is this elasticity,

the more competitive is the environment in which it operates. In considering the effect of

competition on school performance, one would ideally like to isolate the impact of a change in

this primitive – a school’s residual elasticity of demand – on school performance.

        In practice, the measures of choice used in the literature tend to be related to competition

because an increase in the availability of schooling options or in the ease of selecting these

options is likely to increase the residual elasticity of demand faced by incumbent schools, thereby

making the market more competitive. But the overall impact of increased choice on school

performance depends on both demand and supply factors, combining (i) the effect of increased

choice on the competitiveness of local market (i.e., extent to which increased choice raises the

residual elasticity of demand faced by schools) and (ii) the effect of increased competition on

school performance. The first of these reflects factors on the demand side of the education

market, and is likely to vary depending on the way that choice increases.6 The latter effect isolates

the supply-side response to greater competition - the response of individual schools to variation in

the competitiveness of the environment in which they operate.

        By focusing on the overall effect of choice on school performance, the existing literature

provides only indirect guidance as to the magnitude of the responsiveness of schools to


4
  The distinctness of these concepts can be made clear by noting that, in principle, choice could increase
without any increase in competition. For example, private school vouchers could be given to parents
wholeheartedly opposed to private schools. Likewise, the competitiveness of the education market place
could change without any change in the set of available schooling options. For instance, broad changes in
the demand for school quality or technological improvements in the quality of information available to
households about school performance might increase residual demand elasticities even in the absence of an
explicit change in choice.
5
  We use the term ‘residual’ in the sense that the elasticity results from a change in just that school’s
quality.
6
  For example, choice variation from geographic accessibility to private schools may have a quite different
impact on competition than policies such as within-district school choice programs


                                                    2
competition (supply responsiveness). Yet the distinction between demand vs. supply

responsiveness is important both for understanding the economics of education markets and for

policy. To the extent that an overall modest positive effect of choice on performance is driven by

a sizeable impact of choice on competition and a limited responsiveness of schools to increased

competition, this suggests that policies targeted at improving incentives for schools to respond to

competition are likely to have strong performance effects. On the other hand, if schools are highly

responsive to changes in competition (as we will find) but the current system does not engender a

very competitive environment, policies aimed at increasing demand elasticities would seem more

promising. Such policies might, for example, increase the ability of parents to choose from a

wider set of schools or provide better information about quality differences among the available

options.

           In terms of magnitudes, a reading of the existing education demand literature suggests

that the demand side component of the overall effect of choice on school performance may in fact

be quite small. This conclusion is robust across a wide variety of different research designs: (i)

examining differences in housing prices along school assignment boundaries or as school

assignments are changed over time;7 (ii) estimating the heterogeneity in willingness to pay for

school quality using a model of residential sorting;8 (iii) examining the academic performance of

winners versus losers following randomized school choice lotteries;9 and (iv) examining how

student performance varies with measures of school district enrollment concentration across

metropolitan areas.10 This leaves open the possibility that the responsiveness of schools to


7
   Black (1999) pioneered the use of school assignment boundary fixed effects, estimating that a school-
level standard deviation in average test score is associated with approximately a 2 percent increase in house
value. Kane, Staiger, and Riegg (2004) report almost an identical result using boundary fixed effects. This
latter paper also reports results based on changes in school assignment, although these are less conclusive.
8
   Bayer, Ferreira, and McMillan (2003) incorporate school district boundary fixed effects in estimating a
model of residential sorting, returning an estimated mean marginal willingness to pay for a standard
deviation increase in average test score of approximately 2 percent of house value; they also find evidence
of heterogeneity around this mean, as well as strong preferences relating to the characteristics of neighbors.
9
  Cullen, Jacob, and Levitt (2003) find little evidence that winners of randomized lotteries perform better in
the schools that they subsequently select than losers who do not have the same degree of choice.
10
   Rothstein (2003) finds little evidence that sorting is related to school rather than peer characteristics.


                                                      3
increases in competition may be sizeable despite the mixed results of the previous literature

exploring the impact of choice on performance.

        In this paper, we set out evidence based on a new approach for studying the effects of

competition on school performance. At the heart of the analysis, we develop a school-specific

measure that captures the extent to which reductions in school quality would lead to reductions in

demand. This measure has intuitive appeal: a school is taken to operate in a competitive

environment if slight reductions in school quality would lead to a substantial reduction in demand

for the neighborhoods from which the school draws its students, as measured by the

corresponding decline in local house values.

        To estimate these elasticity measures, we begin by estimating a rich model of residential

sorting using data on the precise location decisions of nearly a quarter of a million households in

California. In estimating the model, we are careful to address an important endogeneity problem

that arises due to the correlation of school quality and neighborhood sociodemographic

characteristics with unobserved aspects of housing and neighborhood quality (a correlation that is

induced by residential sorting), implementing a boundary fixed effects strategy closely related to

that of Black (1999). The resulting preference estimates are reasonable in magnitude across a

wide set of housing, schooling, and neighborhood attributes.

        With these preference estimates in hand, we estimate a measure of the elasticity of

demand faced by each of over 700 elementary schools in the San Francisco Bay Area, carrying

out a series of school-specific simulations that calculate the change in demand from raising that

school’s quality by a fixed amount, holding the quality of all other schools fixed. We then explore

the relationship between these elasticity measures and public school performance, as measured by

standardized tests. If schools simply maximize quality, measured by test scores given their

available resources, then the elasticity would be irrelevant to a school’s quality-setting decision.

In contrast, if (at the other extreme) schools were rent-seeking or prone to make mistakes in




                                                 4
allocating resources, then the elasticity would play a key role, as in the textbook theory of the

firm.

        Our results from this empirical exercise are striking and robust. We find strong evidence

that higher demand elasticities are associated with increases in public school achievement scores,

with little effect on resource use, indicating that productivity improves.          Each reported

specification includes controls for a wide set of student, school, household and neighborhood

attributes (including all the variables that are included in the demand model). The same findings

persist regardless of which student, school, and neighborhood characteristics we condition on,

and the magnitude of the estimated effect is quite large: a one standard deviation increase in the

competitiveness of a school’s local market within the Bay Area is associated with a 0.15 standard

deviation increase in school performance.

        These achievement increases are also accompanied by, if anything, slight reductions in

teacher quality measures. This helps to allay concerns about the role of omitted variables in these

regressions. Such concerns are also eased by specifications that demonstrate that the predicted

effect of our elasticity measures on neighborhood capital income is negative and insignificant. In

terms of heterogeneous effects, while we find that all types of schools respond to increased

competition, school responsiveness is greater in more educated communities.

        In general, our estimated elasticity measures will depend on two factors: (i) the set of

households served by the school (how mobile the types of households are that a school serves in

general) and (ii) the availability of close substitutes in the education market place. By including

controls for a wide set of student, school, household and neighborhood attributes, including all

the variables that are included in the demand model in the analysis, we seek to isolate only the

latter form of variation (i.e., the availability of close substitutes) in our elasticity measure. To

provide additional confidence in our baseline results, we relate our elasticity measure to indices

created directly from the data that characterize the availability of close substitutes in terms of

neighborhood and school characteristics in the local geographic market. In particular, we


                                                 5
construct dissimilarity indices that describe the extent to which the schools/neighborhoods are

isolated in quality space relative to their closest neighbors. We demonstrate that our elasticity

measure is strongly correlated with these dissimilarity measures and that these dissimilarity

measures are correlated with school performance in a manner consistent with our baseline results.

        These results have implications for the broader choice debate. That we find such sizeable

effects in the San Francisco Bay Area is somewhat surprising given California’s public finance

system, which limits the effect of local property values on school resources. This suggests that

supply responsiveness may be even larger in other states. Moreover, it suggests that mechanisms

at work more generally, such as monitoring which might respond to changes in local property

values, may provide enough of an incentive for schools even in the absence of the direct tying of

resources to property values. The findings are of relevance to the broader choice debate.

        The rest of the paper is organized as follows: The next section motivates our empirical

approach. Section 3 sets out the demand model and Section 4 describes its estimation and

addresses important identification issues. Section 5 describes the rich data used in the analysis,

and Section 6 discusses our demand estimates and the way these are used to construct a residual

elasticity of demand for each school, based on meaningful variation in the data. Section 7

discusses the supply-side regressions that yield our main results, and Section 8 concludes.



2   SCHOOL CHOICE AND COMPETITION

        In this section, we motivate more fully the use of the residual elasticity of demand as our

preferred competition measure. We then describe how we use this to shed light on the direct

effect of competition on public school performance.

        The residual elasticity of demand measures the change in demand in response to a change

in school quality. To see why this provides natural measure of competition, consider a stylized

model of a local education market. The agents on the demand side comprise households with

children; the supply side consists of teachers and school administrators. Household preferences


                                                 6
are defined over consumption, housing services and school quality, and households choose where

to live and where to send their children to school (there may be private school alternatives) based

on quality and cost. Suppose school quality is unidimensional, measured by standardized tests.

Quality is the output of a public school education production technology that converts student

characteristics, school resources, teacher quality, and discretionary teacher and administrator

effort into a performance measure.11

           Public school objectives are potentially complex, not least because public schools tend to

be heavily regulated. For simplicity, we will treat the school as a single effort-making body, and

consider two polar cases. On the one hand, public schools could aim to maximize school quality,

given resources; on the other, public schools could aim to maximize rents, which are increasing in

school revenues (and thus enrollment) and decreasing in effort cost.

           If schools were quality maximizers, then quality would be set independent of

considerations about the effect that it would have on enrollment. School personnel would simply

set effort at the maximal level consistent with their continued participation in the schooling

sector. Significantly, under quality maximization, the school production function would be seen

directly in the data, and the elasticity of demand would have no effect on school performance.

           In contrast, under rent seeking, a school would face the following trade-off: by raising

quality (through higher effort), it would increase enrollment, and if funding were on a per-pupil

basis, this would lead to an increase in revenues. At the same time, higher quality would require

higher effort, which is costly. How the school would resolve this trade-off in making its optimal

effort choice would depend in part on the size of the marginal benefit of higher effort. This, in

turn, would depend on the response of demand (measured by school enrollment) to higher quality

– the residual elasticity of demand. Clearly, in a rent-seeking world, the elasticity of demand




11
     In practice, school personnel have other choice variables than effort, such as school resources.


                                                         7
would affect school production via discretionary effort choice: as the elasticity rose, so the school

would have greater incentive to raise quality so as to avoid a significant loss of enrollment.12

         This discussion motivates our main estimating equation, which relates measured school

performance to a set of relevant determinants: the characteristics of students, school inputs,

teacher characteristics, and neighborhood controls, including our measure of local competition,

the residual elasticity of demand. Teacher and administrator effort is not observed by the

researcher, but (depending on school objectives) might be influenced by market conditions. We

adopt the following linear production function specification:



(1)      T m = X cm ' γ c + X nm ' γ n + γ E E m + ε m



where T is school m’s average test score, Xcm is a vector of the characteristics of the children that

attend the school m, Xnm represents a set of neighborhood controls, Em is the elasticity of demand,

γc, γn and γE are coefficients to be estimated, and εm is a random error term. This is the equation

we will take to the data, with interest focusing on the γE coefficient.

         Beyond the stylized model, there are a variety of reasons why public schools might be

responsive to the residual elasticity of demand, consistent with a positive estimate for γE. A high

elasticity might make homeowners more sensitive to school behavior, leading to better

monitoring and more active political involvement in elections for school board and other local

officials. In some school finance regimes, property values determine local property taxes and thus

influence school revenue; thus schools would have an incentive in such settings to care about the

effect of school quality on local property prices. Conversely, there are clear reasons why schools

might not be responsive: teaching and administrative positions afford a good deal of job security;


12
   In practice, it is unlikely that schools are pure rent-seekers. However, to the extent that they have some
discretion over quality setting, and depart from pure quality maximization, so the elasticity of demand will,
to some degree, influence school quality setting.


                                                         8
and political pressure might be ineffective if elections were for positions (such as mayor) where

schooling is only one among many competing issues.



Construction of the Elasticity

        It is an empirical question just how strong these incentives to respond to competition are.

To shed light on this issue, we estimate the key equation (1) above using a rich data set from the

San Francisco Bay Area. For this purpose, we construct a set of school-specific elasticities in

which demand is measured in terms of local housing values,13 and quality is measured using

school average test scores, conditioning on school and student characteristics. The corresponding

residual elasticity for a given school captures the change in local house prices as school quality

changes.

        The residual elasticities are not directly observed in the data. Rather, we estimate them in

the following way: first, rich Census data are used to estimate a flexible demand system, taking

careful account of endogeneity issues on the demand side of the market and making explicit the

way that individual demands aggregate up to form a housing market equilibrium using an

equilibrium model of the housing market. We then use these demand estimates in combination

with the equilibrium model to perform a series of simple counterfactual experiments. In

particular, for each of 708 elementary schools in the Bay Area, we use the equilibrium model to

conduct a simple counterfactual simulation, raising its average test score by 0.1 standard

deviation (7.76 test score points) and calculating the new housing market equilibrium. This has

the effect of increasing house values in the corresponding neighborhood catchment area; the

resulting predicted change in house values, given the change in school quality, is then used in the

estimating various specifications of the regression shown in equation (1).




13
  Alternatively, demand could be measured based on student enrollment (or even enrollment of specific
types of student). We intend to explore alternative measures in subsequent analyses.


                                                 9
        Unlike prior work, it is important to note that our approach provides estimates of school-

specific elasticities, rather than MSA-level average choice indices. Constructing our elasticities

from a single financing regime, rather than looking across MSAs, has the advantage that one

would expect the incentives to respond to competition to vary with financing: our approach will

better allow us to identify the direct effect of competition. We note that under California’s local

public finance system, the marginal dollar comes from the state rather than from local property

taxes. This might be expected to provide weaker incentives to respond to competition, as schools

are less able to take advantage of quality improvements directly. In turn, it is likely to provide

lower bound on incentives to respond to competition, worth remembering when it comes to

interpreting the economic significance of our results.



3   DEMAND

        To measure the impact of racial sorting on the consumption of neighborhood amenities,

we now turn to a model of the residential location decision of households in the Bay Area. In

developing such a model, our goal is to provide the simplest analytical tool that can account for

(i) heterogeneity in both household attributes and the attributes of houses/neighborhoods and (ii)

the endogenous determination of housing prices and neighborhood sociodemographic

compositions.

        To this end, we adopt the equilibrium model of an urban housing market developed in

Bayer, McMillan, and Rueben (2005). This equilibrium model consists of two key elements: the

household residential location decision problem and a market-clearing condition. While

maintaining a simple structure, the model allows households to have heterogeneous preferences

defined over housing and neighborhood attributes in a very flexible way; it also allows for

housing prices and neighborhood sociodemographic compositions to be determined in

equilibrium. In estimating the model, we are careful to account for the correlation that naturally

arises between unobserved housing and neighborhood attributes and both housing prices and


                                                10
neighborhood composition.14 Having estimated the model, we then use it to construct our

measures of the elasticity of demand faced by each school.



The Residential Location Decision. We model the residential location decision of each

household as a discrete choice of a single residence from a set of house types available in the

market. The utility function specification is based on the random utility model developed in

McFadden (1973, 1978) and the specification of Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995), which

includes choice-specific unobservable characteristics. Let Xh represent the observable

characteristics of housing choice h, including characteristics of the house itself (e.g., size, age,

and type), its tenure status (rented vs. owned), and the characteristics of its neighborhood (e.g.,

crime, land use, and topography). As above, let Th represent the quality of the local elementary

school as measured by its average test score. We use the notation capital letter Zh to represent the

average sociodemographic characteristics of the corresponding neighborhood, writing it

separately from the other housing and neighborhood attributes to make explicit the fact that these

characteristics are determined in equilibrium. Let ph denote the price of housing choice h and,

finally, let dhi denote the distance from residence h to the primary work location of household i.

Each household chooses its residence h to maximize its indirect utility function Vhi:



(2)      Max Vhi = α Xi X h + α Ti Th + α Zi Z h − α ip ph − α di d hi + ξ h + ε hi .
           (h)




14
   A long line of theoretical studies, including important papers by Epple, Filimon and Romer (EFR) (1984,
1993), Benabou (1993, 1996), Anas and Kim (1995), Anas (2002), Fernandez and Rogerson (1996, 1998),
and Nechyba (1999, 2000) have developed and used models of sorting to analyze the way that
interdependent individual decisions in the housing market aggregate up to determine the equilibrium
structure of a metropolitan area. In recent years, a new line of empirical research has sought to take these
models to the data. Epple and Sieg (1999) develop an estimator for the equilibrium sorting model of EFR,
providing the first unified treatment of theory and empirics in the literature. In the same vein, Sieg et al.
(2004) use this approach to explore the general equilibrium impacts of air quality improvements in the Los
Angeles Basin.


                                                        11
The error structure of the indirect utility is divided into a correlated component associated with

each housing choice that is valued the same by all households, ξh, and an individual-specific term,

εih. A useful interpretation of ξh is that it captures the unobserved quality of each housing choice,

including any unobserved quality associated with its neighborhood.

         Each household’s valuation of choice characteristics is allowed to vary with its own

characteristics, zi, including education, income, race, employment status, and household

composition. Specifically, each parameter associated with housing and neighborhood

characteristics and price, αij, for j ∈ {X, T, Z, d, p}, varies with a household’s own characteristics

according to:



                         K
(3)      α ij = α 0 j + ∑ α rj z ki ,
                        k =1




with equation (3) describing household i’s preference for choice characteristic j.

         This specification of the utility function gives rise to a horizontal model of sorting in

which households have preferences defined distinctly over each choice characteristic including

both school quality and neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics.15 This contrasts with

vertical models, which restrict households to have preferences over a single locational index,

thereby constraining households to have the same preference ordering across locations.16 The



15
   The horizontal specification also captures the geography of the urban housing market very naturally,
allowing households to have preferences over neighborhoods depending on the distance from their
employment locations. This gives rise to variation in the aggregate demand for housing in various
neighborhoods throughout the metro area, thereby increasing equilibrium housing prices in neighborhoods
near employment centers.
16
   It is important to point out that this flexible feature of our model is made possible because we abstract
from issues related to local politics. As Epple, Filimon, and Romer (1993) note, incorporating local politics
into models of residential sorting requires restrictions to be placed on preferences in order to guarantee the
existence of an equilibrium. Important recent papers by Epple and Sieg (1999) and Epple, Romer and Sieg
(2001) estimate equilibrium models that include voting over the level of public goods, restricting
households to have shared rankings over a single public goods index. We view our model as having a
comparative rather than absolute advantage over the papers in that line of the literature, better suited for an


                                                      12
additional flexibility of the horizontal model is especially relevant for this paper as it is the

magnitude of the heterogeneity in preferences for neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics

that will determine the extent to which the initial stratification induced by the variation in school

quality across the metropolitan area is reinforced by additional sorting due to preferences for

one’s neighbors.



Characterizing the Housing Market. As with all models in the broad sorting literature, the

existence of a sorting equilibrium is much easier to establish if the individual residential location

decision problem is smoothed in some way. To this end, we assume that the housing market can

be fully characterized by a set of housing types that is a subset of the full set of available houses,

letting the supply of housing of type h be given by Sh. We also assume that each household

observed in the sample represents a continuum of households with the same observable

characteristics, with the distribution of idiosyncratic tastes εih mapping into a set of choice

probabilities that characterize the distribution of housing choices that would result for the

continuum of households with a given set of observed characteristics.17

        Given the household’s problem described in equations (2)-(3), household i chooses

housing type h if the utility that it receives from this choice exceeds the utility that it receives

from all other possible house choices - that is, when



(4)     Vhi > Vki   ⇒ Whi + ε hi > Wki + ε ki   ⇒ ε hi − ε ki > Wki − Whi   ∀ k≠h



where Wih includes all of the non-idiosyncratic components of the utility function Vih. As the

inequalities in (4) imply, the probability that a household chooses any particular choice depends



institutional setting such as that which holds in Californian, where Proposition 13 leaves almost no
discretion over property tax rates or the level of public goods spending at the local level.
17
   For expositional ease and without loss of generality, let the measure of this continuum be one.


                                                  13
in general on the characteristics of the full set of possible house types. Thus the probability Pih

that household i chooses housing type h can be written as a function of the full vectors of housing

and neighborhood characteristics (both observed and unobserved) and prices {X, Z, p, ξ}:18



(5)        Phi = f h ( z i , Z, X, p, ξ )



as well as the household’s own characteristics zi.

           Aggregating the probabilities in equation (5) over all observed households yields the

predicted demand for each housing type h, Dh:



           Dh =   ∑P    h
                         i
                             .
(6)                 i




In order for the housing market to clear, the demand for houses of type h must equal the supply of

such houses and so:



(7)        Dh = S h , ∀ h ⇒                 ∑P
                                            i
                                                h
                                                 i
                                                     = Sh   ∀h.




Given the decentralized nature of the housing market, prices are assumed to adjust in order to

clear the market. The implications of the market clearing condition defined in equation (6) for

prices are very standard, with excess demand for a housing type causing price to be bid up and

excess supply leading to a fall in price. Given the indirect utility function defined in (1) and a

fixed set of housing and neighborhood attributes, Bayer, McMillan, and Rueben (2004) show that

a unique set of prices (up to a scale) clears the market.

18
     For the purposes of characterizing the equilibrium properties of the model, we include an individual’s



                                                              14
        Given that some neighborhood attributes are endogenously determined by the sorting

process itself, we define a sorting equilibrium as a set of residential location decisions and a

vector of housing prices such that the housing market clears and each household makes its

optimal location decision given the location decisions of all other households. In equilibrium, the

vector of neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics along with the corresponding vector of

market clearing prices must give rise to choice probabilities in equation (4) that aggregate back

up to the same vector of neighborhood sociodemographics.19 Whether this model gives rise to

multiple equilibria depends on the distributions of preferences and available housing choices as

well as the utility parameters. In general, it is impossible to establish that the equilibrium is

unique a priori. However, estimation of the model does not require the computation of an

equilibrium nor uniqueness more generally, as we describe in the next section. We discuss the

issue of uniqueness further in the context of calculating our demand elasticity measures below.



4     DEMAND ESTIMATION

        Estimation of the model follows a two-stage procedure closely related to that developed

in Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995). This section outlines the estimation procedure; a rigorous

presentation is contained in Bayer, Ferreira, and McMillan (2003) and is included in a technical

appendix. It is helpful in describing the estimation procedure to first introduce some notation. In

particular, rewrite the indirect utility function as:



(8)      Vhi = δ h + λih + ε hi

where



employment location in zi and the residential location in Xh.
19
   Bayer, McMillan, and Rueben (2004) establish the existence of a sorting equilibrium as long as (i) the
indirect utility function shown in equation (2) is decreasing in housing prices for all households; (ii)
indirect utility is a continuous function of neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics; and (iii) ε is
drawn from a continuous density function.


                                                   15
(9)        δ h = α 0 X X h + α 0Z Z h − α 0 p ph + ξ h

and

                  ⎛   K
                                 ⎞        ⎛   K
                                                         ⎞        ⎛   K
                                                                                 ⎞        ⎛   K
                                                                                                        ⎞
(10)       λih = ⎜⎜ ∑ α kX z ki ⎟⎟ X h + ⎜⎜ ∑ α kZ z ki ⎟⎟ Z h − ⎜⎜ ∑ α kp z ki ⎟⎟ p h − ⎜⎜ ∑ α kd z ki ⎟⎟d h .
                  ⎝ k =1         ⎠        ⎝ k =1         ⎠        ⎝ k =1         ⎠        ⎝ k =1        ⎠



In equation (9), δh captures the portion of utility provided by housing type h that is common to all

households, and in (10), k indexes household characteristics. When the household characteristics

included in the model are constructed to have mean zero, δh is the mean indirect utility provided

by housing choice h. The unobservable component of δh, ξh, captures the portion of unobserved

preferences for housing choice h that is correlated across households, while εhi represents

unobserved preferences over and above this shared component.

           The first step of the estimation procedure is equivalent to a Maximum Likelihood

estimator applied to the individual location decisions taking prices and neighborhood

sociodemographic compositions as given,20 returning estimates of the heterogeneous parameters

in λ and mean indirect utilities, δh. This estimator is based simply on maximizing the probability

that the model correctly matches each household observed in the sample with its chosen house

type. In particular, for any combination of the heterogeneous parameters in λ and mean indirect

utilities, δh, the model predicts the probability that each household i chooses house type h. We

assume that εhi is drawn from the extreme value distribution, in which case this probability can be

written:




20
   Formally, the validity of this first stage procedure requires the assumption that the observed location
decisions are individually optimal, given the collective choices made by other households and the vector of
market-clearing prices and that households are sufficiently small such that they do not interact strategically
with respect to particular draws on ε. This ensures that no household’s particular idiosyncratic preferences
affect the equilibrium and the vector of idiosyncratic preferences ε is uncorrelated with the prices and
neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics that arise in any equilibrium. For more discussion, see the
Technical Appendix.


                                                                 16
                 exp(δ h + λˆih )
(11)     Phi =
                                    ∑ exp(δ
                                     k
                                              k   + λˆik )



Maximizing the probability that each household makes its correct housing choice gives rise to the

following quasi-log-likelihood function:


              ∑∑ I
         ~
(12)     l=              i
                         h   ln( Phi )
                 i   h



where Iih is an indicator variable that equals 1 if household i chooses house type h in the data and

0 otherwise. The first stage of the estimation procedure consists of searching over the parameters
                                                           ~
in λ and the vector of mean indirect utilities to maximize l . Notice that the quasi-likelihood

function developed here is based solely on the notion that each household’s residential location is

optimal given the set of observed prices and the location decisions of other households.



The Endogeneity of School Quality and Neighborhood Sociodemographic Composition.

Having estimated the vector of mean indirect utilities in the first stage of the estimation, the

second stage of the estimation involves decomposing δ into observable and unobservable

components according to the regression equation (9).21 In estimating equation (9), important

endogeneity problems need to be confronted. To the extent that house prices partly capture house

and neighborhood quality unobserved to the econometrician, so the price variable will be

endogenous. Estimation via least squares will thus lead to price coefficients biased towards zero,

producing misleading willingness-to-pay estimates for a whole range of choice characteristics.

This issue arises in the context of any differentiated products demand estimation and we describe

the construction of an instrument for price in the Technical Appendix.



21
  Notice that the set of observed residential choices provides no information that distinguishes the
components of δ. That is, however δ is broken into components, the effect on the probabilities shown in
equation (10) is identical.


                                                             17
         A second identification issue involves the correlation of neighborhood sociodemographic

characteristics Z and school quality with unobserved housing and neighborhood quality, ξh. To

properly estimate preferences in the face of this endogeneity problem, we adapt a technique

previously developed by Black (1999). Black’s strategy makes use of a sample of houses near

school attendance zone boundaries, estimating a hedonic price regression that includes boundary

fixed effects. Intuitively, the idea is to compare houses in the same local neighborhood but on

opposite sides of the boundary, exploiting the discontinuity in the right to attend a given school.

Differences in valuation will then reflect differences in school quality, controlling for other

neighborhood characteristics (both observed and unobserved).

         There are plausible reasons to think that households will sort with respect to such

boundaries – an important theme in the work of Nechyba (1999, 2000). Thus, while boundary

fixed effects are likely to control well for differences in unobserved fixed factors, neighborhood

sociodemographics are likely to vary discontinuously at the boundary. This is important. It

implies that boundary fixed effects isolate variation in both school quality and neighborhood

sociodemographics in a small region in which unobserved fixed features (e.g., access to the

transportation network) are likely to vary only slightly, thereby providing an appealing way to

account for the correlation of both school quality and neighborhood sociodemographics with

unobservable neighborhood quality.

         We incorporate school district boundary fixed effects when estimating equation (11).22 In

particular, we create a series of indicator variables for each Census block that equal one if the

block is within a given distance of each unique school district boundary in the metropolitan area

(e.g., Palo Alto-Menlo Park).23 After first describing the basic features of the dataset, we show the


22
   While we report preference estimates based on school district boundaries below, it is important to add
that these are qualitatively similar to those obtained in a preliminary analysis using a large sample of school
attendance zone boundaries that we have been assembling for our sample and time period.
23
   A number of empirical issues arise in incorporating school district boundary fixed effects into our
analysis. A central feature of local governance in California helps to eliminate some of the problems that
naturally arise with the use of school district boundaries, as Proposition 13 ensures that the vast majority of


                                                      18
variation in school quality and neighborhood sociodemographics at school district boundaries in

the next section, drawing attention to clear discontinuities in neighborhood sociodemographics at

the boundary.



5   DATA

        The analysis conducted in this paper is facilitated by access to restricted Census

microdata for 1990. These restricted Census data provide the detailed individual, household, and

housing variables found in the public-use version of the Census, but also include information on

the location of individual residences and workplaces at a very disaggregate level. In particular,

while the public-use data specify the PUMA (a Census region with approximately 100,000

individuals) in which a household lives, the restricted data specify the Census block (a Census

region with approximately 100 individuals), thereby identifying the local neighborhood that each

individual inhabits and the characteristics of each neighborhood far more accurately than has

been previously possible with such a large-scale data set.

        We use data from six contiguous counties in the San Francisco Bay Area: Alameda,

Contra Costa, Marin, San Mateo, San Francisco, and Santa Clara. We focus on this area for a

number of reasons. First, this geographic area is reasonably self-contained, and is sizeable along a

number of dimensions, including over 1,100 Census tracts, and almost 39,500 Census blocks –

the smallest unit of aggregation in the data. The sample consists of 242,100 households.

        Very relevant for this analysis, the use of data from California makes it reasonable to use

school district rather than school attendance zone boundaries in the analysis. In particular,

Proposition 13 ensures that local jurisdictions have almost no discretion over property tax rates or

the level of public good spending including school spending. In this way, unlike almost anywhere

else in the country, one would not expect much variation in property values across school district


school districts within California are subject to a uniform effective property tax rate of one percent.
Concerning the width of the boundaries, we experimented with a variety of distances and report the results



                                                   19
boundaries to arise due to differential property tax rates in California. This same feature the

public finance system may also diminish the overall strength of Tiebout-type sorting in

California, as households are not free to select different tax rates and local public goods packages

in each jurisdiction. For this reason we expect our analysis to generally understate the importance

of school-related sorting relative to other states.

        The Census provides a wealth of data on the individuals in the sample – race, age,

educational attainment, income from various sources, household size and structure, occupation,

and employment location. In addition, it provides a variety of housing characteristics: whether the

unit is owned or rented, the corresponding rent or owner-reported value,24 number of rooms,

number of bedrooms, type of structure, and the age of the building. We use these housing

characteristics directly, and also construct neighborhood variables, such as neighborhood racial,

education and income distributions, based on the households within the same Census block group

(a Census region containing approximately 500 housing units). We merge additional data

describing local conditions with each house record, constructing variables related to crime rates,

land use, local schools, topography, and urban density. For each of these measures, a detailed

description of the process by which the original data were assigned to each house is provided in a

Data Appendix. The list of the principal housing and neighborhood variables used in the analysis,

along with means and standard deviations, is given in the first two columns of Table 1.



School Assignment and School Quality. While we have an exact assignment of Census blocks

to school districts, in the absence of comprehensive information about within-district school




for 0.25 miles, as these were more precise due to the larger sample size.
24
   As described in the Data Appendix, we construct a single price vector for all houses, whether rented or
owned. Because the implied relationship between house values and current rents depends on expectations
about the growth rate of future rents in the market, we estimate a series of hedonic price regressions for
each of over 40 sub-regions of the Bay Area housing market. These regressions return an estimate of the
ratio of house values to rents for each of these sub-regions and we use the average of these ratios for the
Bay Area, 264.1, to convert monthly rent to house value for the purposes of reporting results at the mean.


                                                      20
attendance areas,25 we employ the following approach for linking each Census block to a school:

For a given Census block, we calculate the distance to each school in its district. We then first

assign the Census block to the closest school within its district. Using this closest school

assignment, we can then calculate a predicted enrollment for each school (calculated by summing

over the school-aged children in each Census block assigned to a school) and compare this

measure to the actual enrollment of the school. To correct discrepancies in predicted versus actual

enrollment, we then use an intuitive procedure to adjust the assignment of Census blocks to

schools so as to ensure that predicted enrollments equal their actual counterparts in each school in

each district. We describe this procedure in detail in the Data Appendix; the results are not

sensitive to this adjustment.

        As our measure of school quality, we use the average test score for each school, averaged

over two years. Averaging helps to reduce any year-to-year noise in the measure. When variables

that characterize the sociodemographic composition of the school or surrounding neighborhood

are included in the analysis, the estimated coefficient on average test score picks up what

households are willing to pay for an improvement in average student performance at a school,

holding the sociodemographic composition constant. While the average test score is an imperfect

measure of school quality, it has the advantage of being easily observed by both parents and

researchers and consequently has been used in most analyses that attempt to measure demand for

school quality.



Boundaries. Table 1 displays descriptive statistics for various samples related to the boundaries.

The first two columns report means and standard deviations for the full sample while the third




25
  The preference estimates based on school district boundaries reported below are qualitatively similar to
those obtained in a preliminary analysis using a large sample of school attendance zone boundaries that we
have been assembling for our sample and time period.


                                                   21
column reports means for the sample of houses within 0.25 miles of a school district boundary.26

Comparing the first column to the third column of the table, it is immediately obvious that the

houses near school district boundaries are not fully representative of those in the Bay Area as a

whole. To address this problem, we create sample weights for the houses near the boundary.27

Column 7 of Table 1 shows the resulting weighted means, indicating that using these weights

makes the sample near the boundary much more representative of the full sample.

        The fourth and fifth columns report means for houses within 0.25 miles of a boundary,

comparing houses on the high versus low average test score side of the each boundary; the sixth

column reports t-tests for the difference in means. Comparing these differences reveals that

houses on the high side cost $53 more per month and are assigned to schools with test scores that

are 43-point higher on average.28 Moreover, houses on the high quality side of the boundary are

much more likely to be inhabited by white households and households with more education and

income. These types of across-boundary differences in sociodemographic composition are what

one would expect if households sort on the basis of preferences for school quality. While far less

significant, other housing characteristics do vary across the boundaries as well. Consequently, we

expect the use of boundary fixed effects to control for much of the variation in unobserved

housing and neighborhood quality, thereby giving rise to more accurate estimates of preferences

for neighborhood sociodemographics and school quality.




26
   We experimented with a variety of distances and report the results for 0.25 miles, as these were more
precise due to the larger sample size.
27
   The following procedure is used: we first regress a dummy variable indicating whether a house is in a
boundary region on the vector of housing and neighborhood attributes using a logistic regression. Fitted
values from this regression provide an estimate of the likelihood that a house is in the boundary region
given its attributes. We use the inverse of this fitted value as a sample weight in subsequent regression
analysis conducted on the sample of houses near the boundary.
28
   As described in the Data Appendix, we construct a single monthly price vector for all houses, whether
rented or owned.


                                                   22
6   DEMAND ESTIMATES

        We noted in Section 3 that estimation of the full model proceeds in two stages. The first

stage recovers interaction parameters and a vector of mean indirect utilities; the second stage

returns the components of mean indirect utility. To give the reader a sense of the interplay

between the estimates of the demand for school quality and sociodemographic characteristics of

neighbors, we report results for two main specifications, which respectively exclude and include

variables that characterize the racial composition, average educational attainment, and average

income of the neighborhood (Census block group). To make the discussion of these estimates

more transparent, we transform the estimates so that they can be described in terms of marginal

willingness-to-pay measures (MWTP), reporting these estimates in Tables 2-4.

        Table 2 reports the implied measures of the mean MWTP for school average test scores

and other selected housing and neighborhood attributes for six specifications of the mean indirect

utility regression.29 Results are reported for the two main specifications, which exclude and

include neighborhood sociodemographic variables, respectively. For each of these main

specifications, results are reported for the full sample and for a sample of houses within 0.25

miles of school district boundaries, with and without including boundary fixed effects. In all

cases, when the sample of houses is restricted to those within 0.25 miles of a boundary, sample

weights (as described in Section 5) are used in order to make this sample as close to

representative of the full sample as possible. Comparing columns 1 and 2 or columns 4 and 5, it is

clear that results are very similar whether the full sample or the weighted sub-sample of houses

near a school district boundary is used.

        The first three columns of Table 2 report results for specifications that exclude

neighborhood sociodemographics. In this case, the estimated mean MWTP for a one standard

deviation increase in school average test score declines from $123 to $82 in monthly rent




                                               23
($21,500 in house value) when boundary fixed effects are included in the analysis. The final three

columns report results for analogous specifications that include neighborhood sociodemographic

characteristics. The coefficient on the average test score in these specifications returns the

average of what households are willing to pay for a standard deviation increase in the average test

score conditional on the sociodemographic characteristics of the neighborhood, which are also

indicative of the sociodemographic characteristics of the local school. The estimated MWTP for a

one standard deviation increase in the average test score in this case declines to $26 in monthly

rent ($6,900 in house value), which is approximately 2.4 percent of the average house price index

for our Bay Area sample.30

        These results make clear that much of what initially appears in the specification without

neighborhood sociodemographics to be a significant willingness on the part of households to pay

for school quality is instead more properly attributed to the characteristics of neighbors or peers.

That the resulting MWTP for school average test scores is relatively small is exactly what one

would expect if households have difficulty inferring the quality of a school from published

average test score data.31 That is, one would expect households to place a relatively small weight

on this measure when choosing neighborhoods if the signal that the published average test score

provided about actual school quality was small relative to the noise that it contains related to

differences in the underlying composition of individuals taking the test. In fact, some of the

weight that parents place directly on neighborhood sociodemographics may result from a belief

that these provide a better indication than the test score of the quality of the education that their

children will receive in the local schools, especially if parents perceive peer effects to be

important.


29
   The specifications of the mean indirect utility regressions are reported in Appendix Table 1. The mean
MWTP measures reported in Table 2 are calculated by dividing the coefficient associated with each choice
characteristic by the coefficient on price.
30
   This is very similar to the estimates of Black (1999) and Kane, Staiger, and Riegg (2004).
31
   This is especially true in 1990, which pre-dates most concerted efforts on the part of states to provide
information to households about the quality of the local school.


                                                    24
         Before turning to the results related to heterogeneity in preferences, it is important to

point out that the final two columns of Table 2 also show the impact of including boundary fixed

effects on the estimates of mean preferences for neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics.

Comparing these columns reveals the pattern of results that one would expect if boundary fixed

effects control in part for unobserved neighborhood quality and unobserved quality is positively

correlated with neighborhood income and education and negatively correlated with the fraction of

non-white households.32 Thus boundary fixed effects seem to be effective in controlling for fixed

aspects of unobserved neighborhood quality that are correlated with neighborhood

sociodemographics, and thus provide an attractive way of estimating preferences for both school

quality and neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics in the presence of this important

endogeneity problem.



Heterogeneity in Willingness-to-Pay

         The interaction parameters estimated in the first stage for the specifications that exclude

and include neighborhood sociodemographics, respectively, are reported in Appendix Tables 2

and 3. These specifications correspond to the mean MWTP estimates reported in columns 3 and 6

of Table 2, respectively. In each case, the model controls simultaneously for the effect of each of

a series of household characteristics (income, education, race, work status, age, and household

structure) on the marginal willingness-to-pay for a variety of housing and neighborhood

attributes, including the average test score of the local school. The model also captures the spatial




32
   The fact that the estimated coefficient on the average test score rises from $20 to $26 when boundary
fixed effects are included reflects that fact it is positively correlated with neighborhood income and
education and negatively correlated with the fraction of non-white households. Thus, the estimated
coefficient on the average test score tends to rise as the coefficients on these other variables change, as they
do in moving from column 5 to column 6 in Table 2.


                                                      25
aspect of the housing market by allowing households to have preferences over commuting

distance.33

         Table 3 converts the estimates of the heterogeneity in MWTP for the average test score

into dollar terms. The two columns of the table report results for specifications that exclude and

include neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics, respectively. Thus the first row of this

table reports the estimated mean MWTP for the change listed in each column heading: for

example, the first entry reports the $82 mean MWTP for a one standard deviation increase in the

average test score, conditional on neighborhood sociodemographics initially reported in column 3

of Table 2. The remaining rows report the difference in MWTP associated with the comparison of

household characteristics shown in the row heading, the second row showing how a household’s

MWTP changes with an increase of $100,000 in income.

         Analogous to the effect of including neighborhood sociodemographic variables on the

estimates of the mean MWTP reported in Table 2, including these variables decreases the

magnitude of the estimated heterogeneity in demand for school quality, decreasing the coefficient

associated with household income by 60 percent, with education by 75 percent, and with race

(which may proxy in part for wealth) by upwards of 80 percent. The estimates of the specification

that includes neighborhood sociodemographics also return the expected positive additional

MWTP associated with the presence of school-aged children. Table 4 reports analogous measures

of the heterogeneity in MWTP for selected housing and neighborhood attributes when including

neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics. This reveals, for example, that increases in

household income are typically associated with large increases in the demand for housing

attributes, and that college-educated households are willing to pay a substantial premium relative

to less-educated households to live with more educated neighbors. Specifically, they are willing


33
   We treat a household’s primary work location as exogenous, calculating the distance from this location to
the location of the neighborhood in question. MWTP estimates for other housing and neighborhood
attributes based on a specification without commuting distance are qualitatively similar except for variables
that are strongly correlated with employment access, such as population density.


                                                     26
to pay around $59 per month more than less-educated households for a 10 percent increase in

college-educated neighbors. Not surprisingly, strong racial interactions are also at work in the

housing market, leading to significant sorting along this dimension as well.34



Constructing Measures of the Residual Elasticity of Demand Faced by Each School

         Given the estimates of the demand system, we now calculate a measure of the residual

elasticity faced by each school. For each of 708 elementary schools in the Bay Area, we use the

equilibrium model to conduct a simple counterfactual simulation, raising each school’s average

test score by a 0.1 standard deviation (7.76 points on a mean of 522) and then calculating the new

housing market equilibrium. In every case, this has the effect of increasing house values in the

corresponding neighborhood catchment area. The elasticity measure that we use in the subsequent

analysis consists of the estimated change in average local property values per standard deviation

increase in test score. Across the 708 elementary schools, the corresponding increase in house

values following this increase ranges from $1,400 to $19,600 ($5-$80 in monthly house price),

with a mean of $11,800 ($45.5) and a standard deviation of $3,200 ($12.4).35

         Figure 1 shows the geographic distribution of the estimated elasticities across the Bay

Area. In the figure, the area of the circle indicates the magnitude of the estimated elasticity. In

general, a school’s elasticity of demand (as measured by the gradient of house values with respect

to school quality) will be a function of two features of its environment: (i) the willingness of the

34
   Note that the strength of the estimated racial interactions reported in Table 4 may reflect the presence of
centralized discriminatory practices in the market in addition to the direct preferences of households to live
with others of the same race. See Bayer, McMillan, and Rueben (2005) for more discussion of this issue.
35
   The basic structure of the computation of the new equilibrium consists of a loop within a loop. Having
lowered the test score of a given school by a standard deviation, we first calculate a new set of prices that
clears the market; Berry (1994) ensures that there is a unique set of market clearing prices up to scale.
Using these new prices and the initial sociodemographic composition of each neighborhood, we calculate
the probability that each household chooses each housing type, and aggregating these choices to the
neighborhood level, the corresponding predicted sociodemographic composition of each neighborhood. We
replace the initial neighborhood sociodemographic measures with these new measures and start the loop
again – i.e., calculate a new set of market clearing prices with these updated neighborhood
sociodemographic measures. We continue this process until the neighborhood sociodemographic measures




                                                     27
households that it serves to pay for improvements in school quality, and (ii) the availability of

close substitutes in geographically proximate neighborhoods. The former type of variation in the

elasticity measure is problematic from the point of view of estimating the productive effect of

competition in that a household’s willingness-to-pay (WTP) for school quality is likely to be

correlated with the performance of its children on standardized tests for reasons that have nothing

to do with the school itself. The latter form of variation is much less problematic in that a school

and its corresponding neighborhood in any quality range can be located such that it has either

many similar or dissimilar neighboring school catchment areas. It is this latter form of variation

that we would like to exploit in our analysis.

        Looking directly at the model of residential sorting estimated above, it is clear that the

household sociodemographic characteristics included in the model, such as parental education,

increase a household’s estimated WTP for school quality and therefore increase the estimated

elasticity of demand for schools that serve these households. Thus in every specification of the

analysis that follows, we include a complete set of controls for neighborhood averages of all the

household sociodemographic and other housing and neighborhood measures included in our

demand estimation. Without including this full set of controls, the elasticity measure would be

mechanically correlated with the average school test score: because highly educated households

are willing to pay more for school quality and select in to schools with higher test scores, the

elasticity of demand for these schools is mechanically greater. When this full set of controls is

included in estimating our main regression equations, however, this mechanical correlation is

eliminated; doing so has the effect of reducing the effective variation in our main elasticity

measure to the variation related to the availability of close substitutes in the local market.

        Figure 2 shows the geographic distribution of the remaining variation in the estimated

elasticities across the Bay Area once the full set of sociodemographic and other housing and


converge. The household location decisions corresponding to the final sociodemographic measures along
with the vector of housing prices that clears the market then represents the new equilibrium.


                                                  28
neighborhood attributes included in the demand model have been conditioned out (i.e., the

residual from a regression of our elasticity measure on this complete set of controls). For those

familiar with the Bay Area, even a quick glance comparing Figure 1 and Figure 2 reveals that the

remaining variation in the elasticity measure is not a simply a function of neighborhood

socioeconomic conditions. For expositional ease, we work with a standardized version of this

conditional elasticity measure throughout the remainder of our analysis. (Means and standard

deviations for the school-related variables summarized for the 708 elementary schools used in the

subsequent analysis are shown in Table 5.)

         To demonstrate that the variation in these conditional elasticity measures is indeed related

to the notion of the proximity of close substitutes, we construct a series of dissimilarity indices

based on average house prices, neighborhood income, and neighborhood education. Using the

neighborhood catchment areas for the nearest 10 schools, we construct a measure of the average

absolute difference between the measure of the school in question and each of these neighbors.

Thus a high measure for a given dissimilarity index indicates that a school is quite distinct from

its geographic neighbors in the corresponding dimension (e.g., price, income, education).36

         These dissimilarity indices provide a simple (albeit crude) measure of the availability of

close substitute neighborhoods in the local market. Table 6 shows the correlation between these

dissimilarity indices and our conditional elasticity measure (once the full set of

sociodemographic, housing, and other neighborhood measures used in estimating the demand

model have been conditioned out). In each case, the correlation is negative, indicating that

schools that are differentiated from their neighbors in terms of sociodemographic and housing

characteristics tend to have lower elasticities ceteris paribus. This suggests that the remaining



36
  The point of this exercise is not to suggest that the set of the 10 closest neighboring schools necessarily
contains a school’s closest substitutes. High quality schools separated by large distances may be closer
substitutes for one another than a high quality and low quality pair of neighboring schools. We use this
measure primarily to show that our estimated elasticity measure is correlated with a clear measure of the
availability of close substitutes, acknowledging that this constructed measure is not itself a perfect proxy.


                                                     29
variation in our elasticity measure is indeed picking up the type of variation that we would like to

exploit in estimating equation (1).

        Finally, to demonstrate that our conditional elasticity measures are based on variation in

the data driven by the geography of the Bay Area rather than the types of households in the local

neighborhood, we conducted the following diagnostic test. First, we re-calculated an estimate of

the residual elasticity of demand using a model of residential sorting that did not include distance

to work (i.e., a model that ignored geography). We then included these alternate elasticities in

average test score regressions analogous regressions to those reported below in Table 7. In each

case, the coefficients on the demand elasticity were essentially zero and statistically insignificant.

This diagnostic test gives us confidence that any mechanical correlation associated with the

increased willingness of some households to pay for school quality (e.g., highly-educated) is

eliminated by the inclusion of a full set of controls for the variables used in the demand

estimation. It also makes clear the importance of including geography in the demand estimation;

it is the notion of the availability of close substitutes in geographic space that forms the basis for

the remaining variation in our elasticity measures.37



7    SUPPLY-SIDE REGRESSIONS

        We now turn to our main regression analysis. In particular, we report results for the

specification shown in equation (1) using a variety of school characteristics (output and input) as

the dependent variable and a series of six distinct sets of control variables. (The variables

included in each set of control variables are listed in Appendix Table 4.)

        Table 7 reports results when the average 4th grade test score is used as the dependent

variable. As mentioned above, because we are using the conditional elasticity measure (the

37
   Finally, it is worth noting that by construction our elasticity measures are complex functions of
observable household and neighborhood variables including location. In this way, they are generally
insulated against bias that might normally come about due to the correlation of unobserved ability and




                                                 30
residual from a regression of the elasticity on a complete set of controls for the neighborhood

average of all household sociodemographic, housing, and other neighborhood variables used in

estimating the demand side of our mode). This amounts to including this complete set of controls

in all specifications reported in Table 7.

        The first column of Table 7 includes only these variables as controls. The second column

adds seventeen additional controls for 4th grade school sociodemographics. These are included to

account for the fact that the sociodemographic characteristics of the students in the school

(important in the production of the test score) might differ from the neighborhood average

sociodemographics. The third column adds controls for five measures of the employment access

by education level as well as four direct geographic measures. These controls are included to

account for the possibility that the households who live within the core of the Bay Area may be

systematically different than those who live in outlying regions.38 A full set of parameter

estimates for the specification shown in the third column are shown in Appendix Table 5. The

fourth column adds controls for interactions between neighborhood race, education and income

measures. This ensures that the remaining variation in the elasticity measure is not an artifact of

non-linearities in these important household sociodemographics. Column five adds higher-order

house price and income terms, and finally, column six adds four local land-use measures.

        The estimates reported in the six columns of Table 7 reveal a consistent pattern of results

with the conditional elasticity coefficient estimate falling in the range of 8.6-12.8 and the t-

statistic ranging between 3.0 and 4.0. These coefficients are reported for a standardized

conditional elasticity measure and thus the interpretation is that a one standard deviation increase

in the competitiveness of a school’s local environment within the Bay Area is associated with a

10-12 point increase in the average test score of the school – about 0.15 standard deviations. This




unobserved demand on the part of parents; our elasticity measures are constructed so as to avoid including
this portion of the variation in the measures.
38
   It is also worth noting that the inclusion of county fixed effects also does not affect the results.


                                                   31
is a sizeable effect, indicating that a school’s performance is indeed strongly linked to the

competitiveness of its local environment.

        We use a specification corresponding to the third column of Table 7 for the remaining

analysis conducted in the paper. The first six columns of Table 8 report a series of such

regressions using various school input measures as the dependent variable. The first three

columns relate to teacher experience and reveal that schools facing a greater elasticity of demand

actually have significantly fewer of the most productive teachers (those with experience between

5-9 years) and tend to have a higher number of teachers who are just beginning and nearing the

end of their careers. The point estimates for the effect of the elasticity on the dependent variables

considered in the next three columns, the pupil-teacher ratio and teacher education variables, are

highly insignificant and very small in magnitude. Thus, in general, schools facing a higher

elasticity of demand appear to produce higher test scores without any significant advantages in

terms of observable school inputs.

        As discussed above, that school input decisions are not strongly related to the conditional

elasticity of demand in the Bay Area is not especially surprising given the restrictive financing

regime in place in California. The fact that schools facing greater amounts of local competitive

pressures do not attract observably better teachers provides some assurance that the remaining

variation in our elasticity measure is not simply picking up unobserved student or neighborhood

characteristics. Because teachers can sort across schools, we might be worried, for example, if a

higher residual demand elasticity was correlated with the presence of more experienced or better-

educated teachers. If anything, it appears that increased competition may push better teachers

away from a school, perhaps because competition is associated with more intense monitoring.

        The final column of Table 8 provides another way to evaluate the possibility that the

conditional elasticity measure is correlated with unobserved student/household characteristics. In

particular, column 7 reports the results for a specification that uses the average amount of income

from capital sources in the corresponding neighborhood (the best proxy for wealth available in


                                                 32
the Census) as the dependent variable. Importantly, this measure was not used in estimating the

demand side of the model and therefore serves as an appropriate test of whether the remaining

variation in our elasticity measure proxies for the type of unobserved household characteristic

that might be expected to positively affect test scores. As the results reveal, the point estimate is

actually negative in this case (with a t-statistic of -1.3), indicating that higher elasticity schools

actually serve households with lower levels of capital income ceteris paribus. This evidence

provides a further indication that the remaining variation in our elasticity measure is not simply

proxying for unobserved household characteristics.

         In the final two tables of the paper, we explore the relationship between the dissimilarity

indices described above and the average 4th grade test score. Again, it is this type of variation in

our elasticity measure that we would ideally like to exploit in estimating the main specification

shown in Tables 7 and 8, although it is again important to remember that these dissimilarity

indices provide only a crude measure of the availability of close substitutes that our elasticity

measures are capturing.

         Table 9 reports the results of a series of specifications that relate the standardized school

elasticity measure to various dissimilarity indices and additional control variables. Not

surprisingly, given the negative correlations in Table 6, these measures are negatively related to

the elasticity measure and are significant in most cases. When various combinations of these

dissimilarity measures are included directly in the average 4th grade test score regression in Table

10, they collectively enter negatively and significantly. This lends further support to the view that

the positive coefficient estimates reported in Table 7 are in fact reasonable. Schools increasingly

isolated in product space (relative to their ten closest geographic neighbors) perform significantly

worse.




                                                 33
8   CONCLUSION

        Numerous studies have addressed the policy-relevant question of whether greater choice

will lead to improvements in school quality. The typical focus in the prior literature has been on

the overall effect of increased choice on school performance.

        In the current paper, we began with the observation that this overall effect can be

decomposed into a component measuring demand responsiveness (how increased choice affects

school competition) and a second component measuring supply responsiveness (the way that

increased competition affects school performance). By focusing on the overall effect of choice,

the previous literature has provided little guidance as to the effect of competition itself on school

performance. Moreover, existing research suggests that the responsiveness of demand to

increased choice may be weak, leaving open the possibility that supply responsiveness may be

altogether more powerful.

        This paper then presented a new approach for measuring the direct effect of competition

on school performance – the strength of supply responsiveness. Central to this approach is the

construction of a residual elasticity of demand for each school – our preferred measure of local

competition – which captures the change in demand each school faces in response to a change in

that school’s quality. We do so using a flexible demand model, estimated using very rich Census

data. This competition measure is then used in a regression framework that relates measured

school performance to student, school and neighborhood controls, including the competition

measure.

        Our results provide the first estimates in the literature of the direct effect of increased

competition on public school performance. We find evidence of a marked increase in test scores

in response to an increase in the residual elasticity of demand: a one standard deviation increase

in the competitiveness of a school’s local market within the Bay Area is associated with a 0.15

standard deviation increase in school performance. At the same time, these achievement increases




                                                 34
are accompanied by, if anything, slight reductions in important inputs, helping allay concerns

about the role of omitted variables in these regressions.

        These findings are robust to inclusion of many types of control. We show that our

residual elasticity has no effect in predicting neighborhood wealth, lending support to the notion

that our preferred competition measure is not simply picking up unobserved household

characteristics. In contrast, it is correlated with similarity indices that describe the extent to

which a school is isolated geographically (and in terms of product space): the residual elasticities

increase the less isolated a school becomes. As one might expect, these similarity measures also

have positive effect on school performance. In terms of heterogeneous effects, we find that

school responsiveness to increased competition is greater in more educated communities,

suggesting that educated parents may be better able to monitor school personnel as competition

increases.

        Overall, our evidence is consistent with strong supply responsiveness on the part of

public schools. This is relevant to the broader school choice debate.


REFERENCES

Barrow, Lisa and Cecilia Rouse (2004) “Using Market Valuation to Assess Public School Spending,”
Journal of Public Economics, 88:9-10, pp. 1747-69.

Bayer, Patrick, Fernando Ferreira, and Robert McMillan (2003), “A Unified Framework for
Measuring Preferences for Schools and Neighborhoods,” Economic Growth Center, Yale University
Working Paper No. 872.

Bayer, Patrick, Robert McMillan, and Kim Rueben (2004), “An Equilibrium Model of an Urban
Housing Market,” NBER Working Paper 10865.

________ (2005), “Residential Segregation in General Equilibrium,” NBER Working Paper 11095.

Belfield, Clive and Henry Levin (2002), “The Effects of Competition on Educational Outcomes: A
Review of US Evidence,” National Center for the Study of Privatization in Education Report,
Columbia University.

Benabou, Roland (1993), “The Workings of a City: Location, Education, and Production,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 108(3), pp.619-652.

________ (1996), “Heterogeneity, Stratification, and Growth: Macroeconomic Implications of
Community Structure and School Finance,” American Economic Review, 86(3), 584-609.


                                                 35
Berry, Steven (1994), “Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Differentiation,” RAND
Journal of Economics, Vol. 25, pp. 242-262.

Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes (1995), “Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium,”
Econometrica, Vol 63, pp. 841-890.

Black, Sandra (1999), “Do Better Schools Matter? Parental Valuation of Elementary Education,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1999.

Borland, M and R. Howson (1992), “Students’ Academic Achievement and the Degree of Market
Concentration in Education,” Economics of Education Review, 11: 31-39.

Cullen, Julie, Brian Jacob, and Steven Levitt (2003), “The Effect of School Choice on Student
Outcomes: Evidence from Randomized Lotteries,” NBER Working Paper No. 10113.

Debreu, Gerard (1969), “Economies with a Finite Set of Equilibria,” Irving Fisher lecture at the
Brussels meeting of the Econometric Society, September, reprinted in Mathematical Economics:
Twenty Papers of Gerard Debreau, Cambridge University Press, 1983.

Epple, Dennis, David Figlio, and Richard Romano (2004), “Competition between Private and Public
Schools: Testing Stratification and Pricing Predictions,” Journal of Public Economics 88, 1215-45.

Epple, Dennis, Radu Filimon, and Thomas Romer (1984), “Equilibrium Among Local Jurisdictions:
Towards an Integrated Approach of Voting and Residential Choice,” Journal of Public Economics,
Vol. 24, pp. 281-304.

________ (1993), “Existence of Voting and Housing Equilibrium in a System of Communities with
Property Taxes,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, Vol. 23, pp. 585-610.

Epple, Dennis and Richard Romano (1998), “Competition Between Private and Public Schools,
Vouchers, and Peer Group Effects,” American Economic Review 88(1): 33-62.

Epple, Dennis, Thomas Romer and Holger Sieg (2001), “Interjurisdictional Sorting and Majority
Rule: An Empirical Analysis,” Econometrica, Vol. 69, No. 6., pp. 1437-1455.

Epple, Dennis and Holger Sieg (1999), “Estimating Equilibrium Models of Local Jurisdictions,”
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 107, No. 4., pp. 645-681.

Fernandez, Raquel and Richard Rogerson (1996), “Income Distribution, Communities, and the
Quality of Public Education.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 111, No. 1., pp. 135-164.

________ (2003), “Equity and Resources: An Analysis of Educational Finance Systems,” Journal of
Political Economy, vol. 111, no. 4.

Ferreira, Fernando V. (2004), “You Can Take It with You: Transferability of Proposition 13 Tax
Benefits, Residential Mobility, and Willingness to Pay for Housing Amenities.” Center for Labor
Economics, University of California, Berkeley, Working Paper No. 72.

Ferreyra, Maria (2003), “Estimating the Effects of Private School Vouchers in Multi-District
Economies,” mimeo, Carnegie-Mellon University.




                                               36
Figlio, David, and Joe Stone (1999) “School Choice and Student Performance: Are Private Schools
Really Better?” Research in Labor Economics, 18: 115-40.

Hanushek, Eric and Steve Rivkin (2003) “Does Public School Competition Affect Teacher Quality,”
in The Economics of School Choice, edited by Caroline Hoxby, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.

Hoxby, Caroline M. (1994) “Do Private Schools Provide Competition for Public Schools?” NBER
Working Paper No. 4978.d

Hoxby, Caroline M. (2000) “Does Competition Among Public Schools Benefit Students and
Taxpayers?” American Economic Review, 90 (5), 1209-38.

Jepsen, Christopher (1999) “The Effects of Private School Competition on Student Achievement,”
mimeo, Northwestern University.

Kane, Thomas, Douglas Staiger, and Stephanie Riegg (2004) “Do Good Schools or Good Neighbors
Raise Property Values?” mimeo, University of California, Los Angeles.

McFadden, Daniel (1978), “Modeling the Choice of Residential Location,” in eds. Karlquist, A., et al.,
Spatial Interaction Theory and Planning Models, Elsevier North-Holland, New York.

Millimet, Daniel and Vasudha Rangaprasad (2005) “Strategic Competition Amongst Public Schools,”
mimeo, Southern Methodist University.

Nechyba, Thomas J. (1999), “School Finance-Induced Migration and Stratification Patterns: the
Impact of Private School Vouchers,” Journal of Public Economic Theory, Vol. 1.

________ (2000), “Mobility, Targeting and Private School Vouchers,” American Economic Review
90(1), 130-46.

Rothstein, Jesse (2003), “Good Principals or Good Peers? Parental Valuation of School
Characteristics, Tiebout Equilibrium, and the Incentive Effects of Competition Among Jurisdictions,”
mimeo, Princeton University.

Sieg, Holger, V. Kerry Smith, H. Spencer Banzaf and Randall Walsh (forthcoming) “Estimating the
General Equilibrium Benefits of Large Changes in Spatially Delineated Public Goods,” International
Economic Review.

Tiebout, Charles M. (1956), “A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures,” Journal of Political Economy,
64: 416-424.

Timmins, Christopher (2003), “If You Can't Take the Heat, Get Out of the Cerrado... Recovering the
Amenity Cost of Non-Marginal Climate Change in Brazil,” mimeo, Yale University.

Walsh, Randall (2004), “Endogenous Open Space Amenities in a Locational Equilibrium,” CEA
Working Paper No. 04-03, February.




                                                 37
            Figure 1: Actual Elasticities of Demand: San Francisco Bay Area Elementary Schools


                                                                                                   38.18



          Marin County

                                                                                                   37.98




                                                              East Bay
                                                                                                   37.78
               San Francisco




                                                                                                   37.58




                                                                            San Jose
                                                                                                   37.38
                                                      Silicon Valley




                                                                                                    37.18
-122.75            -122.55           -122.35             -122.15             -121.95             -121.75
           Figure 2: Conditional Elasticities of Demand: San Francisco Bay Area Elementary Schools


                                                                                                       38.18



          Marin County

                                                                                                       37.98




                                                                    East Bay                           37.78
                 San Francisco




                                                                                                       37.58




                                                                               San Jose

                                                                                                       37.38
                                                   Silicon Valley




                                                                                                        37.18
-122.75              -122.55          -122.35                -122.15              -121.95            -121.75
Table 1. Full Sample, and School District Boundary Sub-Sample

Sample                                               full sample                                                   within 0.25 miles of boundaries
Boundary/Weights                                                             actual sample       high test score side*    low test score side*        t-test for         weighted sample
Observations                                            242,100                 27,958                  13,348                  14,610              difference in            27,958
                                                  (1)              (2)            (3)                     (4)                      (5)                  means                  (6)
                                                 Mean             S.D.           Mean                   Mean                     Mean              ((4) versus (5))           Mean
Housing/Neighborhood Characteristics
  monthly house price                            1,087          755              1,130                   1,158                    1,105                  5.71                   1,098
  average test score                              527            74               536                     558                      515                   50.96                   529
  1 if unit owned                                0.597         0.491             0.629                   0.632                    0.626                  1.04                   0.616
  number of rooms                                5.114         1.992             5.170                   5.207                    5.134                  3.13                   5.180
  1 if built in 1980s                            0.143         0.350             0.108                   0.118                    0.099                  5.09                   0.148
  1 if built in 1960s or 1970s                   0.391         0.488             0.424                   0.412                    0.437                  4.22                   0.406
  elevation                                       210           179               193                     194                      192                   1.14                    212
  population density                             0.434         0.497             0.352                   0.349                    0.355                  2.08                   0.374
  crime index                                    8.184         10.777            6.100                   6.000                    6.192                  2.36                   7.000
  % Census block group white                     0.681         0.232             0.704                   0.712                    0.686                  4.69                   0.676
  % Census block group black                     0.081         0.159             0.071                   0.065                    0.076                  3.01                   0.080
  % Census block group Hispanic                  0.110         0.114             0.113                   0.107                    0.119                  4.56                   0.117
  % Census block group Asian                     0.122         0.120             0.112                   0.110                    0.113                  1.12                   0.121
  % block group college degree or more           0.438         0.196             0.457                   0.463                    0.451                  2.89                   0.433
  average block group income                     54,744        26,075            57,039                 58,771                   55,457                  4.65                  55,262

Household Characteristics
  household income                               54,103        50,719            56,663                 58,041                   55,405                   4.20                 55,498
  1 if children under 18 in household            0.333         0.471             0.324                   0.322                    0.325                   0.54                  0.336
  1 if black                                     0.076         0.264             0.066                   0.062                    0.070                   2.69                  0.076
  1 if Hispanic                                  0.109         0.312             0.111                   0.102                    0.119                   4.54                  0.115
  1 if Asian                                     0.124         0.329             0.112                   0.114                    0.110                   1.06                  0.121
  1 if white                                     0.686         0.464             0.706                   0.717                    0.696                   3.86                  0.682
  1 if less than high school                     0.154         0.361             0.141                   0.134                    0.147                   3.12                  0.152
  1 if high school                               0.184         0.388             0.176                   0.177                    0.175                   0.44                  0.183
  1 if some college                              0.223         0.417             0.222                   0.222                    0.223                   0.20                  0.225
  1 if college degree                            0.291         0.454             0.294                   0.295                    0.294                   0.18                  0.286
  1 if more than college                         0.147         0.354             0.166                   0.172                    0.161                   2.46                  0.155
  age (years)                                    47.607        16.619            47.890                 48.104                   47.699                   1.99                 47.660
  1 if working                                   0.698         0.459             0.705                   0.702                    0.709                   1.28                  0.701
  distance to work (miles)                       8.843         8.597             8.450                   8.412                    8.492                   0.82                  8.490


Notes: Columns 1 and 2 report the mean and standard deviation for key variables for the full sample. Column 3 reports means for the sample of houses within 0.25 miles of a school district
boundary. Columns 4 and 5 report means on the high versus low test score side of boundaries. Column 6 provides a t-statistic for a test of whether the means reported in columns 4 and 5
are equal. Column 7 reports weighted means for the sample of houses within 0.25 miles of a school district boundary. Weights are constructed so as to make the boundary sample more
representative of the full sample and are described in the main text. In constructing columns 4 and 5, we assign each house in the full sample to the nearest school district boundary, noting
whether its local school has a higher test score than the school associated with the closest Census block on the other side of the boundary.
Table 2: Implied Mean MWTP Measures

                                                   Without Neighborhood Sociodemographics                  With Neighborhood Sociodemographics
Sample                                               full sample     within .25 mile of boundaries         full sample    within .25 mile of boundaries
Boundary Fized Effects                                    No              No              Yes                   No             No              Yes
Observations                                          242,100           27,958           27,958             242,100          27,958           27,958
                                                          (1)             (2)              (3)                  (4)            (5)              (6)

average test score (in standard deviations)            126.08           122.89            81.53               20.17            20.19            26.22
                                                       (1.96)           (5.36)            (7.72)              (1.72)           (4.77)           (6.13)
1 if unit owned                                        209.76           178.37           184.54              165.38           150.77            161.05
                                                       (3.29)           (8.99)           (11.39)             (3.19)           (8.76)            (9.24)
number of rooms                                        148.98           149.36            138.71             122.03           121.12            118.93
                                                       (1.51)           (4.24)            (5.49)             (1.48)           (4.23)            (4.40)
1 if built in 1980s                                    129.93            74.74           106.17               99.69            85.50            95.55
                                                       (3.94)           (10.87)          (14.41)              (3.79)          (10.69)          (11.84)
1 if built in 1960s or 1970s                            28.48             9.46            15.39               13.79             7.40             4.50
                                                        (2.78)           (8.03)          (10.48)              (2.67)           (7.71)           (8.51)
elevation (/100)                                        21.09            -4.82            46.46               -1.06            -18.04           12.83
                                                        (0.81)           (2.48)           (6.35)              (0.75)           (2.46)           (5.04)
population density                                     -100.43          -153.53          -133.08              19.41            41.68            30.33
                                                        (4.23)          (15.64)          (23.85)              (4.30)          (15.76)          (20.09)
crime index                                             -2.95            -2.30             1.78                0.00            -1.39             1.96
                                                        (0.18)           (0.70)           (2.20)              (0.20)           (0.81)           (1.91)
% Census block group black                                                                                   -324.67          -318.83          -267.08
                                                                                                             (10.14)          (32.15)          (39.84)
% Census block group Hispanic                                                                                 -4.42            18.06           138.95
                                                                                                             (14.35)          (46.87)          (63.13)
% Census block group Asian                                                                                   -97.39           -96.22           155.27
                                                                                                             (11.15)          (37.39)          (55.73)
% block group college degree or more                                                                         286.02           206.02           137.71
                                                                                                             (10.50)          (30.58)          (44.53)
average block group income                                                                                    87.08            96.11            87.61
                                                                                                              (1.25)           (3.86)           (4.00)
F-statistic for boundary fixed effects                                                    5.349                                                 4.162
Note: Specifications shown in the table also include controls for land use (% industrial, % residential, % commercial, % open space, % other) in 1, 2, 3, 4,
and 5 mile rings around location and six variables that characterize the housing stock in each of these rings. MWTP measures are reported in terms of a
monthly house price. Standard errors are in parentheses.
Table 3. Heterogeneity in Marginal Willingness to Pay for School Average Test Score


                                         Without Neighborhood                      With Neighborhood
                                       Sociodemographics in Model              Sociodemographics in Model

                                              One Standard Deviation Increase in Average Test Score

Mean MWTP                                           81.53                                   26.22
                                                    (7.72)                                  (6.13)

Heterogeneity in MWTP

Household Income (+$100,000)                        40.45                                   15.66
                                                    (0.28)                                  (0.35)

Children Under 18 vs.                               -11.90                                   7.10
No Children                                         (3.07)                                  (3.78)

Black vs. White                                     -93.84                                  -18.05
                                                    (5.15)                                  (7.50)

Hispanic vs. White                                  -40.75                                   -4.64
                                                    (4.64)                                  (5.80)

Asian vs. White                                      -9.08                                   5.79
                                                    (3.99)                                  (5.08)

College Degree or More vs.                          57.65                                   14.12
Some College or Less                                (3.46)                                  (4.24)

Householder Working vs.                              1.91                                    6.63
Not Working                                         (3.16)                                  (4.02)

Age (+10 years)                                      1.02                                    0.86
                                                    (0.09)                                  (0.11)

Note: The first row of the table reports the mean marginal willingness-to-pay for the change reported in the column
heading. The remaining rows report the difference in willingness to pay associated with the change listed in the row
heading, holding all other factors equal. Standard errors are in parentheses.
Table 4. Heterogeneity in Marginal Willingness to Pay for Select Housing and Neighborhood Attributes
Specification Includes Neighborhood Sociodemographic Charactersitics
                                                          House Characteristics                                                 Neighborhood Sociodemographics
                                              Own vs. Rent     +1 Room         Built in 1980s              +10% Black vs. +10% Hisp vs. +10% Asian vs. +10% College                        Blk Group
                                                                                vs. pre-1960                  White          White          White         Educated                         Avg Income
                                                                                                                                                                                            + $10,000

Mean MWTP                                         161.05               118.93          95.55                    -26.71              13.90              15.53               13.77               87.61
                                                  (9.24)               (4.40)         (11.84)                   (3.98)              (6.31)             (5.57)              (4.45)              (4.00)

Household Income (+$100,000)                      218.37               61.19          105.07                    -15.32               7.73               -0.50              26.17               15.44
                                                  (7.13)               (1.70)         (7.62)                    (3.89)              (4.13)             (2.54)              (2.18)              (1.13)

Children Under 18 vs.                             -12.87               40.06           -24.52                   10.38               15.03              12.17               -14.18               5.05
No Children                                       (6.67)               (1.80)          (7.94)                   (2.70)              (3.41)             (2.51)              (2.15)              (1.06)

Black vs. White                                    -63.55               1.56            2.95                    96.82               46.13              48.02               16.99                -0.45
                                                  (13.25)              (3.40)         (16.38)                   (3.62)              (5.75)             (4.84)              (4.40)              (2.27)

Hispanic vs. White                                 -6.44               -14.14          -8.07                    28.89               81.36              18.01                5.43                2.07
                                                  (9.53)               (2.63)         (12.00)                   (3.68)              (4.01)             (3.81)              (3.19)              (1.41)

Asian vs. White                                   113.65               -32.92          43.94                    27.74               21.95              92.49                -0.05               1.99
                                                  (8.96)               (2.27)         (10.77)                   (3.64)              (4.67)             (2.78)              (2.91)              (1.41)

College Degree or More vs.                        33.83                 4.50           42.06                     8.34                -4.16             -12.70              59.29                3.66
Some College or Less                              (7.67)               (2.05)          (9.57)                   (3.27)              (3.94)             (2.91)              (2.37)              (1.29)

Householder Working vs.                           42.72                 3.69           60.60                     -4.71               -2.17              -2.81              -12.62               3.88
Not Working                                       (7.31)               (1.94)          (8.92)                   (2.88)              (3.65)             (2.82)              (2.27)              (1.04)

Age (+10 years)                                    6.49                 0.30            -2.07                    -0.15               -0.56              -0.03               -0.12               0.11
                                                  (0.21)               (0.06)          (0.25)                   (0.08)              (0.10)             (0.08)              (0.06)              (0.03)

Note: The first row of the table reports the mean marginal willingness-to-pay for the change reported in the column heading. The remaining rows report the difference in willingness to pay associated with the
change listed in the row heading, holding all other factors equal. Standard errors are in parentheses.
Table 5 - Summary Statistics for School-Related Variables (N=708)

Variable Description                                                                                                         Mean        Std Dev

School Characteristics
   Residual Elasticity Measure                                                                                               45.53         12.37
   Average 4th grade test score                                                                                             522.27         77.62
   Proportion of teachers with 0-4 years experience                                                                          19.63         13.29
   Proportion of teachers with 5-9 years experience                                                                          14.90         10.09
   Proportion of teachers with more than 10 years experience                                                                 65.46         17.02
   Pupil teacher ratio                                                                                                       23.98          3.09
   Proportion of teachers with Max B.A. or less                                                                               9.53         12.81
   Proportion of teachers with Min M.A. or more                                                                              26.28         13.92

4th Grade School Sociodemographics
    % AFDC                                                                                                                   14.87         15.95
    % Moved in Past Year                                                                                                     16.09         10.34
    % Asian                                                                                                                  14.70         17.49
    % Black                                                                                                                  13.50         22.34
    % Hispanic                                                                                                               22.13         24.62
    % White or Other Race                                                                                                    49.66         36.79
    % Parent Educ Category 1                                                                                                 23.59         21.62
    % Parent Educ Category 2                                                                                                 20.01         11.32
    % Parent Educ Category 3                                                                                                 29.08         15.76
    % Parent Educ Category 4                                                                                                 13.59         14.52
    % Parent Educ Category 5                                                                                                  6.84         12.72
    % Parent Educ Category 6                                                                                                  2.46          5.10
    % Parent Educ Category 7                                                                                                  4.42         11.08
    % Parent Language Category 1                                                                                             72.44         21.36
    % Parent Language Category 2                                                                                             17.35         14.59
    % Parent Language Category 3                                                                                             10.23         13.48
    % Parent Language Category 4                                                                                              3.56          7.83

School Dissimilarity Indices
   avg diff btwn average income in school catchment area vs the 10 closest schools                  9677.34 11018.11
   avg diff btwn proportion of householders with higher ed in school catchment area vs the 10 closes 0.077    0.064
   avg diff btwn average number of rooms in school catchment area vs the 10 closest schools.          0.54     0.43
   avg diff btwn proportion of home owners in school catchment area vs the 10 closest schools.        0.12     0.09
   avg diff btwn average monthly housing price in school catchment area vs the 10 closest schools    204.78  238.07

Note: This table reports means and standard deviations for school-related variables summairzed for the 708 schools used in the subsequent analysis.
Table 6 - Correlation Matrix Conditional Elasticity Measure and Dissimilarity Indices

Obs=708
                                       Cond. Elasticity             D10 - Income              D10 - Education              D10 - Rooms              D10 - Ownership                 D10 - Price
Conditional Elasticity                     1.000
D10 - Income                               -0.069                        1.000
D10 - Education                            -0.086                        0.510                       1.000
D10 - Rooms                                -0.111                        0.681                       0.374                      1.000
D10 - Ownership                            -0.098                        0.427                       0.249                      0.716                       1.000
D10 - Price                                -0.138                        0.859                       0.485                      0.649                       0.393                       1.000

D10 - Income                        dissimilarity index: avg. absolute diff. between average income in school catchment area vs. the 10 closest schools.
D10 - Education                     dissimilarity index: avg. absolute diff. between % householders with higher education in school catchment area vs. the 10 closest scho
D10 - Rooms                         dissimilarity index: avg. absolute diff. between average number of rooms in school catchment area vs. the 10 closest schools.
D10 - Ownership                     dissimilarity index: avg. absolute diff. between proportion of home owners in school catchment area vs. the 10 closest schools.
D10 - Price                         dissimilarity index: avg. absolute diff. between average monthly housing price in school catchment area vs. the 10 closest schools.

Note: The conditional elasticity measure used in this table is the residual from a regression of the actual elasticity measure on the full set of sociodemographic, school, housing, and neighborhood
controls used in column 3 in Table 7. This table summarizes the correlation between this conditional elasticity measure and five dissimilarity indices that measure the average absolute difference
between the measure associated with a given school and those of the ten nearest schools.
Table 7 - Regressions of Test Score on School Elasticity Measure with Control Variables

Dependent Variable                                                                                            Average 4th Grade Test Score
St. Dev. of Dep. Var.                                                                                                    77.62

Variable                                                                              (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)              (6)

Standardized Conditional Elasticity Measure                                         12.839           8.637            9.651           10.826          11.649           11.696
(St. Dev. = 1.0)                                                                    (3.312)         (2.952)          (3.256)          (3.468)         (3.929)          (3.926)

Control Variables Included in Specification
Neighborhood Sociodemographics                                                        Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes
Housing and Neighborhood Characteristics                                              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes
School Sociodemographics                                                                              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes
Employment Access and Geographic Variables                                                                             Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes
Neighborhood Race-Education-Income Interactions                                                                                         Yes              Yes             Yes
Higher-Order House Value and Income Terms                                                                                                                Yes             Yes
Land-Use Variables                                                                                                                                                       Yes

Obs                                                                                   708             708              708              708             708              708
R2                                                                                   0.703           0.788            0.793            0.805           0.807            0.807

Note: This table reports the results of six specifications of a regression of the average 4th grade test score on the standardized elasticity measure and seven sets of control
variables. The variables included in each set of controls variables are listed in Appendix Table 4. The complete results for the specification reported in the third column are
shown in Appendix Table 5. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.
Table 8 - Regressions of School and Neighborhood Characteristics on Elasticity Measure with Control Variables



Dependent Variable                                            % Teachers                % Teachers              % Teachers              Pupil-Teacher           % Teachers w/            % Teachers w/           Avg. N'hood Capital
                                                              <5 years exp.            5-9 years exp.         >= 10 years exp.              Ratio                 Max BA                   Min MA                 Income (/10.000)
St. Dev. Dependent Variable                                       13.29                    10.09                   17.02                     3.09                  12.81                    13.92

                                                                     (1)                      (2)                      (3)                     (4)                      (5)                      (6)                         (7)

Standardized Conditional Elasticity Measure                         1.033                  -2.477                    1.444                    0.055                  -0.071                   -0.055                      -0.398
(St. Dev. = 1.0)                                                   (0.857)                 (0.853)                  (1.217)                  (0.180)                 (0.602)                  (0.721)                     (0.316)

Control Variables Included in Specification
Neighborhood Sociodemographics                                       Yes                     Yes                      Yes                      Yes                     Yes                      Yes                         Yes
Housing and Neighborhood Chars.                                      Yes                     Yes                      Yes                      Yes                     Yes                      Yes                         Yes
School Sociodemographics                                             Yes                     Yes                      Yes                      Yes                     Yes                      Yes                         Yes
Employment Access and Geographic Vars.                               Yes                     Yes                      Yes                      Yes                     Yes                      Yes                         Yes

Obs                                                                  708                     708                      708                      708                     708                      708                         708
R2                                                                  0.160                   0.186                    0.199                    0.188                   0.217                    0.293                       0.834

Note: This table reports the results of seven specifications of a regression of various school inputs and neighborhood capital income on the standardized elasticity measure and four sets of control variables. The variables included in each
set of controls variables are listed in Appendix Table 4. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.
Table 9 - Regressions of Elasticity Measure on Control Variables and Dissimilarity Measures

Dependent Variable                                                                      Standardized Conditional Elasticity Measure
St. Dev. of Dep. Var.                                                                                      1.00

                                                                                           (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)
Neighborhood Income Dissimilarity Index (/10,000)                                        -0.108                                             0.208
(St. Dev. = 1.102 )                                                                     (0.079)                                            (0.225)

House Price Dissimilarity Index (/100)                                                                    -0.100                            -0.172
(St. Dev. = 2.381 )                                                                                      (0.023)                           (0.099)

Neighborhood Education Dissimilarity Index                                                                                -1.295            -0.416
(St. Dev. = 0.064 )                                                                                                      (0.689)           (0.727)

Control Variables Included in Specification
Neighborhood Sociodemographics                                                            Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Housing and Neighborhood Characteristics                                                  Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
School Sociodemographics                                                                  Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Employment Access and Geographic Variables                                                Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes

Obs                                                                                       708              708              708              708
R2                                                                                       0.953            0.954            0.953            0.955

Note: This table reports the results of four specifications of a regression of the standardized elasticity measure on various dissimilarity indices and
four sets of control variables. The variables included in each set of controls variables are listed in Appendix Table 4. Standard errors are reported in
parentheses.
Table 10 - Regression of Test Scores on Control Variables and Dissimilarity Measures


Dependent Variable                                                                                              Average 4th Grade Test Score
St. Dev. of Dep. Var.                                                                                                       77.62

Variable                                                                                (1)              (2)             (3)               (4)             (5)              (6)

Neighborhood Income Dissimilarity Index (/10,000)                                     6.203            6.591            -3.473           -3.466
(St. Dev. = 1.102 )                                                                  (3.539)          (3.924)          (2.092)          (2.108)

House Price Dissimilarity Index (/100)                                                -3.379           -3.919                                            -9.620           -8.499
(St. Dev. = 2.381 )                                                                  (1.603)          (1.545)                                           (2.828)          (2.600)

Neighborhood Education Dissimilarity Index                                           -93.269          -77.123          -43.583          -31.262          -37.878         -26.809
(St. Dev. = 0.064 )                                                                 (35.970)         (33.277)         (26.278)         (27.135)         (24.450)        (25.405)

Control Variables Included in Specification
Neighborhood Sociodemographics                                                         Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes
Housing and Neighborhood Characteristics                                               Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes
School Sociodemographics                                                               Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes
Employment Access and Geographic Variables                                             Yes                               Yes                               Yes

Obs                                                                                    708              708              708              708             708              708
R2                                                                                    0.791            0.785            0.785            0.780           0.789            0.783

Note: This table reports the results of six specifications of a regression of the average 4th grade test score on various combinations of dissimilarity measures control variables. The
variables included in each set of controls variables are listed in Appendix Table 4. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.
Appendix Table 1: Choice-Specific Constant Regressions

                                                  Without Neighborhood Sociodemographics                    With Neighborhood Sociodemographics
Sample                                              full sample     within .25 mile of boundaries           full sample     within .25 mile of boundaries
Boundary Fized Effects                                   No              No              Yes                     No              No              Yes
Observations                                         242,100           27,958           27,958               242,100           27,958           27,958

monthly housing price (/1000)                          -10.23            -9.73            -11.34              -15.94            -15.97            -16.19
                                                       (1.39)            (1.13)           (1.36)              (1.71)            (1.56)            (1.69)
average test score (in standard deviations)             1.29              1.20              0.92               0.32              0.32              0.42
                                                       (0.02)            (0.05)            (0.01)             (0.03)            (0.08)            (0.01)
1 if unit owned                                         2.15              1.74              2.09               2.64              2.41              2.61
                                                       (0.03)            (0.09)            (0.01)             (0.05)            (0.14)            (0.01)
number of rooms                                         1.52              1.45              1.57               1.95              1.93              1.93
                                                       (0.02)            (0.04)            (0.01)             (0.02)            (0.07)            (0.01)
1 if built in 1980s                                     1.33              0.73              1.20               1.59              1.37              1.55
                                                       (0.04)            (0.11)            (0.02)             (0.06)            (0.17)            (0.02)
1 if built in 1960s or 1970s                            0.29              0.09              0.17               0.22              0.12              0.07
                                                       (0.03)            (0.08)            (0.01)             (0.04)            (0.12)            (0.01)
elevation (/100)                                        0.22             -0.05              0.53              -0.02             -0.29              0.21
                                                       (0.01)            (0.02)            (0.01)             (0.01)            (0.04)            (0.01)
population density                                     -1.03             -1.49             -1.51               0.31              0.67              0.49
                                                       (0.04)            (0.15)            (0.03)             (0.07)            (0.25)            (0.03)
crime index                                            -0.03             -0.02              0.02               0.00             -0.02              0.03
                                                       (0.00)            (0.01)            (0.00)             (0.00)            (0.01)            (0.00)
% Census block group black                                                                                    -5.18             -5.09             -4.32
                                                                                                              (0.16)            (0.51)            (0.06)
% Census block group Hispanic                                                                                 -0.07              0.29              2.25
                                                                                                              (0.23)            (0.75)            (0.10)
% Census block group Asian                                                                                    -1.55             -1.54              2.51
                                                                                                              (0.18)            (0.60)            (0.09)
% block group college degree or more                                                                           4.56              3.29              2.23
                                                                                                              (0.17)            (0.49)            (0.07)
average block group income                                                                                     1.39              1.53              1.42
                                                                                                              (0.02)            (0.06)            (0.01)
F-statistic for boundary fixed effects                                                     4.545                                                  3.963
Note: Specifications shown in the table also include controls for land use (% industrial, % residential, % commercial, % open space, % other) in 1, 2, 3, 4,
and 5 mile rings around location and six variables that characterize the housing stock in each of these
Appendix Table 2. Interaction Parameter Estimates - Model Without Neighborhood Sociodemographics

                                                                                      House Characteristics                                             Neighborhood Attributes
                                          Average               Monthly          Owner    Number of       Built in             Built in            Elevation Population Crime Index                Distance to
                                         Test Score            House Price      Occupied    Rooms           1980s             1960-1979                        Density                               Work
Household Characteristics                 (+1 s.d.)             (/1000)                                                                              (/100)
household income                            0.050                0.121            0.305           0.074          0.142           0.038               0.016      0.028       -0.001                    -0.004
(/10,000)                                  (0.004)              (0.003)          (0.010)         (0.002)        (0.011)         (0.009)             (0.001)    (0.013)     (0.001)                    (0.001)

1 if children under 18 in household        -0.190                  0.063         -0.102           0.544         -0.316           0.146                0.010        -0.740        0.015                 0.036
                                           (0.047)                (0.065)        (0.094)         (0.025)        (0.112)         (0.083)              (0.022)       (0.101)      (0.005)               (0.005)

1 if black                                 -1.395                  -0.941        -0.510           0.152          0.004           0.401               -0.062        -1.285        0.110                -0.023
                                           (0.080)                (0.127)        (0.167)         (0.044)        (0.211)         (0.144)              (0.041)       (0.159)      (0.007)               (0.011)

1 if Hispanic                              -0.642                  0.168         -0.036          -0.268         -0.180          -0.157               -0.104        -0.155        0.050                 0.014
                                           (0.072)                (0.122)        (0.130)         (0.036)        (0.164)         (0.115)              (0.040)       (0.136)      (0.007)               (0.007)

1 if Asian                                 -0.167                  0.315          1.765          -0.503          1.037           0.686               -0.015         0.941        0.030                 0.003
                                           (0.062)                (0.080)        (0.122)         (0.031)        (0.145)         (0.108)              (0.028)       (0.095)      (0.006)               (0.007)

1 if college degree or more                 0.787                  0.917         -0.032          -0.012          0.489          -0.045                0.225        -0.007        0.031                -0.006
                                           (0.053)                (0.071)        (0.108)         (0.029)        (0.135)         (0.093)              (0.024)       (0.111)      (0.006)               (0.006)

1 if working                                0.007                  0.244          0.563           0.032          0.641           0.406               -0.048        -0.437       -0.027                -0.858
                                           (0.049)                (0.067)        (0.103)         (0.027)        (0.125)         (0.086)              (0.025)       (0.097)      (0.005)               (0.008)

age (years)                                 0.015                  0.010          0.090           0.004         -0.034          -0.009                0.003        -0.006        0.001                -0.001
                                           (0.001)                (0.002)        (0.003)         (0.001)        (0.004)         (0.003)              (0.001)       (0.003)      (0.000)               (0.000)

Note: The parameters shown describe the elements of the utility function that interact household characteristics, shown in row headings, with choice characteristics, shown in column headings. Standard errors are in
parentheses.
Appendix Table 3. Interaction Parameter Estimates - Model With Neighborhood Sociodemographics

                                                                                    House Characteristics                                          Neighborhood Attributes                              Neighborhood Sociodemographics
                                          Average             Monthly          Owner    Number of       Built in            Built in          Elevation Population Crime Index             % Block     % Block     % Block % Blk Group Blk Group          Distance to
                                         Test Score          House Price      Occupied    Rooms           1980s            1960-1979                      Density                         Group Black Group Hisp Group Asian    College Avg Income           Work
Household Characteristics                 (+1 s.d.)            (/1000)                                                                          (/100)                                                                                                     (miles)
household income                            0.020               0.121           0.303          0.076           0.144          0.028             0.010      0.011       -0.001                 -0.223          0.113          -0.009    0.385     0.012      -0.004
(+10,000)                                  (0.005)             (0.004)         (0.011)        (0.003)         (0.012)        (0.009)           (0.002)    (0.017)     (0.001)                (0.060)         (0.064)        (0.039)   (0.034)   (0.002)    (0.001)

1 if children under 18 in household         0.102                0.231          -0.238         0.582           -0.399         0.095             0.051         -0.947        0.002             1.594           2.294          1.857     -2.171    0.055      0.027
                                           (0.058)              (0.075)        (0.103)        (0.028)         (0.122)        (0.092)           (0.025)       (0.127)       (0.006)           (0.416)         (0.527)        (0.387)   (0.331)   (0.016)    (0.005)

1 if black                                  -0.282               0.143          -1.006         0.002           0.027          0.577             -0.068        -1.106        0.045            14.874           7.082          7.371     2.607     -0.023     -0.010
                                           (0.116)              (0.170)        (0.205)        (0.053)         (0.253)        (0.184)           (0.052)       (0.228)       (0.009)           (0.560)         (0.888)        (0.747)   (0.680)   (0.035)    (0.013)

1 if Hispanic                               -0.077               0.204          -0.138         -0.246          -0.147         -0.248            -0.067        -0.128        0.005             4.435          12.471          2.757     0.830     0.011      0.012
                                           (0.089)              (0.139)        (0.147)        (0.041)         (0.185)        (0.131)           (0.045)       (0.169)       (0.008)           (0.568)         (0.620)        (0.587)   (0.492)   (0.022)    (0.008)

1 if Asian                                  0.072                0.558          1.633          -0.571          0.612          0.457             -0.006        -0.053        0.006             4.236           3.330         14.060     -0.016    -0.022     0.012
                                           (0.078)              (0.095)        (0.138)        (0.035)         (0.166)        (0.123)           (0.033)       (0.132)       (0.007)           (0.562)         (0.721)        (0.429)   (0.449)   (0.022)    (0.007)

1 if college degree or more                 0.200                0.501          0.428          0.006           0.588          0.106             0.031         0.486         0.022             1.279           -0.638         -1.935    8.986     0.009      0.009
                                           (0.065)              (0.079)        (0.118)        (0.032)         (0.148)        (0.101)           (0.027)       (0.134)       (0.007)           (0.504)         (0.607)        (0.450)   (0.366)   (0.020)    (0.007)

1 if working                                0.093                0.272          0.604          0.021           0.897          0.425             0.023         -0.515        -0.019            -0.712          -0.335         -0.434    -1.931    0.033      -0.896
                                           (0.062)              (0.074)        (0.113)        (0.030)         (0.138)        (0.096)           (0.028)       (0.125)       (0.007)           (0.444)         (0.563)        (0.436)   (0.350)   (0.016)    (0.009)

age (years)                                 0.013                0.011          0.097          0.003           -0.033         -0.010            0.003         -0.011        0.001             -0.022          -0.085         -0.005    -0.018    0.001      -0.001
                                           (0.002)              (0.002)        (0.003)        (0.001)         (0.004)        (0.003)           (0.001)       (0.003)       (0.000)           (0.013)         (0.016)        (0.013)   (0.010)   (0.001)    (0.000)

Note: The parameters shown describe the elements of the utility function that interact household characteristics, shown in row headings, with choice characteristics, shown in column headings. Standard errors are in parentheses.
Appendix Table 4 - List of Variables Included in Each Set of Controls

Neighborhood Sociodemographics                                                            Neighborhood Race-dEucation-Income Interactions
percent black in catchment area                                                           percent asian*average income in catchment area
percent asian in catchment area                                                           percent black*average income in catchment area
percent hispanic in catchment area                                                        percent hispanic*average income in catchment area
percent of householders with higher education                                             percent asian*proportion high school graduates in catchment area
average household income in catchment area                                                percent asian*proportion with some college in catchment area
average age in catchment area                                                             percent asian*proportion with college degree
proportion of households with children under 18 in catchment area                         percent asian*proportion with advanced degree
proportion of householders who do not work in catchment area                              percent black*proportion high school graduates in catchment area
                                                                                          percent black*proportion with some college in catchment area
Housing and Neighborhood Characteristics                                                  percent black*proportion with college degree
average monthly house price in catchment area                                             percent black*proportion with advanced degree
proportion of homeowners in catchment area                                                percent hispanic*proportion high school graduates in catchment area
average number of rooms in psuedo-catchment area                                          percent hispanic*proportion with some college in catchment area
crime index in catchment area                                                             percent hispanic*proportion with college degree
proportion of houses built in the 1980's in catchment area                                percent hispanic*proportion with advanced degree
proportion of houses built in the 1960's & 70's in catchment area
population density in catchment area                                                      Higher-Order House Price and Income Terms
                                                                                          average house price squared
School Sociodemographics                                                                  average household income squared
percent 4th grade AFDC                                                                    average household income cubed
percent 4th grade moved in past year                                                      average household income to the fourth power
percent of asian students in grade 4
percent of black students in grade 4                                                      Land Use Variables
percent of hispanic students in grade 4                                                   proportion of industrial land use in 1 mile radius
percent of white students in grade 4                                                      proportion of commercial land use in 1 mile radius
Seven grade 4 parental education categories                                               proportion of other urban land in 1 mile radius
Four grade 4 parental language categories                                                 proportion of open space in 1 mile radius

Employment Access and Geographic Variables
employment accessibility index for high school dropouts
employment accessibility index for high school graduates
employment accessibility index for those with some college
employment accessibility index for college graduates
employment accessibility index for those with an advanced degree
school latitude
school longitude
school latitude squared
school longitude squared


Note: This table lists the control variables included in each set of controls used in the analysis reported in Tables 7-10.
Appendix Table 5 - Regressions of Test Score on School Elasticity Measure with Control Variables

Dependent Variable                                                                                     Average School Test Score
St. Dev. of Dep. Var.                                                                                           77.62

Variable                                                                                         f Coefficient             Std Error

standardized conditional elasticity measure                                                                9.651          3.256
percent black in catchment area                                                                           49.696         43.234
percent asian in catchment area                                                                          -50.009         32.223
percent hispanic in catchment area                                                                        34.204         42.690
percent of householders with higher education in catchment area                                           19.461         40.046
average income in catchment area                                                                           0.000          0.000
average age of catchment area                                                                              0.936          1.313
proportion of households with children under 18 in catchment area                                         77.380         32.513
proportion of householders who do not work in catchment area                                               8.275         63.310
average monthly house price in catchment area                                                              0.003          0.019
proportion of homeowners in catchment area                                                               -30.637         25.717
average number of rooms in catchment area                                                                -14.155          7.093
crime index in catchment area                                                                              0.062          0.636
proportion of houses built in the 1980's in catchment area                                               -17.401         14.452
proportion of houses built in the 1960's & 70's in catchment area                                         -3.915         11.689
population density in catchment area                                                                      -3.928         10.449
c4pafdc                                                                                                   -0.544          0.248
c4pmobil                                                                                                  -0.423          0.176
percent of asian students in grade 4                                                                       0.372          0.124
percent of black students in grade 4                                                                      -0.331          0.214
percent of hispanic students in grade 4                                                                   -0.361          0.101
percent of white students in grade 4                                                                       0.320          0.106
percent grade 4 parental education category 1                                                              1.237          1.826
percent grade 4 parental education category 2                                                              1.103          1.794
percent grade 4 parental education category 3                                                              0.452          1.824
percent grade 4 parental education category 4                                                              0.380          1.866
percent grade 4 parental education category 5                                                              0.025          1.804
percent grade 4 parental education category 6                                                             -0.149          1.961
percent grade 4 parental education category 7                                                              0.796          1.875
percent grade 4 parental language category 1                                                              -4.281          3.397
percent grade 4 parental language category 2                                                              -4.057          3.432
percent grade 4 parental language category 3                                                              -4.496          3.437
percent grade 4 parental language category 4                                                               0.198          0.195
employment accessibility index for high school dropouts                                                   -0.049          0.014
employment accessibility index for high school graduates                                                   0.015          0.017
employment accessibility index for those with some college                                                 0.007          0.022
employment accessibility index for college graduates                                                       0.000          0.013
employment accessibility index for those with an advanced degree                                           0.009          0.016
school latitude                                                                                        -1025.008        3331.935
school longitude                                                                                        5781.304       24468.960
school latitude squared                                                                                   13.305         44.360
school longitude squared                                                                                  11.841         50.081

Obs                                                                                                                 708
R2                                                                                                                 0.793

Note: This table reports the full specification corresponding to that report in column 3 of Table 7.
