                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             SEARCHING FOR BETTER PROSPECTS:
                             ENDOGENIZING FALLING JOB TENURE
                              AND PRIVATE PENSION COVERAGE

                                            Leora Friedberg
                                           Michael T. Owyang
                                            Tara M. Sinclair

                                          Working Paper 11808
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11808


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2005




The authors wish to thank Marcus Berliant, Rob Dittmar, Richard Johnson, Éva Nagypál, Stan Panis, Garey
Ramey, John Stevens, Jay Stewart, seminar participants at Washington University, and participants at the
North American Summer Meeting of the Econometrics Society and the American Economic Association
annual meetings for helpful comments. Abbigail J. Chiodo and Kristie M. Engemann provided excellent
research assistance. The views in this paper are the authors.alone and do not re.ect the views of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Saint Louis or the Federal Reserve System. All remaining errors are our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2005 by Leora Friedberg, Michael T. Owyang, and Tara M. Sinclair. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Searching for Better Prospects: Endogenizing Falling Job Tenure and Private Pension Coverage
Leora Friedberg, Michael T. Owyang, and Tara M. Sinclair
NBER Working Paper No. 11808
December 2005
JEL No.E24, J32, J41, J63, J64

                                           ABSTRACT

Recent declines in job tenure have coincided with a shift away from traditional defined benefit (DB)
pensions, which reward long tenure. Recent evidence also points to an increase in job-to-job
movements by workers, and we document gains in relative wages of job-to-job movers over a similar
period. We develop a search model in which firms may offer tenure-based contracts like DB
pensions to reduce the incidence of costly on-the-job search by workers. Reduced search costs can,
under fairly general conditions, lower the value of deterring search and the use of DB pensions.

Leora Friedberg
University of Virginia
Department of Economics
P.O. Box 400182
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182
and NBER
lfriedberg@virginia.edu

Michael T. Owyang
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Saint Louis
P.O. Box 442
St. Louis, MO 63166
michael.t.owyang@stls.frb.org

Tara M. Sinclair
Economics Department
George Washington University
1922 F Street, NW
Old Main, Suite 208
Washington, DC 20052
tsinc@gwu.edu
1    Introduction

Workers in the United States have experienced signi…cant changes in both job tenure and the

structure of employer-provided pensions over the past twenty years.      Traditional de…ned bene…t

(DB) pensions, which reward long tenure, have become steadily less common, while both actual

and expected job tenure have fallen over the same period.        The link between job tenure and

pension trends has not been closely examined but o¤ers insights about both phenomena.           This

paper investigates how on-the-job (OTJ) search by workers provides a motive for the use of deferred

compensation and how that motive may have changed over time.

    Spurred by evidence of a long-term increase in job-to-job mobility (Stewart [41]), we show that

these increased job-to-job ‡ows have been associated with rising relative wages.      We develop a

model in which workers may search for new, more productive matches while on the job.          A key

feature of the model is that both OTJ search and the resulting quits are costly to the …rm. We

show conditions under which the …rm, to avoid this loss, might o¤er a contract that dissuades

workers from searching. The contract takes the form of delayed compensation that is conditioned

on the worker not quitting. These contracts look much like DB pensions.          In a recent paper,

Friedberg and Owyang [13] (hereafter FO) argued that the value of long-term jobs has fallen,

which has reduced expected job tenure and thus undermined the e¤ectiveness of DB pensions at

deterring moral hazard. This paper pursues a related line of research, incorporating a more realistic

representation of job search and thus highlighting another change in the nature of long-term jobs.

    In this framework, an increase in the gains from OTJ search caused by, for example, lower

search costs, results in more search, more quits, and consequently shorter job tenure, all of which

undermines the incentive to o¤er pensions. Although a decline in search costs has a theoretically

ambiguous e¤ect on relative wages of job-to-job movers in our model, our evidence that their

relative wages have improved in recent years bolsters the premise that OTJ search has grown more

rewarding. We emphasize an endogenous shift in the use of pensions in this paper, as opposed to

exogenous changes resulting from new government regulations that have been highlighted in the

pension literature. Also, in contrast to FO where the decline in job tenure and DB pension use

results from an increase in endogenous match destruction, we consider the role played by increased

voluntary worker ‡ows, which are involuntary to the …rm.


                                                 2
    This paper draws on research in several areas.                 The model is motivated by the empirical

importance job-to-job ‡ows by workers and the role they play in explaining the decline in job

tenure.    The paper also builds on an emerging literature that documents a variety of evidence

about reduced search costs.           Anecdotal reports suggest that search costs have dropped, most

recently as use of the internet has expanded and over a longer period due to structural shifts in

the economy, some of them associated with thicker local labor markets.1 In the search literature,

a reduction in search frictions is generally predicted to increase the productivity range over which

agents search, thus raising job-to-job ‡ows (Pissarides [34]) and reducing average job tenure.2 The

greater incentive to search diminishes the e¤ectiveness of pensions in deterring search –thus linking

recent trends in job tenure and pension structure.3

    This paper also extends the literature focusing on DB pensions as incentive contracts, building

on work by Lazear [25]. Notably, this paper complements other recent work incorporating tenure-

based contracts that deter OTJ search (Burdett and Coles [5], Stevens [39]). The essential similarity

of those two papers and ours is that a worker in a job may choose not to seek outside o¤ers if the

…rm o¤ers a rich enough incentive, for example by tying compensation to tenure, even though

productivity need not rise with tenure.             The papers di¤er in the details of search and match

formation, which determine the particular costs and bene…ts of search. Both Stevens and Burdett

and Coles assumed that …rms post wages for jobs in which productivity is known in advance and

workers choose among jobs o¤ering di¤ering starting points on the tenure-based wage pro…le. Job

o¤ers arrive costlessly, but workers are less likely to quit the higher they are on the wage pro…le.

Firms face a tension between starting workers at a lower point on the wage pro…le and raising

current pro…ts, or at a higher point and raising retention rates and future pro…ts.4 In Stevens,

…rms post not a wage but a contract taking the form that all pay is deferred until a date T agreed
   1
     For example, local labor markets are changing so that workers with given skills seem to have more …rms to match
with in a particular location. This is a consequence of trends like the shift into services and out of manufacturing,
in which …rms tend to be local monopsonists; of rising urbanization and resulting agglomeration economies, either
within or across industries [16]; and of reductions in communication and transportation costs, which increase the gain
to decentralizing production (Gersbach and Schmutzler [15]).
   2
     If the matching function exhibits increasing returns to scale (Sato [36] reported evidence of this), then develop-
ments like these will have a magni…ed e¤ect in raising matching e¢ ciency and hence the gains to search.
   3
     This emphasis complements recent papers that explore conditions under which reductions in search frictions
undermine long-term relationships (Ramey and Watson [35], McLaren and Newman [27], Matouschek, Ramezzana,
and Robert-Nicoud [26]).
   4
     The starting point on the wage pro…le is heterogeneous across …rms since they di¤er by size (as they can hire
more than one worker) and by productivity (in Stevens).



                                                          3
to at the outset. In Burdett and Coles, workers are risk-averse, so …rms o¤er a contract with rising

wages.

      In comparison, our model simpli…es some aspects of job markets in order to expand on others.

Instead of posted contracts for jobs with known productivity, we assume bargaining after risk-

neutral agents meet and get a permanent productivity draw. That draw determines whether the

worker accepts the match and, in addition, a pension contract to forgo OTJ search. In our case,

search is costly, which explains why (as in the real world) only some and not all workers search

OTJ. We also assume that a …rm cannot post a vacancy while a worker occupies the job, and that

a …rm faces uncertainty in the value of future matches. The resulting costs of search borne by …rms

motivate the …rms to discourage workers from searching. Compared to the papers by Burdett and

Coles and by Stevens, we o¤er a more stylized contract. The contract consists of wages determined

by Nash bargaining, together with a lump-sum paid out to the worker in the event that a match

ends exogenously but forfeited if the worker quits.5

      Besides incorporating asymmetries in the costs and bene…ts of search, another key contribution

that we make is the analysis of changes in the economic environment that undermine tenure-based

contracts. While the papers by Burdett and Coles and by Stevens concentrate on proving the

existence of the tenure-based contract in the steady state, we emphasize the fragility of the contract

in response to plausible changes in the economic environment. Our hypothesis of an endogenous

motive for the shift in pension structure also contrasts with the pension literature that focuses on

exogenous changes in federal regulations. The shift in emphasis here suggests the possibility that

regulatory changes responded to an underlying increase in the gains to worker mobility.

      The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we discuss trends in private pension coverage,

job tenure, job-to-job ‡ows, and job search costs. We also present evidence that wages of people

moving job-to-job rose over time, relative to wages of both people staying in the same job and

people starting a new job after a spell of unemployment. In Section 3, we present the baseline

model with OTJ search. In Section 4, we introduce the pension contract which may prevent OTJ

search. In Section 5, we show how a reduction in the cost of OTJ search may reduce the value of

a job and hence render the pension contract. Section 6 concludes.
  5
      We prove that such a contract are feasible, while the other papers proved that the contracts are optimal.




                                                           4
2     Background on Worker Mobility and Pensions

In this section, we discuss trends in job tenure and private pensions.            We then present evidence

developed by others about the incidence of on-the-job search and job-to-job ‡ows, which are im-

portant in magnitude, and about trends in search, job-to-job ‡ows. Lastly, we present data that

we have constructed analyzing wage changes associated with job-to-job ‡ows.


2.1    Trends in job tenure

Over the last 20 years, both actual and expected job tenure have fallen. Expected tenure data are

noisier than actual tenure data but show a greater decline. Average current tenure of male full-time

employees in the Survey of Consumer Finances fell from 9.7 in 1983 to 8.8 years in 1998, while

expected remaining tenure fell from 18.6 in 1983 and 16.2 in 1989 to 14.7 in 1998.6 Changes in job

tenure among women re‡ect a combination of cohort-speci…c increases in labor force attachment and

secular declines in job tenure. Average current tenure of female full-time employees rose from 7.4

years in 1983 to 8.1 years in 1992 and then fell back to 7.3 in 1998, while expected remaining tenure

fell from 15.9 in 1983 to 12.5 in 1989, rose to 14.4 in 1992, and then fell to 12.8 in 1998.7 Adding

together current and expected remaining tenure yields subjective estimates of total expected job

duration. For men, total expected tenure fell from 27.3 years in 1983 to 24.6 years in 1989 and

23.0 years in 1998, a 15.5% decline between 1983 and 1998 and a 6.3% decline between 1989 and

1998. For women, expected tenure fell by 12.9% between 1983 and 1998 and by 10.3% between

1992 and 1998.

    A decline in expected remaining job tenure may indicate either a greater willingness to change

jobs or a greater fear of involuntary job loss. We do not have evidence about whether the rate of

voluntary quits has risen. However, Farber [11] noted that the decline in job tenure in the CPS

was not matched by an increase in layo¤s, indicating that increases in mobility are to some extent

voluntary. In any case, a perceived increase in the risk of involuntary job loss should induce more
   6
     See FO for more details. Since the mid-1990s, researchers have found mounting evidence of a decline in male
job tenure in the Current Population Survey (Neumark, Polsky, and Hansen [31]; Bureau of Labor Statistics [6]),
the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (Jaeger and Stevens [20]), and the National Longitudinal Surveys (Bernhardt,
et. al., [3]), although not the Survey of Income and Program Participation (Gottschalk and Mo¢ tt [17]). Other
researchers have not investigated data on expected tenure.
   7
     The wording and organization of questions regarding future work plans was di¤erent enough that the 1983 SCF
may not be comparable to later years.



                                                       5
on-the-job search as well.


2.2      The structure of private pensions

At any given time, over half of all full-time workers in the U.S. have pension coverage in their

current job, and a greater number have been in a job with a pension at some point.8 Fundamental

di¤erences in the structure of pension plans a¤ect the incentive to stay in a particular job. DB

plans discourage mobility for many years after a worker starts a job, while DC plans are largely

tenure-neutral. The path of pension wealth accrual in a typical DB plan is characterized by sharp

spikes, as in Figure 1.9 Allen, Clark, and McDermed [2] estimated that the pension loss associated

with switching jobs for the average worker with a DB plan aged 35-54 was approximately half a

year’s earnings. The smooth path of DC pension wealth accruals, which consist of contributions

to an account and accumulated returns, as shown in Figure 1, stands in stark contrast.

       Workers have experienced a major shift in pension coverage in the last twenty years. Among

full-time employees with a pension in the SCF, 69% had a DB plan and 45% had a DC plan in

1983, while 40% had a DB plan and 80% had a DC plan in 1998 (some have both types).                               FO

demonstrated that workers with DB pensions have longer current and expected total job tenure than

workers with DC pensions or no pensions, and that the same workers are generally experiencing

declines in tenure and in DB pension coverage.

       In a series of papers summarized in [25], Lazear developed models in which employers structure

compensation to deter shirking by workers whose e¤ort cannot be observed perfectly.                           A DB

pension, whose value rises with job tenure, motivates e¤ort by workers who do not want to get …red

and lose their “bond.” Early models of pensions, however, did not typically incorporate uncertainty

about job duration, nor make explicit the nature of the worker’s outside option. FO incorporated

moral hazard in a matching model which clari…es the value of tenure-based contracts, while this

paper allows workers in jobs to seek new opportunities as well, which provides another motive for

pension contracts.
   8
     The rate of pension coverage in the current job among full-time employees declined a little from 67% in the 1983
SCF to 58% in 1998.
   9
     Pension wealth in year t is the actuarially discounted real present value of expected pension bene…ts if the job
ends at year t. Pension wealth accrual is the discounted change in pension wealth if the worker stays another year and
then leaves. Figure 1 shows pension wealth accrual in two plans from the Health and Retirement Study (Friedberg
and Webb [14]).



                                                          6
       Recent research on private pensions has focused on changes in federal pension regulations.

Regulatory changes have enhanced DB funding provisions and DC tax incentives and placed limits

on the structure of DB and DC plans. FO discussed a variety of reasons why regulatory changes

do not appear to fully explain the shift in pension structure. For example, pension structure has

not changed uniformly in all jobs; instead, workers have moved over time from jobs that typically

o¤er DB plans to jobs that typically o¤er DC plans (Clark and MacDermed [7], Gustman and

Steinmeier [18], Kruse [23], Ippolito [19], Papke [32]). Also, inequality in pension coverage by skill

group has increased, mirroring trends in earnings inequality that have been attributed to structural

changes in the economy (Bloom and Freeman [4], Even and Macpherson [9]).


2.3      Existing research on worker mobility

Data limitations severely hamper the measurement of job-to-job ‡ows, on-the-job search, and search

costs. Nevertheless, U.S. data that has become available since the mid-1990s o¤er several pieces

of relevant evidence. First, job-to-job moves are relatively frequent. Second, on-the-job search is

common. Third, search costs appear to be declining, as, for example, internet use has expanded.


2.3.1      Job-to-job ‡ows

In 1994, the Current Population Survey (CPS) started to ask people whether they were still working

for the same employer as they had been a month earlier, which provided a much more accurate view

of job-to-job ‡ows than was available before. Fallick and Fleischman [10] computed employment-to-

employment ‡ows in the 1994-2003 CPS. They found that an average of 2.6% of employed workers

changed employers each month, accounting for almost 40% of both job separations and new job

starts –a major share of all labor market ‡ows.10 It remains di¢ cult at this point to distinguish

between cyclical characteristics and secular trends in the data, however. The magnitude of job-to-

job ‡ows dipped from 1994 to 1996 and rose slowly from 1996 to 2000, then fell considerably from

2000 to 2003 during a time of labor market weakness.

       Stewart [41],[42] recently developed a much longer series, though with a smaller sample size,
  10
    It should be kept in mind that this method will underestimate job-to-job ‡ows. The CPS follows residents of
the same address from month to month, rather than following the same individuals, so it misses job changes that
involve a change of residence.




                                                      7
based on retrospective data from March CPSs.11 Stewart [41] documented a substantial increase in

job-to-job ‡ows (de…ned as occurring with two or fewer weeks of unemployment) from 1975 to 2000

of 59%. This was matched by a decline in job-to-unemployment ‡ows, suggesting that workers are

increasingly better at searching while on-the-job. While the series rose and then fell during the

1970s to roughly the same level in 1982, it then increased steadily afterwards, save for a dip during

the economic downturn of 1989 to 1991.


2.3.2      On-the-job search

In February 1995, 1997, and 1999, the CPS asked questions designed to elicit information about on-

the-job search by workers. Meisenheimer and Ilg [28] tabulated data on active search by employed

wage-and-salary workers.12 They found that, in February 1999, 4.5% had actively looked for a new

job within the previous three months.13 Fallick and Fleischman [10] linked information on search

in February 1997 and 1999 with job-to-job ‡ows a month later and concluded that those who had

actively searched for a job in the three months prior to February were much more likely to have

changed jobs (11.3% versus 2.1% for non-searchers) by March. Thus, on-the-job search is followed

by job changes.

       Nevertheless, it appears that traditional survey methods do not capture all forms of job search.

Only about 1/5 of those who had moved from one job to another in March had actively looked for

a job earlier, according to Fallick and Fleischman. A similarly low rate (about 1/3) of those who

had started a new job in March after being out of work in February were classi…ed in February as

unemployed, i.e. actively searching for a job. There may be a few explanations for the apparent

low rate of active job search among those subsequently starting new jobs: contacts initiated by

potential employers may not be reported as active search; active search may have only taken place

a few weeks immediately prior to starting a new job; and some new jobs resulting from active job

search are associated with residential moves and thus not followed in the CPS.
  11
     Fallick and Fleischman discussed the drawbacks of other attempts to use the CPS to develop longer series of
worker ‡ows. Kamborouv and Manovskii [21] noted the di¢ culty of identifying occupational mobility using Stewart’s
method, arising because of high rates of error in occupational coding. We are not directly concerned with occupational
mobility, though.
  12
     Active job search involves contacting an employer, employment agency, school employment center, or acquain-
tances about a job; sending out resumes; …lling out applications; checking union or professional registers; or placing
or answering ads. Passive job search involves reading the want-ads or attending a job training program.
  13
     The incidence of on-the-job search declined between 1995, when it was 5.6%, and 1999. It is, again, impossible
to distinguish between cyclical and secular shifts in behavior with a short series.


                                                          8
2.3.3   Search costs and the internet

While we have no data on long-term trends in search costs, many researchers have focused on the

reduced cost of conveying information brought about by the expansion of the internet since the

early 1990s.   The incidence of internet search is high.   In the December 1998 CPS, Kuhn and

Skuterud [24] found that 7.1% of people with jobs, 15.9% of people with jobs and with internet

access at home, and half of the unemployed with internet access at home used the internet for job

search. The rate of internet search by those with jobs exceeds earlier estimates of on-the-job search

using all other methods, as we noted above (Meisenheimer and Ilg [28]).

   Moreover, there is growing evidence of an impact on labor markets. It is many times cheaper

for …rms to post vacancy announcements on the internet than in newspapers (Autor [1]), and

almost all major employers now accept online job applications (Freeman [12]).         These changes

may have subtler e¤ects too; heterogeneity in the way jobseekers use the internet may explain

simultaneous claims that individuals who use the internet are positively selected on unobservable

qualities (according to internet search …rms cited in Kuhn and Skuterud [24]) or negatively selected

(a belief commonly held by employers, according to Autor).        Meanwhile, Autor suggested that

employers are increasingly using the internet to target employed “passive candidates”; activity of

this type would help explain the increase in job-to-job ‡ows together with the relatively low rate

of job search reported by job movers.

   Two recent papers attempted to estimate the causal e¤ect of internet search on labor market

outcomes, but they were limited by the scope of the available data as well as the identi…cation

strategies. Kuhn and Skuterud [24] focused on the unemployed. They found that, after controlling

for observable di¤erences correlated with both internet use and shorter unemployment durations

(like education and previous occupation), the unemployed who used the internet for job search were

neither more nor less likely to be employed a year later than other unemployed. Estimates that

attempted to control for unobservable di¤erences suggested that those who used the internet may

have been less likely to be employed a year later.

   Stevenson [40] documented some of the consequences of internet job search using an instrumental

variable strategy. She focused on average internet penetration rates across U.S. states and found,

after instrumenting, several positive and statistically signi…cant relationships.     In states with



                                                 9
higher internet penetration, the unemployed used a greater number of types of search activities;

employment-to-employment ‡ows among more skilled workers rose; and interstate mobility rates of

younger and more skilled individuals rose –all evidence that the internet facilitates job search. As

Stevenson remarked, this is clearly an area that awaits further investigation in order to understand

how to match theoretical concepts of job search with those that can be observed and measured.


2.4      New evidence on wages and job-to-job ‡ows

Earlier, we discussed the new method developed by Stewart [41] that allows for a long-term investi-

gation of job-to-job ‡ows. We have extended his method to study wages associated with job-to-job

‡ows from 1983-2001.        While we cannot examine wage changes directly, we can compare hourly

wages in a given March CPS for two groups of workers who have been continuously employed for

the last 14.5 months –those who experienced a job-to-job ‡ow relative to those who stayed in the

same job continuously.14       We make this comparison by running a regression in each year’s sam-

ple, putting log hourly earnings on the left-hand side and an indicator variable on the right-hand

side for people experiencing a job-to-job ‡ow within the last year, along with controls for gender,

education, age, and race.15

       Our results are shown in Figures 2 and 3. The hourly wage of people in the CPS who experienced

a job-to-job ‡ow is lower throughout than the hourly wage of people staying in the same job

continuously. However, Figure 2 shows a major, steady, and statistically signi…cant decline in this

relative wage gap in the 1990s, with the gap closing from -17.6% in 1992 at the end of a recession

to -3.0% in 2001. Because job-to-job ‡ows are cyclical, we went further by regressing this relative

wage gap for job changers on the contemporaneous unemployment rate, with the resulting residual

shown in the heavy lower line in Figure 3. Except when this cyclically-adjusted relative wage gap

experienced a dip during the 1990 recession, it otherwise shrank steadily during both the 1980s

(from -15.7% in 1983 to -11.6% in 1990) and the 1990s (from -13.6% in 1993 to -10.4% in 2001),
  14
     We focus on almost the same sample as Stewart, as described in the Figure 2 notes. We limit our focus to the
CPS outgoing rotation groups, who reported data on current hourly earnings. Our resulting sample is roughly 1/4
of the total available and ranges from 7,000-9,000 per year. While we could try computing wage changes by getting
hourly earnings data for the same people a year earlier, this would involve matching across CPSs and incurring
substantial attrition that is probably correlated with job changes.
  15
     These demographic controls account for changes in wages due to changes in the composition of the labor force.
The results were virtually the same when we allowed the coe¢ cients on the demographics to change from year to
year; we report results when the covariates are held constant over the sample period. The coe¢ cient on the relative
wage of job-to-job movers is statistically signi…cant every year, based on Huber-White standard errors.


                                                        10
declining by one-third overall.

         The CPS cannot be used to make a further comparison with people who changed jobs but

experienced an intervening spell of unemployment. Instead, we identify those who were in a job

in March and experienced any unemployment spell within the previous 14.5 months.16                      Then,

we compare current wages for those experiencing a job-to-job ‡ow with those experiencing some

kind of unemployment-to-job ‡ow (without knowing whether the period began with a job or not).

We …nd that the job-to-job movers experienced relative wage gains on this front as well.                  The

lighter line near the top of Figure 3 shows the di¤erence between residual wages, after controlling

for demographics and then business cycle e¤ects as above, of unemployment-to-job movers and of

job-to-job movers. The relative wage gap for the unemployment-to-job movers rose from -4.2% in

1983 to -7.7% in 2001, relative to the job-to-job movers.

         To sum up, we …nd that job-to-job movers experienced relative wage gains over the same period

in which job-to-job ‡ows rose and DB pension use declined. The wage gap among those who moved

job-to-job within the previous 14.5 months narrowed signi…cantly and substantially, compared to

those staying in a job continuously. Moreover, the wage gap compared to those in a job but with

an unemployment spell in the previous 14.5 months widened signi…cantly.



3         The Model

Spurred by evidence of a long-term increase in job-to-job ‡ows and of gains in relative wages of job-

to-job movers, we develop a model in which workers may search for new, more productive matches

while on the job. The framework we employ here is based on stochastic job matching models with

incomplete contracting.17 Our contribution is to incorporate ‡ows to new jobs out of employment

as well as unemployment.

         Deterring OTJ search o¤ers a motive to defer compensation when …rms cannot directly con-

tract to prevent quits, although the willingness of agents to commit to long-term contracts depends

crucially on the degree of uncertainty –hence the importance of assuming stochastic match draws.
    16
     The problem is that we cannot distinguish those who began the period in a job, became unemployed, and then
got a new job versus those who were unemployed at the outset and then got a job. These two groups are probably
somewhat heterogeneous.
  17
     The stochastic job matching framework builds on den Haan, Ramey, and Watson [8]. Few other models combine
OTJ search and match-speci…c productivity. Our model of OTJ search is based on Mortensen [29] and Pissarides
[33] and [34].


                                                      11
Because we are speci…cally interested in this compensation, we will focus almost exclusively on cur-

rently employed workers (rather than the unemployed) as we discuss the model. After developing

the model, we show how an increase in the expected gains from OTJ search undermine the pension

contracts.


3.1      Basic framework

The matching market.         A unit mass of risk-neutral workers and a continuum of …rms search in

the labor market during a given period and match with probability .18 Workers searching in the

labor market may be either employed (E) or unemployed (U). Workers searching while employed

incur a search cost c (Y ), which is manifested as a reduction in output and increases with match

productivity.      Firms, however, cannot search for a worker unless the position is vacant.                   This

assumption prevents the …rm from …ring a worker if it were to …nd a more productive one.                          A

newly matched worker and …rm receive a productivity draw Y , which is drawn from a cumulative

distribution function F (y) that is homogeneous for all new matches. They either commence pro-

duction if the productivity draw exceeds a reservation value or re-enter the market to seek a new

match next period.

       Separation and Search.       Unlike some related models (see FO), we assume that a match’s

productivity stays …xed after it is initially drawn. We impose the alternative simplifying assumption

of exogenous layo¤s in order to preserve our focus on quits. Thus, matches end because of one of

the following:


         (Involuntary) Layo¤ . At the beginning of the period, an exogenous shock arrives with prob-

         ability , independent of current match-speci…c productivity. Layo¤ shocks are idiosyncratic

         and generate the worker ‡ow to unemployment.

         (Voluntary) Quit. If a worker searches OTJ and matches with a new …rm, the pair draws

         a new level of productivity Y 0 . If the new draw exceeds the worker’s reservation productiv-

         ity, the new match is established and the old one destroyed.              Otherwise, the old match is

         preserved, and the worker and old …rm continue to produce Y , less the cost of search c(Y ) > 0.
  18
    For simplicity, we assume that the match probability is …xed, instead of allowing it to vary with the vacancy and
unemployment rate. Thus, we ignore potential decreasing (increasing) returns to scale in the matching function,
which would mitigate (magnify) the e¤ects of an exogenous increase in the gains from search.


                                                         12
       If a layo¤ occurs, the worker returns to unemployment and receives the outside option bw

representing unemployment bene…ts, home production, or leisure, while the …rm receives the outside

option bf and opens a vacancy.          In the event of a quit, the worker goes to the new job and the

…rm again receives bf outside option and opens a vacancy. This leads to an asymmetry when the

worker …nds a better match: the …rm is indi¤erent as to the cause of separation but the worker is

better o¤ with a quit than a layo¤.19

       Division of Output.    Workers and …rms bargain over the surplus of the match which is net

of search costs, with shares determined by bargaining weights. Thus, the worker receives a share

of current productivity (Y ) < Y if there is no search or (Y                 c(Y )) < Y       c(Y ) if the worker

searches OTJ. This leads to an additional asymmetry –the …rm bears part of the costs of search

but enjoys none of its bene…ts.20

       Output is allocated via the function (Y ), determined by Nash bargaining.21 The Nash bar-

gaining solution maximizes the weighted product of the worker’s and …rm’s net surplus from the

job match, where a higher value of , the worker’s bargaining weight, raises (Y ). Thus, the value

of the match for each agent is determined by the split of current productivity (Y ).22 The total

value of the match depends on both current output and the expected discounted stream of future

production.


3.2      The value of jobs

The productivity distribution can be divided into three regions. For a productivity draw Y above

a threshold Y > R, an unemployed worker will accept the job. If the draw exceeds some higher

threshold Y > R > R, the worker will not search after accepting the job.                    In the intermediate

range R > Y > R, the worker will search after accepting the job and accepts any new o¤er with a

draw exceeding her reservation productivity, determined as follows.
  19
     We assume that the …rm cannot write a contract conditioned on the worker not searching.
  20
     Search is thus viewed as a substitute for e¤ort at work. While the resulting moral hazard adds to the asymmetry
in the costs and bene…ts of OTJ search, this assumption does not change the qualitative results. In principle, we
could impose some intermediate assumption about leisure-time search.
  21
     We assume that the worker’s surplus is the di¤erence between the value of the new match and unemployment
regardless of the worker’s current employment status. Shimer [37] analyzed how Nash bargaining di¤ers when current
productivity is the threat point. In that case, the worker’s share of output depends on her past productivities. For
tractability, we abstract from the possibility here.
  22
     From Pissarides [34], we know that the Nash bargaining allocative mechanism (:) is continuous and di¤erentiable
and that 0 (:) 0.



                                                        13
   If a worker’s current productivity exceeds the search-deterring threshold R, the cost of search

outweighs the expected gain from potentially …nding a more suitable match. This is because the

cost of search is increasing in Y while the likelihood of …nding an acceptable alternative is shrinking

in Y . We compute the worker’s value of a job in this case as


                               w
                              Vns (Y ) = (Y ) +          [ U w + (1             w
                                                                            ) (Vns (Y ))] ;                               (1)

where U w is the value of unemployment. In this case, the worker only separates from the …rm if

there is a layo¤, while in this case there are no search costs to be paid. Similarly, the value to the

…rm is:

                                                            h                            i
                              f
                             Vns (Y ) = Y        (Y ) +         U f + (1          f
                                                                                )Vns (Y ) :                               (2)

where U f is the value to the …rm of holding a vacancy.

   If, on the other hand, the productivity draw is not su¢ ciently high to deter search, the worker’s

valuation of the match is



                            Vsw (Y ) = (Y         c(Y )) + ( U w + (1             )Jsw (Y ));                             (3)

where the worker’s expected value of matching with a new …rm is
                                       "                          Z                             Z                   #
                                                                      R                             1
     Jsw (Y ) = (1      )Vsw (Y ) +        Vsw (Y )F (R(Y )) +              Vsw (y)dF (y) +              w
                                                                                                        Vns (y)dF (y) :
                                                                    R(Y )                       R


           The value of employment with search is, therefore, the worker’s share of current output

less search costs plus the worker’s discounted expected future income.

   When the worker searches, the value of the job to the …rm is de…ned as follows:



                     Vsf (Y ) = Y     c(Y )       (Y     c(Y )) +           U f + (1      )Jsf (Y ) ;                     (4)

where

                                                   h                                               i
                Jsf (Y ) = (1       )Vsf (Y ) +        Vsf (Y )F (R(Y )) + U f (1        F (R(Y ))) :


                                                           14
            Now, the nature of the asymmetry between worker and …rm becomes apparent.                           Both

share the surplus of the current job, but the worker (who can search OTJ) has access to better

opportunities than the …rm, since the …rm loses a productive match in case of a quit and cannot

post a vacancy before the quit.           Therefore, the value of the job to the worker versus the …rm

diverges when the worker searches, compared to the value when the worker does not search.                          It

is because of this asymmetry that the …rm might o¤er a pension contract. If the …rm can o¤er a

contract which will prevent the worker from searching by, in e¤ect, lowering the search-deterring

threshold, then the …rm will neither share the costs of search nor face the loss resulting from a quit.


3.3      The value of search

We next focus on determining the conditions under which workers search OTJ. A worker with a job

yielding Y will accept any new job with productivity draw Y 0 such that its value V w (Y 0 ) > Vsw (Y ),

where the lack of the subscript on the left-hand side explicitly assumes the possibility of matching

to a search-deterring job. However, as we demonstrate shortly, any search-deterring job necessarily

yields a higher valuation, so the job-to-job acceptance threshold is determined by a new job o¤er

that would entail continued search. The acceptance condition can be summarized in the following

lemma:

Lemma 1 Acceptance Threshold–Job to Job. Given (3), a worker currently in a match yielding

productivity Y < R and therefore searching on-the-job will accept any new match with productivity

Y 0 > Y .23

       Since new matches are only formed with vacant jobs, Nash-bargaining of wages implies that the

…rm will hire any worker who would accept the job.

       Although better o¤ers are possible, above productivity R a worker does not search because the

expected gain is outweighed by the search cost.               R is the value such that the worker’s expected

return from searching just equals the cost of search.               Consider a worker in a match currently

yielding Y . The worker’s gain from search GS(Y ) is



            GS(Y ) = Vsw (Y )      w
                                  Vns (Y ) = (Y        c(Y ))      (Y )     (1         w
                                                                                   ) (Vns (Y )    Jsw (Y ))       (5)
  23
     For tractability, we abstract away from conditions like an endogenous matching rate or endogenous job destruction
as in FO. Such conditions would generate a wedge between the current productivity and the acceptance threshold.


                                                         15
The gain from search GS(Y ) decreases in Y , since higher Y makes the current match increasingly

attractive relative to other possible matches.           At the search-deterring threshold, the worker is
                                                                                   w (R) –that is,
indi¤erent between searching and receiving Vsw (R) or not searching and receiving Vns

GS(R) = 0: We summarize this condition in the following lemma:


Lemma 2 Search-Deterring Threshold.                  A worker is indi¤ erent between searching and not

searching at a productivity level R which solves

                                                          Z   1
                                         (1      )
               R       R    c(R) =                                (y)dF (y)   R   1   F (R)   :
                                     1    (1         )     R


    The left-hand side of the expression shows the gain in current output from not incurring search

costs, while the right-hand side shows the expected gain from seeking a better match.             A con-

sequence of the preceding lemmas is that the support of the productivity distribution over which

the worker engages in OTJ search is not state- or time-dependent, but rather is uniform across all

worker-history combinations, so the thresholds do not depend on the idiosyncratic match-speci…c

productivity, work history, etc. This will allow us to compute a pension contract that depends only

on the current productivity level. The worker’s gain from search (5) reveals the worker’s incentives

at varying levels of productivity and will play an important role in determining the existence of the

pension contract that we outline next.



4    The Pension Contract

A …rm matched to a worker with current productivity Y < R who is searching OTJ experiences

losses from three sources. Search itself costs the match c(Y ); output is lost when the …rm stands

idle immediately after the worker departs; and the match with known productivity is replaced by an

uncertain future draw. Consequently, the …rm is willing to compensate the worker for not searching

as long as the compensation does not exceed the gain to the …rm from deterring search. Similarly,

the worker is willing to accept the compensation as long as it exceeds the value of opportunities lost

from not searching. We demonstrate that the contract may fail to deter search in some matches,

but it will deter search in relatively more productive matches in the range Y < R, since the surplus

is high enough to make it worth forgoing search.


                                                     16
       Speci…cally, we consider contracts that, like DB pensions, defer a portion of output destined for

the worker, with the payment forfeited if the worker quits. This payment is made in addition to

the wages that continue to be determined by Nash bargaining. Since we do not model retirement,

we assume that workers get the payment in a lump-sum when the layo¤ shock inevitably hits.24

Once we abstract away from the risk that the worker loses the pension because the match ends

unexpectedly early, then we can simply characterize the total value of the contract without saying

more about its structure –how much is deferred for how long.25


4.1      Will the …rm o¤er the pension contract?

A …rm may o¤er a pension – a lump-sum payment at the end of the match that is forfeited if

the worker quits – for the purpose of preventing OTJ search.26                    The size of the pension a …rm

is willing to o¤er depends on the gain if the worker does not search.                      The maximum pension

M P (Y ) which the …rm in a match with output draw Y will o¤er at the outset of the match is the

di¤erence between the value to the …rm of the same production level with and without search, so
            f
M P (Y ) = Vns (Y )      Vsf (Y ).27 Substituting (4) and (2), we have:


                                                                                 f
                   M P (Y ) = (Y        c(Y )) + c(Y )       (Y ) + (1        )[Vns (Y )   Jsf (Y )];               (6)

where the …rst set of terms re‡ects the gain from avoiding search costs and the second set re‡ects

the gain from avoiding a vacancy.           Equation (6) represents one step toward demonstrating that
  24
      Figure 1 showed that DB pension accruals in the real world eventually turn negative after 20-30 years, encouraging
retirement. Since we do not include a retirement motive here, we ignore this aspect of DB pensions. FO argued
on several grounds that it is unlikely that an exogenous increase in optimal retirement ages caused the decline in DB
pension use.
   25
      FO and Stevens [39] elaborated on the tension that arises in a risky environment between the promised pension
bene…t and the pension’s termination date. If we extended our model so that the pension were forfeited by any early
end to the match, even involuntary, it would not change the qualitative predictions of the model but would further
narrow the productivity range de…ning a feasible contract (since relatively unproductive matches would not …nance
a large enough deferred payment to get the worker to accept the early termination risk). In Burdett and Coles [5],
risk-averse workers prefer upfront pay in order to smooth consumption, which in our model would again narrow the
productivity range over which pensions are feasible. Lastly, we ignore the possibility that the …rm breaches the
pension contract. DB pensions are partially insured, and in addition, there is little empirical evidence of obvious
breach by employers .
   26
      Our pension is also similar in ‡avor to the e¢ ciency wage of Shimer [38], which transfers a portion of output
from the …rm to the worker to prevent search.
   27
      Once the …rm promises a pension P (Y ) at the outset, it no longer has to set aside any additional funds because
the problem is stationary and the initial amount P (Y ) will continue to deter search. The ex post gain to the …rm
from deterring search will almost certainly di¤er from P (Y ), depending on when the layo¤ shock occurs. We may
assume that an insurance market eliminates the risk of early or late termination.



                                                          17
the pension contract is feasible. The following proposition lays out the next step:



Proposition 3 A Firm’s Gain from Deterring OTJ Search. For all productivity levels in

the range R > Y > R, M P (Y ) > 0:

    The proposition shows that the …rm always bene…ts from deterring OTJ search. This occurs

because the …rm bears some of the costs of search but receives none of the bene…ts.                      Moreover,

the maximum value of the pension M P (Y ) rises monotonically with Y , since higher productivity

matches have increasing value over a new match and since search costs rise with Y .28


4.2    Will the worker accept the pension contract?

While (6) reveals the …rm’s willingness to sacri…ce some of its surplus to deter the worker from

searching, the …rm need o¤er no more than the worker’s gain from OTJ search GS(Y ), as determined

in (5). The resulting pension is incentive-compatible if the maximum value M P (Y ) that the …rm

is willing to o¤er exceeds GS(Y ) and, thus, prevents the worker from searching. Therefore, the

value of the o¤ered (and accepted) pension P (Y ) will be

                                           8
                                           >
                                           <     0      if GS(Y ) > M P (Y )
                                P (Y ) =                                            .                            (7)
                                           >
                                           : GS(Y ) if GS(Y )           M P (Y )

If the maximum pension M P (Y ) is smaller than GS(Y ), then any pension the …rm is willing to

o¤er will not be incentive-compatible, since it fails to discourage search. A pension is e¤ective,

therefore, if total expected losses from search exceed expected gains – thus fully internalizing the

costs and bene…ts of search that accrue to agents in the match. Essentially, through the pension,

the …rm voluntarily reallocates a portion of its share of output in order to avoid productivity losses

caused by search and periods of idleness caused by quits resulting from search.

Proposition 4 Existence. Suppose the partition of the productivity distribution’s support over

which workers search on-the-job is non-degenerate – that is, R > R. Then, there exists some Y
  28
     Our results di¤er from Pissarides [34], who found that search by workers makes …rms better o¤. First, in our
model workers and …rms share search costs. Second, …rms in our model do not know what match-speci…c productivity
they will draw next, whereas Pissarides assumed that …rms always match at the highest level of productivity. Finally,
…rms in Pissarides’model open vacancies until their value is equal to zero, whereas in our model a continuum of …rms
exist and have vacancies only when they are not producing.


                                                         18
such that R > Y > R and          (Y ) = M P (Y )      GS(Y ) > 0. Moreover,          (Y ) > 0 implies that there

exists some P (Y ) > 0.


       This proposition shows, and Figure 4 illustrates, that over at least some portion of the relevant

region R > Y > R of the productivity distribution, the pension is indeed e¤ective. As shown in

Figure 4, GS(Y ) falls with Y and de…nes R at the point where GS(Y ) = 0, while M P (Y ) is positive

and rises with Y . The pension will consequently be e¤ective at Y = R                    , since GS(R) = 0 and

M P (R) > 0.

       However, as Figure 4 demonstrates, it is possible that in some matches OTJ search cannot be

discouraged by pensions.        While …rms want to eliminate search at all productivity levels (since

M P (Y ) > 0), there may be some values of Y such that the worker’s incentives cannot be changed

for less than the …rm will sacri…ce. If pensions are infeasible in some matches, it would be in the

lowest productivity matches with OTJ search, i.e. over some range of Y beginning at Y = R. This

occurs in Figure 4, since GS(Y ) and M P (Y ) intersect at a value of Y > R. We denote this value

as RP , de…ned as the reservation productivity level which, if it lies between R and R, renders the

pension contract infeasible for matches with Y < RP . It is likely that the threshold RP is relevant

in the real world, since we observe that DB pensions are much less common in low-wage jobs.

       To sum up, pension contracts exist in medium-productivity jobs (matches with R > Y > RP

R) and not in the highest-productivity search-deterring jobs (with Y > R).29 Moreover, as Figure

4 shows, the pension bene…t might not be e¤ective in the lowest productivity jobs (near R). We

cannot further characterize the level of RP 2 (R; R) at which the …rm would be just indi¤erent

between o¤ering a pension that deters search or not without assuming a particular distribution of

productivity.

       While these pension contracts enhance the value of the current job, they may raise or lower

aggregate welfare. On the one hand, pension contracts reduce excessive OTJ search arising from

the asymmetry in how its costs and bene…ts are distributed.                 On the other hand, though, new

matches that dominate current ones are not formed.                Welfare considerations depend on speci…c
  29
    In the real world, many very high-wage workers have pensions. Some likely explanations are that high-wage
workers have higher marginal tax rates and higher saving rates; these motivations are not contract-theoretic and lie
beyond the scope of this paper.




                                                        19
assumptions about the productivity distribution.30



5    A Decline in Search Costs

The feasibility and value of the pension contract shift if the value of the match to the worker or the

…rm changes. In this section, we analyze how a decline in search costs alters the value of the current

job relative to alternatives.     This discussion ties into important trends that we discussed earlier

–notably, the increased incidence of job-to-job ‡ows and the increase in relative wages associated

with such ‡ows, and indirect evidence of declining search costs and more frequent OTJ search.

    We will consider the e¤ect of a simple reduction in search costs in order to capture these changes.

Suppose that search costs uniformly decrease from c0 (Y ) to c1 (Y )              c0 (Y ) 8Y . This alters the

worker’s gains from search GS(Y ) and the …rm’s maximum pension o¤er M P (Y ), and in turn the

value of the pension P (Y ) and possibly the threshold of productivity RP at which the pension

is rendered incentive-incompatible. To summarize the consequences for the match, we o¤er the

following proposition:

Proposition 5 Decrease in Search Costs. Given a productivity distribution F (y) and the …xed

allocative mechanism (y), a decrease in search costs causes (i) an increase in the search-preventing

threshold R, (ii) an increase in the worker’s gains from search GS(Y ), and (iii) a decrease in the

…rm’s gains from preventing search M P (Y ).

    These e¤ects are illustrated in Figure 5 and arise because both              (Y    c1 (Y )) >   (Y     c0 (Y ))

and Y    c1 (Y ) > Y    c0 (Y ).31 Because the worker gets to keep more of current output in the event

of search, it boosts the gains from search GS(Y ), de…ned in (5). That in turn raises the search

threshold from R0 computed from search costs c0 (Y ) to R1 computed from search costs c1 (Y ).

Therefore, in the absence of pension contracts, some workers previously satis…ed with Y will begin

to search.

    These changes will clearly in‡uence the viability and size of the pension contract. The increase

in GS(Y ) makes it more costly for …rms to discourage search. Also, because the …rm gets to keep
  30
     In a very di¤erent model than ours, Nagypál [30] investigated the aggregate welfare consequences of employment
protection policies that raise the cost of dismissal when there is learning in matches. She studied ine¢ ciencies
generated by the use of legal employment protection to prevent layo¤s, while we study pensions that prevent quits.
  31
     Note that there may be enough workers with R1 > Y > R0 such that total output net of search costs decreases
rather than increases.


                                                        20
more of current output in the event of search, it reduces the gain from preventing search and hence

the maximum pension M P (Y ) the …rm is willing to o¤er, as de…ned in (6).

       We argue that under realistic parameters the pension-feasible region will probably shrink as a

result, and hence the total number of pensions o¤ered in the economy will decrease while the number

of workers who search will increase –as has been observed in recent years.32 The ambiguity arises

because of two countervailing e¤ects. The pension-feasible region may get squeezed at the lower

end while expanding at the upper end, so the actual outcome depends primarily on the density of

the productivity distribution in di¤erent regions. On the one hand, RP may increase, so pensions

in some of the less productive matches in which search used to be deterred are no longer feasible.

This will de…nitely happen if it was already the case that RP > R, as in Figure 5, so pensions were

failing to deter some OTJ search. We already argued that this is likely to be the case. If there is

a great deal of density in the region over which RP rises, then even a small decrease in search costs

could cause a large decrease in the use of pension contracts and an associated increase in search.

       On the other hand, the pension-feasible region gets expanded from above, as the search-deterring

threshold R rises. In the matches in which search is now attractive but was not before, GS(Y ) is

small relative to M P (Y ), so …rms will begin to o¤er pensions. However, unless the productivity

distribution is skewed strongly to the right and therefore the mass of matches without search is

large (which seems unlikely, or else OTJ search and job-to-job ‡ows would be very uncommon),

then the …rst e¤ect (the squeeze from below) will dominate the second (the expansion from above),

and the number of pensions will decline.33

       It should be noted that the e¤ect of a decrease in the cost of search is robust to other speci…ca-

tions of search costs. If search costs are borne entirely by the worker, then a decrease induces more

search because GS(Y ) rises and the incentive-compatibility constraint binds for more matches, with

no increased funding for pensions to counteract the e¤ect.                  If search costs are borne entirely by

the …rm, then a decrease induces more search because M P (Y ) falls as search becomes less costly

for the …rm, so fewer pensions will be o¤ered. The same e¤ects occur whether search costs are a
  32
      The economy will immediately enter a new steady state like this one if existing pensions contracts are renegotiated.
If not, then all existing pensions will be too small to deter search and will be abandoned, and the economy will reach
the new steady state after workers reshu- e into new jobs with new pensions.
   33
      It is also likely that the average value of remaining pensions will change, depending on the density of Y and on
other parameters. At the lower end, the largest pensions will disappear but remaining pensions will get bigger; while
at the upper end, the new pensions that appear will be small. Evidence in FO suggests that remaining DB pensions
are becoming less valuable on average.


                                                           21
function of productivity Y or are constant.

         Thus, our model implies that the number of pensions is likely to fall when the costs of OTJ

search decline. Earlier, we discussed evidence of such a decline, so our results may help explain

the recent decline in job tenure and in DB pensions.



6         Conclusions

In the midst of the economic boom of the 1990s, the New York Times suggested that “the no-

tion of lifetime employment has come to seem as dated as soda jerks, or tail …ns” (Kolbert and

Clymer [22]).34 While many media reports have highlighted the supposed decline in job stability,

economists have only recently found con…rmation that job tenure has declined, while over a similar

period job-to-job ‡ows have increased in frequency.

         In this paper we propose a model of on-the-job search and job-to-job ‡ows to help explain these

changes. Recent data makes it clear that these activities occur commonly, yet they are actively

discouraged by DB pensions. The decline in the use of DB pensions suggests an important link

with trends in tenure and job-to-job ‡ows. Other recent theoretical papers have also tied together

the motive to search on-the-job with the use of tenure-based deferred compensation contracts. We

propose a model with some distinct features that add to our understanding of the costs and bene…ts

of on-the-job search and, consequently, the feasibility of tenure-based contracts. Then, we highlight

changes in the expected value of search that can explain the declining use of such contracts. We

focus on a decline in search costs which, under fairly general conditions, would reduce the use of

DB pensions and boost worker mobility.               A jump in the expected gains from search tallies with

observed growth in relative wages of job-to-job movers.

         Further research on the causes and consequences of the recent decline in job tenure and the

connection to job-to-job ‡ows will be important.                Identifying the causes will ultimately allow a

careful evaluation of the welfare consequences for workers and …rms.                    Such an analysis might

reveal that DB pensions have become socially ine¢ cient, even if they remain privately e¢ cient.

In our model, pensions internalize the costs and bene…ts of search within the match but impede

matches that o¤er higher surplus to a new …rm from being formed.                     It is relevant that some of
    34
         We have appropriated this quote, with thanks, from Neumark, Polsky, and Hansen [31].



                                                           22
the federal pension regulations implemented since 1974 constrain the degree to which DB pensions

can be designed to condition compensation on tenure (Clark and McDermed [7]).                                     This raises

the possibility that regulations were implemented in response to rising social gains from mobility

resulting from the types of changes we have outlined here. Our paper represents a step towards

understanding the causes and consequences of increased mobility.



7         Appendix

Proof of Lemma 1:

         The worker’s current continuation value is


                               Vsw (Y ) = (Y        c(Y )) +     [ U w + (1       )Jsw (R(Y ))]


and the value of the new match is


                            Vsw (Y 0 ) =    Y0     c(Y 0 ) +        U w + (1      )Jsw (R(Y 0 )) :


The acceptance threshold is de…ned as the minimum Y 0 that satis…es Vsw (Y 0 ) > Vsw (Y ).                                By

construction, Vsw (Y ) is monotonically increasing in Y , which yields the result.35

         Proof of Lemma 2:
                                   w (R) = V w (R). Then, equating (3) and (1) evaluated at R gives
         Indi¤erence at R implies Vns       s



                                                w
                              R + (1         ) Vns (R) =            R     c(R) + (1         )Jsw (R):                     (8)

                w (R) = V w (R), we can substitute for J w (R(Y )):
         Since Vns       s                              s


                                                                                        Z   1
                                                            w                                    w
                     R =       R    c(R) +         (1    ) Vns (R) F (R)          1 +           Vns (y)dF (y) :           (9)
                                                                                        R

However, from (1), it can be shown that


                                                  w             (Y ) +     Uw
                                                 Vns (Y ) =                   :                                         (10)
                                                               1     (1     )
    35
         Monotonicity also implies that the worker accepts Y 0 > R > Y:


                                                               23
Substituting (10) into (9) yields the result.

       Proof of Proposition 3:

       Consider (Y         c(Y ))+c(Y )           (Y ). By de…nition, (Y )          (Y     c(Y )) < Y       (Y      c(Y )) = c(Y ).
                                                                        f
Thus, (Y           c(Y )) + c(Y )         (Y ) > 0 and M P (Y ) > 0 if Vns (Y )          Jsf (Y )    0. It is straightforward

to show that



                                     Jsf (Y ) = Vsf (Y )    (1     F (R(Y )) Vsf (Y )         Uf :

For R > Y > R, Vsf (Y )                 U f > 0 by Nash bargaining36 , and, thus, Vsf (Y ) > Jsf (Y ). De…ne


                    Vbsf (Y ) = Y          (Y     c(Y ))    c(Y ) +       U f + (1         )Vbsf (Y ) > Vsf (Y );


hence Vbsf (Y ) > Vsf (Y ) > Jsf (Y ). Moreover,


                                 Y      (Y ) +       Uf   Y         (Y      c(Y )) c(Y ) +          Uf
                   f
                  Vns (Y ) =                            >                                                = Vbsf (Y )
                                      1   (1        )                     1     (1   )

since (Y ) < (Y                                       f
                               c(Y )) + c(Y ). Thus, Vns (Y ) > Vbsf (Y ) > Jsf (Y ). The result follows.

       Proof of Proposition 4:
                                                                          f
         (Y ) = M P (Y )         GS(Y ) > 0 if c(Y ) + (1              )[Vns (Y )   Jsf (Y )] > (1        ) [Jsw (Y )      w (Y )].
                                                                                                                          Vns
                     f
From Proposition 3, Vns (Y )                   Jsf (Y ) > 0, which implies that          (1         f
                                                                                                 )[Vns (Y )      Jsf (Y )] > 0 for

all Y .                                w (R) = V w (R), implying (R)
              From Lemma 2, at Y = R, Vns                                                                 R      c(R) =       (1
                                                s

 ) Jsw (R)         w (R) . Further, c(R) > (R)
                  Vns                                               R      c(R) , implying



                                               c(R) > (1         ) Jsw (R)      w
                                                                               Vns (R) :

                              w (Y ) < V w (Y ), continuity and the de…nition of P give the result.
Finally, since Y < R implies Vns        s

       Proof of Proposition 5:

       Consider c0 (Y ) and c1 (Y ), where c1 (Y ) < c0 (Y ) for all Y                0.

       (i)      R1 > R0 : Recall that Ri solves GSi (Ri ) = 0. Since GSi0 (Y ) is negative at Y = Ri , if

GS0 (Y ) < GS1 (Y ), the result follows.

       (ii)      GS1 (Y ) > GS0 (Y ) follows directly from (i).
  36                                 f
       It is also true for Y     R; Vns (Y )     U f > 0.


                                                                  24
    (iii)    M P1 (Y ) < M P0 (Y ) : By de…nition, (Y                            c1 (Y ))        (Y       c0 (Y ))     c0 (Y ) + c1 (Y ) < 0.
          f              f            f                 f
Thus, if Vns;1 (Y )     Vns;0 (Y ) < Js;1 (Y )         Js;0 (Y ), the result obtains. From (4), we have



                                                               h                                      i
             f            f                                       f                            f
            Js;1 (Y )    Js;0 (Y ) = (1               + F (Y )) Vs;1 (Y )                    Vs;0 (Y )

                                           +      U1f        U0f (1          F (Y ))
                                                      (1       (1       F (Y ))
                                       =
                                           1          (1      ) (1        + F (Y ))
                                           2                                                                                 3
                                           6      c1 (Y ) + c0 (Y )               (Y         c1 (Y )) + (Y           c0 (Y )) 7
                                           4                                                                                  5:
                                                                         +          U1f        U0f

                                       h                            i        h                       i
                                         f                  f                     f           f
It can then be shown that             = Js;1 (Y )          Js;0 (Y )             Vns;1       Vns;0



                        (1       (1
                             F (Y )) [ c1 (Y ) + c0 (Y ) (Y c1 (Y )) + (Y                                             c0 (Y ))]
                 =
                                      1     (1     ) (1  + F (Y ))
                          (1      (1 F (Y ))               1
                   +                                                   U1f                                            U0f
                      1   (1    ) (1      + F (Y )) 1      (1    )
                   (1   (1 F (Y )) [ c1 (Y ) + c0 (Y )   (Y c1 (Y )) + (Y                                             c0 (Y ))]
                 =
                                      1     (1     ) (1  + F (Y ))
                                      (1       ) (1     F (Y )) U1f               U0f
                        +                                                                            :
                            (1    (1       ) (1        + F (Y ))) (1                    (1      ))

                             h                                 i        h                      i
Since U1f    U0f > 0, we have Js;1
                               f
                                   (Y )                f
                                                      Js;0 (Y )              f
                                                                            Vns;1         f
                                                                                         Vns;0   > 0.




                                                                 25
References
 [1] Autor, David H. “Wiring the Labor Market.”Journal of Economic Perspectives, Winter 2001,
     15(1), pp. 25-40.

 [2] Allen, Steven G.; Clark, Robert L. and McDermed, Ann A. “The Pension Cost of Changing
     Jobs.” Research on Aging, December 1988, 10(4), pp. 459-471.

 [3] Bernhardt, Annette; Morris, Martina; Handcock, Mark S. and Scott, Marc A. “Trends in Job
     Instability and Wages for Young Adult Men.” Journal of Labor Economics, October 1999,
     17(4) Part 2, pp. S65-S90.

 [4] Bloom, David E. and Freeman, Richard B. “The Fall in Private Pension Coverage in the United
     States.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, May 1992, 82(2), pp. 539-545.

 [5] Burdett, Ken and Coles, Melvyn. “Equilibrium Wage-Tenure Contracts.” Econometrica,
     September 2003, 71(5), pp. 1377-1404.

 [6] Bureau of Labor Statistics. “Employee Tenure in 2000.” Press report, U.S. Department of
     Labor, August 29, 2000.

 [7] Clark, Robert L. and McDermed, Ann A. The Choice of Pension Plans in a Changing Regu-
     latory Environment. AEI Studies, No. 509, Washington, D.C.: AEI Press, 1990.

 [8] den Haan, Wouter; Ramey, Garey and Watson, Joel. “Job Destruction and the Experiences of
     Displaced Workers.”Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, June 2000, 52(0),
     pp. 87-128.

 [9] Even, William E. and Macpherson, David A. “The Changing Distribution of Pension Cover-
     age.” Industrial Relations, April 2000, 39(2), pp. 199-227.

[10] Fallick, Bruce C. and Fleischman, Charles A. “Employer-to-Employer Flows in the U.S. Labor
     Market: The Complete Picture of Gross Worker Flows.” Finance and Economics Discussion
     Series 2004-34, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 2004.

[11] Farber, Henry S. “Trends in Long Term Employment in the United States, 1979-96.” Working
     Paper No. 384, Industrial Relations Sections, Department of Economics, Princeton University,
     July 1997.

[12] Freeman, Richard B. “The Labour Market in the New Information Economy.”Working Paper
     No. 9254, National Bureau of Economic Research, October 2002.

[13] Friedberg, Leora and Owyang, Michael T. “Explaining the Evolution of Pension Structure and
     Job Tenure.” Working Paper No. 2002-022B, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, October
     2002.

[14] Friedberg, Leora and Webb, Anthony. “Retirement and the Evolution of Pension Structure.”
     National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 9999, 2003.

[15] Gersbach, Hans and Schmutzler, Armin. “Declining Costs of Communication and Transporta-
     tion: What Are the E¤ects on Agglomerations?” European Economic Review, October 2000,
     44(9), pp. 1745-1761.


                                               26
[16] Glaeser, Edward, Kallal, Hedi, Scheinkman, José, and Shleifer, Andre. “Growth in Cities.”
     Journal of Political Economy, December 1992, 100 (6), pp. 1126-1152.

[17] Gottschalk, Peter and Mo¢ tt, Robert. “Changes in Job Instability and Insecurity Using
     Monthly Survey Data.” Journal of Labor Economics, October 1999, 17(4) Part 2, pp. S91-
     S126.

[18] Gustman, Alan L. and Steinmeier, Thomas L. “The Stampede Toward De…ned Contribution
     Pension Plans: Fact or Fiction?” Industrial Relations, Spring 1992, 31(2), pp. 361-369.

[19] Ippolito, Richard A. “Toward Explaining the Growth of De…ned Contribution Plans.” Indus-
     trial Relations, January 1995, 34(1), pp. 1-20.

[20] Jaeger, David A. and Stevens, Ann Hu¤. “Is Job Stability in the United States Falling? Rec-
     onciling Trends in the Current Population Survey and Panel Study of Income Dynamics.”
     Journal of Labor Economics, October 1999, 17(4) Part 2, pp. S1-S28.

[21] Manovskii, Iourii, and Gueorgui Kambourov. “A Cautionary Note on Using (March) CPS
     Data to Study Worker Mobility.” Draft, University of Pennsylvania, April 2004.

[22] Kolbert, Elizabeth, and Clymer, Adam. “The Politics of Layo¤s: In Search of a Message.”
     New York Times, March 8, 1996, p.A23.

[23] Kruse, Douglas L. “Pension Substitution in the 1980s: Why the Shift toward De…ned Contri-
     bution?” Industrial Relations, April 1995, 34(2), pp. 218-241.

[24] Kuhn, Peter and Skuterud, Mikal. “Internet Job Search and Unemployment Durations.”Amer-
     ican Economic Review, March 2004, 94(1), pp. 218-232.

[25] Lazear, Edward P. “Retirement from the Labor Force.” In Ashenfelter, Orley and Layard,
     Richard, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 1. New York: Elsevier Science Publish-
     ers, 1986.

[26] Matouschek, Niko; Ramezzana, Paolo and Robert-Nicoud, Frédéric. “Labor Market Frictions,
     Job Insecurity, and the Flexibility of the Employment Relationship.” Draft, Northwestern
     University, November 2003.

[27] McLaren, John and Newman, Andrew. “Globalization and Insecurity.” Discussion Paper
     02-06, Department of Economics, University College London, July 2002.

[28] Meisenheimer II, Joseph R. and Ilg, Randy E. “Looking for a ‘Better’Job: Job-Search Activity
     of the Employed.” Monthly Labor Review, September 2000, 123(9), pp. 3-14.

[29] Mortensen, Dale T. “Wages, Separations, and Job Tenure: On-the-Job Speci…c Training or
     Matching?” Journal of Labor Economics, October 1988, 6(4), pp. 445-471.

[30] Nagypál, Éva. “The Cost of Employment Protection in the Presence of Match-Speci…c Learn-
     ing.” Draft, Northwestern University, 2002.

[31] Neumark, David; Polsky, Daniel and Hansen, Daniel. “Has Job Stability Declined Yet? New
     Evidence for the 1990s.” Journal of Labor Economics, October 1999, 17(4) Part 2, pp. S29-S64.

[32] Papke, Leslie E. “Are 401(k) Plans Replacing Other Employer-provided Pensions? Evidence
     from Panel Data.” Journal of Human Resources, Spring 1999, 34(2), pp. 346-368.

                                               27
[33] Pissarides, Christopher A. “Search Unemployment with On-the-job Search.” Review of Eco-
     nomic Studies, July 1994, 61(3), pp. 457-475.

[34] Pissarides, Christopher A. Equilibrium Unemployment Theory, Second Edition. Cambridge,
     MA: MIT Press, 2000.

[35] Ramey,    Garey and Watson,          Joel.      “Bilateral Trade      and Opportunism
     in a Matching Market.”             Contributions to Theoretical       Economics, 1(1),
     http://www.bepress.com/bejte/contributions/vol1/iss1/art3, 2001.

[36] Sato, Yasuhiro. “Labor Heterogeneity in an Urban Labor Market.” Journal of Urban Eco-
     nomics, September 2001, 50(2), pp. 313-337.

[37] Shimer, Robert. “Dynamics in a Model of On-the-Job Search.” Manuscript, University of
     Chicago, June 2003.

[38] Shimer, Robert. “A Note on Nash Bargaining with On-the-job Search.”Manuscript, University
     of Chicago, August 2003.

[39] Stevens, Margaret. “Wage-Tenure Contracts in a Frictional Labour Market: Firms’Strategies
     for Recruitment and Retention.” Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.

[40] Stevenson, Betsey. “The Internet, Job Search, and Worker Mobility.” Manuscript, University
     of Pennsylvania, November 2003.

[41] Stewart, Jay. “Recent Trends in Job Stability and Job Security: Evidence from the March
     CPS.” U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, BLS Working Paper 356, March 2002.

[42] Stewart, Jay. “Using March CPS Data to Analyze Labor Market Transitions.” Manuscript,
     U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, July 2005.




                                              28
                       FIGURE 1: Accrual of Pension Wealth

                 100
                  80
Accrual, $1000




                  60
                  40
                  20
                  0
                 -20
                       40          50           60            70
                        Age at which the employee leaves the job
                           Typical DB plan     Typical DC plan
                                                         FIGURE 2
                                       Relative wages, job-to-job movers vs. stayers
       difference in relative wages


                                       0%

                                      -5%

                                      -10%

                                      -15%

                                      -20%
                                          83

                                                 85

                                                        87

                                                               89

                                                                      91

                                                                             93

                                                                                    95

                                                                                           97

                                                                                                  99

                                                                                                         01
                                        19

                                               19

                                                      19

                                                             19

                                                                    19

                                                                           19

                                                                                  19

                                                                                         19

                                                                                                19

                                                                                                       20
                                                 wages, job-to-job movers minus stayers


NOTES

(1) We used the method described in Stewart (2002, 2005) to identify people in March CPSs from 1983-
2001 who had moved job-to-job (with an intervening unemployment spell of 0-2 weeks) within the
previous 14.5 months, versus those who had stayed in the same job continuously. We used the sample
selection criteria from Stewart (workers aged 19-55, with at least one year of potential labor market
experience, who are not currently and were not self-employed in the previous year, and who worked full-
time in the previous year) but limited the sample to people in the outgoing rotation groups, for whom the
CPS collected data on current hourly earnings. Our resulting sample ranges from 7,000-9,000 per year.

(2) We ran a regression on each year’s sample, putting log hourly earnings on the left-hand side and putting
an indicator variable on the right-hand side for people experiencing a job-to-job flow, along with controls
for gender, education (did not finish high school, high school diploma, attended but did not finish college,
finished a college degree), age (and its square), and race (white, black, other). We computed Huber-White
standard errors and used earnings weights.

(3) Figure 2 reports the coefficient estimates on the indicator variable for people experiencing a job-to-job
flow from these regressions. Thus, it shows the percentage difference in wages each year for job-to-job
movers compared to job stayers, controlling for demographics.
                                                        FIGURE 3
     difference in relative wages      Relative wages, adjusted for business cycle

                                     0%

                                    -4%

                                    -8%

                                    -12%

                                    -16%
                                        83

                                               85

                                                      87

                                                             89

                                                                    91

                                                                           93

                                                                                  95

                                                                                         97

                                                                                                99

                                                                                                       01
                                      19

                                             19

                                                    19

                                                           19

                                                                  19

                                                                         19

                                                                                19

                                                                                       19

                                                                                              19

                                                                                                     20
                                      wages, job-to-job movers minus stayers
                                      wages, unemployment-job movers minus job-to-job movers



NOTES (continued from Figure 2)

(4) We took the coefficient estimates reported in Figure 2, which show the percentage difference in wages
each year for job-to-job movers compared to job stayers, and regressed them on the contemporaneous
unemployment rate in order to remove business cycle effects. The residuals are shown as the heavy lower
line in Figure 3. Thus, it shows the percentage difference in wages for job-to-job movers compared to job
stayers, controlling for demographics and for business cycle effects.

(5) Next, we adapted Stewart’s method to identify people in March CPSs who had moved to a new job
within the previous 14.5 months and had experienced a spell of unemployment lasting more than 2 weeks
(which may have occurred at any time during the previous 14.5 months). We ran a similar regression as in
(2) above, putting log hourly earnings on the left-hand side and now putting two indicator variables on the
right-hand side – one for people experiencing a job-to-job flow and one for people experiencing an
unemployment-to-job flow – along with the same controls for gender, education, age, and race.

(6) The regressions yielded two coefficient estimates of interest, the percentage difference in wages for
job-to-movers compared to job stayers and for unemployment-to-job movers compared to job stayers. As
in (4) above, we regressed the coefficient estimates on the contemporaneous unemployment rate in order to
remove business cycle effects. The difference between these residuals is shown as the light upper line in
Figure 3. Thus, it shows the percentage difference in wages for unemployment-to-job movers compared to
job-to-job movers, controlling for demographics and for business cycle effects.
       FIGURE 4: Initial Steady State


                                                          MP(Y)




                                   P(Y)


                                                                  Y
                       P
          R        R                    R
                                                          GS(Y)
                   pension-feasible
                        range


FIGURE 5: New Steady State after Decline in Search Costs

                                                          MP(Y)

                                                             MP’(Y)



                                                                  A = old pensions are destroyed
                                                                  B = new pensions are created


                                            P’(Y)


                                                                  Y
                                   P'
              R'               R                     R'           GS’(Y)
                                                          GS(Y)
                           A                 B

                                    new pension-
                                    feasible range
