                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE INDUSTRY ORIGINS OF JAPANESE ECONOMIC GROWTH

                                           Dale W. Jorgenson
                                             Koji Nomura

                                         Working Paper 11800
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11800


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2005




This paper was presented at the 17th TRIO Conference at Keio University, Tokyo, on December 10, 2004.
We have greatly extended our accounting system and incorporated new data on information technology since
this presentation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Dale W. Jorgenson and Koji Nomura. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
The Industry Origins of Japanese Economic Growth
Dale W. Jorgenson and Koji Nomura
NBER Working Paper No. 11800
November 2005
JEL No. C82, D24, E23

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper presents new data on the sources of growth for the Japanese economy over the period

1960- 2000. The principal innovation is the incorporation of detailed information for individual

industries, including those involved in the production of computers, communications equipment, and

electronic components as information technology equipment. We show that economic growth is

dominated by investments and productivity growth in information technology, both for individual

industries and the economy as a whole. We also show that the revival of total factor productivity

growth accounts for the modest resurgence of the Japanese economy since 1995.

Dale W. Jorgenson
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
djorgenson@harvard.edu

Koji Nomura
Keio Economic Observatory
Keio University
2-15-45 Mita, Minato-ku
Tokyo, 108-8345
Japan
nomura@sanken.keio.ac.jp
Introduction
        Our objective in this paper is to quantify the sources of Japanese economic growth for 1960-2000,
using data for individual industries. Industry-level data enable us to trace the sources of Japanese
economic growth to its industry origins. A novel feature of these data is that we include the IT-producing
industries – Computers, Communications Equipment, and Electronic Components.1 We are able to assess
the relative importance of productivity growth and capital accumulation at both industry and economy-
wide levels. We divide productivity growth between the IT and Non-IT sectors and allocate capital
accumulation between IT and Non-IT capital.
        Productivity growth in the IT-producing industries has steadily risen in importance, generating a
relentless decline in the prices of information technology equipment and software.2 This decline in IT
prices is rooted in developments in technology that are widely understood by technologists and
economists, particularly the continuous improvement in the performance/price ratio of semiconductors
captured by Moore’s Law. Information technology has reduced the cost and improved the performance of
products and services embraced by businesses, households, and governments. The enhanced role of
investment in IT is a conspicuous feature of the Japanese economy and a growth revival is under way in
many important IT-using industries.
        The mechanisms for diffusion of advances in IT are two-fold. First, advances in semiconductors
generate continuing price reductions for a given level of performance. These price reductions drive
demands for intermediate inputs in semiconductor-using industries such as computers, communications
equipment, and a host of others. Second, the industries that use semiconductors as inputs generate further
price declines that drive investments in IT equipment like computers and telecommunications equipment.
Advances in equipment production augment the downward pressure on prices, steadily redirecting the
rising IT investment flow toward its most productive uses.3
        Our major goal is to characterize the role of information technology in the Japanese economy. We
also focus on the impact of IT during the long Japanese recession of the 1990’s. There are three main
challenges in isolating and analyzing the IT-producing industries in Japanese economy. The first is that
the IT-producing industries are below the two-digit industrial classification used in previous studies of
Japanese productivity, such as Jorgenson (1995), Nomura (2004a), and Fukao, Inui, Kawai, and
Miyagawa (2004). In this paper, we have generated detailed data for these industries in order to
characterize IT-production as precisely as possible. This enables us to quantify the impact of IT



1
  Our methodology follows that of Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2005).
2
  See Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2005).
3
  Models of the interactions among semiconductor, computer, and other industries are presented by Dulberger
(1993), Triplett (1996), and Oliner and Sichel (2000).

                                                        1
production on the Japanese economy more accurately and represents a substantial advantage over earlier
studies using the broader industry aggregates.
        The second challenge is the capitalization of investment in software in the Japanese national
accounts. The official national accounts treat expenditures for custom software, mineral exploration, and
plant engineering as gross fixed capital formation (GFCF) in intangible assets. Own-account software and
pre-packaged software have not been capitalized, although this is recommended by the United Nations
(1993) System of National Accounts 1993 (1993 SNA). 4 In this paper, we capitalize own-account
software and pre-packaged software and rebalance the time-series of input-output tables given in Nomura
(2004b). The methodology is similar to the one adopted by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) in
the benchmark revision of the U.S. national accounts in 2003.
        The third challenge is to construct appropriate prices for IT products. For example, Jorgenson
(2004) analyses the sources of growth of the G7 economies at the aggregate level. He uses
“internationally harmonized” IT prices based on U.S. prices. The use of harmonized prices is one possible
approximation to quality-adjusted prices for countries whose statistical agencies do not adjust IT prices to
eliminate quality change. However, the IT price statistics in Japan have already been quality-adjusted, so
that internationally harmonized prices are unnecessary. Nomura and Samuels (2004) compare Japanese
and U.S. IT prices and estimate the “best practice” IT prices for Japan that we employ in this paper. We
also consider Japanese IT prices for output and investment, since these are critical in measuring
productivity growth in Japanese industries, including IT-producing industries.
        In addition to reconciling the national accounts for Japan with the 1993 SNA, we create a
production account for the household sector and expand the Japanese accounts in three areas. We impute
capital services for public capital, owner-occupied housing, and consumer durables. This makes it
possible to compare the Japanese national accounts with the U.S. national accounts described in
Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2005). The national accounting system employed in this paper includes a
complete production account for the Jorgenson system of national accounts (Fraumeni, 2000; Jorgenson
and Landefeld, 2005). This provides an appropriate valuation of capital services for fixed assets and land
in non-market production. This will be considered in the next revision of the SNA in 2008 (1993 SNA
Revision 1) or future revisions, as discussed in Ahmad (2004).



4
  It is not evident why these categories of software were not capitalized. One reason might be that benchmark 1995
input-output (IO) table, one of basic sources for estimating the Japanese national accounts, treated only custom
software as a software investment. The benchmark 2000 input-output table, published in the summer of 2004, treats
pre-packaged software as GFCF. However, capitalization of own-account software was not included in the
benchmark 2000 IO table. Due to constraints on data from the Japanese national accounts, own-account and pre-
packaged software are not capitalized in previous studies of the Japanese growth accounts at the industry level, such
as Nomura (2004a) and Fukao, Inui, Kawai, and Miyagawa (2004).

                                                              2
        The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section II presents our methodology for
measuring output and intermediate inputs. The most important feature is a consistent time series of inter-
industry transactions tables that enables us to allocate the sources of Japanese economic growth among
industries. In Section III we outline our methods for measuring capital input. Constant quality price
indexes for information technology equipment are essential for separating the change in performance of
this equipment from the change in price for a given level of performance. The cost of capital is the key
concept for capturing the economic impact of information technology prices. Section IV outlines our
methods for measuring labor input. These incorporate differences in hours worked and wages for workers
who differ in age, sex, and, most important, educational attainment. We combine measures of industry
output and capital, labor, and intermediate inputs to construct estimates of productivity by industry in
Section V.
        In Section VI we outline a framework for aggregating output, capital, labor, and intermediate
inputs, and productivity over industries. This framework was introduced by Jorgenson, Gollop, and
Fraumeni (1987). A key role is played by a weighting scheme proposed by Domar (1961), based on the
relative importance of each industry in value added, as well as the relative importance of value added in
the industry’s output. The Domar weighting scheme captures the impact of sources of growth at the
industry level, both in the industry where growth occurs and the industries that purchase the output of this
industry. Section VII presents our analysis of the industry origins of Japanese economic growth over the
period 1960-2000. The contributions of capital and labor inputs and gains in economy-wide productivity
presented in Tables 2, 3, and 4 reflect the evolution of the production structure of all industries in the
Japanese economy. We aggregate over industries in order to show how changes in production structure at
the industry level cumulate to determine economy-wide economic growth. We focus special attention on
the role of productivity growth in the IT-producing industries. Section VII concludes the paper.



I. Measuring Output, Intermediate Input, and Value Added.
i. Methodology
        This section describes our methodology for measuring industry outputs, intermediate inputs, and
value added. This uses a time series of input-output (IO) tables and was introduced by Jorgenson, Gollop,
and Fraumeni (1987, Ch.5). We begin with a description of our definitions and notation:
        Yj       quantity of output of industry j

        X i, j   quantity of input i into industry j

        Xj       total intermediate input into industry j



                                                            3
         Kj       capital input into industry j

         Lj       labor input into industry j

        Tj        index of technology in industry j

        Yi C      quantity of domestically produced commodity i

        Yi S      quantity of total supply of commodity i

         M j ,i   Make matrix; nominal value of commodity i made by industry j

        Vj        quantity of value added in industry j

         PjY      price of output to producer in industry j

         PjYT     price of output in industry j , including net indirect tax

         Pi       price of commodity i

         PjX      price of total intermediate input into industry j

         PjK      price of total capital input into industry j

         PjL      price of total labor input into industry j

         PiYC     price of domestically produced commodity i

         PjV      price of total value added in industry j

         mi       quantity of imports of commodity i

         Pi m     price of imported commodity i




    We assume that the production function for industry j has M distinct intermediate inputs and is
separable in these inputs, so that:
                      (2.1)    Y j = f ( K j , L j , X j , T j );       X j = x ( X 1, j , X 2, j ,..., X M , j ) ,

where M =51; there are 47 commodities corresponding to the primary products of the industries listed in
Table 5 and 4 non-competitive import goods for Japanese economy –– Crude Oil, LNG, Iron Ore, and
Other Non-competitive Imports. The second equation of Equation (2.1) is an aggregator function of
intermediate inputs in industry j. Inputs of capital and labor, K j and L j , are also aggregated from the

detailed categories for each input defined below.


                                                                    4
         Under the assumptions of constant returns to scale and competitive markets, the value of output is
equal to the value of all inputs –– capital, labor, and intermediate:
                                 (2.2)      PjY Y j = PjK K j + PjL L j + ∑ Pi X i , j ,
                                                                             i


where we assume that the price of intermediate input Pi of commodity i is the same for all purchasing

industries.
         In the aggregator function of Equation (2.1), we define the quantity of intermediate input as a
translog index of its components:
                                        (2.3)    ∆ ln X j = ∑ vi , j ∆ ln X i , j ,
                                                                i


where the vi , j weights are the average, two-period shares of the components in the value of intermediate

input. The price index of intermediate input PjX is equal to the value of intermediate input, divided by

the quantity index X j . Note that this price is specific to industry j, even if the prices of the component

inputs are the same for all industries, since the shares of the components differ among industries.
         We require the concept of industry value added for aggregation over sectors in Section VI below.
Assuming that the production function is separable in intermediate input and value added, we define
industry value added V j implicitly from the equation:

                                (2.4)     ∆ ln Y j = (1 − v Vj ) ∆ ln X j + v Vj ∆ ln V j ,

where the v Vj weights are the two-period average shares of value added in gross output. Value added in

nominal terms is PjV V j = PjK K j + PjL L j . The price of value added PjV is derived by dividing this

nominal value by the quantity index from Equation (2.4).
         In order to identify the impact of information technology, we isolate the industries that produce
IT-related goods. In particular, we divide Electric Machinery into Computers, Electronic Components,
Communications Equipment, and Other Electrical Machinery. This breakdown allows us to better identify
and analyze the impact of IT-production on the Japanese economy. We derive both outputs and
intermediate inputs from a time series of inter-industry transactions tables. These tables consist of a Use
Table that allocates the use of each commodity among intermediate inputs and final demand categories
and a Make Table that allocates the output of each commodity among the industries that produce it. The
output of a given commodity by all industries and the input of this commodity by all industries must be
equal.
         In the Use Table the jth column represents industry j and the ith row represents commodity i. In
nominal terms, the sum of the elements in column j is the value of the industry’s output. This is equal to

                                                               5
the value of this output to the producer, plus net indirect taxes paid on this output by the purchaser
TAX j :

                                        (2.5)        PjYT Y j = PjY Y j + TAX j ,

where the price received by the seller is PjY and the price paid by the purchaser is PjYT , which includes

net indirect taxes and does not include trade and transportation margins paid by the purchaser.
          An industry may produce several commodities and a commodity may be produced by several
industries. The value of the output of industry j is equal to the value of all the commodities it produces:
                                             (2.6)      PjYT Y j = ∑ M j ,i ,
                                                                           i


where M j ,i is the value of commodity i produced by j on Make table. This implies that:

                                             (2.7)     PiYC Yi C = ∑ M j ,i ,
                                                                               j


where Yi C denotes the quantity of domestically produced commodity i. We assume that each commodity

is an aggregate of the quantities produced in various industries and the output price of the jth industry
PjYT is given by:

                                                                       M j ,i
                                     (2.8)      ln PjYT = ∑                               ln PiYC .
                                                               i   ∑M  j
                                                                                   j ,i



          The Use Table also includes sales to final demand. This is broken down into the familiar
categories of personal consumption expenditures, gross private domestic investment, government
purchases, exports, and imports (c,i,g,x,m). The sum of the elements in row i of the Use Table is the
value of all deliveries of the ith commodity to intermediate and final demand. Thus, the supply-demand
balance for commodity i in value terms is:
                          (2.9)   PiYC Yi C = ∑ Pi X i + Pi ( ci + ii + g i + xi ) − Pi m mi .
                                                i

We can rewrite this as the total supply from domestic suppliers and imports, which equals total demand:
                         (2.10)   PiYC Yi C + Pi m mi = ∑ Pi X i + Pi ( ci + ii + g i + xi ) .
                                                           i

          We assume that all buyers purchase the same basket of commodity i, that is, the same share of the
imported variety. The quantity of the total supply of commodity i, Yi S , is assumed to be a translog index

of the two varieties, and the price is defined to make the value identity hold:




                                                                   6
                                            ∆ ln Yi S = viC ∆ ln Yi C + vim ∆ ln mi
                                   (2.11)                                             .
                                            Pi Yi S = PiYC Yi C + Pi m mi
Note that this price Pi is the price paid by producers for their input in Equation (2.2). This completes our

inter-industry accounting system.


ii. Data
           We next describe the sources and methods for construction of our system of inter-industry
accounts. We extend the latest version of the time-series of input-output (IO) tables in the KEO Database.
This is a comprehensive productivity database for the Japanese economy produced at the Keio Economic
Observatory (KEO), Keio University, Japan. The official benchmark U.S. Input-Output (IO) tables
produced by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) are defined as Use Tables and transactions are
classified by commodity and industry. By contrast the Japanese benchmark IO tables published by
Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications (MIC) classifies transactions commodity by
commodity. The IO tables (KEO-IO) in the KEO Database consist of Commodity Table, Make Table, and
Use Table. The Use Table is estimated using the other two tables, based on the commodity-technology
assumption that the same input coefficients are utilized for the production of a given commodity, even if
it has been produced by different industries.
           The KEO-IO system has a 43-industry and 47-commodity classification, including non-
competitive imports during 1960-2000.5 The components of final demand in the KEO-IO are consistent
with the corresponding components of GDP in the Japanese official national accounts. However, since the
official Japanese national accounts based on 1993 SNA are estimated only back to 1980, it is impossible
to estimate long-term industry accounts based on 1993 SNA. Accordingly, the latest KEO-IO was
estimated on the basis of the 1968 SNA and adjusted for capitalization of custom software.
           In this paper, we expand the KEO-IO in six major areas. By including capital consumption for
infrastructure our estimates become close to the official Japanese national accounts. Adding capitalization
of own-account and pre-packaged software, our concept approaches the 1993 SNA. Finally, additional
adjustments make our accounts comparable with the U.S. accounts based on the Jorgenson system of
national accounts (Fraumeni, 2000; Jorgenson and Landefeld, 2005). In 1993 SNA and also in the
National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) from the U.S. BEA, only consumption of fixed capital
(CFC) is included in the production accounts for government and household sectors. The CFC is only a


5
 Although the documentation for the latest version of KEO Database estimated in 2003 is not yet published, Kuroda,
Shimpo, Nomura, and Kobayashi (1997) provides a detailed explanation of the estimation of time-series Input-
Output tables for the Japanese economy. The methodology for estimating the latest KEO-IO is based on the same
approach.

                                                             7
part of the capital cost. The extension to the Jorgenson system of national accounts requires replacement
of the CFC by a proper measure of capital services in non-market production. This will be considered in
the next revision of SNA in 2008 (1993 SNA Revision 1) or future revisions as proposed by the Canberra
II Group (Ahmad, 2004).


iii. Issues

        a) Identification of IT Producers

       In order to identify the impact of IT on the Japanese economy, three IT producers –– Computers,
Communications Equipment, and Electronic Components –– are separated from Electric Machinery in the
KEO-IO during 1960-2000. In the US Standard Industrial Classification (SIC), Computers (SIC-357)
belong to Industrial Machinery and Equipment (SIC-35) at the two-digit level, but in Japan this industry
is included in Electric Machinery. In the SIC Computers (SIC-357) consists of Electronic Computers
(SIC-3571), Computer Storage Devices (SIC-3572), Computer Peripheral Equipment (SIC-3577),
Calculating And Accounting Machines (SIC-3578), and Office Machines (SIC-3579). Our definition of
the Computer Industry does not include SIC-3578 and 3579, both of which are included in General
Machinery.6

       The Census of Manufacturing, produced by Ministry of Economy, Trade, and Industry (METI),
and the benchmark IO tables for Japan give data for production and the components of value added in the
IT-producing industries. We develop a time series of data that is consistent with our industry definitions
at the three-digit level, since the industry classification of the source data changes over time. We estimate
the input columns of IT producers and Other Electrical Machinery using the RAS method. The sum is the
same as the input column of Electric Machinery industry in the original KEO-IO. We use the values for
exports and imports from the Trade Statistics of Japan by Ministry of Finance (MOF) to estimate the total
domestic demand for IT commodities. Maintaining consistency with the detailed fixed capital formation
matrixes estimated in Nomura (2004a, Ch.A-B), we distribute domestic demand, excluding investment,
among intermediate inputs and consumption and other final demands, based on shares in Benchmark IO
tables every five years. The row and column vectors aggregated from the four industries to Electric
Machinery industry are unchanged from the original KEO-IO. We discuss the issue of output prices for IT
producers in the next subsection.


6
  The Computer industry in Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2005) is based on the SIC-357. In the North American
Industrial Classification (NAICS), large parts of SIC-3578 and SIC-3579 are excluded from Computer and
Electronic Product Manufacturing (NAICS-334) in the three-digit classification. These industries are included in
Machinery Manufacturing (NAICS-333) and other industries. To be consistent with the latest NAICS data, we
decided that the Computer Industry, excluding SIC-3578 and SIC-3579, is preferable in the Japanese accounts.

                                                           8
       b) Consumption of Infrastructure

      Based on the 1993 SNA, consumption of infrastructure is included in our IO tables, although the
original KEO-IO did not include it. The values of depreciation are estimated to be consistent with detailed
estimates of infrastructure stock during 1955-2000 in Nomura (2004a, Ch.2). This definition increases the
value added in government sector and government consumption in final demand. In the official Japanese
national accounts, consumption of infrastructure is already treated as one component of GDP. However, it
is estimated only from 1980 onwards and evaluated at historical prices. Since our estimates are in current
prices and differ from the values in the official national accounts, GDP also differs. Our estimate for the
additional consumption of infrastructure is 8.1 trillion yen in the year 2000.

       c) Capitalization of Own-Account Software and Pre-packaged Software

      In the Japanese national accounts, the expenditure for custom software is treated as GFCF.
Although 1993 SNA also recommends the capitalizing of own-account software and pre-packaged
software, the official Japanese national accounts do not follow this recommendation. In order to maintain
comparability of IT impacts between the U.S. and Japan, we capitalize these two types of software.
Nomura (2004b) estimates the investment and stock of own-account software by industry during 1955-
2000, based on a methodology similar to the one BEA employed in the benchmark revision of the U.S.
national accounts in 2003. This requires rebalancing the IO tables.7

      Since the output of the government sector is defined by total cost, capitalization of software leads
to a change in the definition of government output. The increase in the GDP is the sum of the increase of
investment for own-account and pre-packaged software, the increase of consumption for both types of
capital in the government sector, and the decrease of own-account software produced by the government
and pre-packaged software purchased by the government. The consumption of software capital is required
to be consistent with our estimates of the stock of software held by the government sector. By the
capitalization of both types of software, the GDP is increased by 3.8 trillion yen in 2000 in our estimates.

       d) Capital Services of Public Capital

      Consumption of public capital is already included in GDP in our IO table, based on the
recommendation of 1993 SNA. To maintain comparability with the Jorgenson system of national



7
 Nomura (2004b) discusses the two different methods to describe own-account software in the IO table and achieve
consistency with other data. The production of own-account software within each industry is described as an output
of the software industry in our Use Table. Our labor data are not cross-classified by occupational categories.
Although the labor cost for programmers and system engineers producing own-account software in each industry is
deducted from the labor income, the aggregate index of wages in each industry is not be reflected in the
capitalization of own-account software.

                                                            9
accounts for the U.S., we impute the capital service costs for publicly owned capital, using the average
rate of return of all industries, weighted by the nominal share of capital stock in these industries. The rate
of return in each industry is defined by the weighted average of rate of interest and the rate of return on
equity, as measured in Nomura (2004a, Ch.3). This is based on the methodology of Jorgenson and Yun
(2001). The difference between the imputed public capital cost and CFC of public capital is defined as the
operating surplus of government sector.8 Again, this leads to a rebalancing our IO table, and an increase
of GDP. Our estimate for the additional capital cost for public capital is 8.4 trillion yen in 2000.

       e) Capital Services of Owner-Occupied Housing by Households

       We treat households as a producer in our accounting system. One of outputs of the household
sector is defined by the imputed rent for owner-occupied housing. Since the imputed rent of structures for
owner-occupied housing by households is included in national accounts, this change does not affect our
estimate of the GDP, although the description in our IO tables is changed accordingly.9 Note that the
output of Real Estate Industry is redefined to exclude the imputed cost of owner-occupied housing.

       In 1993 SNA, land is defined as non-produced capital and income earned by renting of land is
defined as property income not presented in the production account. Although the rental fees observed in
the market may sometimes include the rental fees for land, the imputed rent for land is intentionally
excluded from the national accounts. In the U.S., on the other hand, the imputed rent for land is included
in the GDP. To maintain consistency between the national accounts in the two countries, we impute the
capital cost of land for residences owned by households. The imputed value is described as the operating
surplus of household sector as a producer and is added to GDP. In 2000, the increase of the GDP is 7.9
trillion yen.

       f) Capital Services of Consumer Durables
         In order to maintain comparability with the U.S. national accounts constructed by Jorgenson, Ho,
and Stiroh (2005) we treat households as a producer. The capital services from consumer durables are
defined as an output of the household sector. We estimate the stock of consumer durables for each
category of consumer durables and impute the capital service cost of the consumer durables, based on the
average rate of return of all industries. The expenditures on these durables are consistent with household


8
  The estimated CFC for public capital is based on the value in the national accounts. In the Japanese national
accounts, CFC is defined by historical prices. The computed difference includes the capital cost, except CFC, and
the revaluation of CFC from historical to current prices. In our framework, CFC and operating surplus are added to
generate the cost of capital services.
9
  The imputed rent in national accounts consists of the cost of capital and also intermediate inputs. Here we estimate
the capital costs from the imputed rent in national accounts. Second, we impute the rate of return for owner-
occupied housing maintaining consistency with our estimates of capital cost and capital stock. The residual non-
capital costs are described as intermediate inputs of the household sector in our accounts.

                                                              10
consumption in our IO table. This additional imputation leads to an increase of GDP. In 2000, it is 25.5
trillion yen and 4.6 percent share of our redefined GDP, based on the Jorgenson system. The share is
almost half of the U.S. share, which is 9.4 percent in 2000, reflecting the larger stock of consumer
durables and higher rate of return in the U.S.


iv. Output Prices for IT
         International comparisons of productivity often employ internationally harmonized prices, which
translate U.S. prices to comparison-country prices in order to control for the quality improvements in the
comparison country.10 These studies treat the quality-adjusted computer prices constructed by BEA as the
most satisfactory for capturing the rapid technological improvements in the computer industry. Since
price statistics in comparison countries often do not adjust for quality change in IT goods, the use of
harmonized prices may be a useful approximation to quality-adjusted prices. However, price statistics in
Japan are already quality-adjusted.
         The Bank of Japan (BOJ) produces the Corporate Goods Price Index (CGPI), a system which is
similar to the Producer Price Index (PPI) constructed by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). In the
BOJ’s 2000 benchmark revision, price statistics were vastly improved and the Wholesale Price Index
(WPI) was renamed as the CGPI. Here, we refer to both sets of statistics as the WPI/CGPI. Nomura and
Samuels (2004) have compared IT prices in the U.S. and Japan at the SIC three-, four-, and five-digit
levels. Comparing the U.S. and Japanese price data for Personal Computers and General Purpose
Computers & Servers at the five-digit level from 1995 to 2003, the gap between the two countries is not
large if the index numbers are constructed by aggregation over the most detailed items available.
         By adjusting the index number formula and aggregation weights for the WPI/CGPI to be
consistent with the BEA’s output price, the resulting price declines for Electronic Computers are
comparable. During 1995-2003 prices fall 29.3 percent per year in the U.S., compared to 27.0 percent per
year in Japan. At the three-digit level the price of Electronic Computers and Peripheral Equipment falls
23.8 percent per year in the U.S. compared to 15.5 percent per year in Japan. A significant portion of the
price gap at the three-digit level can be explained by the Peripheral Equipment price, which falls less
rapidly in Japan and has a larger share of total output when exports are included. We conclude that




10
  Price harmonization is an attempt to control for price differences under the assumption that the comparison
country's price data fails to capture quality improvements. The relative price of IT to non-IT in the comparison
country is set equal to the IT to non-IT price relative in the U.S. The harmonized price is formulated such that:
∆ ln p ITX = ∆ ln p nIT
                    X
                        + ( ∆ ln p US
                                   IT − ∆ ln p nIT )
                                               US
                                                     , where the suffix X means the reference country, p IT is the IT product
price, and p nIT is the non-IT price.


                                                                 11
computer prices at the SIC three-, four-, and five-digit level in the U.S. and Japan are appropriately
adjusted for quality change after 1995.
        During 1980-95, computer prices based on BEA data at the three-digit level fall 13.1 percent per
year in the U.S., while prices fall 7.6 percent per year in Japan. In the 1980s the Japanese PC market was
dominated by the NEC Corporation, which had a 60-70 percent share of domestic demand. On the other
hand, the international PC market was very competitive with many manufacturers of IBM-compatible
computers entering in order to combat the dominance of IBM in the early 1980s. Until 1991, the Japanese
PC market was separated from the international market due to hardware and software differences and
incompatibility issues, but the introduction of DOS/V as a new Operating System (OS) in 1991 changed
that.
        DOS/V is a version of MS-DOS that provides both English and Japanese language command
interfaces and can be used for applications designed for either or both English and Japanese. DOS/V
includes all the English-based commands and specific Japanese DOS/V commands.11 Because DOS/V
works on all IBM-compatible computers, foreign manufacturers were able to enter to the Japanese PC
market. Competition brought prices down for computers. In 1993, NEC Corporation introduced a new
model PC, priced 50 percent lower than the previous model. The import share of computers in Japan
increased from 7.6 percent in 1990 to 14.3 percent in 1995 and reached to 23.1 percent in 2000.
        We conclude that internationally harmonized prices for computers are inappropriate for Japan,
since these prices fail to reflect differences in market conditions between Japan and the U.S. Nomura and
Samuels (2004) have estimated IT prices for the Japanese economy during 1960-2003, using the available
price data sources such as WPI/CGPI, Linked-IO Tables, Nikkei Data (prior to 1970), and others with the
adjustment of index number formulas and aggregation weights, where possible.12 These embody the best
practice for measuring IT prices for Japan and we have used them in this paper.


III. Measuring Capital Input
i. Methodology
        This section outlines our methodology for measuring the flow of capital services in each industry.
The key objective is to account for substitution among assets with different marginal products. The
methodology was originated by Jorgenson and Griliches (1995), who constructed price and quantity


11
   DOS/V gets its name because it requires a Video Graphics Array (VGA) display. In 1991 the Open Access
Development Group (OADG), a consortium organized by IBM, developed DOS/V.
12
   Nikkei Data is a time series data covering real and nominal output, imports, and exports, based on the commodity
classification in the Japanese benchmark 1965 IO table. Output data covers 1951 to 1968 and import and export data
cover 1951 to 1972. These data was constructed at the Japan Center for Economic Research (JCER), directed by
Professor Iwao Ozaki, Keio University. Unfortunately, the documentation for these data is no longer available.

                                                            12
indexes for capital input, based on Jorgenson’s (1996) model of the corporate cost of capital. These
indexes were extended to the industry level for all three legal forms of organization – corporate, non-
corporate, and household - by Jorgenson, Gollop, and Fraumeni (1987, Ch.4) and updated and revised by
Jorgenson (1995). We are unable to identify corporate and non-corporate capital services separately for
Japan because of data constraints.
        Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2005) incorporate recent methodological advances by Jorgenson and
Stiroh (2000). These include the use of asset-specific revaluation terms in the service price equation. In
addition, capital service flows from new investments are assumed to become available in the middle of
the year, rather than at the end of the year, as in earlier work. In the measurement of capital in Japan
Nomura (1998) used asset-specific revaluation terms and Nomura (2004a, Ch.3) changed the timing of
capital service flows from new investments to be consistent with Jorgenson and Stiroh (2000), except for
buildings and structures.
        We begin with notation for investment, capital stocks, and capital services for individual assets
and industry aggregates. The subscript k refers to the specific asset, while j refers to the industry; time
subscripts are suppressed wherever possible. For individual assets we have:
        Ak , j   quantity of investment

        Sk , j   quantity of capital stock

        Zk, j    quantity of installed capital stock

        Kk, j    quantity of capital service

        PkA      price of investment, which is the same as price of capital stock for each k

        PkK, j   price of capital service

        VkK, j   nominal capital service cost

        δk       geometric depreciation rate

     For industry aggregates:
        Aj       quantity index of industry investment

        Zj       quantity index of industry installed capital stock

        Kk       quantity index of industry capital service

        PjA      price index of industry investment

        PjZ      price index of industry stock



                                                          13
            PjK    price index of industry capital service

            Q Kj   index of industry capital quality

        For each industry we begin with data on the quantity of investment in each individual asset Ak , j .

We assume that the investment price index transforms nominal investment in different time periods into
identical “efficiency units” over time, so that investments of different vintages are perfect substitutes in
production. Improvements in the performance of capital input, for example, a faster processor in a
computer, are incorporated into the price index that transforms the current vintage of investment into an
equivalent number of efficiency units of earlier vintages. As a concrete example, the constant-quality
price index for computer equipment transforms more recent investments in faster, more powerful,
computers into additional units of constant efficiency base-year computers.
        We transform data on the quantities of investment into estimates of capital stocks for all assets,
industries, and years through the familiar perpetual inventory method. This is consistent with the
assumption of perfect substitutability across vintages and defines the capital stock for each industry and
asset as:
                                                                                        ∞
                          (3.1)      S k , j ,t = S k , j ,t −1 (1 − δ k ) + Ak , j ,t = ∑ (1 − δ k )τ Ak , j ,t −τ ,
                                                                                       τ =0

where the efficiency of an asset is assumed to decline geometrically with age at the rate δ k . The

geometric approach makes it possible to simplify the perpetual inventory method, as in Equation (3.1).
        Equation (3.1) has the interpretation that capital stock is a weighted sum of past investments,
where the weights are derived from the relative efficiencies of capital of different ages, captured by the
geometric rate of decline. Note that the rates of decline in efficiency δ k are indexed by asset only and not

by industry. Finally, because all capital is measured in base-year efficiency units, the appropriate price
for valuing the capital stock is the investment price deflator PkA .

        Since investment Ak , j is defined in terms of progress in construction, the capital stock S k , j

defined in Equation (3.1) includes capital goods that are not yet installed. For each asset we assume that
new investment becomes available for production at the mid-point of the year so the installed capital
stock for each industry and each asset is assumed to the arithmetic average of the current and lagged
capital stock. An exception to this, considering the time lag between progress in construction and
installation, is that we assume the installed stock of buildings and structures is the lagged capital stock:

                                             S k , j ,t −1                          k ∈ Buildings, Structures
                      (3.2)    Z k , j ,t =                                                                            .
                                            (S k , j ,t + S k , j ,t −1 ) 2        otherwise


                                                                               14
         The installed stock of capital Z k , j represents the accumulation of past investments, but we are

primarily interested in K k , j , the flow of capital services from that stock over a given period. This

distinction is not critical for individual assets, but becomes essential when we aggregate heterogeneous
assets to form an industry or economy-wide aggregate. We assume the flow of capital services for each
industry and each asset is proportional to the installed stock of capital:
                                                 (3.3)        K k , j ,t = φ k , j Z k , j ,t ,

where φ k , j denotes the proportionality constant. The constant coefficient: φ k , j , is an “annualization

factor”, which transform capital stock into capital services. Here, we normalize it to one; therefore, the
stock and services of capital are identical: K k , j = Z k , j .

         We estimate a price of capital services that corresponds to the quantity of capital input via the
cost-of-capital formula. With no uncertainty about capital income, investors are indifferent between
earning a nominal rate of return it on a different investment or buying a unit of capital, collecting a rental
fee, and then selling the depreciated asset in the next period. For investors purchasing the asset the cost
of capital equals the marginal product of the asset. This implies the familiar cost of capital, or user cost,
for each asset in each industry:
                                       (3.4)      PkK, j ,t = (i j ,t − π k ,t ) PkA,t −1 + δ k PkA,t ,

where the asset-specific capital gains term is π k .t = ( PkA,t − PkA,t −1 ) / PkA,t −1 and i j ,t is the nominal rate of

return in industry j.
         The cost of capital accounts for the nominal rate of return, asset-specific depreciation, and asset-
specific revaluation. An asset with a higher depreciation rate has a higher marginal product and must
receive a higher capital service price as compensation. Similarly, if an investor expects a capital loss
( π k ,t < 0 ), then a higher service price is required. Jorgenson and Stiroh (2000) and Oliner and Sichel

(2000) discuss the importance of incorporating asset-specific revaluation terms for information
technology assets experiencing rapid downward revaluations.
         Tax considerations are also a key component of capital service prices, as discussed by Hall and
Jorgenson (1996) and developed in detail by Jorgenson and Yun (2001) for the U.S. economy and
Nomura (1998, 2004a) for the Japanese economy. We follow Nomura (2004a, Ch.3) in accounting for
capital consumption allowances, income allowances and reserves, special depreciation, corporate income
tax, business income tax, property taxes, acquisition taxes, debt/equity financing, and personal taxes. We
estimate an asset-specific, after-tax real rate of return for each asset in each industry, rk , j ,t , that enters the

cost-of-capital formula:


                                                                       15
                                               1 + (1 − τ t )τ kA,t − τ t zk ,t
                       (3.5)     PkK, j ,t =
                                                        1−τt
                                                                                      [                       ]
                                                                                rk , j ,t PkA,t −1 + δ k PkA,t + τ kP,t PkA,t ,

where τ t is the rate for corporate income tax and business income tax, z k ,t is the present value of capital

consumption allowances for tax purposes, τ kA,t is a acquisition tax rate, τ kP,t is a property tax rate.13 The

rate of return rk , j ,t is formulated as a weighted average of real, after-tax returns to debt and equity. We

then assume the after-tax rate of return to all assets in each industry is the same and exhaust the value of
payments to capital across all assets in the corporate sector of each industry. Inventories and land have a
depreciation rate of zero and do not qualify for capital consumption allowances for tax purposes, so the
cost-of-capital formula in Equation (3.5) can be simplified for these assets.
         Equations (3.1) through (3.5) describe our estimation procedure for the capital service flows and
capital service prices, K k , j and PkK, j , respectively, for each asset, industry, and time period. We combine

capital services for all assets within an industry by means of a translog quantity index as:
                                                (3.6)        ∆ ln K j = ∑ v kK, j ∆ ln K k , j
                                                                              k


where the v kK, j weights are the two-period average shares of each type of capital income in total capital

income by each industry. The corresponding price index of capital inputs PjK is defined implicitly to

make the value identity hold:
                                     (3.7)          V jK = PjK K j = ∑ PkK, j K k , j = ∑VkK, j .
                                                                             k                     k


Similarly, the price index for capital stock PjZ is defined implicitly by the identity:

                                                    (3.8)        PjZ Z j = ∑ PkA, j Z k , j .
                                                                                  k


         We define capital quality Q Kj for industry j, as the ratio of capital input to capital stock:

                                                                                      Kj
                                                            (3.9)      Q Kj =              ,
                                                                                      Zj
where:


13
  The cost-of-capital formula is summarized here for simplicity. Nomura (2004a, Ch.3) develops a detailed cost-of-
capital formula based on the Japanese tax structure. In the Japanese tax system, a business income tax is levied on
revenue for some industries like electricity, although Equation (3.4) does not identify the differences. Since the use
of income allowances and reserves could reduce the effective tax rate for corporate income, a denominator of the
formula, (1 − τ t ) , depends on the rate of return. Also, z k ,t depends on the imputed rate of return, although Jorgenson
and Yun (2001) treat this as exogenous.

                                                                           16
                                                             (3.10)     Z j = ∑ Zk, j
                                                                                     k
                                                                       14
is the unweighted sum of each type of capital stock.
               The translog index of capital input in the Equation (3.6) is a discrete approximation to the Divisia
          &                           K&
index;  K j                                       defined in a continuous time, where v K are nominal shares of each
                      Kj ∑
                        = v kK, j  k , j                                             k, j
                                             K
                        k                   k, j 


type of capital income in total capital income. In comparison to the Divisia index of capital inputs, the
growth rate of capital stock in the Equation (3.10) is interpreted the weighted average of the growth rates
                                   &                               Z&
of capital stock by each asset;  Z j                                           , where the weights w Z are the shares of each
                                                    Zj ∑
                                                      = wkZ, j  k , j                             k, j
                                                                          Z
                                                      k                  k, j 


                                                                          &                                         Z& j  , is the growth rate
type of capital in total capital stock. The difference of two indexes,  K j                                     −      
                                                                                                               Kj  Zj
                                                                                                                        
of capital quality in Equation (3.9). Since the growth rates of capital inputs and capital stocks are the
same for each asset, the difference is the use of capital service costs versus capital stocks as weights;
(v   K
     k, j                     (
            − wkZ, j ) = v kK, j 1 − PjK PkjK
                                     ~
                                                )             ~
                                                    , where PjK       is an average capital service price defined by

V jK Z j = V jK   (        ∑  k
                                     )
                                  K kj . This implies that growth in capital quality reflects substitution towards assets

with relatively high service prices and high marginal products. For example, large depreciation rates and
rapid downward revaluations for computers imply that these assets have high marginal products, so that
their weights will be positive. The higher weights for computers imply that the substitution toward
computers makes capital input grow faster. This is captured by our index of capital quality.
                  Finally, we separate IT capital and Non-IT capital. The capital services of IT assets K IT
                                                                                                          j include

the service flows from computer hardware, software, and communications equipment, while the Non-IT
capital service flow K nIT
                       j   includes the services from all other equipment, structures, inventories, and

land. We create sub-indexes of capital services as:

                                                             ∆ ln K IT
                                                                    j =
                                                                            k∈IT
                                                                                ∑v       IT
                                                                                         k, j   ∆ ln K kIT, j
                                                    (3.11)                                                       ,
                                                             ∆ ln K   nIT
                                                                      j     =   ∑v
                                                                                k∉IT
                                                                                          nIT
                                                                                          k, j   ∆ ln K knIT
                                                                                                          ,j




14
   Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2005) define capital quality by the ratio of the translog index of capital inputs over the
translog index of capital stock. In this paper, we define the capital quality using the simple sum of capital stock as a
denominator, analogously with the definition of labor quality. Nomura (2004a, Ch.4) examines both indexes for
capital quality, the growth of capital quality using the simple sum of capital stock is higher than that with the
translog index of capital stock during 1960-2000 for the Japanese economy.

                                                                                17
where the shares, v kIT, j and v knIT
                                   , j , are those of IT capital and Non-IT capital, respectively.

ii. Data
           Gross Capital Stock Private Enterprises (GCSPE), produced by Economic and Social Research
Institution (ESRI) of the Cabinet Office (CAO), is the main data source for the Japanese capital stock by
industry. However, the GCSPE is defined as gross capital stock and does not have an asset classification;
using this estimate of productive capital stock would result in biases. Nomura (2004a, Ch.2) shows that
the stock estimates of GCSPE may have an upward bias of 20 percent in 2000. This is due to the use of
the gross concept and the absence of consideration of quality change for heterogeneous capital. We
conclude that the official stock data are not sufficiently precise for our purposes.
           Our investment data are based on the estimates of Nomura (2004a, Ch.A-B). He estimates a time
series of private and public fixed capital formation matrixes by 46 industries and 95 fixed assets during
1955-2000. The data sources are the benchmark Fixed Capital Formation Matrixes (IO-FCFM), which are
published by the MIC every five years after 1970 as one of supplementary tables of benchmark IO tables,
the Annual Report of Financial Statements of Corporations produced by the Ministry of Finance (MOF),
and many other primary data sources for investment, production, and trade in capital goods. 15 We
estimate stock matrixes for fixed assets, based on the best geometric approach for each fixed asset and a
perpetual inventory method, using the initial benchmark stock of the Japanese National Wealth Survey in
1955.
           The stocks of inventories and land by industry are estimated in the Chapters C and D in Nomura
(2004a), respectively. In the Japanese economy, the value of land is particularly noteworthy. By
comparison with the 23.6 percent share of land in nominal capital stock in the U.S. in 2000, the Japanese
land share is 43.5 percent in 2000, even though the Japanese economy has experienced a record decline of
land prices in the 1990s. Diewert and Lawrence (2000) indicate that neglecting land and inventories leads
to a decline in average TFP growth rates of 0.1 percent per year in Canada. This is large in relative terms,
since the average growth rate for the Canadian TFP averaged only 0.5-0.6 percent per year during 1963-
1996.
           Nomura (2004a, Ch.4) shows that neglecting land and inventories for Japan leads to a decline of
0.7 percent per year in the average TFP growth rate during 1960-2000, compared to 1.5 percent annual
average growth rate for Japanese TFP. TFP growth is underestimated by a factor of almost fifty percent if
land and inventories are ignored! Land has a significant role in the measurement of capital and
productivity, especially in Japan. The clarification of the role of land as a capital input in production


15
 The latest 2000 IO-FCFM became available after Nomura (2004a) was published. We have revised our capital
matrixes to incorporate the latest IO-FCFM.

                                                              18
account is one of the most significant aspects of Jorgenson system of national accounts. Probably due to
the definition of land as a non-produced capital input in the 1993 SNA, the cost of land has been
neglected in production analysis. The capital cost of land, however, is implicitly included in value added
in the production account. In addition, our accounting system in this paper is defined to include the capital
cost of land also for non-market production as well.


iii. Issues
         Although the methodology described above conforms to the international standards recommended
by Blades (2001) and Schreyer (2001) of the OECD, there are important issues related to the availability
of data and the plausibility of certain assumptions that arise in implementing this methodology. This
subsection outlines these issues and presents our solutions.

        g) Negative Service Prices
         The intuition behind our estimation of capital service prices is that the value of capital service
flows must exhaust capital income. One problem is that there is very little income, or exceptionally large
negative capital income, in the periods of the oil shocks. This leads to negative estimates of service
prices. For example, if asset inflation rates are high and depreciation rates are low, relative to the
weighted average rate of return, negative service prices may result. This occurs especially in measuring
capital service prices for land during the period of the Japanese bubble economy in the late of 1980s,
since land is a non-depreciable asset. Economically, this is possible and suggests that ex post capital gains
are higher than expected, so that a small service price is possible in equilibrium. Empirically, however,
negative service prices make aggregation difficult so we have made adjustments for several assets. To
avoid the negative capital service prices, Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2005) and Nomura (1998) use a
smoothed inflation rate from the surrounding years rather than current inflation in the cost-of-capital
calculation. Berndt and Fuss (1986) and Diewert (2005) discuss this issue in more detail.
         Bulow and Summers (1984) distinguish the “income risk”, which refers to uncertainty in future
capital incomes, and “capital risk”, which refers to uncertainty in future asset prices. In our framework of
measuring capital, although no income risk is assumed, Nomura (2004a, Ch-3) considers the difference of
capital risks among different assets to avoid negative capital service prices generated by ex post high
capital gains. The difference of risk premium of asset k from the risk premium of average asset in industry
j is assumed to be:

                                                            σ kπ
                                        (3.12)   Rk , j =        (π k − π j ) ,
                                                            σ πj




                                                            19
where σ kπ is a standard deviation of the price change π k and σ πj is a standard deviation of π j , which is

the price change of average asset, defined later. In the Equation (3.12), price changes in assets are
regarded as surrogates for the rate of return on each asset.16 If it is assumed that there is no uncertainty
about the price change of asset k, σ kπ = 0 , and the risk premium for asset k is zero. Since the imputed

rate of return on equity includes the average risk premium for asset price uncertainty, the average of risk
premiums in each industry is assumed to be zero. If the price change of asset k is expected to be the same
as the price change of average asset in j industry: π k = π j , the risk premium for asset k is also zero.

     To set the average of risk premium in any industry to zero, we assume π j is


                                            (3.13) π j   =
                                                           ∑ π σπvk       k       k
                                                                                        Z
                                                                                        k, j
                                                                                               ,
                                                           ∑ σ πv     k       k
                                                                                      Z
                                                                                      k, j


where v kZ, j is a nominal share of asset k in industry j. Assuming that the weighted average of differences

in risk premia among assets is zero in each industry:      ∑v k
                                                                      Z
                                                                      k, j    Rk , j = 0 . If the price variation of an asset is

relatively high and the capital gain is over that of the average asset, Rk , j is positive for the asset. The rate

of return rk , j in the Equation (3.5) is assumed to be rk , j + Rk , j . Considering the difference of capital risks

among assets can reduce the likelihood of negative capital service prices. As a last resort, we interpolate
the negative measured capital service prices, using the average price for capital services of all assets.

        h) Capitalization of Software
         As described in the previous section, the expenditures for own-account and pre-packaged
software are not capitalized in the official Japanese national accounts. We capitalize both types of
software in our accounts, based on the estimates in Nomura (2004b). Relative to the official GDP,
redefined to include the investment in three types of software, the share of total software investment is
2.03 percent in 2000, which is almost the same as the U.S. share of 2.07 percent. Including three types of
software, our capital stock matrixes consist of 102 assets: three types of inventory, four types of land, 90
tangible assets, and five intangible assets. These assets are listed in Table 1.

        i) Capital for IT-Producing Industries

       We are particularly interested in IT-producing industries, but Nomura (2004a) provides insufficient
detail. We estimate investment of Computers, Communications Equipment, and Electronic Components

16
  Although it is possible to consider different formulations for capital risk, we assume that the set of Equations
(3.12)


                                                             20
industries using two main data sources. The IO-FCFM gives the asset composition of investment every
five years from 1970 to 2000. The Census of Manufacturing produced by the Ministry of Economy, Trade,
and Industry (METI) gives annual data for acquisition of two types of assets and the possession of land
and inventories for the IT-producing industries. Maintaining consistency with capital formation matrixes
estimated in Nomura (2004a), we expand our fixed capital formation and stock matrixes during 1955-
2000 to include the IT-producing industries.

       j) Infrastructure as a Sector Holds Capital
        One of the most substantial differences between the U.S. capital data described in Jorgenson, Ho,
and Stiroh (2005) and Japanese capital data is the treatment of infrastructure as a sector. In Japan,
infrastructure sectors are identified separately from other government activities. Nomura (2004a)’s capital
matrix has 23 classes of infrastructure investment. By expanding to IT-producing industries, our capital
matrixes have 70 capital-holding sectors in total; 45 industries, general government, excluding other
identified infrastructure, and households, which hold housing and consumer durables. Identification in
government-owned capital makes it possible to compute CFC and the service cost of government capital
as precisely as possible.

       k) Deflators for IT capital assets
        Jorgenson and Stiroh (2000) argued that the official deflators, especially for software and
communications equipment, do not fully account for quality change. In the U.S. the price index for own-
account software was defined by the BEA's input cost index, consisting of labor compensation cost
indexes and an intermediate inputs cost index. For custom software, the price index was defined as a
weighted average of the price indexes for own-account software and pre-packaged software, where the
weights are arbitrarily selected as 75 percent for own-account software and 25 percent for pre-packaged
software (Parker and Grimm, 2000). In the 2003 revision by the BEA, both price indexes for custom
software and own-account software are defined by a weighted average of the input cost index with the
NIPA pre-packaged software price index, which is estimated holding the quality constant.17
        In Japan, a satisfactory estimate of the constant-quality price for pre-packaged software is not
available.18 The price for custom software estimated by the BOJ after 1995 from the Corporate Service
Price Index (CSPI), is based on labor cost. The official Japanese national accounts also use this price
index and extend it backward to 1980. Nomura (2004b) extends this cost index backward to 1955, based
on a similar method. In Japan, the share of pre-packaged software in total software investment is slightly


and (3.13) holds.
17
   See Grimm, Moulton, and Wasshausen (2005).
18
   BOJ began to estimate the price for pre-packaged software in their CSPI after 2000, although it is based on the
cost evaluation method.

                                                            21
less than 6.2 percent in 2000, based on Nomura (2004b), by comparison with 28.0 percent in the U.S. We
use same deflator as that of the Japanese national accounts for the three kinds of software.19
        For IT capital goods, computers and communications equipment, we use the investment prices
estimated in Nomura and Samuels (2004). These price indexes are based on import shares and import
prices, trade margins, transportation costs, and the “best practice” output prices mentioned in the previous
section. The rates of decline in the IT investment prices are smaller than in the IT output prices, reflecting
the more moderate movements in prices for wholesale trade and transportation.

       l) Depreciation Rates
        Many studies of the Japanese economy use the depreciation rates of the BEA (Fraumeni, 1997).
However, depreciation rates can differ between the U.S. and Japan, reflecting differences in natural and
environmental conditions, as well as utilization, maintenance, and composition of capital goods. Nomura
(2004a, Ch-2) estimates depreciation rates based on a Box-Cox transformed age-price profile, using data
in the second-hand market for motor vehicles, and an age-efficiency profile using data in the rental
markets for housing in Japan. The geometric approach is accepted as an approximation for these assets.
        The estimated geometric depreciation rates are 16.3 percent for passenger motor vehicles, 22.4-
23.8 percent for trucks, and 3.1-4.8 percent for housing. By comparison with the U.S. depreciation rates
in the BEA, passenger vehicles and housing are less durable and trucks are more durable in Japan. In this
paper we use these estimates. For other assets, we estimate average service lives T based on the Japanese
tax-lives and the arbitrary rates converted to effective service-life in each fixed asset. Based on the
relationship: δ = R T , we compute the Japanese depreciation rates using the declining balance rates R
originated by Hulten-Wykoff (1981) and employed by the BEA.
        The BEA depreciation rates currently incorporate Oliner’s (1993, 1994) estimates for all
computer components except personal computers. Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2005) use 31.5 percent for
computers based on the depreciation schedule of the BEA. In Japan, the tax-life is four years for personal
computers and five years for other computers, which are abridged from six years after the 2001 fiscal year.
Based on the tax lives, we assume 34.7 percent depreciation rate for computers in Japan. The depreciation
rates for all assets in this paper are presented in Table 1.




19
  In order to check the sensitivity of the change of software prices, Nomura (2004b) estimates a harmonized price
index for pre-packaged software, based on the cost indexes in the U.S. and Japan and the NIPA pre-packaged
software price index. When the BEA definition of prices for own-account software and custom software is applied,
the growth rate of total software stock in Japan is 8.3 percent during 1995-2000, by comparison with 6.3 percent for
the prices defined by the cost index. Although our estimates may understate the growth of capital inputs and outputs
as final demands of software, we have chosen to employ the cost index.

                                                             22
II. Measuring Labor Input
i. Methodology
        Our methodology for deriving labor input was introduced by Jorgenson and Griliches (1995),
who constructed an index number of aggregate labor input, based on labor compensation data for male
workers, classified by educational attainment. This was extended to the industry level for the U.S.
economy by Jorgenson, Gollop, and Fraumeni (1987, Ch.3). and greatly disaggregated by age, sex,
occupation, class of employment, as well as educational attainment. In this section we describe the
construction of labor input indexes by industry for Japan.
        To construct a measure of labor input that accounts for heterogeneity in hours worked, we now
describe our implementation, beginning with the notation.
        saecj subscripts for sex, age, education, class, industry
         Esaecj   employment matrix, number of workers in cell s,a,e,c,j

         H saecj hours worked by all workers in cell s,a,e,c,j

         H l, j   abbreviation for H saecj

         Ll , j   labor input of cell l in industry j

         Pl ,Lj   price of labor input of cell l

        Vl ,Lj    nominal labor cost of cell l


        We express the industry volume of labor input as a translog quantity index of the individual
components:
                                         (4.1)      ∆ ln L j = ∑ vlL, j ∆ ln Ll , j ,
                                                                    l


where the vlL, j weights are the two-period average share of each type of labor income in total labor income

by each industry. To quantify the impact of substitution among different types of labor input, we assume
that labor input for each category Ll , j is proportional to hours worked H l , j :

                                                 (4.2)    Ll , j = ϕ l , j H l , j ,

where the constants of proportionality ϕ l , j transform hours worked into flows of labor services. We

assume that labor services are the same at all points of time for each category of hours worked. For
example, an hour worked by a self-employed male worker, aged 34, with four years of college education,
represents the same labor input in 1977 as in 2000.


                                                                 23
           Under assumption Equation (4.2) the labor quantity index in Equation (4.1) is expressed in terms
of hours worked:
                                        (4.3)     ∆ ln L j = ∑ vlL, j ∆ ln H l , j .
                                                                l


Observations on the constants ϕ l , j are not required to define aggregate labor input. The corresponding

price of labor input PjL is the ratio of the value of labor compensation to the volume index. The total

value is simply:
                                   (4.4)    V jL = PjL L j = ∑ Pl ,Lj Ll , j = ∑Vl ,Lj .
                                                                l                l

           Finally, the labor quality index measures the contribution of substitution among the components
of labor input to the volume obtained from a given number of hours:
                                                                        Lj
                                                 (4.5)     Q Lj =            ,
                                                                        Hj
where:
                                                (4.6)    H j = ∑ Hl, j
                                                                    l

is the unweighted sum of each type of hours worked. The definition of labor quality in Equation (4.5) is
similar to the definition of capital quality in Equation (3.9).
ii. Data
           We use the labor data in the KEO Database, described in Kuroda, Shimpo, Nomura, and
Kobayashi (1997, Ch.4) for the period 1960-1992, and extend these data to 2000. The KEO Database
classifies workers by sex, age (eleven classes), educational attainment (four classes for males, three
classes for females), employment class (three types: employees, self-employed, and unpaid family
workers), and industry.20 There is a total of (11 x 4 x 3) +(11 x 3 x 3) = 231 types of workers for each of
43 industries: in total 231*43=9,933 cells.
           The data source for estimating the employment matrix is the Population Census of Japan,
Statistics Bureau, MIC, for benchmark years in every five years from 1960 to 2000.21 The Labour Force
Survey (LFS) by MIC, Census of Manufacturing by METI, and many other primary data sources are used
to interpolate between the benchmark years. Although a multiple jobholder is counted as one in the
Population Census, the Employed Persons Employees and Hours Worked classified by Economic

20
  The age classes consist of 15-19, 20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44, 45-49, 50-54, 55-59, 60-64, 65-. Classes of
education attainment are 1) less than high school degree, 2) high school degree, 3) professional school, and 4)
college degree and above for males, and 1), 2), and 3)+4) for females. Before 1980, the education attainment of
females is split into just two classes: 1) and 2)+3)+4). Those attending but not completing universities are in 2).


                                                              24
Activities, a supporting table in the Japanese National Accounts, counts the workers in multiple jobs. Our
estimated employment matrix is converted to this concept.
        The Basic Survey on Wage Structure, Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare (MHLW), is the
data source for estimating average hours and wages for employees. To complement the information for
some industries and categories, the Monthly Labour Survey by MHLW, the Census of Manufacturing, the
LFS, and some other primary data are used. For self-employed and unpaid family workers, the LFS gives
average hours. Wage rates of self-employed and unpaid family workers are imputed from data available
for select industries to yield an estimate of labor compensation for the self-employed group. The wage
differential between the self-employed and unpaid family workers is estimated to be the same as the
differential between full-time and part-time employees.22
        Total labor compensation by industry has to be consistent with the input-output table. The
adjustment coefficients are computed from the discrepancy between the labor data and the KDB-IO. We
maintain consistency at the industry level by adjusting average hours worked. The KEO Database does
not have labor input for the separate industry categories for IT producers. In this paper, we estimate the
average wages for IT-producing industries, based on the Census of Manufacturing. We estimate time-
series wage indexes p Lj for three IT-producing industries and Other Electric Machinery during 1960-

2000. The labor quality indexes for the four industries are assumed to be identical.



III. Measuring Industry Productivity
i. Methodology
        We next examine the sources of Japanese economic growth at the industry level. The
contributions of capital and labor inputs and gains in aggregate total factor productivity ultimately reflect
the evolution of the production structure at the industry level and it is critical to examine the component
industries. Changes in this production structure cumulate into the determinants of economic growth as
technologies evolve and prices and economic incentives are altered accordingly.
        Our methodology for measuring total factor productivity at the industry level begins with an
industry production function:
                                       (5.1)    Y j = f (K j , L j , X j , Tj ) ,




21
  The Population Census is available every five years, except 1945, from 1920.
22
  Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2005) assume that the hourly wage of the self-employed and unpaid family workers
equals the hourly wage of the employed. Estimates of hours worked, multiplied by the wage for the same category
of employed worker, yields an estimate of labor compensation for the self-employed and unpaid family workers.

                                                            25
where Y j is industry output23, K j is capital input, L j is labor input, and X j is intermediate input, and

T j as an indicator of efficiency, all for industry j. The variables K j , L j , and X j are each aggregates of
the many components described in the preceding sections and the production function Equation (5.1) is
assumed to be separable in these components, based on the Leontief-Sono aggregation theorem.
        Let PjY , PjK , PjL , and PjX denote the prices for outputs and the three inputs, respectively.

Under the assumptions of constant returns to scale and competitive markets, a translog index of total
factor productivity (TFP) growth is defined as:
                         (5.2)      vT , j ≡ ∆ ln Y j − v jK ∆ ln K j − v jL ∆ ln L j − v jX ∆ ln X j ,

where v ij (i ∈ K , L, X ) is the two-period average share of the input in the value of output. Note that the

value of output is equal to the sum of outlays on all inputs, so that PjY Y j = PjK K j + PjL L j + PjX X j and

the value shares sum to one.24
        Equation (2.4) provides an alternative definition in terms of value added:
                                 (5.3)    vT , j ≡ v Vj ∆ ln V j − v jK ∆ ln K j − v jL ∆ ln L j .
While useful for aggregation purposes, this definition fails to identify the role of intermediate inputs, such
as semiconductors used in producing computers and communications equipment. The definition of
industry-level total factor productivity growth in Equation (5.2) is more useful for this purpose and will
be employed in our study of the growth of individual industries.
        Under the same assumptions as in Equation (5.2), we decompose industry labor productivity
growth, or growth of output per hour worked, as:
                         (5.4)      ∆ ln y j = v jK ∆ ln k j + v jL ∆ ln Q Lj + v jX ∆ ln x j + vT , j ,
where lower-case letters refer to output and inputs per hour worked. The terms on the right-hand side are
the contributions of capital deepening, labor quality, intermediate input deepening, and TFP growth to
growth of labor productivity, respectively. We refer to Equation (5.2) as TFP growth or productivity
growth, and Equation (5.4) as average labor productivity (ALP) growth.




23
   We refer to this simply as “output” although the term “gross output” is sometimes used to distinguish this measure
from “value added”.
24
   See Hall (1988), Basu and Fernald (1995, 1997), and Basu, Fernald, and Shapiro (2001) for alternative
assumptions and their implications.

                                                                 26
IV. Aggregation Over Industries
i. Methodology
        To examine the Japanese economy as a whole, we next aggregate across industries. We define the
production possibility frontier as the efficient combination of outputs and inputs for the economy as a
whole. Value added, V, consists of value added from all j industries and is produced from primary inputs
and technology as:
                                             (6.1)     V (V1 ,...V J ) = f ( K , L, T ) ,
where V, K, and L are aggregate value added, capital services, and labor input, respectively.
        The production possibility frontier does not impose the assumption of perfect substitution of
value added between industries required for the existence of an aggregate production function. We define
value added as a translog index over industry value added:
                                              (6.2)     ∆ ln V = ∑ w Vj ∆ ln V j ,
                                                                          j


where w Vj is the two-period average share of industry value added in aggregate value added and V j is

from Equation (2.4).
        Aggregate capital and labor inputs are defined as translog indexes of all types of capital and
labor, respectively:
                                                       ∆ ln K = ∑ wkK, j ∆ ln K k , j
                                                                      k, j
                                            (6.3)                                           ,
                                                       ∆ ln L = ∑ wlL, j ∆ ln Ll , j
                                                                   l, j


where the weights, wkK, j and wlL, j , are the two-period average share of each type and each industry of

capital or labor input in total capital or labor input. P V , P K , and P L are the corresponding price

indexes for aggregate value added, capital, and labor, respectively, to make the value identity
PV V = P K K + P L L .
        We define aggregate quality indexes for capital and labor:
                                                                      K L L
                                               (6.4)       QK =         ,Q = ,
                                                                      Z     H
where Z =   ∑  k, j
                      Z k , j and H = ∑l , j H l , j . The quality indexes of capital and labor, defined by industry

in Equation (3.9) and (4.5), respectively, represent the composition of capital and labor inputs within each
industry. Next, we define the quality indexes for reallocation of capital and labor inputs by industry:




                                                                 27
         Kk         L
QkKA =      , QlLA = l ,
         Zk         Hl

where Z k =   ∑    j
                       Z k , j and H l = ∑ j H l , j . K k and Ll are the translog quantity indexes of capital and

labor, defined by ∆ ln K k =      ∑   j
                                          w jK,k ∆ ln K k , j and ∆ ln Ll = ∑ j w jL,l ∆ ln Ll , j .

         The growth of aggregate capital and labor inputs in Equation (6.3) can be rewritten using the
quality indexes,

                               ∆ ln K = ∆ ln Z + ∆ ln Q K = ∆ ln Z + ∆ ln Q KI + ∆ ln Q KA + ∆ ln Q KO
                 (6.5)                                                                                     ,
                               ∆ ln L = ∆ ln H + ∆ ln Q L = ∆ ln H + ∆ ln Q LI + ∆ ln Q LA + ∆ ln Q LO
where:
                                                     Q KI = ∑ w jK Q Kj , Q LI = ∑ w jLQ Lj
                                                                j                       j
                                          (6.6)                                                        .
                                                     Q   KA
                                                              = ∑ w Q ,Q
                                                                     k
                                                                      K    KA
                                                                           k
                                                                                 LA
                                                                                      = ∑ wlLQlLA
                                                                k                           l


where Q KI and Q LI are aggregate measures for quality of capital and labor, defined in Equation (3.9) and

Equation (4.5), respectively. Also, Q KA and Q LA are aggregate measures for reallocation of capital and

labor among industries defined in Equations (6.5) for each category of capital and labor. Total quality
indexes for capital and labor are the sums of Q iI , Q iA , and Q iO ( i ∈ K , L ), which are cross-effects by

industry and category and defined as the residuals in Equation (6.6).
         We then define aggregate TFP growth as:
                                           (6.7)      vT ≡ ∆ ln V − v K ∆ ln K − v L ∆ ln L ,

where the shares, v K and v L , are the two-period average shares of the inputs in aggregate value added.

As above, we can estimate the sources of aggregate labor productivity, or value added per hour worked,
as:
                                           (6.8)      ∆ ln v ≡ v K ∆ ln k + v L ∆ ln Q L + vT ,
where the definition of the determinants is the same as for industries, except that there is no intermediate
input component.
         Aggregate TFP growth in Equation (6.8) is also defined as the sum of “Domar-weighted” industry
rates of TFP growth. If we multiply industry productivity growth in Equation (5.3) by the industry share
of aggregate value added w Vj , divide through by the industry share of value added in output v Vj , and sum

across all industries, this yields:



                                                                      28
                                                                        w Vj
                                                 (6.9)     vT = ∑              vT , j .
                                                                    j   v Vj
            The ratio of the two proportions – the so-called Domar weight – captures both the relative
importance of the industry in value added for the economy as a whole and the relative importance of
value added in the industry’s output.25 The numerator is the proportion of each industry’s value added in
aggregate value added. The denominator is the proportion of value added in the industry’s output. Note
that the sum of the Domar weights exceeds unity and that the industry sum of Domar weights is the
inverse of the ratio of value added to gross output at the aggregate level. This ingenious weighting
scheme, originated by Domar (1961), plays a key role in our framework for aggregation over industries.
            An important feature of our methodology is that we are able to identify the contributions of
individual industries to aggregate economic growth. This includes both the direct contribution to value
added and the flows of goods and services among industries as intermediate inputs in the inter-industry
transactions tables. Triplett (1996), for example, has quantified the role of semiconductors as an input into
the computer industry. Under plausible assumptions, falling semiconductor prices account for essentially
all of the price decline in computers. Building on this observation, Oliner and Sichel (2000) have
constructed a model of the U.S. economy with three industries – computers, semiconductors, and all other
products.
            An alternative aggregation methodology, employed by Jorgenson, Gollop, Fraumeni (1987, Ch.
9), is based on an aggregate production function. Here, the price of a unit of value added must be the
same in all industries in order to reduce the production possibility frontier to an aggregate production
function. Under this assumption, value added from the aggregate production function, V * , is defined as a
simple sum across industries:
                                                    (6.10)    V * = ∑V j .
                                                                         j


            Based on V * , Z , and H , we define a measure of TFP growth at the aggregate production
function approach as:
                                       (6.11)   vT* ≡ ∆ ln V * − v K ∆ ln Z − v L ∆ ln H .




25
  Our approach to defining aggregate TFP growth is based on the production possibility frontier introduced as
“aggregation over industries” in Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2005). Their aggregate TFP growth is almost equivalent
with ( vT   + Q KA + Q LA ) in this paper.

                                                               29
        Substituting Equations (6.6) and (6.12) to Equation (6.8), aggregate TFP growth vT is

decomposed to vT* , the three components of quality change in capital and labor inputs, and the

reallocation of value added Q VA :

                      (6.12)   vT = vT* + Q VA − v K (Q KI + Q KA + Q KO ) − v L (Q LI + Q LA + Q LO ).
where
                                                                      V
                                                   (6.13)    Q VA =        .
                                                                      V*

This decomposition shows that TFP for an aggregate production function: vT* , has three allocation biases
of value added, capital, and labor, two quality change biases of capital and labor, and two other
aggregation biases.



V. Empirical Results
i. Growth in IT Production
        Table 2 represents growth in aggregate value added and its sources. Aggregate value added is
defined by real gross domestic product at factor cost, separately for IT manufacturing industries ––
Computers, Communications Equipment, and Electronic Components –– Non-IT manufacturing, and
Non-manufacturing. During 1960-1973, the contribution of IT manufacturing is only 0.23 percent in 9.89
percent growth rate of aggregate value added. The contribution expands to 0.31 during 1973-1990. After
the bursting of the bubble economy, value added growth declines rapidly in the Japanese economy. The
contribution of IT manufacturing is only 0.15 percent during 1990-1995.
        Since 1995, however, IT manufacturing has contributed 0.41 percent to aggregate value added. IT
manufacturing revives relative to other industries, so that almost one third of the growth in aggregate
value added is generated by the growth of IT manufacturing in the late 1990s. Resurgence of three IT
manufacturing industries after 1995 is shown in Figures 1 and 2; Figure 1 is value added growth and the
industry contribution to aggregate value added during 1995-2000 and Figure 2 is the difference between
the growth rate and the industry contribution from the early 1990s to the late 1990s. In the late 1990s, the
three IT manufacturing industries have the highest growth of value added in our forty-seven sectors.
Communications Equipment, especially, shows the largest improvement –– almost 30 percent of value
added growth. Also, the growth of the Computer industry improves by more than 20 percent.


                                              (Insert Figure 1 and Figure 2)



                                                             30
        Gross and net output growth by industry is given in Tables 7 and 8. The high growth rate of IT
manufacturing is very persistent. During the periods 1960-2000, the three IT manufacturing industries
have the highest rates of value added growth. However, the value added share of three IT industries is
small, even in 2000. Table 5 presents value added shares by industry in 1960, 1973, 1990, 1995, and 2000.
The value added share of the three IT manufacturing industries is only 1.83 percent in 2000. The relative
importance of IT manufacturing in value added in the U.S. is similar. Based on Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh
(2005), the share of value added of the three IT manufacturing industries is 1.62 percent in 2000.
        In 1960, the largest industry in terms of value added is Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishery. This
industry has a 12.96 percent share of value added. The relative importance rapidly declines to 5.50
percent in 1970 and only 1.35 percent in 2000. By contrast service industries, defined as a sum of
industries 30-45, gradually expand from 36.50 percent to 50.39 percent of total value added from 1960 to
2000. Clearly, the Japanese industry structure shifts toward service industries in this period. Among
manufacturing industries, the largest industry is Iron and Steel in 1960. Although this industry occupied
3.32 percent in 1960, the share decreases to 1.08 percent in 2000. Only six manufacturing industries ––
three IT manufacturing industries, Other Electric Machinery, Printing and Publishing, and Other
Manufacturing–– expand in relative importance in value added for the economy as a whole.
        Within IT manufacturing, the Computers industry expands in importance until the end of the
1980s. From the beginning of the 1990s, when the Japanese personal computer market became
internationally competitive, the value added contribution of Computers within IT manufacturing
decreases, as shown in Table 2. On the other hand, the Electronic Components industry has expanded in
importance. In the U.S. the Electronic Components industry also has the largest share of three IT
manufacturing industries –– 49.91 percent in 2000. Relative to the U.S., however, Electronic Components
industry is more significant in Japanese IT manufacturing. In 2000, 72.94 percent of value added in IT
manufacturing is generated by Electronic Components industry. In comparisons between the U.S. and
Japan, the difference in the composition of IT manufacturing should be noted.


ii. IT and Non-IT Capital
        The contribution to the economic growth of IT capital, about 0.2 percent annually from the 1960s
to the middle of the 1990s, is shown in Table 2. After 1995 the IT capital contribution increased by a
factor of two. Figure 3 represents the contribution of IT capital to total capital input for the economy as a
whole. In the 1980s, IT capital contributes 31.89 percent of the growth of total capital inputs in the U.S.,
as measured by Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2005), but only 13.52 percent in Japan. Since 1995, the
Japanese economy has rapidly shifted its capital allocation from Non-IT capital to IT capital. In 2000, the
contribution of the IT capital rose to 42.47 percent, approaching the 46.04 percent in the U.S.


                                                         31
                                                  (Insert Figure 3)


          In the 1990s, Japanese economic growth depends mainly on the growth of capital input; by
contrast labor input actually decreases. The contribution of Non-IT capital is 1.68 percent annually in the
early 1990s and decreases to less than half that in the late 1990s. Accelerated growth of IT capital input,
especially Computers, partly compensates for the decrease. The contribution of Computers, which
includes software embedded in the computer hardware, is 0.22 percent. The contribution of computer
software – Custom, Pre-packaged, and Own-Account Software – also expands to 0.10 percent in this
period.
          In the U.S. the impacts of IT capital on U.S. economic growth in the late 1990s led to a
resurgence of U.S. economic growth. In examining the impact of IT capital in Japan, the differences
between the U.S. and Japan must be recognized. Table 10 gives growth rates of capital input by industry.
From the early 1990s to the late 1990s, the growth of the capital input falls in most of the Japanese
industries, while capital input expands in most U.S. industries. In other words, the impact of IT capital in
the U.S. is enhanced by the economy-wide expansion of the U.S. economy in the late 1990s. The surge of
investment in IT capital in Japan took place during a lengthy recession. The financial sector was
immobilized by holdings of worthless assets, the non-financial corporate sector was restructuring its
business in order to deal with the decline in demand and intensified international competition, and the
household sector confronted the imbalance between the depreciated value and the financial liability in
residences purchased during the bubble economy in the late 1980s.
          The annual growth rate of IT capital input in Japan is a surprisingly 11.26 percent in the late
1990s, as shown in Table 2. The growth rate in Japan is much lower than the 19.28 percent growth in the
U.S., measured by Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2005). However, the growth of IT capital in Japan had a
very significant role in growth, since Non-IT capital in Japan expands by only 1.87 percent in this period,
relative to the 3.09 percent in the U.S. We conclude that, despite the long economic recession in Japan,
the rapid technological progress in the IT-producing industries diffuses through the production system
through capital accumulation in the IT-using industries.
          Growth rates in IT capital and Non-IT capital by industry are presented in Tables 11 and 12,
respectively. Although growth in the capital input decreases in most industries from the early 1990s to the
late 1990s, the growth of IT capital input increases. In almost all industries, except for Metal Products and
Electricity, the growth of IT capital is greater than the growth of Non-IT capital. The Household sector
has the highest growth of IT capital input, over 25 percent during 1995-2000, due to the expansion in
personal computers and cellular phones as consumer durables. Eight service industries, including Finance


                                                           32
and Insurance, Railroad Transportation, and Medical Care, expand the input of IT capital by more than 10
percent annually.
           Tables 13 and 14 represent industry contributions to IT and Non-IT capital input for the economy
as a whole. The sum of contributions to IT capital for the manufacturing industries is 1.03 percent in the
late 1990s, only 9.18 percent of IT capital expansion. Service industries are most important for both IT
and Non-IT capital. The Finance and Insurance industry is one of the largest contributors to IT capital
expansion, but this industry does not contribute to Non-IT capital at all. On the other hand, the Household
sector contributes only 0.17 percent to the growth of IT capital during 1960-1973, although this sector has
the highest contribution of Non-IT capital in this period. Capital allocation among assets has gradually
shifted toward the Household sector. In the late 1990s, this sector’s contribution to IT capital is 1.88
percent.
           Although manufacturing industries are not the main contributors to IT capital, some
manufacturing industries are highly IT-capital-intensive. Table 15 gives the shares of IT capital in total
capital cost by industry. The most IT-capital-intensive industry is Computers with a share of IT-capital
cost of 46.86 percent in 2000. Figure 4 shows the capital cost structure in four highest IT-capital-intensive
industries in 2000. Computer software has the largest share in IT capital in the Computers industry.26
Communications Equipment has the largest share of capital cost in the Communications industry, where
the cost of IT capital is 40.22 percent of the total. Finance and Insurance has a 34.45 percent share of IT
capital cost, of which 16.94 percent is the capital cost of Computers. The rate of technological progress is
not uniform among different types of IT capital, so that different rates of progress have been incorporated
into the production system, depending on the capital structure in each industry.


                                                    (Insert Figure 4)


           Table 2 represents the contributions of capital and labor inputs to the growth of value added at the
economy-wide level. During 1960-2000, the contribution of capital input is 3.05 percent annually, so that
the growth of capital inputs explains 56.81 percent of the Japanese economic growth. The role of capital
in Japan is very similar to that in the U.S., where capital input contributes 56.49 percent during 1977-
2000. This estimate by Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2005) is based on similar accounting concepts. As
pointed out by Nomura (2004a), the difference in sources of long-term economic growth in the U.S. and
Japan is in the contribution of non-capital inputs. The growth of labor input contributes 38.63 percent of


26
  Within computer software, own-account software has a share of 30.4 percent of software cost in the Computers
industry. In 2000 own-account software has a larger share, especially in Machinery (64.5 percent) and Research
(62.9 percent), where industry-specific software is required.

                                                           33
the U.S. economic growth during 1977-2000, by comparison with 18.08 percent in Japan. Relative to
Japan, the U.S. economic growth is more labor-intensive. Japanese economic growth depends more
heavily on productivity growth, reflecting the opportunities for “catching up” with the U.S. and other
industrialized economies during the period 1960-2000.


iii. Productivity and IT
        The aggregate TFP contribution to the Japanese economy as a whole is shown in Table 2. Until
the beginning of the 1970s, rapid economic growth approaching 10 percent per year was supported by the
TFP growth of 3.05 percent. Of this TFP growth 2.02 percent is contributed by Non-IT manufacturing,
0.86 percent by Non-manufacturing, and only 0.17 percent by IT manufacturing. TFP growth by industry
is shown in Table 19. Even in the period 1960-1973, the TFP growth in the three IT manufacturing
industries was highest; however, the small Domar weights of IT manufacturing industries resulted in a
relatively small contribution.27
        During 1973-1990, aggregate TFP contributes only 0.88 percent annually to Japanese economic
growth. The serious decline of the TFP contribution can be found in Non-IT manufacturing and Non-
manufacturing industries. The TFP contribution of the IT manufacturing industries increases to 0.20
percent. The increase of the contribution in IT manufacturing is due to the high TFP growth rate in
Computers of 8.54 percent, shown in Table 19, accompanied by a rapid expansion in the Domar weight.
        In the early 1990s aggregate TFP turns negative. The overall contribution is –0.48 percent, –0.30
percent in Non-IT manufacturing and –0.27 percent in Non-manufacturing. Even in IT manufacturing, the
contribution is only 0.09 percent. In this period, the TFP growth in Computers is only 1.03 percent
annually; by contrast the U.S. computer industry has TFP growth of 11.87 percent (Jorgenson, Ho, and
Stiroh, 2005). The weakness in price competition in the closed Japanese market is clearly evident in this
period. Value added growth in Computers declines remarkably from 32.65 percent growth during 1973-
1990 to 3.34 percent in the early 1990s, as represented in Table 8. In this period, Communications
Equipment has a negative value added growth rate.
        Relative to other industries, IT manufacturing revived after 1995, so that the annual growth rates
of value added in the three IT manufacturing industries exceeds 20 percent. Figure 5 gives TFP growth
and the industry contribution to aggregate TFP in the late 1990s. The growth rate of TFP is 6.38 percent
for Computers, 7.07 percent for Communications Equipment, and 7.96 percent for Electronic
Components, respectively. The contribution of TFP growth in IT manufacturing to the economic growth

27
  Domar weights by industry are represented in Table 6. By definition, the industry-sum of value added weights in
Table 5 is 100 and the industry-sum of Domar weights is over 100; the industry-sum is 242.7 in 1960 and gradually



                                                           34
at the economy-wide level is 0.39 percent, which is four times higher than the contribution in the early
1990s.


                                              (Insert Figure 5 and Figure 6)


         Figure 6 shows the differences between the TFP growth rates and industry contributions in the
early 1990s and the late 1990s. By comparison, Figure 2 shows the differences in value added by industry.
The industry TFP growth improved more broadly than industry value added growth. Although the TFP
growth rates are small or negative in Non-IT manufacturing industries in the late 1990s, the differences
between the two periods show widespread improvements. At the economy-wide level, the TFP
contribution of Non-IT manufacturing recovers from –0.30 percent to 0.29 percent, as shown in Table 2.
The revival in the Other Electric Machinery industry is especially notable during this period. The TFP
growth is 4.11 percent in the late 1990s, which is higher than the 3.77 percent growth during 1960-1973.
The Domar weight in this industry is greater than the sum of the Domar weights in three IT
manufacturing industries. In Japanese economy TFP growth in Non-IT manufacturing has recovered since
1995.
         The recovery of TFP growth in the late 1990s is not apparent in Non-manufacturing industries,.
However, within the service industries, TFP growth revives in the two industries; the Communications
industry has a TFP growth rate of 3.58 percent and Finance and Insurance industry a rate of 2.27 percent.
Both industries are highly IT-capital-intensive, as shown in Figure 4. No obvious increases in TFP growth
in the IT-using industries are found in the U.S. productivity statistics presented by Jorgenson, Ho, and
Stiroh (2005). On the other hand, the widespread TFP gains in the U.S. in the late 1990s are still not
apparent in Japan. Figure 7 represents TFP indexes in twelve selected industries. Two representative
industries within Non-manufacturing with no improvement are the Wholesale and Retail industry and the
Construction industry. Both strongly impact economy-wide growth due to large Domar weights. The TFP
indexes in both industries decrease from the beginning of the 1990s.


                                                     (Insert Figure 7)


         Table 3 represents the growth rates of the aggregate production function TFP. This includes
aggregation bias in value added, capital input, and labor input. In every sub-period, this measure is greater
than the growth rate of aggregate TFP. In the 1990s, the over-estimate exceeds 1.0 percent per year. Table


decreases to 185.7 in 2000. The increase in the rate of value added leads to a decrease in the industry-sum of Domar



                                                             35
4 shows the growth rate of average labor productivity (ALP) and its decomposition. In the late 1990s,
despite the resurgence of aggregate TFP growth, aggregate ALP growth declines slightly from the early
1990s, due to decreases in capital deepening and labor quality. ALP growth is heavily influenced by
particular labor-intensive industries.
           Labor productivity by industry is shown in Table 20. In a number of industries, labor productivity
growth has improved since 1995. However, some labor-intensive industries have decreased their labor
productivity growth. The Construction industry and Wholesale and Retail industry have negative growth
in labor productivity in the late 1990s. Ironically, the increase of unemployment due to the long recession
generated additional labor supplies for both industries. Figure 7 represents the labor productivity indexes
for selected industries, measured in the right axis. In IT-capital-intensive industries – three IT
manufacturing industries, Communications, and Finance and Insurance industry – the growth of labor
productivity is higher than TFP growth in the late 1990s.



VI. Conclusion
           In the 1990s the resurgence of the U.S. economy stimulated optimism, while the long recession of
the Japanese economy engendered pessimism. The optimistic view for the U.S. economy has been
supported by the widespread impact of IT. Contrary to the Solow Paradox, the observed facts about IT
impacts can be found everywhere in the productivity statistics since the late 1990s. The enhanced role of
investment in IT is a conspicuous feature of the U.S. economy and a growth revival is under way in many
important IT-using industries. Our major goal in this paper is to characterize the role of IT in the Japanese
economy, especially in the “lost decade” of the 1990s.
           Our main conclusion is a growth revival can be spotted in many Japanese industries. This can be
clearly detected in the growth of value added and productivity in IT manufacturing industries and IT-
using industries like Communications and Finance and Insurance since 1995. Even during economic
recession periods in Japan, IT capital has been incorporated into the production structure. The IT-
intensive industries have generated a modest recovery in the growth of TFP and labor productivity in the
Japanese economy.
           However, widespread diffusion of IT is absent in the Japanese economy by 2000. Due to the
differences in economic conditions, the Japanese economy has responded to the progress of IT in a
different way from the U.S. economy. The dwindling of demand and the restructuring of the economy
have inhibited the spread of IT in Japan. For many of the Non-IT manufacturing and Non-manufacturing




weights.

                                                          36
industries, the shift from Non-IT capital to IT capital has been postponed into the future and widespread
productivity gains are still to come.
        Relative to the U.S., the growth of Japanese economy during the period 1960-1973 depended
more heavily on growth in TFP, as Japanese industries approached the levels of technology in their U.S.
counterparts. This process slowed dramatically after 1973 and then reversed course in the early 1990s.
The growth rate of labor quality is decreasing in Japan, as in other countries. Unlike other countries, the
labor force in Japan has already entered a phase of decline. Future growth will depend on a revival of
capital deepening and investment in information technology will continue to have an essential role.




                                                        37
                                              References
Ahmad, Nadium. (2004). “Introducing Capital Services into the Production Account,” Meeting of the
      Advisory Expert Group on National Accounts, December.
Basu, Susanto and John G. Fernald (1995). “Are Apparent Productive Spillovers a Figment of
       Specification Error?,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 36, 165-188.
_____ (1997). “Returns to Scale in U.S. Production: Estimates and Implications,” Journal of Political
       Economy, 105, 249-283.
Basu, Susanto, John G. Fernald, and Matthew D. Shapiro (2001). “Productivity Growth in the 1990s:
       Technology, Utilization, or Adjustment?,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
       Policy, 55, 117-166.
Berndt, Ernst R. and Melvyn A. Fuss (1986). “Productivity Measurement with Adjustments for Variations
        in Capacity Utilization and Other Forms of Temporary Equilibrium,” Journal of Econometrics,
        33, 7-29.
Blades, Derek (2001). Measuring Capital: A Manual on the Measurement of Capital Stocks,
       Consumption of Fixed Capital, and Capital Services, Paris, OECD, September, 132p.
Bulow, Jeremy I. and Lawrence H. Summers (1984). “The Taxation of Risky Assets,” Journal of
       Political Economy, 92, 20-39.
Bureau of Economic Analysis (1997). “Note on Alternative Measures of Gross Product by Industry,”
       Survey of Current Business, November, 84-85.
_____ (1999). Fixed Reproducible Tangible Wealth in the United States, 1925-94. Washington, U.S.
      Department of Commerce, 43p.
Diewert, Erwin W. (2005). “Measuring Capital,” in Carol Corrado, John Haltiwanger, and Daniel Sichel,
       edt. Measuring Capital in the New Economy, Chicago, University of Chicago Press.
Diewert, Erwin W. and Denis A. Lawrence (2000). “Progress in Measuring the Price and Quantity of
       Capital,” in Lawrence J. Lau eds. (2000), Chapter 11, 273-326.
Domar, Evsey (1961). “On the Measurement of Technological Change,” Economic Journal, 71, 709-729.
Fraumeni, Barbara (1997). “The Measurement of Depreciation in the U.S. National Income and Product
      Accounts,” Survey of Current Business, July, 7-23.
_____ (2000). “The Jorgenson System of National Accounting,” in Lawrence J. Lau eds. (2000), Chapter
       6, 111-142.
Fukao, Kyoji, Tomohiko Inui, Hiroki Kawai, and Tsutomu Miyagawa (2004), “Sectoral Productivity and
       Economic Growth in Japan, 1970-98: An Empirical Analysis Based on the JIP Database,” in
       Takatoshi Ito and Andrew K. Rose, edt., Growth and Productivity in East Asia, Chicago,
       University of Chicago Press.
Grimm, Bruce T., Brent R. Moulton, and David B. Wasshausen (2005). “Information Processing
      Equipment and Software in the National Accounts,” in Carol Corrado et al, edt. (2005).
Hall, Robert E. (1988). “The Relationship between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S. Industry,” Journal of
        Political Economy, 96, 921-947.
_____ (2001). “The Stock Market and Capital Accumulation,” American Economic Review, 91, 1185-
       1202.
Hall, Robert E. and Dale W. Jorgenson (1996b). “Tax Policy and Investment Behavior.” in Dale W.
       Jorgenson, Tax Policy and the Cost of Capital, Chapter 1, Cambridge, The MIT Press, 1-26.

                                                      38
Hulten, Charles R. and Frank C. Wykoff (1981), “The Measurement of Economic Depreciation,” in C. R.
        Hulten eds., Depreciation, Inflation, and the Taxation of Income from Capital, Washington, D.C.,
        The Urban Institute Press, 81-125.
Jorgenson, Dale W. (1995). International Comparisons of Economic Growth, Cambridge, The MIT Press,
       470p.
_____ (1996). “Capital Theory and Investment Behavior,” In Dale W. Jorgenson, Capital Theory and
       Investment Behavior, Cambridge, The MIT Press, Chapter 1, Cambridge, 1-16.
_____ (2004). “Information Technology and G7 Economies,” (updated version of a paper with the same
       title in World Economics, 4, 139-169)
Jorgenson, Dale W., Frank M. Gollop, and Barbara M. Fraumeni (1987). Productivity and U.S. Economic
       Growth, Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 567p.
Jorgenson, Dale W., and Zvi Griliches (1995). “The Explanation of Productivity Change,” in Dale W.
       Jorgenson, Postwar U.S. Economic Growth, Cambridge, The MIT Press, Chapter 3, 51-98.
Jorgenson, Dale W., Mun S. Ho, and Kevin J. Stiroh (2005). Information Technology and the American
       Growth Resurgence, Cambridge, The MIT Press.
Jorgenson, Dale W. and J. Steven Landefeld (2005). “Blueprint for Expanded and Integrated U.S.
       National Accounts: Review, Assessment, and Next Steps,” in D.W. Jorgenson, J.S. Landefeld,
       and W.D. Nordhaus, eds., A New Architecture for the U.S. National Accounts, Chicago,
       University of Chicago Press, 488p.
Jorgenson, Dale W. and Kevin J. Stiroh (2002). “Raising the Speed Limit: U.S. Economic Growth in the
       Information Age,” In Dale W. Jorgenson, Economic Growth in the Information Age, Cambridge,
       The MIT Press, Chapter 3, 71-150.
Jorgenson, Dale W. and Kun-Young Yun (2001). Lifting the Burden: Tax Reform, the Cost of Capital and
       U.S. Economic Growth, Cambridge, The MIT Press, 474p.
Kuroda, Masahiro, Kazushige Shimpo, Koji Nomura, and Nobuyuki Kobayashi (1997). Keio Economic
       Observatory Database: Measurement of Output, Labor and Capital Inputs, Tokyo, Keio
       University Press. (in Japanese) , 390p.
Lau, Lawrence J. eds. (2000). Econometrics and the Cost of Capital: Essays in honor of Dale W.
       Jorgenson, Cambridge, The MIT Press, 455p.
Nomura, Koji (1998). “Measurement of Capital Service Price Based on Japanese Tax Structure,” KEO
      Discussion Paper, No.53, (in Japanese), 56p.
_____ (2004a). Measurement of Capital and Productivity, Tokyo, Keio University Press. (in Japanese) ,
       633p.
_____ (2004b). “Capitalizing Own-Account Software in Japan,” Program on Technology and Economic
       Policy (PTEP), John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, 35p.
Nomura, Koji and Jon D. Samuels (2004). “Can We Go Back to Data? Reconsideration of U.S.-
      Harmonized Computer Prices in Japan,” Program on Technology and Economic Policy (PTEP),
      John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, 43p.
Oliner, Stephen D. (1993). “Constant-Quality Price Change, Depreciation, and the Retirement of
        Mainframe Computers,” in Murray F. Foss, Marilyn E. Manser, and Allan H. Young, eds., Price
        Measurement and Their Uses, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 19-61.
_____ (1994). “Measuring Stocks of Computer Peripheral Equipment: Theory and Application,”
      Washington, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May.

                                                      39
Oliner, Stephen D. and Daniel E. Sichel (2000). “The Resurgence of Growth in the Late 1990s: Is
        Information Technology the Story?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14, 3-22.
_____ (2002). “Information Technology and Productivity: Where are We Now and Where are We
      Going?,” Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, 87(3), Quarter Three, 15-44.
Parker, Robert P. and Bruce T. Grimm (2000). “Recognition of Business and Government Expenditures
        for Software Investment: Methodology and Quantitative Impacts, 1958-98,” paper presented for
        BEA's Advisory Committee, May.
Schreyer, Paul (2001). Measuring Productivity: Measurement of Aggregate and Industry-Level
       Productivity Growth, OECD, Paris, March., 154p.
Solow, Robert M. (1960). “Investment and Technical Progress,” in Kenneth J. Arrow, Samuel Karlin, and
       Patrick Suppes, eds., Mathematical Methods in the Social Sciences, 1959, Stanford, Stanford
       University Press, 89-104.
Triplett, Jack E. (1996). “High-Tech Industry Productivity and Hedonic Price Indices,” Industry
         Productivity, International Comparison and Measurement Issues, Paris, OECD, 119-142.
United Nations (1993). System of National Accounts 1993, New York, United Nations, November, 711p.




                                                     40
                                                     Table 1: Asset Classification and Depreciation Rates
    1 Trees                                                                0.200     52 Steel ships                                                 0.108
    2 Livestock                                                            0.309     53 Other ships                                                 0.166
    3 Textile products                                                     0.347     54 Railway vehicles                                            0.068
    4 Wooded products                                                      0.236     55 Aircraft                                                    0.135
    5 Wooden furniture and fixtures                                        0.171     56 Bicycles                                                    0.498
    6 Metallic furniture and fixtures                                      0.098     57 Transport equipment for industrial use                      0.217
    7 Nuclear fuel rods                                                    0.413     58 Other transport equipment                                   0.332
    8 Metallic products                                                    0.086     59 Camera                                                      0.210
    9 Boilers and turbines                                                 0.102     60 Other photographic and optical instruments                  0.218
   10 Engines                                                              0.112     61 Watches and clocks                                          0.118
   11 Conveyors                                                            0.098     62 Physics and chemistry instruments                           0.236
   12 Refrigerators and air conditioning apparatus                         0.116     63 Analytical and measuring instruments and testing machines   0.236
   13 Pumps and compressors                                                0.118     64 Medical instruments                                         0.199
   14 Sewing machines                                                      0.112     65 Miscellaneous manufacturing products                        0.274
   15 Other general industrial machinery and equipment                     0.142     66 Residential construction (wooden)                           0.048
   16 Mining, civil engineering and construction machinery                 0.171     67 Residential construction (non-wooden)                       0.031
   17 Chemical machinery                                                   0.143     68 Non-residential construction (wooden)                       0.057
   18 Industrial robots                                                    0.150     69 Non-residential construction (non-wooden)                   0.039
   19 Metal machine tools                                                  0.127     70 Road construction                                           0.020
   20 Metal processing machinery                                           0.111     71 Street construction                                         0.020
   21 Agricultural machinery                                               0.098     72 Bridge construction                                         0.020
   22 Textile machinery                                                    0.117     73 Toll road construction                                      0.020
   23 Food processing machinery                                            0.113     74 River improvement                                           0.019
   24 Sawmill, wood working, veneer and plywood machinery                  0.137     75 Erosion control                                             0.019
   25 Pulp equipment and paper machinery                                   0.104     76 Seashore improvement                                        0.018
   26 Printing, bookbinding and paper processing machinery                 0.127     77 Park construction                                           0.048
   27 Casting equipment                                                    0.107     78 Sewer construction                                          0.027
   28 Plastic processing machinery                                         0.122     79 Sewage disposal facilities                                  0.027
   29 Other special industrial machinery, nec                              0.130     80 Waste disposal facilities                                   0.061
   30 Other general machines and parts                                     0.208     81 Harbor construction                                         0.018
   31 Office machines                                                      0.347     82 Fishing port construction                                   0.018
   32 Vending, amusement and other service machinery                       0.210     83 Airport construction                                        0.054
   33 Electric audio equipment                                             0.236     84 Agricultural construction                                   0.028
   34 Radio and television sets                                            0.236     85 Forest road construction                                    0.034
   35 Video recording and playback equipment                               0.236     86 Forestry protection                                         0.019
   36 Household electric appliance                                         0.196     87 Railway construction                                        0.030
   37 Electronic computer and peripheral equipment                         0.347     88 Electric power facilities                                   0.025
   38 Wired communication equipment                                        0.206     89 Telecommunication facilities                                0.035
   39 Radio communication equipment                                        0.275     90 Other civil engineering and construction                    0.025
   40 Other communication equipment                                        0.118     91 Plant engineering                                           0.025
   41 Applied electronic equipment                                         0.196     92 Mineral exploration                                         0.550
   42 Electric measuring instruments                                       0.196     93 Custom software                                             0.330
   43 Generators                                                           0.079     94 Pre-packaged software                                       0.330
   44 Electric motors                                                      0.079     95 Own-account software                                        0.330
   45 Relay switches and switchboards                                      0.079     96 Finished-goods inventory                                    0.000
   46 Other industrial heavy electrical equipment                          0.109     97 Work-in-process inventory                                   0.000
   47 Electric lighting fixtures and apparatus                             0.079     98 Material inventory                                          0.000
   48 Passenger motor vehicles                                             0.163     99 Land for agricultural use                                   0.000
   49 Trucks, buses and other vehicles                                     0.228    100 Land for industrial use                                     0.000
   50 Two-wheel motor vehicles                                             0.218    101 Land for commercial use                                     0.000
   51 Motor vehicle parts                                                  0.208    102 Land for residential use                                    0.000


Note: Assets 48-49 and 66-67; Estimates of Nomura (2004, Ch-2) based price data at the markets for rental and second-hand goods.
      Other Assets; Estimates based the Japanese tax-lives years estimated by Nomura and the BEA's declining balance rates.
                             Table 2: Growth in Aggregate Value Added and Its Sources

                                                       1960-1973     1973-1990     1990-1995      1995-2000         1960-2000
Contributions
    Value-Added                                              9.89           4.29          1.27          1.34              5.37
           IT Manufacturing                                  0.23           0.31          0.15          0.41              0.28
                 Computers                                   0.04           0.11          0.01          0.08              0.07
                 Communications Equipment                    0.04           0.02          0.00          0.07              0.03
                 Electronic Components                       0.15           0.18          0.14          0.26              0.18
           Non-IT Manufacturing                              4.16           1.08         -0.24          0.19              1.80
           Non-Manufacturing                                 5.50           2.90          1.36          0.74              3.28
    Capital Input                                            5.16           2.32          1.90          1.17              3.05
           IT Assets                                         0.21           0.24          0.22          0.41              0.25
                 Computers                                   0.07           0.10          0.10          0.22              0.10
                 Communications Equipment                    0.13           0.05          0.05          0.09              0.08
                 Custom Software                             0.01           0.05          0.04          0.08              0.04
                 Prepackaged Software                        0.00           0.01          0.01          0.01              0.00
                 Own-Account Software                        0.02           0.03          0.02          0.01              0.02
           Non-IT Assets                                     4.94           2.08          1.68          0.76              2.80
    Labor Input                                              1.69           1.09         -0.15         -0.18              0.97
    Aggregate TFP                                            3.05           0.88         -0.48          0.35              1.35
           IT Manufacturing                                  0.17           0.20          0.09          0.39              0.20
                 Computers                                   0.02           0.07          0.01          0.10              0.05
                 Communications Equipment                    0.03           0.02         -0.01          0.07              0.02
                 Electronic Components                       0.12           0.12          0.09          0.23              0.13
           Non-IT Manufacturing                              2.02           0.53         -0.30          0.29              0.88
           Non-Manufacturing                                 0.86           0.14         -0.27         -0.33              0.26

Growth
    Value-Added                                              9.89          4.29           1.27          1.34              5.37
          IT Manufacturing                                  28.98         27.24           9.08         23.00             25.00
          Non-IT Manufacturing                              14.47          4.74          -1.18          1.03              6.70
          Non-Manufacturing                                  7.81          3.86           1.77          0.93              4.52
    Capital Input                                           10.18          5.15           4.14          2.65              6.35
          IT Assets                                         26.02         13.89           7.23         11.26             16.67
                 Computers                                  48.09         20.51           9.29         15.82             27.48
                 Communications Equipment                   21.36          8.37           9.70         12.02             13.21
                 Custom Software                            26.30         18.50           4.90          8.69             18.11
                 Prepackaged Software                       26.50         17.84           7.17          8.36             18.13
                 Own-Account Software                       32.50         10.48           3.59          2.13             15.73
          Non-IT Assets                                      9.92          4.80           3.91          1.87              5.99
    Labor Input                                              3.42          1.99          -0.28         -0.33              1.88


Note: All figures are average annual growth rates.Value added is aggregated from industry GDPs evaluated at the factor cost.
The contribution of value added is the growth rate multiplied by the average value shares.
                          Table 3: Growth in Aggregate Production Fuction TFP

                                              1960-1973       1973-1990   1990-1995   1995-2000   1960-2000
Aggregate Production Fuction TFP                       3.72        1.89        0.51        1.27        2.24
(+) Allocation Change of Value Added                   2.63        0.55        0.05       -0.40        1.04
(-) Contribution of Capital Quality                    2.76        0.83        0.66        0.31        1.37
     Quality Change                                    2.01        0.51        0.08        0.23        0.91
     Allocation Change                                 0.48        0.19        0.35       -0.04        0.27
     Other Change                                      0.28        0.13        0.23        0.13        0.19
(-) Contribution of Labor Quality                      0.54        0.74        0.39        0.20        0.56
     Quality Change                                    0.27        0.54        0.27        0.16        0.37
     Allocation Change                                -0.19       -0.28       -0.16       -0.92       -0.32
     Other Change                                      0.46        0.48        0.29        0.96        0.51

Aggregate TFP                                         3.05         0.88       -0.48        0.35        1.35


Note: All figures are average annual growath rates.
                           Table 4: Decomposition of Aggregate Labor Productivity

                                                      1960-1973   1973-1990   1990-1995   1995-2000   1960-2000
Aggregate Labor Productivity                               7.58        3.63        2.27        2.02        4.55
Capital Deepening                                          4.00        2.02        2.36        1.48        2.64
    IT Assets                                              0.20        0.22        0.25        0.44        0.25
         Computers                                         0.07        0.10        0.11        0.23        0.11
         Communications Equipment                          0.11        0.04        0.06        0.10        0.07
         Custom Software                                   0.01        0.05        0.05        0.09        0.04
         Prepackaged Software                              0.00        0.01        0.01        0.01        0.00
         Own-Account Software                              0.02        0.03        0.02        0.01        0.02
    Non-IT Assets                                          3.79        1.79        2.11        1.04        2.39
Labor Quality                                              0.54        0.74        0.39        0.20        0.56
Aggregate TFP                                              3.05        0.88       -0.48        0.35        1.35
    IT                                                     0.17        0.20        0.09        0.39        0.20
    Non-IT                                                 2.88        0.67       -0.57       -0.04        1.14



Note: All figures are average annual growath rates.
                          Table 5: Industry Value Added Weights by Subperiod

                                                        1960           1973     1990     1995     2000
  1   Agriculture, Forestry, Fishery                   12.96            5.50     2.25     1.77     1.35
  2   Coal Mining                                       0.88            0.08     0.02     0.01     0.01
  3   Other Mining                                      0.61            0.60     0.21     0.17     0.14
  4   Construction                                      5.30            7.90     8.90     9.05     7.75
  5   Foods                                             3.14            2.12     1.92     1.99     2.03
  6   Textile                                           2.70            1.46     0.48     0.36     0.24
  7   Apparel                                           0.42            0.58     0.53     0.37     0.24
  8   Woods and Related Products                        0.73            0.76     0.30     0.24     0.19
  9   Furniture and Fixture                             0.33            0.59     0.34     0.24     0.20
 10   Paper and Pulp                                    0.96            0.82     0.68     0.64     0.58
 11   Printing and Publishing                           0.97            0.98     1.16     1.10     1.09
 12   Chemical Products                                 2.71            2.29     2.15     1.94     1.78
 13   Petroleum Refining                                0.93            0.76     0.28     0.40     0.50
 14   Coal Products                                     0.11            0.14     0.11     0.07     0.08
 15   Rubber Products                                   0.40            0.31     0.29     0.23     0.21
 16   Leather Products                                  0.08            0.13     0.09     0.06     0.05
 17   Stone, Clay, Glass                                1.22            1.43     0.87     0.73     0.62
 18   Iron and Steel                                    3.32            2.83     1.53     1.23     1.08
 19   Non-ferrous Metal                                 0.69            0.96     0.46     0.35     0.31
 20   Metal Products                                    1.33            2.02     1.46     1.22     1.01
 21   Machinery                                         2.81            2.84     3.26     2.56     2.56
 22   Computers                                         0.01            0.16     0.63     0.35     0.22
 23   Communications Equipment                          0.18            0.21     0.24     0.22     0.27
 24   Electronic Components                             0.55            0.54     0.91     1.12     1.34
 25   Other Electrical Machinery                        1.95            2.30     2.36     1.87     2.06
 26   Motor Vehicles                                    1.80            2.83     2.09     1.88     1.76
 27   Other Transportation Equipment                    0.90            0.67     0.32     0.26     0.23
 28   Precision Instruments                             0.49            0.55     0.45     0.32     0.35
 29   Other Manufacturing                               0.64            1.17     1.16     0.99     0.92
 30   Railroad Transportation                           1.95            0.91     0.84     0.69     0.57
 31   Road Transportation                               2.07            2.39     2.66     2.63     2.21
 32   Water Transportation                              1.29            0.64     0.46     0.43     0.33
 33   Air Transportation                                0.06            0.16     0.26     0.24     0.22
 34   Storage Facility Service                          0.28            0.31     0.31     0.29     0.26
 35   Communications                                    1.58            1.43     1.74     1.94     2.39
 36   Electricity                                       1.56            0.90     1.65     2.04     1.89
 37   Gas Supply                                        0.41            0.18     0.22     0.26     0.28
 38   Water Supply                                      0.20            0.27     0.36     0.43     0.50
 39   Wholesale and Retail                             10.36           12.20    11.40    10.32     8.90
 40   Finance and Insurance                             3.31            4.59     5.40     4.47     4.87
 41   Real Estate                                       3.41            3.51     3.71     4.70     5.40
 42   Education                                         2.46            2.48     3.31     3.49     3.63
 43   Research                                          0.10            0.15     0.23     0.26     0.29
 44   Medical Care                                      1.87            2.32     3.08     3.87     4.79
 45   Other Service                                     5.61            8.09    11.25    12.88    13.87
 46   Public Administration                             4.95            5.14     5.90     6.48     6.78
 47   Household                                         9.47           10.86    11.79    12.84    13.70

      Sum                                             100.00          100.00   100.00   100.00   100.00



Note: All figures are shares.Value added is defined at factor cost.
                              Table 6: Industry Domer Weights by Subperiod

                                                        1960           1973     1990     1995     2000
  1   Agriculture, Forestry, Fishery                   22.58            8.79     4.15     3.27     2.62
  2   Coal Mining                                       1.37            0.14     0.03     0.02     0.01
  3   Other Mining                                      0.97            1.01     0.43     0.36     0.30
  4   Construction                                     19.44           22.75    19.56    18.82    16.15
  5   Foods                                            13.25            8.16     6.43     6.16     5.93
  6   Textile                                          12.40            5.50     1.57     0.98     0.65
  7   Apparel                                           2.32            1.94     1.45     1.04     0.65
  8   Woods and Related Products                        3.72            3.00     1.01     0.84     0.60
  9   Furniture and Fixture                             1.01            1.68     0.86     0.69     0.49
 10   Paper and Pulp                                    4.11            3.17     2.10     1.82     1.60
 11   Printing and Publishing                           2.38            2.27     2.53     2.40     2.31
 12   Chemical Products                                10.04            6.88     5.71     5.04     4.81
 13   Petroleum Refining                                2.35            2.40     1.57     1.32     1.73
 14   Coal Products                                     0.57            0.45     0.34     0.21     0.23
 15   Rubber Products                                   1.43            0.85     0.75     0.61     0.56
 16   Leather Products                                  0.34            0.44     0.26     0.18     0.12
 17   Stone, Clay, Glass                                3.14            3.69     2.15     1.82     1.50
 18   Iron and Steel                                   18.86           13.30     5.96     4.39     4.00
 19   Non-ferrous Metal                                 3.13            3.22     1.62     1.24     1.08
 20   Metal Products                                    3.71            5.16     3.52     2.99     2.41
 21   Machinery                                         8.52            8.92     8.68     7.06     6.78
 22   Computers                                         0.01            0.44     1.81     1.53     1.39
 23   Communications Equipment                          0.52            0.66     0.79     0.79     1.01
 24   Electronic Components                             1.46            1.45     2.43     2.70     3.31
 25   Other Electrical Machinery                        7.39            6.79     6.15     5.14     5.17
 26   Motor Vehicles                                    6.72            8.72     8.14     7.02     6.84
 27   Other Transportation Equipment                    2.62            1.79     0.94     0.76     0.68
 28   Precision Instruments                             1.34            1.40     1.06     0.78     0.77
 29   Other Manufacturing                               2.32            3.31     3.36     2.85     2.59
 30   Railroad Transportation                           2.92            1.47     1.66     1.51     1.45
 31   Road Transportation                               3.37            3.36     4.01     4.02     3.70
 32   Water Transportation                              2.24            1.58     1.16     1.01     0.90
 33   Air Transportation                                0.13            0.38     0.62     0.60     0.67
 34   Storage Facility Service                          0.37            0.54     0.55     0.47     0.50
 35   Communications                                    2.21            1.88     2.40     2.87     3.83
 36   Electricity                                       2.98            1.94     2.83     3.02     2.92
 37   Gas Supply                                        0.75            0.36     0.38     0.41     0.47
 38   Water Supply                                      0.24            0.37     0.56     0.60     0.68
 39   Wholesale and Retail                             20.59           19.77    18.74    17.86    15.38
 40   Finance and Insurance                             5.44            6.29     8.43     7.19     7.91
 41   Real Estate                                       3.72            3.87     4.16     5.29     6.17
 42   Education                                         3.34            2.96     3.90     4.18     4.33
 43   Research                                          0.14            0.18     0.31     0.33     0.36
 44   Medical Care                                      3.33            4.00     5.78     6.79     8.11
 45   Other Service                                    16.52           16.48    21.58    24.82    26.83
 46   Public Administration                             6.39            6.43     7.67     8.55     9.39
 47   Household                                         9.97           11.66    13.18    14.51    15.79

      Sum                                             242.68          211.78   193.28   186.84   185.68



Note: All figures are shares.Value added is defined at factor cost.
                                 Table 7: Growth of Industry Output by Subperiod

                                                     1960-1973   1973-1990   1990-1995   1995-2000   1960-2000
  1   Agriculture, Forestry, Fishery                      2.51        0.66       -0.76       -2.91        0.64
  2   Coal Mining                                        -5.19       -6.78       -6.71      -14.08       -7.17
  3   Other Mining                                       13.47       -0.75       -5.19        0.18        3.43
  4   Construction                                       10.16        3.04        0.19       -1.90        4.38
  5   Foods                                               8.76        2.42        0.23       -0.67        3.82
  6   Textile                                             4.12        0.13       -3.83       -6.06        0.16
  7   Apparel                                             8.97        3.44       -4.62       -8.48        2.74
  8   Woods and Related Products                          6.49       -0.57       -1.62       -4.76        1.07
  9   Furniture and Fixture                              13.83        0.51       -3.08       -5.64        3.62
 10   Paper and Pulp                                     10.70        2.07       -1.12       -1.25        4.06
 11   Printing and Publishing                             7.74        3.31       -0.04       -0.15        3.90
 12   Chemical Products                                  12.75        3.41        0.70       -0.04        5.67
 13   Petroleum Refining                                 14.07        0.42        3.80        0.02        5.23
 14   Coal Products                                      11.56        0.69       -1.86        2.95        4.19
 15   Rubber Products                                    10.10        4.23       -1.97       -0.83        4.73
 16   Leather Products                                   13.71        0.01       -4.98       -7.68        2.88
 17   Stone, Clay, Glass                                 13.83        0.39       -1.05       -2.13        4.26
 18   Iron and Steel                                     11.94        0.16       -1.76        0.27        3.77
 19   Non-ferrous Metal                                  12.48        2.14        0.29       -0.49        4.94
 20   Metal Products                                     15.98        2.18       -0.77       -2.99        5.65
 21   Machinery                                          13.98        5.36       -1.78        0.76        6.69
 22   Computers                                          45.93       23.47        4.67       10.48       26.80
 23   Communications Equipment                           17.95        9.80        3.78       15.40       12.39
 24   Electronic Components                              21.30       17.35        9.01       14.32       17.21
 25   Other Electrical Machinery                         14.48        5.40       -0.24        5.81        7.70
 26   Motor Vehicles                                     17.34        6.29       -0.52        1.02        8.37
 27   Other Transportation Equipment                      8.31        1.90       -3.48       -0.12        3.06
 28   Precision Instruments                              15.08        5.17       -3.70        1.43        6.81
 29   Other Manufacturing                                16.14        4.63       -0.81       -0.43        7.06
 30   Railroad Transportation                             3.56        1.91        0.94       -0.49        2.02
 31   Road Transportation                                 9.40        4.17       -1.21       -1.07        4.54
 32   Water Transportation                                8.13        2.97       -1.75       -1.62        3.48
 33   Air Transportation                                 24.51        7.73        4.19        1.71       11.99
 34   Storage Facility Service                            7.92        5.75       -1.16        1.73        5.09
 35   Communications                                     11.10        5.85        6.44       11.33        8.31
 36   Electricity                                        11.02        3.76        2.95        1.51        5.74
 37   Gas Supply                                          8.22        4.42        5.09        3.37        5.61
 38   Water Supply                                       11.15        3.61        0.99        0.35        5.33
 39   Wholesale and Retail                               11.71        4.55        1.05       -1.66        5.67
 40   Finance and Insurance                              10.22        6.27       -1.51        3.78        6.27
 41   Real Estate                                         7.13        3.13        4.51        3.39        4.63
 42   Education                                           5.59       -0.44        0.23       -0.41        1.61
 43   Research                                           10.07        5.63       -0.51        1.93        5.84
 44   Medical Care                                       11.56        6.29        3.28        0.44        6.90
 45   Other Service                                       7.18        3.81        4.13        2.31        4.76
 46   Public Administration                               7.71        3.83        2.68        2.13        4.73
 47   Household                                           7.45        5.35        4.25        2.87        5.58

      Average                                            11.53        3.81        0.16        0.50        5.45



Note: All figures are average annual growth rates.
                              Table 8: Growth of Industry Value Added by Subperiod

                                                     1960-1973   1973-1990   1990-1995   1995-2000   1960-2000
  1   Agriculture, Forestry, Fishery                      2.19        0.27        0.19       -3.33        0.43
  2   Coal Mining                                        -4.86       -8.37       -6.85      -15.71       -7.96
  3   Other Mining                                       13.43       -1.39       -9.45        4.45        3.15
  4   Construction                                        5.87        4.43       -0.24       -1.91        3.52
  5   Foods                                              14.60        0.83       -1.84       -1.30        4.70
  6   Textile                                             1.88        4.79        3.00       -5.65        2.32
  7   Apparel                                            10.57        2.57       -8.59       -9.03        2.32
  8   Woods and Related Products                          2.35        3.24       -4.56       -1.70        1.36
  9   Furniture and Fixture                              12.51        0.46       -7.37       -3.50        2.90
 10   Paper and Pulp                                     14.91        4.27        0.24        0.05        6.70
 11   Printing and Publishing                             4.16        2.33       -0.55       -0.01        2.27
 12   Chemical Products                                  19.10        6.14        2.00       -0.24        9.04
 13   Petroleum Refining                                 12.62       14.21        1.77        4.62       10.94
 14   Coal Products                                      13.61       -0.84       -1.39        4.53        4.46
 15   Rubber Products                                    14.24        4.82       -3.37       -1.08        6.12
 16   Leather Products                                   15.80       -1.12       -3.96       -6.99        3.29
 17   Stone, Clay, Glass                                 14.47        0.72       -0.95       -1.24        4.73
 18   Iron and Steel                                     15.49        3.18        1.09        0.81        6.62
 19   Non-ferrous Metal                                  14.78        5.69        3.49        1.38        7.83
 20   Metal Products                                     16.97        2.27       -2.32       -2.49        5.88
 21   Machinery                                          13.92        7.17       -3.00        1.51        7.38
 22   Computers                                          52.17       32.65        3.34       24.41       34.30
 23   Communications Equipment                           19.45       12.27       -0.70       28.78       15.04
 24   Electronic Components                              31.17       29.39       14.60       21.47       27.13
 25   Other Electrical Machinery                         18.82        6.54       -1.32       12.29       10.27
 26   Motor Vehicles                                     21.53        7.63       -0.34        0.14       10.21
 27   Other Transportation Equipment                      6.70        2.89       -5.95        0.46        2.72
 28   Precision Instruments                              18.14        7.60       -5.17        2.70        8.82
 29   Other Manufacturing                                19.81        4.49       -1.39       -0.04        8.17
 30   Railroad Transportation                             1.89       -1.16        0.32       -4.86       -0.45
 31   Road Transportation                                 9.00        3.45       -3.09       -2.70        3.67
 32   Water Transportation                                4.93        4.82       -0.73       -4.88        2.95
 33   Air Transportation                                 30.58        8.42        6.15       -2.82       13.93
 34   Storage Facility Service                            2.90        7.50        1.17       -2.22        4.00
 35   Communications                                     12.44        6.10        5.70       11.54        8.79
 36   Electricity                                        11.67        4.58        4.33        2.43        6.59
 37   Gas Supply                                          8.96        6.49        6.55        3.68        6.95
 38   Water Supply                                        9.17        1.83        2.51        0.12        4.09
 39   Wholesale and Retail                               14.79        5.32        0.29       -1.49        6.92
 40   Finance and Insurance                              12.27        6.13       -1.98        3.92        6.83
 41   Real Estate                                         6.81        2.91        4.30        3.02        4.37
 42   Education                                           5.38       -1.31       -0.58       -0.66        1.04
 43   Research                                           10.71        5.08       -0.81        2.35        5.83
 44   Medical Care                                        9.59        5.58        2.82       -1.61        5.64
 45   Other Service                                       3.02        2.52        3.58        1.88        2.74
 46   Public Administration                               7.26        3.43        1.99        0.88        4.18
 47   Household                                           7.12        5.17        4.13        2.49        5.34

      Average                                            12.44        5.02       -0.06        1.37        6.34



Note: All figures are average annual growth rates.
                          Table 9: Growth of Industry Intermediate Input by Subperiod

                                                     1960-1973   1973-1990   1990-1995   1995-2000   1960-2000
  1   Agriculture, Forestry, Fishery                      2.96        1.26       -1.90       -2.44        0.95
  2   Coal Mining                                        -5.48       -4.72       -6.52      -13.31       -6.27
  3   Other Mining                                       13.39       -0.08       -1.33       -3.61        3.70
  4   Construction                                       12.09        2.31        0.56       -1.88        4.74
  5   Foods                                               6.74        3.06        1.18       -0.37        3.59
  6   Textile                                             4.97       -1.62       -7.44       -6.30       -0.79
  7   Apparel                                             8.33        3.85       -2.40       -8.16        3.02
  8   Woods and Related Products                          7.87       -1.71       -0.41       -6.08        1.02
  9   Furniture and Fixture                              14.48        0.58       -0.49       -6.90        4.03
 10   Paper and Pulp                                      9.34        1.22       -1.82       -1.96        3.08
 11   Printing and Publishing                            10.60        4.03        0.47       -0.29        5.18
 12   Chemical Products                                   9.92        2.24       -0.12        0.07        4.17
 13   Petroleum Refining                                 14.95       -1.18        4.16       -1.90        4.64
 14   Coal Products                                      10.99        1.08       -2.18        2.47        4.07
 15   Rubber Products                                     8.36        3.86       -1.08       -0.69        4.14
 16   Leather Products                                   12.96        0.49       -5.56       -8.01        2.72
 17   Stone, Clay, Glass                                 13.34        0.16       -1.13       -2.74        3.92
 18   Iron and Steel                                     11.19       -0.62       -2.80        0.07        3.03
 19   Non-ferrous Metal                                  11.82        1.09       -1.10       -1.20        4.02
 20   Metal Products                                     15.36        2.10        0.33       -3.36        5.50
 21   Machinery                                          13.98        4.47       -1.06        0.31        6.35
 22   Computers                                          42.27       17.75        5.54        6.99       22.85
 23   Communications Equipment                           17.10        8.75        5.63       10.57       11.30
 24   Electronic Components                              14.95       10.82        5.34        9.03       11.25
 25   Other Electrical Machinery                         12.48        4.75        0.40        2.06        6.38
 26   Motor Vehicles                                     15.45        5.73       -0.59        1.34        7.55
 27   Other Transportation Equipment                      9.29        1.33       -2.21       -0.43        3.25
 28   Precision Instruments                              13.15        3.56       -2.62        0.44        5.51
 29   Other Manufacturing                                14.52        4.71       -0.52       -0.64        6.57
 30   Railroad Transportation                             6.77        5.99        1.60        2.84        5.30
 31   Road Transportation                                10.47        5.61        2.66        1.52        6.31
 32   Water Transportation                               11.24        2.07       -2.37        0.44        4.29
 33   Air Transportation                                 19.86        7.22        2.79        4.21       10.40
 34   Storage Facility Service                           16.27        3.41       -4.49        6.48        6.99
 35   Communications                                      6.80        5.20        8.17       10.66        6.78
 36   Electricity                                         9.80        2.50        0.82       -0.33        4.31
 37   Gas Supply                                          7.35        2.25        2.76        2.77        4.04
 38   Water Supply                                       18.16        6.83       -1.84        1.10        8.71
 39   Wholesale and Retail                                7.85        3.39        2.17       -1.87        4.03
 40   Finance and Insurance                               6.80        6.48       -0.71        3.47        5.31
 41   Real Estate                                        10.12        5.21        6.22        6.26        7.06
 42   Education                                           4.48        4.24        4.60        0.85        3.94
 43   Research                                            8.37        7.40        1.03        0.05        6.00
 44   Medical Care                                       14.12        7.10        3.83        3.30        8.50
 45   Other Service                                       9.58        5.20        4.73        2.80        6.27
 46   Public Administration                               9.61        5.27        4.88        5.79        6.70
 47   Household                                          12.60        7.13        5.13        5.62        8.47

      Average                                            11.44        3.65        0.47        0.40        5.38



Note: All figures are average annual growth rates.
                             Table 10: Growth of Industry Capital Input by Subperiod

                                                     1960-1973   1973-1990   1990-1995   1995-2000   1960-2000
  1   Agriculture, Forestry, Fishery                      2.51        1.45       -0.64       -1.06        1.22
  2   Coal Mining                                         3.44       -0.33       -7.01       -6.47       -0.71
  3   Other Mining                                        9.37        1.46       -0.21       -2.14        3.37
  4   Construction                                       17.03        4.09        9.24        1.54        8.62
  5   Foods                                              10.03        4.11        2.40        1.60        5.51
  6   Textile                                             6.86       -0.10        1.38       -1.76        2.14
  7   Apparel                                            15.33        5.31        3.87       -2.11        7.46
  8   Woods and Related Products                          9.23        0.65       -0.54       -2.99        2.84
  9   Furniture and Fixture                              12.63        3.08        2.83       -1.15        5.62
 10   Paper and Pulp                                      9.79        3.03        1.96        0.54        4.78
 11   Printing and Publishing                            14.36        4.19        4.61        3.05        7.41
 12   Chemical Products                                  10.69        2.98        2.34        1.11        5.17
 13   Petroleum Refining                                 11.83        1.38        2.68        1.02        4.89
 14   Coal Products                                      13.32        0.59       -1.33       -0.69        4.33
 15   Rubber Products                                     9.63        3.51        2.55        0.00        4.94
 16   Leather Products                                    9.45        1.52        3.19       -0.32        4.08
 17   Stone, Clay, Glass                                 11.54        3.48        2.66        1.14        5.71
 18   Iron and Steel                                     12.39        2.83        1.00       -0.42        5.30
 19   Non-ferrous Metal                                  10.06        2.42        2.27        0.49        4.64
 20   Metal Products                                     13.87        7.75        3.13        0.81        8.29
 21   Machinery                                          13.20        5.13        2.75        0.94        6.93
 22   Computers                                          37.27       10.99        5.17        0.78       17.53
 23   Communications Equipment                           12.07        6.31        3.78        4.35        7.62
 24   Electronic Components                              13.31       11.83        6.91        5.78       10.94
 25   Other Electrical Machinery                         10.62        6.24        3.19        1.89        6.74
 26   Motor Vehicles                                     16.56        6.23        2.82        1.13        8.52
 27   Other Transportation Equipment                     12.09        2.92        2.46        0.57        5.55
 28   Precision Instruments                              15.01        7.61        2.81       -0.15        8.45
 29   Other Manufacturing                                16.20        4.46        3.64        2.81        7.97
 30   Railroad Transportation                             5.20        2.39        1.67        3.33        3.33
 31   Road Transportation                                12.53        7.56       -0.38       -0.76        7.15
 32   Water Transportation                                0.43        0.70        0.32       -0.28        0.44
 33   Air Transportation                                 17.95        5.69       -0.69       -1.13        8.02
 34   Storage Facility Service                           11.84        5.23        6.56        2.51        7.21
 35   Communications                                     14.42        4.42        4.56        5.83        7.86
 36   Electricity                                         4.41        5.78        4.98        3.60        4.96
 37   Gas Supply                                          9.74        5.32        3.41        1.72        6.07
 38   Water Supply                                       13.41        4.41        2.95        3.87        7.08
 39   Wholesale and Retail                               11.06        5.71        3.34        2.97        6.81
 40   Finance and Insurance                              10.02        4.97        5.26        4.64        6.60
 41   Real Estate                                        11.49        6.34        4.01        1.69        7.14
 42   Education                                           8.87        4.26        2.59        0.93        5.13
 43   Research                                           11.07        6.98        1.96        3.82        7.28
 44   Medical Care                                       15.26        9.67        6.47        5.71       10.59
 45   Other Service                                      18.53        6.93        3.03        3.86        9.83
 46   Public Administration                              10.95        6.13        5.65        4.17        7.39
 47   Household                                           7.12        5.17        4.13        2.49        5.34

      Average                                            11.79        4.53        2.76        1.26        6.26



Note: All figures are average annual growth rates.
                           Table 11: Growth of Industry IT Capital Input by Subperiod

                                                     1960-1973   1973-1990   1990-1995   1995-2000   1960-2000
  1   Agriculture, Forestry, Fishery                     28.20       10.37       -2.69        2.29       13.52
  2   Coal Mining                                        21.07        0.11       -2.31       -1.05        6.47
  3   Other Mining                                       23.01        4.57        3.67        1.77       10.10
  4   Construction                                       31.87       13.86       10.12        9.64       18.72
  5   Foods                                              26.84       13.50        3.57        7.92       15.90
  6   Textile                                            26.67       13.12        0.52       -1.23       14.15
  7   Apparel                                            27.70       10.66        4.58        3.49       14.54
  8   Woods and Related Products                         36.66       14.53        2.06        1.48       18.53
  9   Furniture and Fixture                              37.63       15.65       -0.87       -0.09       18.76
 10   Paper and Pulp                                     22.57        5.44        2.10        4.48       10.47
 11   Printing and Publishing                            25.27       15.53        4.82        7.41       16.34
 12   Chemical Products                                  24.16       11.85        4.01        7.64       14.34
 13   Petroleum Refining                                 19.54       13.57        3.41        9.14       13.69
 14   Coal Products                                      26.15       16.59       -1.50        6.45       16.17
 15   Rubber Products                                    24.11       10.45        2.04        5.55       13.23
 16   Leather Products                                   27.37       15.86        3.34        1.24       16.21
 17   Stone, Clay, Glass                                 24.28       10.82        5.42        7.53       14.11
 18   Iron and Steel                                     25.37        7.09       -0.84        2.26       11.44
 19   Non-ferrous Metal                                  23.86       11.83       -0.50        4.67       13.30
 20   Metal Products                                     24.69       15.22       -0.87        0.71       14.47
 21   Machinery                                          28.77       13.67        3.31        2.79       15.93
 22   Computers                                          41.91       14.55        4.56        2.48       20.69
 23   Communications Equipment                           20.42        8.72        3.22        7.29       11.66
 24   Electronic Components                              23.55       15.65        5.21        6.12       15.72
 25   Other Electrical Machinery                         25.62       11.06        2.39        6.92       14.19
 26   Motor Vehicles                                     24.84       10.99        4.11        6.13       14.03
 27   Other Transportation Equipment                     22.89        3.48       -1.49        2.47        9.04
 28   Precision Instruments                              28.15       18.14        4.40        4.44       17.97
 29   Other Manufacturing                                29.64       16.24        5.30        9.03       18.32
 30   Railroad Transportation                            14.58       16.00        8.47       12.49       14.16
 31   Road Transportation                                29.30       18.42        5.27        7.48       18.94
 32   Water Transportation                               10.75       -2.13        2.40       11.08        4.27
 33   Air Transportation                                 29.71        9.46        3.61        3.97       14.63
 34   Storage Facility Service                           27.52       22.03        1.13        3.28       18.86
 35   Communications                                     17.49       13.35        9.55       10.06       13.81
 36   Electricity                                        15.43       12.78        5.91        3.35       11.60
 37   Gas Supply                                         22.51       10.70        4.62        4.72       13.03
 38   Water Supply                                       34.94       22.10        6.00       10.42       22.80
 39   Wholesale and Retail                               28.91       15.24        2.80        8.01       17.22
 40   Finance and Insurance                              28.57       13.87        6.75       15.45       17.95
 41   Real Estate                                        47.11       17.12        2.07       11.92       24.34
 42   Education                                          39.15       15.83        9.60        3.24       21.06
 43   Research                                           36.77       15.06        1.00        5.76       19.20
 44   Medical Care                                       33.24       14.61       18.23       12.21       20.82
 45   Other Service                                      40.09       14.34        6.88       11.63       21.44
 46   Public Administration                              24.02       18.14       13.60        9.65       18.42
 47   Household                                          18.46       23.04       22.64       25.35       21.79

      Average                                            27.05       13.04        4.29        6.36       15.67



Note: All figures are average annual growth rates.
                        Table 12: Growth of Industry Non-IT Capital Input by Subperiod

                                                     1960-1973   1973-1990   1990-1995   1995-2000   1960-2000
  1   Agriculture, Forestry, Fishery                      2.45        1.36       -0.63       -1.10        1.16
  2   Coal Mining                                         3.27       -0.33       -7.10       -6.58       -0.79
  3   Other Mining                                        9.28        1.41       -0.25       -2.19        3.31
  4   Construction                                       16.95        3.94        9.22        1.23        8.49
  5   Foods                                               9.94        3.95        2.35        1.28        5.36
  6   Textile                                             6.81       -0.40        1.50       -1.81        2.00
  7   Apparel                                            15.10        5.10        3.88       -2.80        7.21
  8   Woods and Related Products                          9.22        0.56       -0.59       -3.14        2.77
  9   Furniture and Fixture                              12.60        2.94        2.98       -1.22        5.57
 10   Paper and Pulp                                      9.41        2.98        1.96        0.43        4.62
 11   Printing and Publishing                            14.22        3.50        4.62        1.77        6.91
 12   Chemical Products                                  10.51        2.70        2.24        0.61        4.92
 13   Petroleum Refining                                 11.78        1.16        2.64        0.76        4.75
 14   Coal Products                                      13.30        0.42       -1.32       -0.95        4.22
 15   Rubber Products                                     9.45        3.30        2.57       -0.61        4.72
 16   Leather Products                                    9.42        1.38        3.20       -0.41        3.99
 17   Stone, Clay, Glass                                 11.47        3.39        2.57        0.76        5.58
 18   Iron and Steel                                     12.21        2.71        1.06       -0.51        5.19
 19   Non-ferrous Metal                                   9.90        2.17        2.43        0.25        4.48
 20   Metal Products                                     13.75        7.43        3.41        0.79        8.15
 21   Machinery                                          13.07        4.88        2.70        0.78        6.76
 22   Computers                                          36.70       10.21        5.58       -0.64       16.88
 23   Communications Equipment                           10.34        5.43        4.14        2.57        6.51
 24   Electronic Components                              12.27       11.12        7.58        5.64       10.37
 25   Other Electrical Machinery                         10.00        5.78        3.40        0.81        6.24
 26   Motor Vehicles                                     16.38        6.06        2.73        0.72        8.33
 27   Other Transportation Equipment                     11.40        2.95        2.91        0.36        5.37
 28   Precision Instruments                              14.86        6.80        2.46       -1.33        7.86
 29   Other Manufacturing                                16.11        4.11        3.50        1.95        7.66
 30   Railroad Transportation                             5.16        2.08        1.14        2.07        2.96
 31   Road Transportation                                12.46        7.22       -0.80       -1.69        6.81
 32   Water Transportation                               -0.47        0.80        0.23       -1.15        0.07
 33   Air Transportation                                 17.58        5.52       -0.95       -1.49        7.75
 34   Storage Facility Service                           11.79        4.49        7.06        2.40        6.92
 35   Communications                                     13.76        1.72        1.57        2.94        5.76
 36   Electricity                                         4.15        5.42        4.91        3.62        4.72
 37   Gas Supply                                          9.44        5.07        3.30        1.45        5.82
 38   Water Supply                                       13.39        4.31        2.91        3.77        7.02
 39   Wholesale and Retail                               10.96        5.30        3.39        2.06        6.49
 40   Finance and Insurance                               9.18        3.92        4.78        0.00        5.25
 41   Real Estate                                        11.48        6.31        4.02        1.65        7.12
 42   Education                                           8.71        3.96        2.23        0.82        4.89
 43   Research                                           10.05        5.67        2.34        3.26        6.38
 44   Medical Care                                       14.94        9.55        5.79        5.16       10.28
 45   Other Service                                      17.33        5.98        2.21        2.13        8.72
 46   Public Administration                              10.80        5.72        5.07        3.66        7.03
 47   Household                                           7.12        5.10        3.95        2.01        5.23

      Average                                            11.49        4.15        2.66        0.64        5.91



Note: All figures are average annual growth rates.
                        Table 13: Industry Contribution to IT Capital Input by Subperiod

                                                 1960-1973     1973-1990      1990-1995     1995-2000           1960-2000
  1   Agriculture, Forestry, Fishery                   0.26           0.13          -0.01          0.00                0.14
  2   Coal Mining                                      0.02           0.00           0.00          0.00                0.01
  3   Other Mining                                     0.06           0.00           0.00          0.00                0.02
  4   Construction                                     0.35           0.36           0.28          0.21                0.33
  5   Foods                                            0.33           0.12           0.04          0.07                0.17
  6   Textile                                          0.04           0.02           0.00          0.00                0.02
  7   Apparel                                          0.05           0.02           0.01          0.00                0.03
  8   Woods and Related Products                       0.00           0.01           0.00          0.00                0.00
  9   Furniture and Fixture                            0.01           0.01           0.00          0.00                0.01
 10   Paper and Pulp                                   0.42           0.02           0.01          0.01                0.15
 11   Printing and Publishing                          0.18           0.13           0.07          0.07                0.13
 12   Chemical Products                                0.75           0.24           0.10          0.15                0.38
 13   Petroleum Refining                               0.15           0.04           0.01          0.03                0.07
 14   Coal Products                                    0.00           0.01           0.00          0.00                0.01
 15   Rubber Products                                  0.06           0.02           0.00          0.01                0.03
 16   Leather Products                                 0.00           0.00           0.00          0.00                0.00
 17   Stone, Clay, Glass                               0.12           0.03           0.01          0.01                0.05
 18   Iron and Steel                                   0.92           0.08           0.00          0.01                0.34
 19   Non-ferrous Metal                                0.15           0.04           0.00          0.01                0.07
 20   Metal Products                                   0.21           0.08           0.00          0.00                0.10
 21   Machinery                                        0.36           0.25           0.06          0.03                0.23
 22   Computers                                        0.22           0.27           0.11          0.03                0.20
 23   Communications Equipment                         0.39           0.10           0.04          0.06                0.18
 24   Electronic Components                            0.76           0.57           0.22          0.24                0.55
 25   Other Electrical Machinery                       1.50           0.47           0.11          0.17                0.72
 26   Motor Vehicles                                   0.78           0.11           0.05          0.05                0.31
 27   Other Transportation Equipment                   0.53          -0.01           0.00          0.00                0.17
 28   Precision Instruments                            0.07           0.09           0.03          0.02                0.07
 29   Other Manufacturing                              0.09           0.12           0.04          0.06                0.09
 30   Railroad Transportation                          0.04           0.06           0.07          0.10                0.06
 31   Road Transportation                              0.09           0.12           0.05          0.06                0.09
 32   Water Transportation                             0.12          -0.03           0.01          0.02                0.03
 33   Air Transportation                               0.05           0.01           0.00          0.00                0.02
 34   Storage Facility Service                         0.01           0.03           0.00          0.00                0.02
 35   Communications                                   3.66           1.42           0.91          1.23                2.06
 36   Electricity                                      0.47           0.42           0.19          0.09                0.37
 37   Gas Supply                                       0.13           0.04           0.02          0.02                0.06
 38   Water Supply                                     0.01           0.01           0.01          0.01                0.01
 39   Wholesale and Retail                             0.77           1.16           0.20          0.35                0.81
 40   Finance and Insurance                            3.05           1.67           0.82          2.06                2.06
 41   Real Estate                                      0.04           0.08           0.01          0.06                0.06
 42   Education                                        0.06           0.07           0.05          0.02                0.06
 43   Research                                         0.02           0.03           0.00          0.01                0.02
 44   Medical Care                                     0.52           0.18           0.19          0.17                0.29
 45   Other Service                                    7.49           3.84           1.85          3.20                4.70
 46   Public Administration                            0.53           0.90           0.77          0.73                0.74
 47   Household                                        0.17           0.55           0.87          1.88                0.63

      Sum                                             26.02          13.89          7.23          11.26              16.67

Note: All figures are average annual contributions. Sum means annual average growth rate in IT capital input at economy-wide
level.
                     Table 14: Industry Contribution to Non-IT Capital Input by Subperiod

                                                 1960-1973     1973-1990      1990-1995     1995-2000           1960-2000
  1   Agriculture, Forestry, Fishery                   0.18           0.06         -0.01          -0.02               0.08
  2   Coal Mining                                      0.00           0.00          0.00           0.00               0.00
  3   Other Mining                                     0.05           0.01          0.00          -0.01               0.02
  4   Construction                                     0.58           0.26          0.71           0.07               0.40
  5   Foods                                            0.35           0.10          0.04           0.02               0.16
  6   Textile                                          0.08           0.00          0.00           0.00               0.03
  7   Apparel                                          0.02           0.01          0.01           0.00               0.01
  8   Woods and Related Products                       0.05           0.00          0.00           0.00               0.02
  9   Furniture and Fixture                            0.04           0.01          0.01           0.00               0.02
 10   Paper and Pulp                                   0.08           0.02          0.01           0.00               0.04
 11   Printing and Publishing                          0.12           0.02          0.03           0.01               0.05
 12   Chemical Products                                0.35           0.07          0.06           0.02               0.16
 13   Petroleum Refining                               0.18           0.00          0.02           0.01               0.06
 14   Coal Products                                    0.02           0.00          0.00           0.00               0.01
 15   Rubber Products                                  0.03           0.01          0.01           0.00               0.01
 16   Leather Products                                 0.00           0.00          0.00           0.00               0.00
 17   Stone, Clay, Glass                               0.15           0.03          0.02           0.00               0.06
 18   Iron and Steel                                   0.43           0.09          0.02          -0.01               0.18
 19   Non-ferrous Metal                                0.08           0.01          0.01           0.00               0.03
 20   Metal Products                                   0.15           0.05          0.04           0.00               0.07
 21   Machinery                                        0.40           0.11          0.08           0.01               0.19
 22   Computers                                        0.02           0.04          0.02           0.00               0.03
 23   Communications Equipment                         0.01           0.01          0.01           0.00               0.01
 24   Electronic Components                            0.06           0.08          0.06           0.06               0.07
 25   Other Electrical Machinery                       0.24           0.11          0.06           0.01               0.13
 26   Motor Vehicles                                   0.34           0.11          0.04           0.01               0.16
 27   Other Transportation Equipment                   0.05           0.01          0.01           0.00               0.02
 28   Precision Instruments                            0.06           0.02          0.01           0.00               0.03
 29   Other Manufacturing                              0.12           0.04          0.03           0.01               0.06
 30   Railroad Transportation                          0.05           0.01          0.01           0.01               0.03
 31   Road Transportation                              0.14           0.05          0.00          -0.01               0.07
 32   Water Transportation                            -0.02           0.00          0.00           0.00               0.00
 33   Air Transportation                               0.02           0.01          0.00           0.00               0.01
 34   Storage Facility Service                         0.02           0.01          0.01           0.00               0.01
 35   Communications                                   0.16           0.03          0.02           0.04               0.07
 36   Electricity                                      0.09           0.13          0.17           0.13               0.12
 37   Gas Supply                                       0.03           0.02          0.01           0.01               0.02
 38   Water Supply                                     0.04           0.01          0.02           0.03               0.03
 39   Wholesale and Retail                             0.89           0.41          0.21           0.06               0.50
 40   Finance and Insurance                            0.34           0.17          0.16           0.00               0.21
 41   Real Estate                                      0.78           0.45          0.32           0.19               0.51
 42   Education                                        0.04           0.03          0.02           0.01               0.03
 43   Research                                         0.00           0.00          0.00           0.00               0.00
 44   Medical Care                                     0.19           0.15          0.07           0.08               0.14
 45   Other Service                                    0.96           0.44          0.19           0.24               0.55
 46   Public Administration                            0.40           0.29          0.29           0.25               0.32
 47   Household                                        1.51           1.29          1.13           0.64               1.26

      Sum                                              9.92           4.80          3.91           1.87               5.99

Note: All figures are average annual contributions. Sum means annual average growth rate in Non-IT capital input at economy-
wide level.
                       Table 15: IT Capital Share in Industry Capital Cost by Subperiod

                                                   1960        1973         1990          1995    2000
  1   Agriculture, Forestry, Fishery               0.07         0.83        1.43           0.70    1.06
  2   Coal Mining                                  0.76         3.23        1.05           1.82    1.86
  3   Other Mining                                 0.73         0.89        1.14           1.31    1.51
  4   Construction                                 0.39         0.94        2.39           2.71    4.79
  5   Foods                                        0.40         1.28        4.33           4.43    5.04
  6   Textile                                      0.15         0.91        5.14           8.54    9.04
  7   Apparel                                      1.42         2.81        4.61           8.48   13.89
  8   Woods and Related Products                   0.01         0.14        1.68           2.89    3.43
  9   Furniture and Fixture                        0.03         0.30        2.55           5.78    5.79
 10   Paper and Pulp                               2.46         5.10        2.52           2.33    2.93
 11   Printing and Publishing                      0.95         2.50       12.02          17.67   25.09
 12   Chemical Products                            1.29         2.85        5.43           5.31    8.82
 13   Petroleum Refining                           0.63         0.83        4.89           2.87    3.57
 14   Coal Products                                0.13         0.34        2.82           2.82    4.07
 15   Rubber Products                              0.87         3.11        4.75           8.76   10.33
 16   Leather Products                             0.04         0.19        2.38           4.43    4.96
 17   Stone, Clay, Glass                           0.46         0.83        2.35           4.66    6.77
 18   Iron and Steel                               0.93         2.48        3.02           2.65    2.93
 19   Non-ferrous Metal                            0.89         1.53        4.54           4.40    5.78
 20   Metal Products                               1.03         1.56        5.50           6.22    8.21
 21   Machinery                                    0.53         2.22        4.24           6.28    8.00
 22   Computers                                   10.29        23.17       23.48          37.98   46.86
 23   Communications Equipment                    16.93        26.99       29.96          37.54   36.88
 24   Electronic Components                        8.15        13.38       28.20          25.29   24.39
 25   Other Electrical Machinery                   2.98         7.27       12.64          15.17   17.74
 26   Motor Vehicles                               1.97         2.63        5.11           6.55    8.52
 27   Other Transportation Equipment               8.55        18.00        8.35           9.15    9.22
 28   Precision Instruments                        0.83         2.31       15.05          20.03   21.01
 29   Other Manufacturing                          0.49         1.38        5.73          10.16   13.71
 30   Railroad Transportation                      0.34         0.75        4.54           8.49   16.76
 31   Road Transportation                          0.30         1.26        4.52           8.62   12.62
 32   Water Transportation                         4.75        19.24        4.14           5.64    8.83
 33   Air Transportation                           1.74         4.99        5.56           6.63    7.22
 34   Storage Facility Service                     0.16         0.80        9.48           7.97   10.00
 35   Communications                              18.53        20.30       33.91          40.22   40.32
 36   Electricity                                  1.55         5.85        6.60           6.36    6.63
 37   Gas Supply                                   1.73         5.81        7.90           7.61    8.63
 38   Water Supply                                 0.03         0.14        1.39           1.25    1.85
 39   Wholesale and Retail                         0.39         1.38        7.86           9.90   18.83
 40   Finance and Insurance                        3.28         6.12       18.22          24.99   34.45
 41   Real Estate                                  0.01         0.12        0.61           0.32    0.59
 42   Education                                    0.22         1.33        3.11           5.27    3.84
 43   Research                                     2.15         7.22       16.52          27.21   22.22
 44   Medical Care                                 1.26         2.44        3.12           7.93    7.58
 45   Other Service                                2.84        10.33       18.32          17.15   21.60
 46   Public Administration                        0.77         1.90        5.79           7.98    7.93
 47   Household                                    0.06         0.09        0.70           1.40    3.02

      Economy-wide level                           1.18         2.65        6.45           7.20    9.83



Note: All figures are shares.
                              Table 16: Growth of Industry Labor Input by Subperiod

                                                     1960-1973   1973-1990   1990-1995   1995-2000   1960-2000
  1   Agriculture, Forestry, Fishery                     -2.48       -2.04       -4.94       -4.35       -2.83
  2   Coal Mining                                       -18.52       -6.39      -10.15      -21.02      -12.63
  3   Other Mining                                       -5.13       -4.25       -1.72       -3.72       -4.15
  4   Construction                                        4.43        2.34        1.34       -0.17        2.58
  5   Foods                                               3.08        3.20        1.52       -1.45        2.37
  6   Textile                                            -0.60       -4.39       -4.26       -9.58       -3.79
  7   Apparel                                             3.32        1.76       -5.06       -9.12        0.05
  8   Woods and Related Products                          0.97       -2.40       -1.93       -4.83       -1.55
  9   Furniture and Fixture                               6.47       -0.63       -3.11       -3.28        1.04
 10   Paper and Pulp                                      0.96        1.61       -1.27       -2.72        0.50
 11   Printing and Publishing                             3.83        3.27        0.94       -0.32        2.72
 12   Chemical Products                                   1.23        0.92        0.23       -0.23        0.79
 13   Petroleum Refining                                  5.18       -0.83        0.84       -2.03        1.18
 14   Coal Products                                       0.30       -1.03       -2.24       -6.18       -1.39
 15   Rubber Products                                     0.36        1.21        0.04       -2.04        0.38
 16   Leather Products                                    7.33       -0.23        0.19       -6.93        1.44
 17   Stone, Clay, Glass                                  2.52        0.78       -0.34       -2.19        0.83
 18   Iron and Steel                                      0.96        0.66       -1.92       -3.89       -0.13
 19   Non-ferrous Metal                                   4.52       -0.33       -3.78       -2.74        0.51
 20   Metal Products                                      4.74        0.28       -1.72       -1.83        1.22
 21   Machinery                                           4.60        2.04       -1.12        1.43        2.40
 22   Computers                                          26.77       10.02       -7.18      -13.20       10.41
 23   Communications Equipment                            1.64        1.55        2.37        0.90        1.60
 24   Electronic Components                              -1.13        5.60        4.24       -0.14        2.53
 25   Other Electrical Machinery                          2.18        3.47       -4.12        0.67        1.75
 26   Motor Vehicles                                      5.99        0.50       -1.71       -0.98        1.82
 27   Other Transportation Equipment                     -0.65       -1.93       -3.99       -0.24       -1.56
 28   Precision Instruments                               4.37        1.28       -4.50       -1.22        1.25
 29   Other Manufacturing                                 6.08        2.09        0.46       -2.58        2.60
 30   Railroad Transportation                            -0.47       -2.08        0.29       -3.54       -1.44
 31   Road Transportation                                 6.30        2.55        0.73       -1.51        3.04
 32   Water Transportation                                1.09       -0.43        0.52       -4.79       -0.36
 33   Air Transportation                                 13.85        5.08        0.12       -1.45        6.49
 34   Storage Facility Service                            4.82        2.24       -2.08       -2.39        1.96
 35   Communications                                      4.19        1.78       -0.49        6.48        2.87
 36   Electricity                                         2.45        1.25        3.42       -2.34        1.46
 37   Gas Supply                                          0.08       -0.87        5.63        0.52        0.42
 38   Water Supply                                       10.39        0.46        1.35        1.15        3.88
 39   Wholesale and Retail                                3.97        2.05       -0.84       -0.54        1.99
 40   Finance and Insurance                               4.05        3.57        0.56       -2.13        2.64
 41   Real Estate                                        14.57        3.56        1.48       -0.05        6.43
 42   Education                                           3.41        3.41       -1.13        0.26        2.45
 43   Research                                            7.42        3.18        3.20        1.17        4.31
 44   Medical Care                                        6.73        3.82        2.71        3.62        4.60
 45   Other Service                                       8.41        2.60       -0.35        0.88        3.91
 46   Public Administration                               5.12        1.77       -0.78       -1.92        2.08
 47   Household                                           0.00        0.00        0.00        0.00        0.00

      Average                                             3.61        1.11       -0.82       -2.35        1.25



Note: All figures are average annual growth rates.
                             Table 17: Sources of Industry Output Growth, 1960-2000

                                                      Output         Capital          Labor    Intermediate            TFP
   1 Agriculture, Forestry, Fishery                      0.64           0.36           -0.78           0.38            0.69
   2 Coal Mining                                        -7.17           -0.06          -5.11           -3.05           1.05
   3 Other Mining                                        3.43           1.02           -0.87           1.36            1.92
   4 Construction                                        4.38           0.95            0.63           3.18           -0.38
   5 Foods                                               3.82           0.82            0.28           2.61            0.11
   6 Textile                                             0.16           0.19           -1.08           -0.40           1.45
   7 Apparel                                             2.74           0.37           -0.16            2.35           0.19
   8 Woods and Related Products                          1.07           0.25           -0.35           0.83            0.33
   9 Furniture and Fixture                               3.62           0.70            0.13           2.67            0.12
 10 Paper and Pulp                                       4.06           0.62            0.04           2.36            1.04
 11 Printing and Publishing                              3.90           1.15            0.80           2.89           -0.95
 12 Chemical Products                                    5.67           1.00            0.09           2.86            1.72
 13 Petroleum Refining                                   5.23           1.46            0.04           2.80            0.92
 14 Coal Products                                        4.19           0.52           -0.10           3.42            0.35
 15 Rubber Products                                      4.73           0.69            0.07           2.75            1.22
 16 Leather Products                                     2.88           0.27            0.11           2.26            0.24
 17 Stone, Clay, Glass                                   4.26           0.98            0.15           2.36            0.77
 18   Iron and Steel                                     3.77           0.63           -0.05           2.53            0.65
 19   Non-ferrous Metal                                  4.94           0.65           -0.01           3.04            1.25
 20   Metal Products                                     5.65           0.89            0.31           3.37            1.08
 21   Machinery                                          6.69           1.05            0.47           4.15            1.02
 22 Computers                                           26.80           3.21            2.09          14.63            6.86
 23 Communications Equipment                            12.39           0.94            0.35           7.64            3.46
 24 Electronic Components                               17.21           2.19            0.41           7.02            7.59
 25 Other Electrical Machinery                           7.70           1.04            0.29           4.31            2.05
 26 Motor Vehicles                                       8.37           1.03            0.30           5.30            1.73
 27 Other Transportation Equipment                       3.06           0.59           -0.41           2.13            0.75
 28 Precision Instruments                                6.81           1.07            0.28           3.37            2.09
 29 Other Manufacturing                                  7.06           1.07            0.46           4.44            1.08
 30 Railroad Transportation                              2.02           0.66           -0.36           2.18           -0.45
 31 Road Transportation                                  4.54            0.92           1.55           2.14           -0.07
 32 Water Transportation                                 3.48           -0.02          -0.07           2.02            1.56
 33 Air Transportation                                  11.99            1.37           1.72           5.93            2.97
 34   Storage Facility Service                           5.09           1.10            0.85           2.57            0.58
 35   Communications                                     8.31           2.61            1.18           1.86            2.66
 36   Electricity                                        5.74           2.08            0.19           1.98            1.55
 37   Gas Supply                                         5.61           2.11            0.11           1.84            1.55
 38   Water Supply                                       5.33           3.06            1.14           2.29           -1.17
 39   Wholesale and Retail                               5.67           1.22            0.77           1.71            1.96
 40   Finance and Insurance                              6.27           1.98            0.99           1.67            1.65
 41   Real Estate                                        4.63           5.87            0.44           0.69           -2.36
 42   Education                                          1.61           0.39            1.78           0.81           -1.37
 43   Research                                           5.84           0.56            2.80           1.67            0.82
 44   Medical Care                                       6.90           1.49            1.94           3.68           -0.22
 45   Other Service                                      4.76           1.90            0.97           3.34           -1.45
 46   Public Administration                              4.73           2.25            1.06           1.41            0.00
 47   Household                                          5.58           4.93            0.00           0.66            0.00

      Industry Median                                    4.76           0.98            0.28           2.53            1.02



Note: The contribution of each input represents the share-weighted growth rate. All figures are average annual percentages.
                        Table 18: Sources of Industry Labor Productivity Growth, 1960-2000
                                                             Capital      Intermediate
                                                    ALP     Deepening      Deepening Labor Quality   TFP
  1   Agriculture, Forestry, Fishery                 4.36          1.39          2.03         0.26    0.69
  2   Coal Mining                                    6.19          1.78          3.04         0.32    1.05
  3   Other Mining                                   8.04          2.49          3.53         0.11    1.92
  4   Construction                                   2.31          0.73          1.82         0.14   -0.38
  5   Foods                                          2.10          0.57          1.32         0.09    0.11
  6   Textile                                        4.73          0.35          2.73         0.20    1.45
  7   Apparel                                        3.19          0.41          2.47         0.13    0.19
  8   Woods and Related Products                     2.88          0.36          2.13         0.05    0.33
  9   Furniture and Fixture                          3.05          0.56          2.25         0.12    0.12
 10   Paper and Pulp                                 4.28          0.68          2.46         0.10    1.04
 11   Printing and Publishing                        1.94          0.85          1.79         0.24   -0.95
 12   Chemical Products                              5.66          1.00          2.84         0.10    1.72
 13   Petroleum Refining                             4.82          1.06          2.82         0.02    0.92
 14   Coal Products                                  6.31          1.00          4.92         0.04    0.35
 15   Rubber Products                                5.10          0.72          2.99         0.18    1.22
 16   Leather Products                               2.07          0.17          1.50         0.16    0.24
 17   Stone, Clay, Glass                             4.13          0.88          2.31         0.17    0.77
 18   Iron and Steel                                 4.56          0.77          3.10         0.05    0.65
 19   Non-ferrous Metal                              4.91          0.64          2.97         0.05    1.25
 20   Metal Products                                 4.99          0.79          2.96         0.16    1.08
 21   Machinery                                      5.00          0.78          3.05         0.16    1.02
 22   Computers                                     17.19          1.20          8.99         0.14    6.86
 23   Communications Equipment                      11.60          0.87          7.12         0.15    3.46
 24   Electronic Components                         15.49          1.87          5.88         0.15    7.59
 25   Other Electrical Machinery                     6.75          0.88          3.65         0.17    2.05
 26   Motor Vehicles                                 7.37          0.87          4.62         0.14    1.73
 27   Other Transportation Equipment                 5.15          0.78          3.49         0.14    0.75
 28   Precision Instruments                          6.42          0.99          3.09         0.24    2.09
 29   Other Manufacturing                            5.25          0.82          3.19         0.16    1.08
 30   Railroad Transportation                        4.27          1.17          3.24         0.32   -0.45
 31   Road Transportation                            1.85          0.48          1.21         0.23   -0.07
 32   Water Transportation                           4.25         -0.09          2.67         0.11    1.56
 33   Air Transportation                             5.55          0.25          2.29         0.04    2.97
 34   Storage Facility Service                       3.32          0.78          1.87         0.09    0.58
 35   Communications                                 6.14          1.92          1.27         0.29    2.66
 36   Electricity                                    4.52          1.61          1.33         0.03    1.55
 37   Gas Supply                                     5.34          1.90          1.87         0.02    1.55
 38   Water Supply                                   2.06          1.43          1.62         0.18   -1.17
 39   Wholesale and Retail                           4.41          1.03          1.14         0.28    1.96
 40   Finance and Insurance                          4.21          1.30          1.03         0.23    1.65
 41   Real Estate                                   -1.58          0.64          0.10         0.04   -2.36
 42   Education                                     -0.37          0.24          0.41         0.35   -1.37
 43   Research                                       1.95          0.24          0.61         0.28    0.82
 44   Medical Care                                   2.74          0.87          1.89         0.20   -0.22
 45   Other Service                                  1.74          1.27          1.66         0.26   -1.45
 46   Public Administration                          3.32          1.86          1.15         0.31    0.00
 47   Household                                      0.00          0.00          0.00         0.00    0.00

      Industry Median                                3.24         0.45           1.62         0.20   0.70



Note: All figures are average annual percentages.
                      Table 19: Growth of Industry Total Factor Productivity by Subperiod

                                                     1960-1973   1973-1990   1990-1995   1995-2000   1960-2000
  1   Agriculture, Forestry, Fishery                      1.28        0.26        1.56       -0.29        0.69
  2   Coal Mining                                         5.16       -2.02        1.14        0.72        1.05
  3   Other Mining                                        6.67       -0.39       -4.08        3.41        1.92
  4   Construction                                       -0.67        0.56       -2.13       -1.04       -0.38
  5   Foods                                               1.96       -0.81       -1.17       -0.29        0.11
  6   Textile                                             0.05        2.33        2.30        1.22        1.45
  7   Apparel                                             1.27        0.06       -1.90       -0.11        0.19
  8   Woods and Related Products                         -0.41        1.10       -0.88        0.90        0.33
  9   Furniture and Fixture                               1.17        0.05       -2.18       -0.12        0.12
 10   Paper and Pulp                                      2.28        0.56        0.03        0.46        1.04
 11   Printing and Publishing                            -1.69       -0.52       -1.32       -0.09       -0.95
 12   Chemical Products                                   3.69        1.24        0.20       -0.28        1.72
 13   Petroleum Refining                                  0.57        1.37        0.07        1.17        0.92
 14   Coal Products                                       0.89       -0.41       -0.01        1.90        0.35
 15   Rubber Products                                     3.02        0.98       -1.64        0.22        1.22
 16   Leather Products                                    1.99       -0.36       -1.82       -0.22        0.24
 17   Stone, Clay, Glass                                  3.02       -0.37       -0.63        0.19        0.77
 18   Iron and Steel                                      1.18        0.30        0.37        0.76        0.65
 19   Non-ferrous Metal                                   1.72        1.07        1.19        0.71        1.25
 20   Metal Products                                      3.63        0.17       -0.93       -0.48        1.08
 21   Machinery                                           1.85        1.34       -1.25        0.06        1.02
 22   Computers                                           7.08        8.54        1.03        6.38        6.86
 23   Communications Equipment                            5.01        2.60       -1.24        7.07        3.46
 24   Electronic Components                               9.57        7.15        3.55        7.96        7.59
 25   Other Electrical Machinery                          3.77        0.70        0.12        4.11        2.05
 26   Motor Vehicles                                      3.37        1.46       -0.02        0.17        1.73
 27   Other Transportation Equipment                      1.01        1.28       -1.20        0.21        0.75
 28   Precision Instruments                               3.90        1.81       -1.11        1.55        2.09
 29   Other Manufacturing                                 2.88        0.49       -1.00        0.48        1.08
 30   Railroad Transportation                             0.35       -0.72       -0.33       -1.78       -0.45
 31   Road Transportation                                 0.74        0.23       -2.51       -0.74       -0.07
 32   Water Transportation                                2.90        1.74       -0.55       -0.39        1.56
 33   Air Transportation                                  6.55        1.35        2.55       -0.40        2.97
 34   Storage Facility Service                           -1.97        2.78        0.64       -0.36        0.58
 35   Communications                                      2.74        2.30        2.75        3.58        2.66
 36   Electricity                                         4.61        0.23       -0.34       -0.07        1.55
 37   Gas Supply                                          1.33        1.75        1.39        1.57        1.55
 38   Water Supply                                       -2.49       -0.21       -0.10       -2.08       -1.17
 39   Wholesale and Retail                                4.58        1.34        0.04       -0.80        1.96
 40   Finance and Insurance                               3.47        1.36       -2.76        2.27        1.65
 41   Real Estate                                        -4.34       -2.79        0.56        1.33       -2.36
 42   Education                                           1.32       -4.03        0.14       -0.83       -1.37
 43   Research                                            1.89        1.16       -3.04        0.76        0.82
 44   Medical Care                                        0.23        0.35       -0.32       -3.23       -0.22
 45   Other Service                                      -3.84       -0.84        1.38       -0.12       -1.45
 46   Public Administration                               0.00        0.00        0.00        0.00        0.00
 47   Household                                           0.00        0.00        0.00        0.00        0.00

      Average                                             1.99        0.78       -0.29        0.75        1.03



Note: All figures are average annual growth rates.
                          Table 20: Growth of Industry Labor Productivity by Subperiod

                                                     1960-1973   1973-1990   1990-1995   1995-2000   1960-2000
  1   Agriculture, Forestry, Fishery                      5.82        3.81        4.32        2.51        4.36
  2   Coal Mining                                        14.34        0.15        4.62        7.09        6.19
  3   Other Mining                                       19.11        3.99       -3.02        4.08        8.04
  4   Construction                                        5.81        1.70       -0.99       -1.44        2.31
  5   Foods                                               6.26        0.14       -1.02        1.03        2.10
  6   Textile                                             5.08        5.60        1.73        3.86        4.73
  7   Apparel                                             6.08        2.38        0.87        0.80        3.19
  8   Woods and Related Products                          5.42        2.37        0.55        0.35        2.88
  9   Furniture and Fixture                               7.74        1.80        0.22       -2.08        3.05
 10   Paper and Pulp                                     10.64        1.29        0.49        1.71        4.28
 11   Printing and Publishing                             4.68        0.98       -0.66        0.63        1.94
 12   Chemical Products                                  12.27        3.50        0.95        0.53        5.66
 13   Petroleum Refining                                  9.35        2.44        3.11        2.82        4.82
 14   Coal Products                                      12.12        2.42        1.54        9.19        6.31
 15   Rubber Products                                    10.76        3.82       -1.57        1.43        5.10
 16   Leather Products                                    7.06        0.92       -4.79       -0.17        2.07
 17   Stone, Clay, Glass                                 11.77        0.61       -0.16        0.52        4.13
 18   Iron and Steel                                     11.72        0.42        0.25        4.35        4.56
 19   Non-ferrous Metal                                   8.57        2.98        4.36        2.53        4.91
 20   Metal Products                                     11.72        2.66        1.30       -0.88        4.99
 21   Machinery                                          10.15        4.14       -0.08       -0.34        5.00
 22   Computers                                          19.82       14.22       13.23       24.40       17.19
 23   Communications Equipment                           16.98        9.01        2.77       15.23       11.60
 24   Electronic Components                              23.09       12.51        6.14       15.19       15.49
 25   Other Electrical Machinery                         12.97        2.69        5.25        5.88        6.75
 26   Motor Vehicles                                     12.32        6.56        2.05        2.54        7.37
 27   Other Transportation Equipment                      9.51        4.58        0.65        0.23        5.15
 28   Precision Instruments                              11.63        4.77        1.97        2.94        6.42
 29   Other Manufacturing                                11.23        3.24       -0.38        2.17        5.25
 30   Railroad Transportation                             5.82        4.27        0.98        3.55        4.27
 31   Road Transportation                                 3.18        2.29       -1.84        0.60        1.85
 32   Water Transportation                                7.16        4.21       -2.29        3.37        4.25
 33   Air Transportation                                  9.58        3.38        4.44        3.59        5.55
 34   Storage Facility Service                            3.17        4.00        0.38        4.33        3.32
 35   Communications                                      7.48        5.05        7.18        5.37        6.14
 36   Electricity                                         9.03        2.39       -0.30        4.86        4.52
 37   Gas Supply                                          7.52        6.08       -0.66        3.19        5.34
 38   Water Supply                                        1.24        4.14       -0.42       -0.34        2.06
 39   Wholesale and Retail                                8.61        3.95        2.42       -2.95        4.41
 40   Finance and Insurance                               6.40        3.40       -1.42        6.89        4.21
 41   Real Estate                                        -7.82        0.71        2.73        2.54       -1.58
 42   Education                                           2.48       -3.04        1.62       -0.65       -0.37
 43   Research                                            2.97        3.04       -3.21        0.77        1.95
 44   Medical Care                                        4.78        3.30        1.01       -2.74        2.74
 45   Other Service                                      -0.61        2.37        5.12        2.30        1.74
 46   Public Administration                               2.87        2.83        4.20        5.31        3.32
 47   Household                                           0.00        0.00        0.00        0.00        0.00

      Average                                             8.25        3.36        1.35        3.13        4.67



Note: All figures are average annual growth rates.
         VA Growth Rate                                                        Industry Contribution

-20%   -10%   0%    10%   20%   30%                                    -0.2%   -0.1%   0.0%   0.1%   0.2%   0.3%

                                   47 Household
                                   24 Electronic Components
                                   35 Communications
                                   45 Other Service
                                   25 Other Electrical Mach
                                   40 Finance and Insurance
                                   41 Real Estate
                                   22 Computers
                                   23 Communications Equipment
                                   46 Public Administration
                                   36 Electricity
                                   21 Machinery
                                   13 Petroleum Refining
                                   37 Gas Supply
                                   28 Precision Instruments
                                   18 Iron and Steel
                                   3 Other Mining
                                   43 Research
                                   19 Non-ferrous Metal
                                   26 Motor Vehicles
                                   14 Coal Products
                                   27 Other Transportation Equipment
                                   29 Other Manufacturing
                                   10 Paper and Pulp
                                   11 Printing and Publishing
                                   38 Water Supply
                                   2 Coal Mining
                                   15 Rubber Products
                                   12 Chemical Products
                                   8 Woods and Related Products
                                   16 Leather Products
                                   34 Storage Facility Service
                                   33 Air Transportation
                                   9 Furniture and Fixture
                                   17 Stone, Clay, Glass
                                   32 Water Transportation
                                   6 Textile
                                   42 Education
                                   7 Apparel
                                   5 Foods
                                   20 Metal Products
                                   30 Railroad Transportation
                                   1 Agriculture, Forestry, Fishery
                                   31 Road Transportation
                                   44 Medical Care
                                   39 Wholesale and Retail
                                   4 Construction




              Figure 1: Value Added Growth and Industry Contribution during 1995-2000
   Difference in VA Growth Rate                                         Difference in Industry Contribution

-10%    0%      10%     20%       30%                                   -0.2%   -0.1%   0.0%   0.1%   0.2%   0.3%

                                    23 Communications Equipment
                                    22 Computers
                                    3 Other Mining
                                    25 Other Electrical Mach
                                    28 Precision Instruments
                                    24 Electronic Components
                                    27 Other Transportation Equipment
                                    14 Coal Products
                                    40 Finance and Insurance
                                    35 Communications
                                    21 Machinery
                                    9 Furniture and Fixture
                                    43 Research
                                    8 Woods and Related Products
                                    13 Petroleum Refining
                                    15 Rubber Products
                                    29 Other Manufacturing
                                    5 Foods
                                    11 Printing and Publishing
                                    26 Motor Vehicles
                                    31 Road Transportation
                                    42 Education
                                    20 Metal Products
                                    10 Paper and Pulp
                                    18 Iron and Steel
                                    17 Stone, Clay, Glass
                                    7 Apparel
                                    46 Public Administration
                                    41 Real Estate
                                    47 Household
                                    4 Construction
                                    45 Other Service
                                    39 Wholesale and Retail
                                    36 Electricity
                                    19 Non-ferrous Metal
                                    12 Chemical Products
                                    38 Water Supply
                                    37 Gas Supply
                                    16 Leather Products
                                    34 Storage Facility Service
                                    1 Agriculture, Forestry, Fishery
                                    32 Water Transportation
                                    44 Medical Care
                                    30 Railroad Transportation
                                    6 Textile
                                    2 Coal Mining
                                    33 Air Transportation




       Figure 2: Recovery of Industry Value Added: Difference from1990-1995 to 1995-2000
                       Japan
     0.5               U.S. (Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh,
                       2005)

     0.4



     0.3



     0.2



     0.1



     0.0
        1960    1965     1970     1975     1980     1985   1990   1995    2000



Figure 3: IT Capital Contribution to Total Capital Input: Comparison of the U.S. and Japan
                         Computer
                         Communications Equipment
                         Software
                         Non-IT Fixed Assets
                         Land and Inventory




22 Computers                                23 Communications Equipment




35 Communications
                                              40 Finance and Insurance



  Figure 4: Capital Cost Structure in Selected High IT-Capital Intensive Industies
            TFP Growth Rate                                                        Industry Contribution

-4%   -2%     0%   2%   4%    6%   8%                                       -0.3% -0.2% -0.1% 0.0%   0.1%   0.2%   0.3%

                                        24 Electronic Components
                                        25 Other Electrical Machinery
                                        40 Finance and Insurance
                                        35 Communications
                                        22 Computers
                                        41 Real Estate
                                        23 Communications Equipment
                                        18 Iron and Steel
                                        13 Petroleum Refining
                                        29 Other Manufacturing
                                        28 Precision Instruments
                                        26 Motor Vehicles
                                        3 Other Mining
                                        6 Textile
                                        19 Non-ferrous Metal
                                        10 Paper and Pulp
                                        37 Gas Supply
                                        8 Woods and Related Products
                                        14 Coal Products
                                        21 Machinery
                                        43 Research
                                        17 Stone, Clay, Glass
                                        27 Other Transportation Equipment
                                        15 Rubber Products
                                        2 Coal Mining
                                        47 Household
                                        46 Public Administration
                                        16 Leather Products
                                        9 Furniture and Fixture
                                        7 Apparel
                                        36 Electricity
                                        34 Storage Facility Service
                                        11 Printing and Publishing
                                        33 Air Transportation
                                        32 Water Transportation
                                        1 Agriculture, Forestry, Fishery
                                        20 Metal Products
                                        38 Water Supply
                                        12 Chemical Products
                                        5 Foods
                                        31 Road Transportation
                                        30 Railroad Transportation
                                        42 Education
                                        45 Other Service
                                        39 Wholesale and Retail
                                        4 Construction
                                        44 Medical Care




                   Figure 5: TFP Growth and Industry Contribution during 1995-2000
  Difference in TFP Growth Rate                                             Difference in Industry Contribution

-4% -2%   0%    2%   4%   6%   8%   10%                                   -0.4%   -0.2%    0.0%     0.2%    0.4%

                                      23 Communications Equipment
                                      3 Other Mining
                                      22 Computers
                                      40 Finance and Insurance
                                      24 Electronic Components
                                      25 Other Electrical Mach
                                      43 Research
                                      28 Precision Instruments
                                      9 Furniture and Fixture
                                      14 Coal Products
                                      15 Rubber Products
                                      7 Apparel
                                      8 Woods and Related Products
                                      31 Road Transportation
                                      16 Leather Products
                                      29 Other Manufacturing
                                      27 Other Transportation Equipment
                                      21 Machinery
                                      11 Printing and Publishing
                                      13 Petroleum Refining
                                      4 Construction
                                      5 Foods
                                      35 Communications
                                      17 Stone, Clay, Glass
                                      41 Real Estate
                                      20 Metal Products
                                      10 Paper and Pulp
                                      18 Iron and Steel
                                      36 Electricity
                                      26 Motor Vehicles
                                      37 Gas Supply
                                      32 Water Transportation
                                      47 Household
                                      46 Public Administration
                                      2 Coal Mining
                                      12 Chemical Products
                                      19 Non-ferrous Metal
                                      39 Wholesale and Retail
                                      42 Education
                                      34 Storage Facility Service
                                      6 Textile
                                      30 Railroad Transportation
                                      45 Other Service
                                      1 Agriculture, Forestry, Fishery
                                      38 Water Supply
                                      44 Medical Care
                                      33 Air Transportation




               Figure 6: Recovery of Industry TFP: Difference from1990-1995 to 1995-2000
1.4
      1.Agriculture, Forestry, Fishery           7      1.2   4.Construction                           4      1.8
                                                                                                                    21.Machinery                              9

      (TFP                                                                                             3
                                                                                                              1.6                                             8
1.2                                              6      1.0
                                                                                                              1.4                                             7
1.0                                              5                                                     3
                                         (ALP)          0.8                                                   1.2                                             6
0.8                                              4                                                     2      1.0                                             5
                                                        0.6
0.6                                              3                                                     2      0.8                                             4

                                                        0.4                                                   0.6                                             3
0.4                                              2                                                     1
                                                                                                              0.4                                             2
0.2                                              1      0.2
                                                                                                       1      0.2                                             1

0.0                                             0       0.0                                             0     0.0                                             0
   1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000            1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000          1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000



18    22.Computers                               1000   4.5   23.Communications Equipment               120         24. Electronic Components
                                                                                                              25                                              500

16                                               900    4.0                                                                                                   450
                                                                                                        100
14                                               800                                                          20                                              400
                                                        3.5
                                                 700                                                                                                          350
12                                                      3.0                                             80
                                                 600                                                          15                                              300
10                                                      2.5
                                                 500                                                    60                                                    250
 8                                                      2.0
                                                 400                                                          10                                              200
 6                                                      1.5                                             40
                                                 300                                                                                                          150
 4                                               200    1.0
                                                                                                               5                                              100
                                                                                                        20
 2                                               100    0.5                                                                                                   50
 0                                             0        0.0                                             0      0                                             0
  1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000             1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000         1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000



2.5   25. Other Electrical Machinery             16     2.5   26.Motor Vehicles                         20    3.5   35.Communications                          12

                                                                                                        18
                                                 14                                                           3.0
                                                                                                                                                               10
2.0                                                     2.0                                             16
                                                 12
                                                                                                        14    2.5
                                                                                                                                                               8
                                                 10
1.5                                                     1.5                                             12
                                                                                                              2.0
                                                 8                                                      10                                                     6
                                                                                                              1.5
1.0                                                     1.0                                             8
                                                 6
                                                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                        6     1.0
                                                 4
0.5                                                     0.5                                             4
                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                 2                                                            0.5
                                                                                                        2
0.0                                             0       0.0                                             0     0.0                                            0
   1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000            1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000          1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000



2.5
      39. Wholesale and Retail                     8    2.5
                                                              40. Finance and Insurance                 6     1.8
                                                                                                                    45. Other Service                         2.5

                                                   7                                                          1.6
                                                                                                        5
2.0                                                     2.0                                                   1.4                                             2.0
                                                   6
                                                                                                        4     1.2
                                                   5
1.5                                                     1.5                                                                                                   1.5
                                                                                                              1.0
                                                   4                                                    3
                                                                                                              0.8
1.0                                                     1.0                                                                                                   1.0
                                                   3
                                                                                                        2     0.6
                                                   2
0.5                                                     0.5                                                   0.4                                             0.5
                                                                                                        1
                                                   1                                                          0.2

0.0                                            0        0.0                                             0     0.0                                             0.0
   1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000            1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000          1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000




                                 Figure 7: Indexes for TFP and Labor Productivity in Selected Industries
