NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REAL WAGE RIGIDITIES AND THE NEW KEYNESIAN MODEL
Olivier Blanchard
Jordi Galí
Working Paper 11806
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11806
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2005

Prepared for the FRB/JMCB conference on "Quantitative Evidence on Price Determination," Washington,
D.C., September 29-30, 2005. We have benefited from comments at various seminars and conferences,
including CREI-UPF, Bank of England, MIT, LBS-MAPMU Conference, U. of Oslo, NBER Summer
Institute, and Federal Reserve Board. We thank in particular Marios Angeletos, Jeff Fuhrer, Andy Levin,
Greg Mankiw, and Michael Woodford, as well as our discussants Bob Hall and Julio Rotemberg, for useful
comments. We are grateful to Anton Nakov for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2005 by Olivier Blanchard and Jordi Galí. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Real Wage Rigidities and the New Keynesian Model
Olivier Blanchard and Jordi Galí
NBER Working Paper No. 11806
November 2005
JEL No. E32, E50
ABSTRACT
Most central banks perceive a trade-off between stabilizing inflation and stabilizing the gap
between output and desired output. However, the standard new Keynesian framework implies no
such trade-off. In that framework, stabilizing inflation is equivalent to stabilizing the welfarerelevant output gap. In this paper, we argue that this property of the new Keynesian framework,
which we call the "divine coincidence", is due to a special feature of the model: the absence of non
trivial real imperfections.
We focus on one such real imperfection, namely, real wage rigidities. When the baseline new
Keynesian model is extended to allow for real wage rigidities, the divine coincidence disappears, and
central banks indeed face a trade-off between stabilizing inflation and stabilizing the welfare-relevant
output gap. We show that not only does the extended model have more realistic normative
implications, but it also has appealing positive properties. In particular, it provides a natural
interpretation for the dynamic inflation--unemployment relation found in the data.
Olivier Blanchard
Department of Economics
E52-357
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
blanchar@mit.edu
Jordi Galí
Department of Economics (E52-359)
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
jgali@mit.edu

A standard new Keynesian (NK) model has emerged. On the supply side, it
consists of Calvo price and/or wage staggering. On the demand side, it is composed of an Euler equation and a Taylor rule. With more explicit microeconomic
foundations than its Keynesian ancestor, and more relevance than its RBC predecessor, it has become the workhorse in discussions of fluctuations, policy, and
welfare.
A central, albeit controversial, block in this standard framework is the so-called
New Keynesian Phillips curve (NKPC), which, in its simple form, has the following representation:
π = β Eπ(+1) + κ (y − y ∗ )

(1)

where π is inflation, y is (log) output, y ∗ is (log) natural output, and (y − y ∗ )
is the output gap. The effects of changes in factors such as the price of oil or
the level of technology appear through their effects on natural output y ∗ .
From a welfare point of view, the model implies that it is desirable to stabilize
inflation and to stabilize the output gap. Equation (1) implies that the two
goals do not conflict: Stabilizing inflation also stabilizes the output gap. Thus,
for example, in response to an increase in the price of oil, the best policy is
to keep inflation constant; doing so implies that output remains equal to its
natural level.1
This property, which we shall call the divine coincidence contrasts with a widespread consensus on the undesirability of policies that seek to fully stabilize
inflation at all times and at any cost in terms of output. That consensus underlies the medium-term orientation adopted by most inflation targeting central
banks.
In this paper, we show that this divine coincidence is tightly linked to a specific
property of the standard NK model, namely the fact that the gap between the
natural level of output and the efficient (first-best) level of output is constant
and invariant to shocks. This feature implies that stabilizing the output gap—
the gap between actual and natural output—is equivalent to stabilizing the
welfare-relevant output gap—the gap between actual and efficient output. This
equivalence is the source of the divine coincidence: The NKPC implies that
1. See, e.g., Goodfriend and King (1997) for discussion of the case for price stability associated
with the new Keynesian model.

2

stabilization of inflation is consistent with stabilization of the output gap. The
constancy of the gap between natural and efficient output implies in turn that
stabilization of the output gap is equivalent to stabilization of the welfarerelevant output gap.
The property just described can in turn be traced to the absence of non trivial
real imperfections in the standard NK model. This leads us to introduce one
such real imperfection, namely real wage rigidities. The existence of real wage
rigidities has been pointed to by many authors as a feature needed to account
for a number of labor market facts (see, for example, Hall [2005]). We show that,
once the NK model is extended in this way, the divine coincidence disappears.
The reason is that the gap between natural and efficient output is no longer
constant, and is now affected by shocks. Stabilizing inflation is still equivalent
to stabilizing the output gap, but no longer equivalent to stabilizing the welfarerelevant output gap. Thus, it is no longer desirable from a welfare point of view.
Stabilization of inflation and stabilization of the welfare-relevant output gap
now present the monetary authority with a trade-off. In the face of an adverse
supply shocks, in particular, the monetary authority must decide whether to
accommodate a higher level of inflation or, instead, keep inflation constant but
allow for a larger decline in the welfare-relevant output gap.
While we focus on the implications of real wage rigidities, we see our results
as an example of a more general proposition. The optimal design of macroeconomic policy depends very much on the interaction between real imperfections
and shocks. In the standard NK model these interactions are limited. In particular, the size of real distortions is either constant or varies over time in response
to exogenous shocks to the distorting variables themselves (e.g. tax rates). This
has strong implications for policy, one of them being the lack of a trade-off in
response to most shocks, including conventional supply shocks. In reality, distortions are likely to interact with shocks, leading to different policy prescriptions.
In our model, this interaction works through endogenous variations in wage
markups, resulting from the sluggish adjustment of real wages. However, this
is not the only possible mechanism: a similar interaction could work, for example, through the endogenous response of desired price markups to shocks, as in
Rotemberg and Woodford (1996). Understanding these interactions should be
high on macroeconomists’ research agendas.2
2.

See Galı́, Gertler, and López-Salido (2005) for some evidence suggesting the presence of

3

At the same time, we see the extension of the NK model to incorporate real
wage rigidities as more than an example of this general proposition. We believe
that real wage rigidities are high on the list of real imperfections affecting
cyclical fluctuations. In fact, as we discuss below, the introduction of real wage
rigidities overcomes a well known empirical weakness of the standard NK model
(as represented in equation (1 )), namely, its lack of inflation inertia—which
we define as the degree of inflation persistence beyond that inherited from the
output gap (y − y ∗ ) itself. We show that real wage rigidities are a natural source
of inflation inertia, and can account for the good empirical fit of traditional
Phillips curve equations.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 1 we lay out a baseline
new Keynesian model, with staggered price setting and no labor market distortions, and use it to illustrate the shortcomings discussed above. In Section
2 we introduce real wage rigidities, and show how their presence generates a
meaningful trade-off between stabilization of inflation and the welfare-relevant
output gap. Section 3 looks at the implications of alternative stabilization policies. Section 4 looks at the costs of disinflation. Section 5 relates our results
to the literature. Section 6 derives some empirical relations between inflation,
unemployment and observable supply shocks implied by our framework, and
provides some evidence on its ability to fit the data. Section 7 concludes.

1

The Standard New Keynesian Model

The baseline framework below is standard, with one exception: In order to
discuss “supply shocks” we introduce a non-produced input, with exogenous
supply M . We interpret shocks to M as supply shocks. For simplicity, we leave
out technological shocks, but, in our model, they would have exactly the same
implications as supply shocks. The only difference, relevant when going to the
data, is that our supply shocks are directly observable—through changes in the
price of the relevant inputs—while technological shocks are not.
Firms. We assume a continuum of monopolistically competitive firms, each
producing a differentiated product and facing an isoelastic demand. The proimportant cyclical variations in the size of aggregate distortions.

4

duction function for each firm is given by:
Y = M α N 1−α

(2)

where Y is output, and M and N are the quantities of the two inputs hired by
the firm (in order to keep the notation simple we ignore firm-specific and time
subscripts when not strictly needed).
Letting lower case letters denote the natural logarithms of the original variables,
the real marginal cost is given by:
mc = w − mpn
= w − (y − n) − log(1 − α)

(3)

where w is the (log) real wage, assumed to be taken as given by each firm.
Each good is non-storable and is sold to households, who consume it in the
same period. Hence, consumption of each good must equate output.
People. We assume a large number of identical households, with time separable
preferences, constant discount factor β, and period utility given by

U (C, N ) = log(C) − exp{ξ}

N 1+φ
1+φ

where C is composite consumption (with elasticity of substitution between
goods equal to ²), N is employment, and ξ is a (possibly time-varying) preference parameter.3
The implied marginal rate of substitution (in logs) is given by:
mrs = c + φn + ξ

(4)

3. While our focus is on supply shocks, we introduce preference shocks for two reasons. First,
our (simplifying) assumption of a closed economy with no capital accumulation implies that
first best employment is invariant to supply shocks (but not to preference shocks). Thus,
in the absence of preference shocks, the employment gap would coincide with employment.
Such nonrobust property could be misleading, especially in empirical applications. Secondly,
and as discussed below, the implications for output of strict inflation targeting policies vary
considerably depending on whether preference or supply shocks are the relevent disturbance
at any point in time.

5

1.1

Efficient Allocation (First Best)

Let us start by assuming perfect competition in goods and labor markets. In
this case we have, from the firms’ side:
w = mpn

(5)

= (y − n) + log(1 − α)
and, from the consumer-workers’ side:
w = mrs
= y + φn + ξ

(6)

where we have imposed the market clearing condition c = y. Combining both
expressions yields the following expression for the first-best level of employment
n1 (we use the subscript “1” to denote values of variables associated with the
first-best—or efficient—allocation)
(1 + φ) n1 = log(1 − α) − ξ

(7)

Note that first-best employment does not depend on the endowment of the
non-produced input (because of exact cancellation of income and substitution
effects implied by log utility and Cobb-Douglas technology), but it is inversely
related to the preference shifter ξ. Given first-best employment, first-best output, denoted by y1 , is given by
y1 = α m + (1 − α) n1

(8)

which, as expected, depends on both shocks.

1.2

Flexible Price Equilibrium (Second Best)

We maintain the assumption that prices and wages are flexible, but we take
into account the monopoly power of firms in the goods market.
From the firms’ side, optimal price setting implies mc + µp = 0, where µp ≡
log(²/(²−1)) is the markup of price over cost, coming from the monopoly power

6

of firms. Hence, using (3)
w = y − n + log(1 − α) − µp

(9)

Henceforth, we use subscript “2” to refer to the second-best (or natural ) levels
of a variable, corresponding to the equilibrium with flexible prices. Combining
(6) and (9), we can determine second-best employment n2 :
(1 + φ) n2 = log(1 − α) − µp − ξ

(10)

which, under our assumptions, is independent of m, but may vary as a result of
changes in the preference parameter ξ. Second-best output is in turn given by:
y2 = α m + (1 − α) n2

(11)

Note an important implication of this baseline NK model: While both first- and
second-best output vary over time, the gap between the two remains constant
and given by
y1 − y2 =

µp (1 − α)
≡δ
1+φ

(12)

That property, which is common to the vast majority of optimizing models with
nominal rigidities found in the literature, will play an important role in what
follows.
1.3

Staggered Price Equilibrium

Assume now that price decisions are staggered à la Calvo. As is well known, in
that case, in a neighborhood of the zero-inflation steady state, the behavior of
inflation is described by the difference equation:
π = β Eπ(+1) + λ (mc + µp )

(13)

where mc + µp denotes the log-deviation of real marginal cost from its value in
a zero inflation steady state, and λ ≡ θ−1 (1 − θ)(1 − βθ), with θ representing
the fraction of firms not adjusting their price in any given period.4
4. See, e.g. Galı́ and Gertler (1999) for a derivation. An identical representation obtains
under the assumption of quadratic costs of price adjustment, as in Rotemberg (1982). In the

7

Substituting (6) into (3) and using (10) and (11), we obtain:
µ
p

mc + µ =

1+φ
1−α

¶
(y − y2 )

Combining the previous two equations gives us the new Keynesian Phillips curve
(NKPC):
π = βEπ(+1) + κ (y − y2 )

(14)

where κ ≡ λ(1 + φ)/(1 − α).
Inflation depends on expected inflation and the output gap, defined as the (log)
distance of output from its natural level. Note that neither supply nor preference
shocks appear directly in equation (14). They appear indirectly through their
effect on the natural level of output, y2 , and thus through the output gap
(y − y2 ).
Equation (14) implies that stabilizing inflation is equivalent to stabilizing the
output gap (y − y2 ). Now recall from (12) that (y1 − y2 ) = δ. This implies
that stabilizing the output gap (y − y2 ) is, in turn, equivalent to stabilizing
the welfare-relevant (log) distance between output and its first-best level, i.e.
(y − y1 ). Putting the two steps together implies that stabilizing inflation is
equivalent to stabilizing the welfare-relevant (log) distance of output from first
best. This is what we referred to as the divine coincidence in the introduction.
Note that the divine coincidence is a consequence of the constancy of δ, the
(log) distance between the first- and the second-best levels of output. In particular, because an adverse supply shock does not alter δ, it does not create
any incentives for the monetary authority to deviate from a policy of constant
inflation.5
A number of recent papers have introduced a trade-off between stabilization of
inflation and stabilization of the distance between output and its first-best level
latter case coefficient λ is related to the magnitude of price adjustment costs. See Roberts
(1995).
5. As this section ends, it may be useful to restate the semantic conventions we use in the
paper. We refer to the level of output which would prevail in the absence of imperfections
as the “efficient” or “first-best” level of output. We refer to the level of output which would
prevail in the absence of nominal rigidities as the “natural” or “second-best” level of output.
We refer to the log distance between the actual level of output and the second-best level of
output as the “output gap.” We refer to the log distance between the actual level of output
and the first-best level of output as the “welfare-relevant output gap”. Similar statements
apply to employment and employment gaps.

8

by assuming (explicitly or implicitly) exogenous stochastic variations in δ, the
gap between first- and second-best output.6 We take a different approach. By
introducing an additional real imperfection in the model, we get endogenous
fluctuations in the gap in response to shocks. We defer a discussion of the two
approaches to later.

2

Introducing Real Wage Rigidities

We assume that real wages respond sluggishly to labor market conditions, as a
result of some (unmodelled) imperfection or friction in labor markets. Specifically, we assume the partial adjustment model:
w = γ w(−1) + (1 − γ) mrs

(15)

where γ can be interpreted as an index of real rigidities.7
We view equation (15) as an admittedly ad-hoc but parsimonious way of modeling the slow adjustment of wages to labor market conditions, as found in a
variety of models of real wage rigidities, without taking a stand on what the
”right” model is.8 An alternative formalization, explicitly derived from staggering of real wage decisions, is presented in Appendix 2. The algebra is more
complex, but the basic conclusions are the same as those presented in the text
below. The important assumption underlying equation (15) is that the slow
adjustment be the result of distortions rather than preferences, so the first-best
equilibrium is unaffected.

9

6. See Woodford (2004, section 4.5) for a general discussion of that approach.
7. In principle one would want to guarantee w ≥ mrs at all times, to prevent workers from
working more than desired, given the wage (as would be the case for example in a model where
wages set in bargaining vary over time, but always remain above the workers’ reservation
wage). This would be easily achieved by introducing a (sufficiently large) positive steady state
wage markup, as in
w = γw(−1) + (1 − γ)(µw + mrs)
without altering any of the conclusions below, though at the cost of burdening the notation.
8. Other authors have adopted a similar assumption in order to model real wage rigidities.
Hence, Kai and Linzert (2005) propose an analogous partial adjustment model in the context
of a matching model in order to account for the response of unemployment and inflation to
monetary policy shocks. Alternative, but related, formalizations of real wage rigidities can be
found in Felices (2005), in a model with variable effort and shirking, and Rabanal (2004), in
a model with rule-of-thumb wage setters.Other authors have adopted a similar assumption in
order to model real wage rigidities.
9. Danthine and Kurman (2005) develop a model in which a real wage rigidity of a very

9

Next we examine the implications of real wage rigidities on the equilibrium level
of employment and inflation. Once again we find it useful to start by looking
at the flexible price case.
2.1

Flexible Price Equilibrium (Second Best)

Assume that prices and wages are flexible, so we solve for the second-best level
of employment. Note that the first-best level is the same as before.
From above, using (4), (15), and our assumptions on technology (2), we have,
from the wage setting side:
w = γ w(−1) + (1 − γ) (y + φn + ξ)
= γ w(−1) + (1 − γ) [α(m − n) + (1 + φ)n + ξ]

(16)

As before, from the firms’ side:
w = mpn − µp
= (y − n) + log(1 − α) − µp
= α(m − n) + log(1 − α) − µp
Putting the two together and rearranging terms, we can solve for second-best
output y2 as a function of first-best output y1 (which remains unchanged, and
given by (7) and (8)) and the two exogenous driving forces:
[y2 − y1 + δ] = Θγ [y2 (−1) − y1 (−1) + δ] + Θγ (1 − α)[∆m + (1 + φ)−1 ∆ξ] (17)
where Θγ ≡ γα/(γα + (1 − γ)(1 + φ)) ∈ [0, 1].
Equation (17) points to the key implication of the introduction of real wage
rigidities: The gap between the first and second-best levels of output is no
longer constant, fluctuating instead in response to both preference and supply
shocks.
Note further that Θγ is increasing in γ, implying that the size and persistence
of deviations of the gap between second- and first-best output are increasing
similar form arises as a result of non-standard preferences, which make the disutility of effort
a function of some ”norm” which depends on the level and the change in the real wage. The
normative implications of such a model would be clearly different from ours.

10

in the degree of real rigidities. Hence, for instance, the effects of an adverse
supply shock (an unexpected decrease in m) are to decrease second-best output
by more than first-best output (the gap being increasing in γ). Only gradually
does the size of that gap return to its steady state level δ, as the wage adjusts
over time. On the other hand, in response to a preference shock that lowers
first-best output (an increase in ξ), second-best output falls by less, since the
assumed real rigidities prevent the wage from adjusting upward sufficiently to
support the lower efficient level of employment and output.
2.2

Staggered Price Equilibrium

We can now solve for the behavior of inflation under the assumption of price
staggering à la Calvo. Combining (2), (3), and (16), and rearranging terms we
obtain
(mc + µp ) = (mc + µp )(−1) + x2

(18)

where
x2 ≡ (1 − α)−1 [(1 − γ)(1 + φ)(y − y2 ) + γα(∆y − ∆y2 )]
is a linear combination of the current and lagged distance of output from second
best. Combining (18) with (13) yields:
π = β Eπ(+1) +

λ
x2
1 − γL

(19)

This is the relation between inflation and the output gap implied by our model.
Notice that as in the baseline NKPC model, it is still the case that there is an
exact relation—although with slightly more complex dynamics—between inflation, expected inflation, and the output gap (now, both level and change). So
fully stabilizing inflation is still consistent with fully stabilizing the ouput gap,
the distance of output from its second-best level: In equation (19), a constant
π implies a constant (y − y2 ).10
But, in contrast with the baseline NKPC model, the divine coincidence no
longer holds, since stabilizing the output gap (y − y2 ) is no longer desirable.
This is because what matters for welfare is the distance of output not from its
second-best level, but from its first-best level. In contrast to the baseline model,
10. More accurately, it implies a constant x2 , which in turn implies an asymptotically constant
y − y2 .

11

the distance between the first- and the second-best levels of output is no longer
constant, but is instead affected by the shocks, as we have shown above.
To see what this implies, combine (19) with (17) to obtain the relation between
inflation and the distance of employment from its first-best level:
π = β Eπ(+1) +

λ
λγα
x1 −
[∆m + (1 + φ)−1 ∆ξ ]
1 − γL
1 − γL

(20)

where now
x1 ≡ (1 − α)−1 [(1 − γ)(1 + φ)(y − y1 + δ) + γα(∆y − ∆y1 )]
involves a linear combination of the current and lagged welfare-relevant output
gap.
Inflation depends on expected inflation, a distributed lag of the distance of
output from its first-best level, and a distributed lag of both supply and preference shocks. In other words, there is no longer an exact relation, however
complex, between inflation and the welfare-relevant output gap. Thus, there is
no way to stabilize both in the presence of either supply or preference shocks,
and monetary policy faces a clear trade-off.
To understand the basic source of the trade-off, it is useful to look at the
economy’s factor price frontier. Let v be the real price of the non-produced
input. Then, given the Cobb-Douglas assumption:
mc = (1 − α) w + α v + const
Thus any shock that induces an increase in the real price of the non-produced
input (say, an increase in the price of oil) must lead either to a decrease in real
wages or an increase in real marginal cost. Depending on the degree of monetary
policy accommodation, the outcome will be reflected in output or inflation. This
can be seen clearly by deriving the inflation equation, now expressed in terms
of ∆v and the distance of output from first-best (see appendix for derivation):
π = β Eπ(+1) +
where Γ ≡

λ
[(1 − Γ)(1 + φ)(1 − α)−1 (y − y1 + δ) + Γα ∆v] (21)
1 − ΓL

γ
1−α(1−γ)

∈ [0, 1] is a monotonic transformation of the index of real
12

wage rigidities γ.
Consider now any shock that drives up the real price of the non produced input,
v.11 Stabilizing inflation requires a proportional decline in the real wage; given
real wage rigidity, this can only be delivered by a decrease in output relative to
first best. Stabilizing instead the distance of output from first best will lead to
higher inflation. We explore this trade-off further in the next section.

3

Policy Tradeoffs

To illustrate the implications of the trade off faced by the monetary authority, it
is easiest to look at two extreme policies. For convenience, we assume ξ = 0 and
a random walk process for the non-labor input endowment, so that ∆m = εm is
a white noise process. Note that, in this case, first-best employment is constant.
Suppose that the central bank stabilizes the welfare-relevant output gap (the
distance of output from first best) at a level consistent with zero average inflation. That requires y = y1 − δ at all times. It follows from (20) that:
π = β Eπ(+1) −

λγα
εm
1 − γL

Solving under rational expectations gives:
π = γ π(−1) −

λγα
εm
1 − βγ

So, stabilizing the welfare-relevant output gap implies some accommodation of
adverse shocks through inflation, followed by a slow (if γ is high) return to
normal.
Suppose instead that the central bank stabilizes inflation, so π = Eπ(+1). Then:
(1 − γ)(1 + φ)(y − y1 + δ) + γα(∆y − ∆y1 ) − γα(1 − α) εm = 0
11. Note that v is endogenous in our framework, and so an increase in v may come from either
a negative supply shock (a drop in m) or a preference shock that brings down the marginal
disutility of labor (a drop in ξ).

13

Or equivalently:
(y − y1 ) = −(1 − Θγ )δ + Θγ [y(−1) − y1 (−1)] + (1 − α)Θγ εm
Not surprisingly, this policy replicates the second best, with large fluctuations
in output relative to first best.
To the extent that the central bank attaches some weight to stabilization of
both inflation and the gap from first best, optimal policy will be somewhere
in between. The important point is that, so long as the central bank puts
some weight on activity, it may have to accommodate adverse supply shocks
through potentially large and long lasting increases in inflation. How long lasting
depends on the degree of real wage rigidity, γ. How large depends also on γ, but
also on λ, the degree of nominal rigidity, and α, the share of the non-produced
input in production.
To get a sense of the order of magnitude of the implied movements in inflation
and the welfare-relevant output gap, we compute the elasticity of those variables
with respect to v, which we can interpret as the real price of oil, under the two
extreme policies just described (and given the assumption of a random walk
process for the endowment m).
Hence, under the policy that fully stabilizes the gap relative to first best, we
have
dπ
dv

=
=
=

dπ dmc
dmc dv
λ dmc/dεm
1 − βγ dv/dεm
λαγ
(1 − βγ)(αγ + (1 − α))

Letting β ' 1, and assuming an average price duration of six months (Bils and
Klenow (2003)), we have λ ' 0.5.12 We set the share of oil in production, α,
to 0.025. As a benchmark, we assume γ = 0.9, which implies a half-life for the
adjustment of the real wage adjustment of 6 quarters.
12. Empirical estimates of λ are often much smaller (See for example Galı́ and Gertler (1998)).
For the purposes of the present exercise we take our model literally and use the implied value
of λ.

14

Under these assumptions we obtain

∂π
∂v

' 0.11. Hence, stabilizing the welfare-

relevant output gap in response to an adverse supply shock which raises the
price of oil by, say, 10 percent, implies an (annualized) inflation slightly above 4
percent on impact. Note however that the expression for
in γ. Hence, if we set γ = 0.8 we have

∂π
∂v

∂π
∂v

is highly non-linear

= 0.05 , bringing the impact on

short run inflation of the same oil price hike down to 2 percent. If γ = 0.5 then
∂π
∂v

= 0.012, and inflation is contained below 0.5 percent.13

Let us consider next the quantitative impact on the welfare-relevant output
gap of the second extreme policy analyzed above, i.e. one that fully stabilizes
inflation. In that case, we have
∂(y − y1 )
∂v

d(y − y1 )/dεm
dv/dεm
(1 − α)Θγ
= −
(1 − α)(1 − Θγ )
αγ
= −
(1 − γ)(1 + φ)
=

Under our baseline calibration (with γ = 0.9) and assuming a unit Frisch labor
supply elasticity (φ = 1) we have

∂(y−y1 )
∂v

= −0.11, thus implying a reduction in

the welfare-relevant output gap in the first quarter of 1.1 percent in response
to a 10 rise in the price of oil, with the persistence of that deviation (measured
by the AR parameter Θγ ) being relatively small: 0.10. When we set γ = 0.8 we
obtain a 0.5 percent output gap loss on impact with persistence 0.05. If γ = 0.5,
the corresponding numbers are 0.1 percent and 0.01.
While these numbers are rough and purely illustrative, they suggest a far from
quantitatively trivial policy trade-off resulting from the presence of real wage
rigidities.

4

Real Wage Rigidities and the Cost of Disinflations

The analysis above has stressed the role of real wage rigidities in generating a
meaningful policy trade-off in response to shocks. Here we briefly discuss their
13. Notice that the expression we derive corresponds to the short run multiplier, and does
not take into account subsequent changes in v, though the latter are small (more especifically,
dv(+k)/dεm = −αγ k for k = 1, 2, ...)

15

implications for the output cost of disinflations.14
As is well known, the standard NKPC implies the presence of a long run tradeoff, however small, between inflation and the output gap.15 To illustrate this
point, consider a sudden, permanent, unexpected reduction in inflation from,
say, π ∗ > 0 to zero. From (14) it follows that, in the standard NK model, this
disinflation leads to a permanent decline in output and real wages given by16
dy(+k) = −
and

µ
dw(+k) = −

1−β
κ

1−β ∗
π
κ

¶µ
1+

φ
1−α

¶
π∗

for k = 0, 1, 2, ...
In the standard NK model, the real effects of disinflations mentioned above
tend to be small, at least for plausible parameter values. Assuming for example
β = 0.99, θ = 0.75, φ = 1 and α = 0.025, we have dy = −0.05 π ∗ and dw ' 0.1
π ∗ . Hence, a permanent reduction in inflation of 5 percentage points lowers the
level of output at all horizons by 0.25 percentage points, while the real wage
declines by 0.1 percentage points.
Consider next the case with real wage rigidities. Starting from an identical
steady state with inflation π ∗ , equations (13) and (18) imply that in the period
immediately after the (assumed to be successful) implementation of price stability, output and real wages are at their natural levels. However, in the period
when disinflation takes place, things are different since, in order to decrease the
real wage to the level consistent with price stability, the central bank needs to
engineer a much larger recession. To be specific, the decline in output required
to stabilize prices in the period of the implementation of price stability is given
by:
dy = −

1−β
π∗
κ(1 − γ)

14. We are grateful to Greg Mankiw for raising the question that stimulated the present
analysis.
15. See King and Wolman (1996) for a detailed discussion of the steady state in the standard
new Keynesian model.
16. Intuitively, the reduction in output comes from the increase in average markups. Calvo
price-setting implies that the higher the inflation rate, the lower are average markups. Thus,
lower inflation leads to an increase in average markups—equivalently a decrease in real wages—
, so a decrease in labor supply, and thus a decrease in output.

16

The output loss is increasing, in a highly non-linear way, with γ, the index
of real wage rigidities. Assuming for example γ = 0.9, the short-run output
loss resulting from any given disinflation is multiplied by a factor of 10. Under
the simple calibration proposed above, moving from 5 percent inflation to zero
inflation now implies a short run output loss of 2.5 percentage points, a non
negligible value.

5

Alternative Approaches

We are not the first to confront the divine coincidence and to offer a resolution. There are at least two alternative approaches: distortion shocks and more
complex nominal wage and price setting.17
5.1

Distortion Shocks

A frequently used approach has been to simply append an exogenous disturbance to the NKPC, call it a “cost-push” shock, and thus create a trade-off
between inflation stabilization and output gap stabilization (for example, Clarida, Galı́ and Gertler (1999)).
Taken at face value, this is a fix, not an acceptable solution: One needs to
know where this additional disturbance comes from, and why it belongs to
the equation. As we have seen, conventional supply shocks do not appear as
disturbances in the baseline NKPC.
A number of authors however have shown that a potential justification for
this approach is to assume the presence of exogenous “distortion shocks”, for
example variations in tax changes, or changes in desired markups by firms (see
for example Smets and Wouters (2003), Steinsson (2003), and Clarida, Galı́ and
Gertler (2001)). Such shocks do not affect the relation between inflation and the
output gap, the distance of output from its second-best value; they do however
affect the distance of second-best output—which is affected by the shock—and
17. ** As discussed in the introduction, models of endogenous desired markups along the lines
of those developed by Rotemberg and Woodford (1996, 1998) would also eliminate the divine
coincidence, very much for the same reason our real wage rigidity assumption does. Rotemberg
and Woodford restricted their analysis to the real implications of endogenous markups, without
exploring their consequences for inflation and monetary policy in the presence of nominal
frictions.

17

first-best output—which, by assumption, is not affected by the shock. Thus,
they create a trade-off between stabilization of inflation and stabilization of the
welfare-relevant output gap.
Such distortion shocks do probably exist, and, with respect to these shocks, the
divine coincidence no longer holds. But it still holds with respect to standard
supply shocks, such as movements in the price of oil or technology shocks. Thus
the model extended in this way still implies that keeping inflation constant in
the face of increases in the price of oil is the right policy—a proposition which,
again, seems implausible.

5.2

Alternative Structures of Wage and Price Setting

Yet another approach aimed at removing the divine coincidence has been to explore the implications of alternative structures of wage and price setting. Erceg,
Henderson, and Levin (2000; EHL, henceforth) in particular have shown that
if both wage decisions and price decisions are staggered à la Calvo, the relation
between price inflation and the output gap no longer holds exactly, implying a
trade off between price inflation stabilization and output gap stabilization.
To assess their argument, consider the baseline model of Section 1, but now
with staggered price and wage setting à la Calvo, as in EHL.
Given our assumptions, wage inflation is described by the difference equation:
π w = βEπ w (+1) − λw (w − mrs − µw )
= βEπ w (+1) − λw (w − αm − (1 − α + φ)n − ξ − µw )
¶
µ
φ
(y − y2 )
= βEπ w (+1) − λw (w − w2 ) + λw 1 +
1−α
where w2 and y2 are, respectively, the natural levels of the real wage and output (now defined as those that would obtain under both flexible prices and
wages). µw is a constant desired wage markup, and λw is a coefficient which
is a function of structural parameters, including the Calvo parameter indexing
the probability that any individual wage is reset in a given period (see EHL for
details).

18

Price inflation, now denoted by π p , is given by:
π p = βEπ p (+1) + λp (mc + µp )
= βEπ p (+1) + λp (w − αm + αn − log(1 − α) + µp )
α
= βEπ p (+1) + λp (w − w2 ) + λp
(y − y2 )
1−α
Note that neither wage nor price inflation depends only on the output gap. In
both cases, inflation depends on the output gap and the distance of the wage
from the natural wage. Thus, the divine coincidence does not apply, either with
respect to price inflation, or with respect to wage inflation.
Let us define however the composite inflation rate π ≡ (λw π p +λp π w )/(λw +λp ).
It follows from the definition that:
π = βEπ(+1) + κ (y − y2 )
where now κ ≡

(22)

λw λp (1+φ)
(λw +λp )(1−α) .

Given that, in the EHL model, the distance between first- and second-best
output is given by
y1 − y2 =

µ (1 − α)
≡δ
1+φ

where µ ≡ µp + µw , we can rewrite (22) as:
π = βEπ(+1) + κ (y − y1 + δ)
Hence the divine coincidence emerges again, though in a different guise: Stabilizing the distance of output from first best is equivalent to stabilizing a weighted
average of wage and price inflation.
What are the policy implications of this weaker form of the divine coincidence?
As shown by EHL, the utility-based loss function needed to evaluate alternative
policies is a weighted average of the squares of the output gap, price inflation
and wage inflation. In this context strict price inflation targeting is generally
suboptimal, and often involves welfare losses that are several times larger than
other, better designed policies. Interestingly, while strict output gap stabilization (and hence stabilization of the composite inflation index) is exactly optimal
only for a specific parameter configuration, EHL conclude that it is nearly op19

timal for a large range of parameter values (see also Woodford (2003), Chapter
6). Hence, and for all practical purposes, a meaningful policy tradeoff is also
missing in the EHL model.

6

The Behavior of Inflation

Beyond its normative implications, our model has implications for the behavior of inflation which appear more consistent with the data than those of the
standard NK model. This is the topic of this section.
6.1

Inflation Inertia

Equation (14) implies that inflation will not outlive any variation in the output
gap. Closing the latter will be sufficient to stabilize inflation fully and with no
delay.
This is no longer the case under our proposed modification of the NK model.
As equation (19) shows, in the presence of real wage rigidities (γ > 0) any
change in the output gap, even if purely transitory, will have persistent effects
on inflation. The reason is simple: Any change in the workers’ reservation wage
resulting from a change in output (and thus a change in employment), will affect
the real wage (and hence real marginal cost) only gradually, with that effect
outliving the eventual return of output to its natural level.
To illustrate this point, consider the limiting case where the output gap follows
a white noise process (so ρy = 0). Equation (19) implies that inflation will
follow:

µ
¶X
∞
λ(1 + φ)
φ
γ k εy (−k)
π=
εy + λ 1 +
1−α
1−α
k=1

Note how inflation inertia is increasing in γ. For γ = 0—that is, in the absence
or real wage rigidities—inflation is white noise, just like the output gap. For
γ close to one, inflation exhibits considerable inertia, despite the lack of serial
correlation in the output gap.18
18. The result that, in the absence of real rigidities, the persistence of inflation is equal to that
of the output gap is not a general proposition. A counterexample is given in Rotemberg (2005),
whom we thank for correcting us on this point. What is true in general is that persistence
increases with γ.

20

The previous point can also be illustrated by using a representation of inflation
dynamics more closely linked to the empirical inflation equations found in the
literature. Multiplying both sides of equation (19) by (1 − γL) and rearranging
terms, we get:
π=

β
λ
γ
π(−1) +
Eπ(+1) +
x2 + ζ
1 + βγ
1 + βγ
1 + βγ

(23)

where ζ ≡ [(βγ)/(1 + βγ)] (π − E(π| − 1)) is white noise and x2 is defined as
above.
Note that this equation takes a form very similar to the hybrid NKPC specifications used in many empirical and policy analysis applications, and which
allow for both backward-looking and forward-looking inflation terms (with coefficients whose sum is close to one, as is the case here).19 In our model, the
relative weight of lagged inflation is tightly linked to the degree of real wage
rigidities. Thus, as γ increases from 0 to 1, the coefficient on past inflation
rises from 0 to 1/(1 + β), which is slightly greater than 1/2; the coefficient on
expected inflation declines from β to β/(1 + β), which is slightly less than 1/2.
The previous discussion provides a potential explanation for the significance of
lagged inflation in estimates of hybrid versions of the NKPC. Yet, we do not
feel fully comfortable in relating equation (23) to much of the existing empirical
work. The reason is that (23) is not directly estimable since the natural level of
output, and by implication the output gap, is not observable (a point stressed
by Galı́ and Gertler [1999]). We view the ad-hoc measures of the output gaps
used in the literature (which approximate the natural levels by some smooth
function of time) with some suspicion.
Fortunately, our model implies a representation of the inflation equation that
can be taken to the data. Perhaps surprisingly, the representation turns out
to be fairly close to the traditional Phillips curve equation relating inflation
to lagged inflation, the unemployment rate, and a supply shock indicator (as
estimated for example by Gordon (1997) among others.)
19. See, e.g. Fuhrer and Moore (1997), or Orphanides and Williams (2005).

21

6.2

Inflation and Unemployment

In order to derive the inflation-unemployment relation implied by our model we
proceed in two steps:
The first is to explicitly introduce unemployment. To do so, let ns be implicitly
defined by
w = y + φ ns + ξ
Note that ns measures the quantity of labor households would want to supply
given the current wage and marginal utility of income.20 Accordingly, define
the (involuntary) rate of unemployment, u, as the (log) deviation between the
desired supply of labor and actual employment:
u ≡ ns − n
Clearly, in the absence of wage rigidities (γ = 0) there is no involuntary unemployment as the wage is always equal to the marginal rate of substitution of
households. For γ > 0, the previous definition and some algebraic manipulation
of (15) give:
∆w = −

(1 − γ)φ
u
γ

Hence, in our model with real wage rigidities, a rate of unemployment above
(below) some constant (implicitly normalized to zero) induces a downward (upward) adjustment of real wages. This adjustment goes on as long as the unemployment rate deviates from zero, with the size of the implied response being
inversely related to γ, our index of real rigidities, but positively related to φ,
the slope of the labor supply.
The second step consists in rewriting the inflation equation (19) in terms of
unemployment, and of the price rather than the quantity of the non-produced
input. Some manipulation gives (the algebra is given in the appendix):
π=

β
λ(1 − α)(1 − γ)φ
αλ
1
π(−1) +
Eπ(+1) −
u+
∆v + ζ (24)
1+β
1+β
γ(1 + β)
1+β

Inflation is a function of past and expected future inflation, of the unemployment rate, and of the change in the real price of the non-produced input. As
20. Note that the two conditioning variables y and n generally differ from what they would
be in a first-best equilibrium, which explains why, in general, ns 6= n1

22

in equation (23) earlier, the term ζ is proportional to (π − E(π| − 1)) and so
is white noise, orthogonal to all variables at t − 1.21 Except for the presence of
expected future inflation, this specification is indeed quite close to traditional
specifications of the Phillips curve, which typically include changes in the price
of oil and other supply side factors in addition to unemployment on the right
hand side.

22

Equation (24) can be estimated using instrumental variables. To do so, we use
annual U.S. data on inflation (measured by the percent change in the GDP
deflator), the civilian unemployment rate, and the percent change in the PPI
raw materials index (relative to the GDP deflator). Our instrument set consists
of four lags of the previous three variables. The sample period is 1960-2004.
The resulting estimated equation is (standard errors in brackets, constant not
reported):
π = 0.66 π(−1) + 0.42 Eπ(+1) − 0.20 u + 0.018 ∆v + ζ
(0.09)

(0.06)

(0.08)

(0.001)

which accords, at least qualitatively, with (24). In particular, all the estimated
coefficients have the right sign and are statistically significant. Furthermore,
the theoretical restriction that the sum of coefficients on lagged and expected
inflation equals one cannot be rejected at the 5 percent level (though not by
much). When we impose this restriction the resulting estimated equation is:
π = 0.52 π(−1) + 0.48 Eπ(+1) − 0.08 u + 0.014 ∆v + ζ
(0.05)

(0.05)

(0.05)

(0.009)

which again matches well the theoretical specification, though the coefficients
on unemployment and raw materials prices are only significant at the 10 percent
level. The coefficients on past and expected future inflation imply a value for
β of 0.92. The other structural coefficients are not identified and cannot be
recovered (they would be if we estimated the full model, something we have not
done).
21. Note that, in contrast with the representation (23), the coefficients on lagged and expected
inflation are independent of the degree of real wage rigidities, as measured by γ. Instead, that
parameter has an influence on the size of the unemployment coefficient. Of course, in a full
fledged general equilibrium model it would have an influence on the path of unemployment
itself.
22. See, for example, Gordon (1997), or Blanchard and Katz (1999).

23

6.3

Alternative approaches

Here again, we are not the first to offer potential solutions to the lack of inflation inertia implied by the standard NK model. Three sets of alternative
explanations, different from ours, can be found in the literature:23
Lagged indexation. A simple way of generating inflation inertia has been to
simply append a lagged inflation term to the NKPC, thus giving rise to what
has been known as the hybrid NKPC. Taken at face value, this is again just
a fix, not an acceptable solution. Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005),
Smets and Wouters (2003), and Steinsson (2004), among others, have shown
however that such a formulation can be derived from automatic indexation of
prices to past inflation by the firms that are not re-optimizing prices in any given
period. We also see this as an unconvincing fix, with little basis in fact: none
of the existing micro-studies of price setting uncover any form of mechanical
indexation to past inflation; instead the prices of individual goods appear to
remain unchanged for several months, even quarters in some cases (see, e.g.
Dhyne et al. [2005]).24
Relative wage concerns. In a well known paper, Fuhrer and Moore (1995)
have argued that one gets inflation persistence in a model of wage staggering if
one assumes that wage setters care about their real wage relative to the real wage
of other workers over the period during which their own nominal wage is fixed.
Holden and Driscoll (2003) have shown however that inflation persistence in
the Fuhrer-Moore specification comes in fact from the assumption that workers
care about the real wages of workers in the previous period. In this sense, the
results from Fuhrer and Moore come from an assumption similar to ours, the
assumption that real wages this period depend, to some extent, on real wages
last period.
23. A fourth set of papers adopt an approach closer to ours in showing how different types
of labor market imperfections affect the dynamics of inflation. A non-exhaustive list includes
Trigari (2004), Walsh (2004), Rabanal (2004), Danthine and Kurmann (2004), Felices (2005),
Kraus and Lubik (2005), among others. The analysis in those papers typically focuses on the
effects of labor market frictions (of different types) on the persistence of the inflation and
output responses to an exogenous monetary policy shock.
24. The version of the hybrid NKPC proposed by Galı́ and Gertler (1999) which assumes a
fraction of rule-of-thumb, backward-looking price setters overcomes that problem, since those
firms are assumed to adjust their prices only occasionally, as conventional Calvo firms.

24

Sticky information: Mankiw and Reis (2002) have proposed a model in which
firms adjust prices every period, according to a pre-specified plan, but revise
that plan infrequently. Accordingly, current inflation is the result of decisions
based on news about future demand and cost conditions obtained in previous
periods, in addition to current news. A consequence of that “distributed lag”
property is the emergence of inertia in inflation. Again, we view that explanation
as one at odds with the micro evidence: Firms do not seem to adjust their
prices continuously according to a pre-specified plan; instead they typically
keep prices unchanged for long periods of time. Furthermore, recent surveybased evidence suggests that firms review their prices more often than they
change them, exactly the opposite to what is assumed by sticky information
models (see Fabiani et al. (2004)).

7

Conclusions

The standard new Keynesian framework is often criticized for its lack of a
trade-off between inflation and output gap stabilization and the radical normative implications that arise from it. In the present paper we have argued
that the introduction of real wage rigidities is a natural way to overcome that
shortcoming. We have proposed a tractable modification of the new Keynesian framework that incorporates these real wage rigidities and generates more
realistic policy trade-offs.
Our model can also account for some aspects of the empirical behavior of inflation that are often viewed as inconsistent with the standard NK model. In
particular, we show how the presence of real wage rigidities becomes a source
of inflation inertia, implying a degree of inflation persistence beyond that inherited from output gap fluctuations. In addition, our model yields a simple
representation of inflation as a function of lagged and expected inflation, the
unemployment rate and the change in the price of non-produced inputs. When
we estimate that relation using annual postwar US data, we find that it fits the
data pretty well. The latter result may not be very surprising given that the
resulting empirical equation is not too different from some of the ad-hoc specifications that other authors have used in the older Phillips curve literature. A
key difference lies in the relevance (confirmed empirically) of a forward-looking
component in the determination of inflation, a feature emphasized by the more
25

recent literature. In a sense, our framework helps bridge the gap between the
old and new Phillips curve literatures in a way that is consistent with the microevidence on price setting.
There are several avenues that we plan to pursue, building on the framework
developed in the present paper.
On the theoretical front, we want to dig deeper and explore microfoundations
for real wage rigidity, and their implications for optimal monetary policy. Micro
foundations, based for example on shirking (Felices 2005), on rule-of-thumb
wage setters (Rabanal 2004), or on bargaining (Hall 2005) may lead to more
substantial departures from the NK benchmark than we have allowed for here.
The formalization offered by Hall for example implies modifying not only the
real wage equation, but also the specification of labor demand: In his model,
the real wage rigidity affects only the rents going to workers and firms, and thus
only the rate of job creation.
On the empirical front, we plan to estimate a model of joint wage and price
inflation dynamics that combines both nominal and real rigidities in wage setting. We also plan to conduct a quantitative analysis of the optimal monetary
policy response to a change in the price of oil or other raw materials, as a function of alternative assumptions about the degree of real wage rigidities and the
persistence of the shock.
More generally, we hope our paper contributes to raise macroeconomists’ awareness of the likely interactions between aggregate shocks and distortions, and of
the implications of these interactions for optimal macroeconomic policy.

26

References
Blanchard, Olivier J., and Lawrence F. Katz (1999): “Wage Dynamics: Reconciling Theory and Evidence,” American Economic Review, 89 (2), 69-74.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans (2001):
“Nominal Rigidities and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,”
NBER WP#8403.
Christoffel, Kai, and Tobias Linzert (2005): ”The Role of Real Wage Rigidity and Labor Market Frictions for Unemployment and Inflation Dynamics,”
mimeo.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galı́, and Mark Gertler (1999): “The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature,
vol. 37, 1661-1707.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galı́, and Mark Gertler (2001): “Optimal Monetary
Policy in Open vs. Closed Economies: An Integrated Approach,” American
Economic Review, vol. 91, no. 2, 248-252.
Dhyne et al. (2004): ”Price Setting in the Euro Area: Some Stylized Facts from
Individual Consumer Price Data,” mimeo.
Erceg Christopher, Dale Henderson, and Andrew Levin, (2000), “Optimal Monetary Policy with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 46(2), 281-313.
Fabiani, Silvia et al. (2004): ”The Pricing Behavior of Firms in the Euro Area:
New Survey Evidence,” mimeo.
Felices, Guillermo (2005): ”Can Information-Consistent Wages Help Explain
the Dynamics of Real Wages and Inflation?” mimeo.
Fuhrer, Jeffrey C., and George R. Moore (1995): “Inflation Persistence”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, No. 440, February, pp 127-159.
Galı́, Jordi and Mark Gertler (1999): “Inflation Dynamics: A Structural Econometric Analysis,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 44, no. 2, 195-222.
Galı́, Jordi, Mark Gertler, David López-Salido (2005): “Markups, Gaps, and
the Welfare Costs of Economic Fluctuations,” mimeo.

27

Goodfriend, Marvin, and Robert G. King (1997): “The New Neoclassical Synthesis and the Role of Monetary Policy,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997,
231-283.
Gordon, Robert J. (1997): ”The Time Varying NAIRU and its Implications for
Economic Policy,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 11 (1), 11-32.
Hall, Robert (2005): ”Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness,” American Economic Review vol. 95, no. 1, 50-64.
Holden, Steinar and John Driscoll (2003): ”Inflation Persistence and Relative
Contracting,” American Economic Review, vol 93 (4), 1369-1372.
King, Robert G., and Alexander L. Wolman (1996): ”Inflation Targeting in a
St. Louis Model of the 21st Century,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review,
vol. 78, no. 3. (NBER WP no. 5507).
Kraus, Michael, Thomas Lubik (2005): ”The (Ir)relevance of Real Wage rigidities in the New Keynesian Model with Search Frictions,” mimeo.
Mankiw, N. Gregory and Ricardo Reis (2002): “Sticky Information vs. Sticky
Prices: A Proposal to Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” Quartely
Journal of Economics, vol. CXVII, issue 4, 1295-1328.
Orphanides, Athanasios, and John Williams (2005): ”Imperfect Knowledge, Inflation Expectations and Monetary Policy,” in in B. Bernanke and M. Woodford, eds. The Inflation Targeting Debate, University of Chicago Press.
Rabanal, Pau (2004): “Real Wage Rigidities, Endogenous Persistence, and Optimal Monetary Policy,” mimeo.
Roberts, John (1995): “New Keynesian Economics and the Phillips Curve,”
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 27, 975-984.
Rotemberg, Julio (1982): “Monopolistic Price Adjustment and Aggregate Output,” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 49, 517-531.
Rotemberg, Julio and Michael Woodford (1996): ”Imperfect Competition and
the Effects of Energy Price Increases on Economic Activity,” Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking, vol. 28, 549-577.
Rotemberg, Julio (2005): “The Persistence of Inflation Versus that of Real Marginal Cost in the New Keynesian Model,” unpublished manuscript.
28

Sbordone, Argia (2002): “Prices and Unit Labor Costs: Testing Models of Pricing Behavior,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 45, no. 2, 265-292.
Smets, Frank, and Raf Wouters (2003): “An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic
General Equilibrium Model of the Euro Area,” Journal of the European Economic Association, vol 1, no. 5, 1123-1175.
Steinsson, Jón (2003): “Optimal Monetary Policy in an Economy with Inflation
Persistence,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 50, no. 7.
Trigari, Antonella (2005): ”Equilibrium Unemployment, Job flows, and Inflation
Dynamics,” ECB WP#304.
Walsh, Carl (2005): ”Labor Market Search, Sticky Prices, and Interest Rate
Policies”, forthcoming in Review of Economic Dynamics.
Woodford, Michael (2003): Interest and Prices. Foundations of a Theory of
Monetary Policy, Princeton University Press.

29

Appendix 1: Derivation of Alternative Representations of Inflation Dynamics in the Presence of Real Wage Rigidities
Throughout this appendix we assume the marginal cost and wage setting schedules:
mc + µp = w − mpn + µp
w = γw(−1) + (1 − γ)mrs
as well as the inflation equation implied by Calvo staggered price setting:
π = βEπ(+1) + λ(mc + µp )

(25)

Representation #1: in terms of the gap between actual and secondbest output.
Combining the wage schedule with (2) and (4)
w = γw(−1) + (1 − γ)(αm + (1 − α + φ)n + ξ)
which can be combined with the marginal cost schedule to yield
mc+µp = γ(mc(−1)+µp )+(1−γ)(ξ−log(1−α))+(1−γ)(1+φ)n−γα(∆m−∆n)
Setting mc = mc(−1) = −µp (flexible price assumption):
0 = (1 − γ)(ξ − log(1 − α)) + (1 − γ)(1 + φ)n2 − γα(∆m − ∆n2 )
which can be subtracted from the equation immediately above to yield:
mc + µp = γ(mc(−1) + µp ) + (1 − γ)(1 + φ)(n − n2 ) + γα(∆n − ∆n2 )
Finally, we combine the previous difference equation for real marginal cost with
the Calvo equation (25) and rewrite in terms of output to obtain:
π = βEπ(+1) +

1
λ
[(1 − γ)(1 + φ)(y − y2 ) + γα(∆y − ∆y2 )]
1 − γL 1 − α

30

or, equivalently,
π=
where x2 ≡

γ
β
λ
π(−1) +
Eπ(+1) +
x2 + ζ
1 + γβ
1 + βγ
1 + βγ

1
1−α [(1

− γ)(1 + φ)(y − y2 ) + γα(∆y − ∆y2 )] and ζ ≡

βγ
1+γβ (π

−

E(π| − 1)).

Representation #2: in terms of the gap between actual and first-best
output, and underlying exogenous shocks.

Combining the wage schedule with (2) and (4)
w = γw(−1) + (1 − γ)(αm + (1 − α + φ)n + ξ)
which can be combined with the marginal cost schedule to yield
mc+µp = γ(mc(−1)+µp )+(1−γ)(ξ−log(1−α))+(1−γ)(1+φ)n−γα(∆m−∆n)
Using the expression for first-best employment, we can rewrite the previous
difference equation in terms of the welfare relevant employment gap and the
underlying shocks:
mc+µp = γ(mc(−1)+µp )+(1−γ)(1+φ)(n−n1 +δ)+γα(∆n−∆n1 )−γα[∆m+(1+φ)−1 ∆ξ]
Combined with (25) we obtain:
π = βEπ(+1)+

λ
{(1−γ)(1+φ)(n−n1 +δ)+γα(∆n−∆n1 )−γα[∆m+(1+φ)−1 ∆ξ]}
1 − γL

or, equivalently,
π =

γ
β
π(−1) +
Eπ(+1)
1 + γβ
1 + βγ
λ
+
(1 − α)−1 [(1 − γ)(1 + φ)(y − y1 + δ) + γα(∆y − ∆y1 )]
1 + βγ
λ
γα(∆m + (1 + φ)−1 ∆ξ) + ζ
−
1 + βγ

31

Representation #3: in terms of the gap between actual and first-best
output, and the real price of non-produced input.
Combining the wage schedule with (2) and (4)
w = γw(−1) + (1 − γ)(α(m − n) + (1 + φ)n + ξ)
Using the fact that m − n = (w − v) + log(α/1 − α), as implied by cost minimization:
w = γw(−1) + (1 − γ)(α(w − v) + α log(α/1 − α) + (1 + φ)n + ξ)
Rearranging terms:
w = Γ w(−1) + (1 − Γ)(1 − α)−1 (α log(α/1 − α) − αv + +(1 + φ)n + ξ) (26)
where Γ ≡

γ
1−α(1−γ)

∈ [0, 1] is a monotonic transformation of the index of real

wage rigidities γ.
Note also that
mc + µp = w − α(m − n) − log(1 − α) + µp
= w − α(w − v) − α log α − (1 − α) log(1 − α) + µp
= (1 − α) w + α v − α log α − (1 − α) log(1 − α) + µp

(27)

which is a version of the factor price frontier (allowing for variable markups).
Thus we see that an increase in the real price of the endowment input (independently of the source, in principle any shock may do), will create both
downward pressure on real wages and upward pressure on marginal costs and,
hence, inflation.
Combining (26) and (27) we obtain (after some algebra):
mc + µp = Γ (mc(−1) + µp ) + (1 − Γ)(1 + φ) (n − n1 + δ) + Γα ∆v

(28)

We can now rewrite inflation as
π = β Eπ(+1) +

λ
[(1 − Γ)(1 + φ) (n − n1 + δ) + Γα ∆v]
1 − ΓL

32

or, equivalently,
π=

Γ
β
λ(1 − Γ)(1 + φ)
λΓα
π(−1)+
Eπ(+1)+
(y−y1 +δ)+
∆v+ζ
1 + βΓ
1 + βΓ
(1 + βΓ)(1 − α)
1 + βΓ

where Γ ≡

γ
1−α(1−γ)

∈ [0, 1]

Representation #4: in terms of the unemployment rate and the real
price of the non-produced input.
First we derive a simple relationship between marginal cost, the unemployment
rate (defined as above), and the employment gap:
mc + µp = w − (y − n) − log(1 − α) + µp
= (y + φns + ξ) − (y − n) − log(1 − α) + µp
= φ (u − un ) + (1 + φ)(n − n1 + δ)
We use the previous expression to substitute for (n − n1 + δ) in the expression
for real marginal cost in (28):
mc + µp = Γ (mc(−1) + µp ) + (1 − Γ) [mc + µp − φ u] + Γα ∆v
After rearranging terms we obtain the difference equation:
mc = mc(−1) −

(1 − γ)(1 − α)φ
u + α ∆v
γ

which is well defined only if γ > 0 (notice that as γ approaches 0 so does u).
Combining the previous equation with (25), we obtain:
π=

1
β
λ(1 − α)(1 − γ)φ
αλ
π(−1) +
Eπ(+1) −
u+
∆v + ζ
1+β
1+β
γ(1 + β)
1+β

33

Appendix 2: A Model with Staggered Real Wage Setting
Consider an economy with staggered wage setting and full indexation. Each
period a fraction 1 − γ of workers, drawn randomly from the population, reset
their wage. The log-linearized law of motion for the aggregate real wage is thus
given by
wt = γwt−1 + (1 − γ)wt∗
where wt∗ denotes the newly set wage in period t. Utility maximization implies
the following wage setting rule (up to first order, and ignoring a constant term):
wt∗ = (1 − βγ)

∞
X
(βγ)k Et {mrst+k|t }
k=0

∞
X
(βγ)k Et {mrst+k − ²w φ(wt∗ − wt+k )}
= (1 − βγ)
k=0
∗
= βγ Et {wt+1
}+

1 − βγ
(mrst + ²w φ wt )
1 + ²w φ

where mrst+k|t denotes the marginal rate of substitution for a worker who last
set its wage in period t.25
Combining both equations we obtain
w = Φ w(−1) + Φβ Et {w(+1)} + Λ mrs
where Φ ≡

(1+²w φ)γ
1+γ[²w φ(1+β)+βγ]

and Λ ≡

(1−βγ)(1−γ)
1+γ[²w φ(1+β)+βγ] .

(29)

Notice that 1 = Φ(1 +

β) + Λ thus implying that in the steady state w = mrs.
Let w
e ≡ w1 − w2 and mrs
g ≡ mrs1 − mrs2 . Using the fact that w1 = mrs1 we
can write
w
e = Φ w(−1)
e
+ Φβ E w(+1)
e
+ Λ mrs
g +Φ z

(30)

25. The second equality uses the fact that the marginal rate of substitution for a worker
who last set its wage in period t, denoted by mrst+k|t , is related to its average counterpart
according to
∗
mrst+k|t = mrst+k − ²w φ(wt+k
− wt+k )
where ²w is the wage elasticity of labor demand for a particular worker, under the assumption
of imperfect substitutability between workers in production.

34

where
z ≡ (1 + β)w1 − w1 (−1) − βEw1 (+1)
= ∆w1 − βE∆w1 (+1)
and where
∆w1 = ∆mpn1
= α(∆m − ∆n1 )
= α[∆m − (1 + φ)−1 ∆ξ]
is a function of the exogenous shocks (and as a result so is z).
α
Notice also that w
e = mpn1 − mpn2 = − 1−α
ye and mrs
g = (1 +

φ
1−α )

ye , where

ye ≡ y1 − y2 . Using these results we can rewrite (30) as:
ye = αΦΥ ye(−1) + αβΦΥ Ee
y (+1) − (1 − α)ΦΥ z
where Υ ≡

1
α+Λ(1−α+φ) .

Thus, to the extent that real wage rigidities are present

(γ > 0), we will have Φ > 0 and hence fluctuations in the gap between first and
second best output in response to shocks.
Next we derive the implied inflation equation. Notice that real marginal cost is
given by
mc = w − (y − n) − log(1 − α)
α
(y − m) − log(1 − α)
= w+
1−α
In terms of deviations from the flexible price equilibrium we have:
mc + µ = (w − w2 ) +

α
(y − y2 )
1−α

Notice that we can also rewrite (29) in terms of deviations from the flexible
price equilibrium values:
w − w2 = Φ (w − w2 )(−1) + Φβ E(w − w2 )(+1) + Λ (1 +

φ
) (y − y2 )
1−α

35

Collecting results we obtain
mc + µ = Φ (mc + µ)(−1) + Φβ E(mc + µ)(+1) + f (y − y2 )
where
f (y − y2 ) ≡ [Λ (1 + (φ/1 − α)) + (α/1 − α)] (y − y2 )
α
α
−Φ
(y − y2 )(−1) − Φβ
E(y − y2 )(+1)
1−α
1−α
Combined with inflation equation (13) we obtain:

π = βEπ(+1) + λE(1 − ΦL − βΦL−1 )f (y − y2 )
= βEπ(+1) + λE(1 − ΦL − βΦL−1 )f (y − y1 ) + u
where u ≡ λE(1 − ΦL − βΦL−1 )f (y1 − y2 ).
Notice that there is no trade-off between stabilization of the output gap y − y2
and stabilization of inflation. However, when γ > 0 , u will fluctuate in response
to shocks, making it impossible to stabilize both inflation and the welfarerelevant ouput gap.

36

