PARENTAL PREFERENCES AND SCHOOL COMPETITION:
EVIDENCE FROM A PUBLIC SCHOOL CHOICE PROGRAM

               Justine S. Hastings
                Thomas J. Kane
               Douglas O. Staiger

              Working Paper 11805
                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  PARENTAL PREFERENCES AND SCHOOL COMPETITION:
                  EVIDENCE FROM A PUBLIC SCHOOL CHOICE PROGRAM

                                            Justine S. Hastings
                                             Thomas J. Kane
                                            Douglas O. Staiger

                                          Working Paper 11805
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11805


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2005




We thank the Charlotte-Mecklenburg School Board, Office of the Superintendent, as well as the excellent
school district staff for making this project possible. We would also like to thank Joseph Altonji, Patrick
Bayer, Steven Berry, Philip Haile, Fabian Lange, Sharon Oster, Miguel Villas-Boas, Sofia Villas-Boas, and
seminar participants at Yale University, University of California at Berkeley, and University of Chicago for
helpful comments. We gratefully acknowledge Sean Hundtofte, Jeffrey Weinstein, and Orkun Sahmali for
providing outstanding research assistance. The project is funded by grants from the Institution for Social and
Policy Studies at Yale University and the U.S. Department of Education. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Justine S. Hastings, Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Parental Preferences and School Competition: Evidence from a Public School Choice Program
Justine S. Hastings, Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger
NBER Working Paper No. 11805
November 2005, Revised December 2006
JEL No. I0, I20, I28

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper uses school choice data from the Charlotte-Mecklenburg School District to study parents’
preferences for school characteristics and their implications for demand and competition in school
choice. We estimate a mixed-logit demand model using the rankings of parents’ top three school
choices in the first year of school choice. Our results show that parents value proximity highly and
preferences for school test scores increase with student income and own academic ability. We also
find considerable heterogeneity in idiosyncratic preferences, with negative correlations between
preferences for academics and proximity. Unique aspects of the choice plan, such as the redrawing
of school boundaries, allow us to test for bias from endogenous residential location and strategic
choices. Simulations of parental responses to school test score improvements suggest that the
demand response at high-performing schools would be larger than at low-performing schools,
leading to disparate demand-side pressure to improve performance under school choice.

Justine S. Hastings                                  Department of Economics
Yale University                                      6106 Rockefeller Hall
Department of Economics                              Hanover, NH 03755
P.O. Box 20868                                       and NBER
New Haven, CT 06520                                  douglas.staiger@dartmouth.edu
and NBER
justine.hastings@yale.edu

Thomas J. Kane
Harvard University
Graduate School of Education
Gutman Hall 455
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
kaneto@gse.harvard.edu


Douglas O. Staiger
Dartmouth College
I.     Introduction


       School choice plans are intended to improve both education quality and equity by
providing demand-side incentives for schools to compete for students and by allowing
broader access to quality public schools. Urban public school districts, such as those in
Charlotte, Milwaukee and Washington DC, are currently experimenting with ways to
promote greater competition, such as public school choice plans, charter school
programs, and limited voucher plans. Moreover, the recent federal No Child Left Behind
Act (NCLB) requires districts receiving federal Title I funds to allow students in failing
schools to choose to attend non-failing schools outside of their neighborhood.
       However, theory suggests that the potential effect of expanded choice depends
critically on the distribution of consumer preferences for product (school) characteristics
(Anderson, de Palma and Thisse (1992)). For example, if parents care primarily about
proximity and convenience, then schools may not face much pressure to improve under
school choice. On the other hand, if parents choose schools primarily for academic
achievement, then school choice may lead to intense pressure to improve education
quality, leading to overall academic gains (‘a tide that lifts all boats’). Differences in
preferences across socio-economic groups can also have important consequences. If high-
income families and parents of high-achieving students focus on academics when
choosing schools, while low-income families focus on proximity or convenience, then
schools may become more stratified under school choice. Strong academic schools may
compete in a city-wide market for higher-achieving students while schools in low-income
neighborhoods serve the remaining students, acting as ‘local monopolists’ with little
pressure to improve.
       The ultimate impact of greater parental choice depends upon the nature of
parental preferences. However, econometric evidence on parental preferences and the
effects of school choice on overall academic achievement is quite limited. In the absence
of micro data with which to directly estimate the demand for schools, researchers in the
related literature have been forced to make strong assumptions about the nature of
demand and competition. For instance, researchers have recently focused on the
relationship between measures of district ‘concentration’ (HHI) across metropolitan areas



                                               1
and average student achievement (Borland and Howson (1992), Hoxby (2000), Hanushek
and Rivkin (2003), Belfield and Levin (2002)). However, the relationship between the
HHI and the degree of competition rests on certain assumptions regarding the nature of
demand and market structure, namely that firms (here schools or districts) are symmetric
and compete on quantity in a homogeneous goods market (Farrell and Shapiro (1990)).
The results of this literature are mixed (Belfield and Levin (2002)), with significant
positive, negative and insignificant relationships between measures of student
achievement and measures of market concentration. Another related literature has taken a
theoretical approach, using computable general equilibrium models to simulate the
impact of stylized choice programs on student sorting and achievement (Nechyba (1999,
2000, 2003), and Epple and Romano (1998, 2002)). These models allow for comparisons
of alternative hypothetical choice programs, but must make assumptions regarding
parental preferences with little empirical guidance.
       In this paper, we use a unique natural experiment in the Charlotte-Mecklenburg
School district (CMS), in North Carolina, to estimate the distribution of preferences for
key school characteristics. We use multiple ranked data from parents’ school choices for
the first year of district-wide school choice to estimate a mixed-logit model of demand
for schools, allowing preferences to vary idiosyncratically as well as with observed
characteristics such as race, income, and baseline academic achievement. We find that
preferences for measures of academic quality are increasing in income and student
baseline achievement. We also find that parents highly value proximity, but that
idiosyncratic preferences for measures of academic achievement and proximity are
negatively correlated, implying that parents with strong preferences for academic
achievement are willing to leave their local neighborhood to get it. We use these
preference distributions to simulate the demand-side response to an increase in a school’s
mean test score, all else equal. We find that higher performing schools compete for
elastic students and experience a relatively high demand response to an incremental
improvement in mean test scores. Lower performing schools, however, face little
demand-side pressure to improve, serving mostly local, inelastic families. Such results
suggest that public school choice may lead towards greater educational stratification of
schools serving high and low income youth.



                                             2
       Several aspects of the Mecklenburg County choice plan make it ideal for
estimating demand parameters. First, CMS introduced public school choice in the fall of
2002, after a race-based bussing plan was terminated by court order. Under the choice
plan, parents in the district were asked to submit their top three choices of schools for
their children. Approximately 95% of the 110,000 students submitted choices for the
choice plan. Thus we have data for nearly the entire student population—whereas most
work using school choice data has been dependent on limited and potentially non-
representative subgroups of students. Second, the multiple responses create variation in
the choice set by effectively removing the prior chosen school from the subsequent
choice set. This choice-set variation allows us to estimate the distribution of preferences
for school characteristics from observed substitution patterns for each individual – a
stronger source of variation for identification than cross-sectional changes in the choice
set based on geographic location (Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (2004)). Third, historic
placement of schools for busing in CMS provides wide variation in school characteristics
for families in all socio-economic groups, dampening collinearity problems that may be
present in other settings.
       Moreover, the introductory year of the school choice plan provides a unique
opportunity to test for the importance of potentially confounding factors such as
residential sorting and strategic behavior. First, the district redrew school boundaries
when they implemented the school choice plan. As a result, approximately fifty percent
of families lost property rights to the school they would have been guaranteed to attend
the year before. This exogenous shock to residential sorting helps identify preferences for
proximity from preferences for other school characteristics. Second, the redrawing of
school boundaries allows us to test for the presence of strategic behavior. Had parents
known the school assignment mechanism, some may have had an incentive to
misrepresent their true preferences. Given the way slots in oversubscribed schools were
allocated, those with weaker default schools would have had an incentive to “hedge” their
first choices, by listing a less popular school first (Glazerman and Meyer (1994),
Abdulkadiroglu and Sonmez (2003)). We test whether choices were different for those
reassigned to stronger and weaker schools. We find little evidence of such strategizing in
the first year of the program, although participants could develop such strategic behavior



                                              3
as they become more familiar with the choice system and they learn more about which
choices will be oversubscribed (Roth and Erev (1995), Kagel and Roth(2000)).
         In the absence of public school choice, residential location alone determines
school assignment. Public school choice advocates argue that competition on the basis of
residential location alone may be not be enough to spur schools to focus on student
achievement, since parental responses are muted by budget constraints and desires for
other neighborhood attributes. Our results measure the additional competitive pressure
created by a public school choice plan when school assignments are decoupled from
residential location. Our analysis points to heterogeneous preferences in a differentiated
schools (products) market and the resulting market segmentation as key factors limiting
competition among schools even after geographic-based constraints are lifted.


II.      Previous Literature on School Choice and Competition

         In recent years, a number of papers have estimated the impact of market
“concentration” in local public schools on educational outcomes. (Borland and Howson
(1992), Hoxby (2000), Hanushek and Rivkin (2003)). Belfield and Levin (2002) provide
a thorough review of this extensive literature. Without micro data with which to directly
estimate demand for schools, researchers often assume that competition in the schooling
market in a metropolitan area can be measured by an HHI (Herfindahl-Hirschman Index)
of districts. The higher the concentration of districts, the lower the extent of competition,
and the lower the pressure to improve academically should be. However, the relationship
between HHI and competition is derived mechanically from the equilibrium price-cost
margins in an n-firm symmetric Cournot model of competition (Farrell and Shapiro
(1990)). The use of the HHI itself takes as a premise certain assumptions on product
differentiation and preferences. 1 Therefore, such studies provide no test for differential
demand-side pressures across schools serving different socio-economic classes. Neither


1
  Recognizing that, outside of the symmetric firm Cournot model, the HHI is no longer a sufficient statistic
for competition, the recent literature in industrial organization has focused on estimating underlying
preference parameters of consumer’s indirect utility to understand demand, substitution patterns, and nature
of competition between firms in differentiated products markets. In our context, estimates of preference
parameters will yield estimates of the demand response faced by individual schools, allowing insights into
the nature of competitive pressure on quality and student sorting under school choice.


                                                     4
can such studies shed light on student sorting (which types of students will pick which
schools), test which schools compete for which students, or elucidate effective supply-
side policy to increase demand-elasticity or improve educational equity. The results of
this literature are mixed, with negative, positive, and insignificant relationships between
HHI’s and educational outcomes (Belfield & Levin (2002), Table 1).
         Other researchers have explored theoretical models of student sorting and
equilibrium outcomes under various forms of voucher plans (Nechyba (1999, 2000,
2003), and Epple and Romano (1998, 2002)).2 The general equilibrium approach has the
benefit of being able to compare alternative, hypothetical school choice and voucher
plans with various funding, admissions, or targeting rules. However, instead of
uncovering parental preferences, these models place theoretical assumptions on parental
choice behavior in order to compute equilibrium outcomes. For instance, they often
assume that preferences are homogeneous or that parents care only about test
performance and peer characteristics (and not proximity). In this paper, we will not be
able to compare equilibrium outcomes across alternative school choice mechanisms;
however we use a large-scale public school choice experiment and parents’ actual choices
to uncover preference distributions for school characteristics. The estimates of demand
parameters presented in this paper, therefore, should be helpful to future efforts to
calculate equilibrium outcomes under alternative school choice mechanisms.
         Another set of research papers have focused on survey analysis, studying what
parents say they look for when choosing schools. Parents generally state that academic
achievement and teacher quality are the most important school characteristics (Armor and
Peiser (1998), Vanourek et al. (1998), Greene et al. (1998), Kleitz et al. (2000), Schneider
et al. (1998)). However, inferring parents’ preferences from survey responses may not
give an accurate estimate of parents’ true preferences. For example, parents’ stated
preferences may be altered to fit social norms – emphasizing a high value for education
quality, a low value for convenience, and potentially downplaying concerns for school
racial composition.3 Furthermore, when responding to hypothetical questions, parents



2
 See Neal (2002) for a summary of the results from this literature.
3
 For example, survey research in Political Science often asks people about their voting history. Voting
history is verifiable using publicly available voting records. Researchers systematically find that a large


                                                      5
may make assumptions that affect their responses in ways not apparent to the researcher
(e.g. automatically incorporating the importance of proximity in their response and
implicitly limiting their choice set to nearby schools).
         A smaller set of studies have exploited the actual choices parents make to infer
parental preferences.4 Bayer, Ferreira and McMillan (2003) use actual household location
decisions from the US Census to estimate household preferences over a broad range of
housing, neighborhood and school characteristics. They find evidence of differences in
preferences for neighborhood attributes across observable characteristics. These studies
must rely on cross-sectional residential location data to infer preferences for many
different neighborhood, school, and life-style characteristics. Glazerman (1997), using a
conditional logit framework and data from a limited choice program in Minneapolis,
found that while test scores mattered in driving parental choices, parents tended to avoid
schools in which their children’s racial group represented less than 20 percent of all
students. However, the Minneapolis choice plan was a long-standing program that
involved only a small percentage of parents with very limited school options, and a
history of incentives and participation that may have affected parents stated choices.
         In summary, the CMS school choice plan provides a unique opportunity to
examine preferences across the population of students at the introduction of a school
choice program. The policy experiment and multiple ranked choice data will allow us to
overcome hurdles of strategy and residential sorting, and use a more flexible mixed-logit
discrete choice framework to estimate both observable and unobservable heterogeneity in
preferences (Hausman and Wise (1978) and Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995, 2004)).
We can then use the distribution of preferences to simulate the implications for demand-
side pressures to improve academic achievement in public school choice.


III.         Details of Public School Choice Plan in CMS

         Before the introduction of a school choice plan in the fall of 2002, the Charlotte-
Mecklenburg public school district (CMS) operated under a racial desegregation order for


fraction of respondents claim that they have voted when in fact they have not. It appears they may do so to
conform to social norms (Karp and Brockington (2005)).
4
  See Manski and Wise (1983) for an early application to college choice.


                                                     6
three decades. In September 2001, the U.S. Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals declared the
school district “unitary” and ordered the district to dismantle the race-based student
assignment plan by the beginning of the next school year. In December of 2001, the
school board voted to approve a new district-wide public school choice plan.
         In the spring of 2002, parents were asked to submit their top three choices of
school programs for each child. Each student was assigned a “home school” in their
neighborhood, often the closest school to them, and was guaranteed a seat at this school.
Magnet students were similarly guaranteed admission to continue in their current magnet
programs. Admission for all other students was limited by grade-specific capacity limits
set by the district. Students could choose any school in the district, however, busing
transportation was only guaranteed to schools in a student’s quadrant of the district (the
district was split into 4 quadrants called ‘choice zones’). The district allowed significant
increases in school enrollment size in the first year of the school choice program in an
expressed effort to give each child one of their top three choices. In the spring of 2002,
the district received choice applications for approximately 105,000 of 110,000 students.
Approximately 95% of parents received admission to one of their top three choices.
Admission to over-subscribed schools was determined by a lottery system as described
below.


Potential for Strategic Choice
         The lottery mechanism used by the Charlotte-Mecklenburg schools was a ‘first-
choice-maximizer,’ in which slots were first assigned to all those listing a given school as
a first choice before moving to those listing the school as a second or third choice. In
such a mechanism, parents with poor home school options may have an incentive to
misstate their preferences – not listing their most preferred school if it had a low
probability of admission (Glazerman and Meyer (1994), Abdulkadiroglu and Sonmez
(2003), Abdulkadiroglu et. al (2006)). Instead, they may have hedged their bets by listing
a less preferred option with a higher probability of admission in order to avoid being
assigned to their home school. Such strategic behavior would imply that student choices
would not reflect true preference orderings for schools—to the extent that students are
not listing their preferred match due to strategic hedging on quality.



                                              7
        However, there were a number of reasons why such strategic behavior was
unlikely to have been a major concern in the 2002-2003 CMS choice plan. First, parents
did not know how the lottery system would be operated. The handful of district officials
who knew the lottery details were not allowed to communicate them to parents. Parents
were never given their actual lottery numbers. The district also told parents that they
would make every attempt to give each student admission to one of their chosen schools,
and instructed them to list what they wanted. In order to accommodate demand, the
district substantially expanded capacity at popular schools. In addition, the district gave a
‘priority boost’ to low-income students choosing to attend schools with low
concentrations of low income students. Hence, choices for top schools by students with
under-performing home schools would be given top priority. This would counteract the
incentive for these students to hedge their choices as outlined above.
        In addition to these strong a priori reasons to suspect that strategy did not play a
large role in determining parents’ choices in this first year of school choice, we use the
redistricting to test if parents with exogenous changes to the quality of their home school
had lower preferences for high-quality schools as would be predicted if parents were
behaving strategically. We present this test in Section VII along with other robustness
checks. Perhaps because of the uncertainty about the mechanism and the newness of the
system, we do not find evidence that strategic behavior played a significant role in this
first year of school choice. 5


Redistricting with the Choice Plan
        Because the public school choice plan replaced a busing plan for racial
integration, school assignment zones, which often paired non-contiguous black and white
neighborhoods, were dramatically redrawn. Under the choice plan, 43 percent of parcels
were assigned to a different elementary grade ‘home school’ than they were assigned to
the year before under the busing system. At the middle school and high school levels this
number was 52 and 35 percent respectively. Therefore, in our analysis, the home school

5
 In subsequent years of school choice, when capacities at schools were no longer changed to accommodate
demand, strategy may have become more important. In the second year of choice, CMS no longer made an
effort to accommodate choices by changing school capacities. Many parents received none of their three
choices, and expressed frustration because they had made choices without knowing the probability of
admittance.


                                                   8
for many students is often not the school they would have been assigned at the time they
chose their residence. This dramatic change in school assignment zones implies that
residential location was less likely to reflect endogenous sorting based on family
preferences for a nearby school.


Heterogeneous Choices
           Interestingly, there was little unanimity in parents’ choice of schools. Certainly,
much of the variance in parents’ top choices is driven by differences in travel times to a
given set of schools. But, even among parents with the same elementary home school
assignment for 2002-03, parents on average listed on average 10.4 different first-choice
elementary schools.6 Such a diversity of choices suggests that there is a considerable
heterogeneity in preferences, making the mixed-logit demand estimation approach
important for understanding demand-side pressure to improve academic achievement in a
public school choice setting.


IV.        Data Description and Empirical Specification


Data
           We have secure access to administrative data for all students in CMS for the year
before and after the implementation of school choice. Throughout the analysis, we focus
on students entering grades 4 through 8. We focus on this student segment for two
reasons. First, younger students do not have baseline standardized test scores. Since we
wanted to study the relationship between baseline test scores and parental preferences,
and the implications for student sorting in school choice, we focus on students entering
fourth grade or higher. Second, we do not consider high school students since high school
choice is likely influenced by factors such as graduation rates and athletic programs that
are not central to elementary and middle school choices, and thus would be better
handled in a separate analysis.
           For each student, we have the choice forms submitted to CMS, allowing a student
to specify up to 3 choices for their school. In addition to the student choices our data


6
    This number accounts for differences in choices listed driven by differences in the prior-year’s school.


                                                        9
contain student characteristics for the years before and after school choice, including
geocoded residential location, race, gender, lunch-subsidy recipient status, and student
test scores for standardized North Carolina End of Grade Exams in math and reading, and
school assignment. We use these data to construct key covariates in the demand for
schools such as driving distance from each student to each school, an indicator for busing
availability, an indicator for the prior year’s school, measures of student-level income,
student baseline academic achievement, school-level academic achievement, and school-
level racial composition. The variables used in our model and are described in detail in
Section VI and in Table II.


Empirical Model
       Our empirical model uses the parental choices, along with data on each student
and school choices, to estimate preferences for school characteristics and how they vary
in the population. We estimate a mixed logit discrete choice demand model (McFadden
and Train 2000, Train 2003). Mixed logits are multinomial logit choice models with
random coefficients on product attributes in the indirect utility function. The mixed logit
can approximate any random utility model, given appropriate mixing distributions and
explanatory variables (Dagsvik (1994), McFadden and Train (2000)). Standard
multinomial logit models impose the independence of irrelevant alternatives (IIA)
assumption, which implies that, when choice sets are altered (for example by the
introduction of a new school), substitution to any new school does not depend on its
similarity to existing schools. In contrast, by introducing individual heterogeneity in
preferences over product attributes, the mixed logit model allows for more flexible
substitution patterns – generating credible estimates of demand elasticities and
simulations, which are key to understanding implications of school choice for
competition on quality.
        This flexibility, however, comes at some cost. Because of the more complicated
functional form, the likelihood function for the mixed logit does not have a closed form,
and must be estimated by numerically integrating over the distribution for the random
parameters. In addition, changes in the choice set generated by multiple choice data are




                                             10
often needed to identify the mean and variance of the preference parameters (Berry,
Levinsohn, and Pakes (2004)). The CMS data provide this important source of variation.
        Our model is based on a standard random utility framework. Let Uij be the
expected utility of individual i from attending school j. Individual i chooses the school j
that maximizes his or her utility over all possible schools in the choice set. For the first
choice, the individual chooses over the set of all available schools (denoted J i1 ), so that:

                  y ij1 = 1 iff U ij > U ik ∀k ∈ J i1

                  y ij1 = 0 otherwise.

The second and third choice (identified by y ij2 and y ij3 ) is made in a similar manner,

except that the choice sets (denoted J i2 and J i3 ) exclude schools already chosen by
individual i.
        We assume that utility is a linear function of the observed student and school
characteristics, X ij , such as distance from home, average test scores, and racial

composition of the school, plus an unobserved component, ε ij , that reflects unobserved

idiosyncratic preference of student i for school j.
(1)     U ij = X ij β i + ε ij

We assume that the unobservable component ( ε ij ) is distributed i.i.d. extreme value,

which yields the usual logit form for the choice probabilities conditional on β i .

        Heterogeneity in individual preferences implies that the coefficients, β i , in
equation (1) will vary across individuals. We allow for this heterogeneity in three ways.
First, we allow the parameters of equation (1) to vary randomly across individuals. We
assume that β ~ f (β | μ β ,θ ), where f ( ⋅) is a multivariate normal mixing distribution,

where μ denotes the mean vector, and θ represents the variance matrix. Second, we
separately estimate parameter distributions for students in each of the four main
demographic categories: white and African American by lunch subsidy status. This
allows us to compare means and variances of preferences for school characteristics across
the different socio-economic groups. Third, we allow the coefficient on a school’s
standardized score to vary with a student’s baseline test score and family income by


                                                        11
including interactions between these student characteristics and the school mean test
score in the vector of characteristics, X.
            In the specifications that are reported below, we assume that all random
parameters are drawn from a joint normal or log normal distribution. We allow for a
covariance between preferences for proximity and school mean test score, since these are
key dimensions of product differentiation that might effect competition on academic
achievement. Other preference parameters are assumed to be independently distributed.7
            Given the specification above, the probability that individual i chooses schools
(j1,j2, j3) is given by:

              (             )                 {(                      ) (           ) (
            Pi j1 , j 2 , j 3 = Pr U ij1 > U ik ∀k ∈ J i1 ∩ U ij 2 > U ik ∀k ∈ J i2 ∩ U ij 3 > U ik ∀k ∈ J i3   )}
                               X          β
                                   ij c
                   3
                           e
            = ∫∏                                   f (β | μ ,θ )dβ
                  c =1 ∑k ∈J c e
      (2)                        X ik β
                                   i




            The term inside the integrand represents the probability of observing the three
ranked choices conditional on the preference coefficients (β): this is the product of three
logit probabilities evaluated at β i , corresponding to the probability of making each
choice from among the remaining options.8 This conditional probability is integrated over
the distribution of β to yield the unconditional probability of observing the ranked
choices.
            These probabilities form the log-likelihood function:
                                          N   J1   J2   J3
(3)         LL( X , μ ,θ ) = ∑∑∑∑ y ij1 y ik2 y il3 ln(Pi ( j , k , l ))
                                       i =1 j =1 k =1 l =1


Since equations (2) and (3) do not have a closed form solution, simulation methods were
used to generate draws of β from f ( ⋅) to numerically integrate over the distribution of

preferences. Estimation was by the method of maximum simulated likelihood, using 100




7
  Allowing for general covariance structure across all parameters led to instability in the estimated
covariance terms in some specifications, but did not significantly affect the remaining parameters or the
substantive results that we report.
8
  For students submitting fewer than three choices, the likelihood is modified in an obvious way to reflect
only the probability of the submitted choices.


                                                                     12
draws of β from f ( ⋅) for each individual in the data set. The results were not sensitive

to increasing the number of draws used.


V.      Descriptive Statistics



        The CMS choice form allowed parents to list up to three school choices. The
availability of more than one choice for students in CMS helps in the identification of the
preference parameters. Intuitively, when only a single (1st) choice is observed for every
individual, it is difficult to be sure whether an unexpected choice was the result of an
unusual error term ( ε ij ) or unusual preferences by the individual ( β i ) for some aspect of

the choice. However, when an individual makes multiple choices that share a common
attribute (e.g. high test scores) we can infer that the individual has a strong preference for
that attribute, because independence of the additive error terms across choices would
make observing such an event very unlikely in the absence of a strong preference. When
we take away the first choice and ask parents which school they would like for their child
instead, the researcher can observe in which direction parents substitute, and infer
something about their preferences for school characteristics.
        Table I provides summary statistics on all of the students who submitted choice
forms for the entire sample, broken down by race and lunch subsidy status. Overall, 95%
of students submitted choice response forms. Whites and Blacks each comprise just over
43% of the school population. Approximately 10 percent of white students receive
federal lunch subsidies, while just over 60 percent of African Americans do. Since
parents were guaranteed a slot in their default school, many parents listed only one or two
schools on their choice forms. In particular, students who were white and ineligible for
lunch subsidies were more likely to fill out only a first choice. Table I shows that the
average scores for their home schools were one quarter to one half of a standard deviation
higher than those of other groups. Between 46% and 63% of parents in the remaining
subgroups submitted all three choices. Note that 20-46% parents who listed their home
school first, listed subsequent choices. For instance, 42% of non-white students who were
not receiving federal lunch subsidies chose their home school first, while only 28% listed



                                              13
only a first choice. Whatever their reasons for doing so, the availability of multiple
choices from those who listed their home school first will further aid in the identification
of the preference parameters.
       Table I also provides the mean and standard deviation of baseline test scores of
students in CMS in Spring 2002 by race and lunch-subsidy status. Student-level test
scores are reported as the standardized score – standardized by the mean and standard
deviation in the district for students in each grade. Hence, a value of zero implies students
who scored the average relative to all other students in their grade in the district. While
there are large differences in average test scores across the groups of students, there is
substantial variation in student ability within each category as measured by performance
on standardized tests. Similarly, the within-school and within-neighborhood variation is
greater than across-school or across-neighborhood variation in student achievement. Such
variation in student level-baseline achievement within and across schools,
neighborhoods, and socio-economic groups will help identify the degree to which
preferences for school quality vary with own academic ability.
       Finally, because schools had historically been placed for the busing for integration
program, high-scoring schools (some of them magnet programs) are dispersed throughout
the county, located in both urban and suburban areas, and in both minority and non-
minority communities. Table I reports the average travel distance (in miles) to the nearest
school in the top quartile of average test scores. The average student in all four categories
lives within 2-3 miles of a top-quartile school. Figure 1a presents a map of school
locations and their test scores against the demographic characteristics of census block
groups in Mecklenburg County (measuring approximately 22 miles across and 30 miles
north to south), while Figure 1b shows an up-close example for a particular set of
neighborhoods measuring roughly 4.5 miles across. Darker shading identifies block
groups where more of the population is African American and identifies schools with
higher average test scores. Note that many neighborhoods are racially integrated – with at
least 20% of either race present. Neighborhoods that vary greatly in their racial
composition are roughly the same distance to the same set of schools, and students in
most neighborhoods can choose from schools with a wide range of average test scores.




                                             14
Such variation will help us identify preferences for school proximity and school quality
across the socio-economic groups of interest.


VI.       Results


          The mixed logit model was estimated separately by race (white vs. non-white)
and by receipt of federal lunch subsidies. Therefore, all estimates for both the means and
variance-covariance matrices of the preference parameters were allowed vary across race
and lunch-subsidy status. Within race and lunch-subsidy status, we included as
explanatory variables measures of school and student characteristics that are central to
understanding competition on quality in the context of the school choice debate. To
capture the importance of proximity and travel costs, the specification included driving
distance (in miles) from the student’s residence to the school (measured in miles), an
indicator if busing was provided for the student to the school (the school was in the
student’s zone), and an indicator if the school is the student’s neighborhood school. An
indicator if the student attended the school in the prior year was included to capture the
importance of continuity for students who were continuing in elementary or middle
school. To capture the academic quality of the school, we calculate the average 2002
standardized test score for students attending the school in 2003 (Cullen, Jacob, Levitt
(2006)). We interacted the school’s average test score with the student’s standardized
baseline test score (standardized by grade level across the district) and the median
household income in the student’s neighborhood for the student’s race (measured in
$1000’s, using their census block group in 2000, and de-meaned with the countywide
median of $51,000). These interactions allowed the effect of school test scores on school
choice to vary with a student’s income and academic ability. Finally, to capture the racial
composition of a school, we included the percent black in the school in Spring 2003 and
its square. When the quadratic term has a negative coefficient, this specification yields an
implied bliss point (where the quadratic peaks) for preferences over racial mix of a
school.
          The final estimation sample includes 36,816 students entering grades 4-8. The
means and standard deviations of these variables across the over 2 million school choice



                                             15
and student choice interactions available to our sample of students and schools are
reported in Table III. The mixed logit parameter estimates are reported in Table IV. All
of the point estimates were precisely estimated and statistically different from zero at less
than the 1 percent level. To preserve space, the standard errors of the estimates of the
preference distribution means and standard deviations are reported in Appendix Table I.


Proximity: Travel Distance, Neighborhood Schools, and Bussing Zones
        Given strong priors that the coefficient on distance would be non-positive, we
imposed a lognormal distribution on the preference coefficient for distance:
β dist = − exp(α ) , where α was assumed to be normally distributed. In the table we report
the mean and standard deviation for the actual coefficient ( β dist ) rather than for the

underlying normal (α). The negative weight placed on distance is fairly uniform across
the four demographic groups. However the effect of distance is slightly larger in absolute
value for white students compared to black students, and slightly more variable for
students receiving lunch subsidies. For an average student, each additional mile of
distance reduces the odds of choosing a school by roughly 35% among whites and 27%
among nonwhites. The standard deviation in this effect across students is 15%-30% of the
mean, implying that for some students distance is a major barrier to choice while other
students place very little weight on distance.
        Preferences for home school are strong on average across all demographic groups;
however there is also a large variance in the strength of the home-school preference
within each group. The pattern for home school preference is similar to that found for
distance: The mean preference for a home school is somewhat larger for whites, and
somewhat more variable for students eligible for lunch subsidies. The mean effect is
roughly equivalent to 5-7 miles in travel distance in each sub-sample of students.
        Because the home school is often the closest school to the student, this variable
may pick up a non-linearity in preferences for proximity (parents have an added
preference for the closest school to them). However, it may also represent a preference
for a “neighborhood school,” where there may be social or informational benefits to
attending the same school as other kids in the immediate neighborhood. We investigated
the degree to which the estimated preference for a home school reflects a non-linear


                                              16
preference for proximity versus a value of neighborhood school by re-estimating the
model on a sample of students living along newly-created home-school boundary borders
that bisected old school assignment zones. To the extent that these students had attended
the same schools in the prior year, and faced a similar distance to all schools, we hoped to
better isolate the importance of the home school designation. The preference for a home
school was lower for students living on the boundary of a home school zone, but still
positive and significant. Hence there appears to be a preference for the neighborhood
school in addition to a non-linear component of preference for proximity.
         Another possibility is that the home school indicator is picking up a default effect,
rather than a preference for neighborhood school. If parents do not want to invest the time
to fully consider all the schools in the choice set, they may simply list their guaranteed
school as their first choice.9 This would imply a stronger preference for a home school on
the first of the three choices. We estimated the mixed logit model with a separate
coefficient on the home school indicator for just the first choice. Default behavior as
described above should imply a positive coefficient on the home school indicator
interacted with first choice. We found that the coefficient was smaller, and within one
half of one standard deviation of the mean overall preference distribution for a home
school. Hence, we interpret the coefficient on the home school indicator as picking up a
preference for the ‘neighborhood school’ instead of picking up a default behavior.
         Finally, the coefficient on a school being in a student’s choice zone was intended
to capture lower travel costs to these schools, since transportation by the district was only
provided to schools within a student’s own choice zone. All four demographic groups
have a strong mean preference for schools in their choice zone, with the effect being
largest among students who are eligible for lunch subsidies (as would be expected if these
students had limited access to alternative transportation). The standard deviation of the
coefficient on choice zone is of roughly the same size as the mean in each demographic
group, suggesting considerable variation across students in these preferences.
         Overall, the estimates for travel distance, neighborhood schools, and choice zones
support the same general conclusion. While there are some differences across

9
  Note this is different than defaulting by not turning in a choice form. Recall that 95% of parents submitted
the choice forms. Of these, defaulting behavior might be an over-propensity to list Home School first, and
nothing else.


                                                     17
demographic groups, it is clear that proximity is an important determinant of school
choice for the average student. At the same time, there appears to be great heterogeneity
across students in the weight that they place on proximity in choosing a school.


School Test Scores
          Given our prior that preferences for school scores would vary with student
baseline academic ability as well as student income level even within race and lunch-
subsidy status, we included school test scores and their interaction with the student’s
baseline test score and neighborhood income level. For students who are eligible for
lunch subsidies, we did not include the interaction with neighborhood income because all
of these students are presumably very low income.10 Both neighborhood income and the
student’s baseline score are “de-meaned”, so that the coefficient on the main effect of
school score measures the value of school test score for a student with average income
and baseline test score (both equal to zero). The coefficient on the main effect (the school
test score) was treated as a random parameter, allowing for additional variation in
preferences for school scores (beyond that explained by income and baseline test score).
          These estimates yield a number of interesting findings. For an average student, the
mean preference for school scores is larger for non-white students within lunch-subsidy
status, but students not eligible for lunch subsidies value school scores much more than
their lunch-eligible peers. The difference between those who were receiving lunch
subsidies and those who were not is consistent with the coefficient on the interaction with
neighborhood income. Higher neighborhood income was strongly associated with higher
mean preference for school scores, with a similar effect for both whites and non-whites.
The difference in the mean preference between students receiving lunch subsidies and
students not receiving lunch subsidies (about 1.0 within each race group) is roughly what
would be predicted by a $70 thousand dollar income difference (based on the coefficient
from the income interaction), which is roughly the right order of magnitude for the
income difference between these groups.




10
  In initial specifications using a conditional logit, income interactions with the preference for school scores were
insignificant for the lunch-recipient segments.


                                                           18
       The mean preference for school scores is also increasing in the student’s baseline
test score. The coefficient on the interaction between the standardized value of one’s own
test score and the school mean test score is positive. The coefficient varies somewhat
across groups (with white free-lunch students having the smallest coefficient), but there is
no obvious pattern by race or free-lunch status. The effect of a student’s baseline score on
the preference for school test scores is similar in magnitude to the effect of income: A
one standard deviation increase in the baseline test score is associated with a 0.29-0.46
increase in the mean preference for school test scores, while a one standard deviation
increase in neighborhood income (about $27,000) is associated with a 0.37-0.39 increase
in the mean preference for school test scores.
       While the mean preferences for school test scores appear to be somewhat stronger
for non-whites the heterogeneity in preferences within racial groups is considerable.
Differences in baseline test scores and income each generate a standard deviation in
preferences of roughly 0.3-0.4 based on the calculations from the previous paragraph. In
addition, the variance on the coefficient for the main effect of school test scores is also
estimated to vary with a standard deviation ranging from 0.3 to 0.7. Taken together, the
total variation in preferences for school test scores across individuals is substantial.


Covariance in Preference Trade-offs Between Proximity and School Scores
       For a student with average preferences, the preference for proximity is very large
relative to the preference for school test scores. For example, an average student with
average preferences who was not receiving lunch subsidies would choose their home
school over a school three miles further away in which average test scores were 1-2
standard deviations higher, ceteris paribus. For the average student receiving lunch
subsidies, the difference in school test scores would have to be even larger to induce them
to switch. However, there is a large variance in preferences for school test scores, and the
idiosyncratic preference for school test scores is negatively correlated with the preference
for the home school across all of the four demographic groups, with particularly strong
correlations amongst African-Americans who do not receive lunch subsidies. This
implies that, while many students are very inelastic with respect to school test scores,
there is a significant density of students who highly value school scores and have low



                                              19
preferences for their neighborhood school. These students are willing to consider schools
outside of their neighborhood, and they place a high weight on average test scores when
picking a school.
        Taken together, these estimates for the distribution of preferences for distance,
home school, and school mean test score imply that there tend to be two types of parents:
i) those who highly value proximity through their neighborhood school and are not likely
to choose another school without substantial improvements to average school scores, and
ii) those who place little value on proximity through their neighborhood school and place
a large value on school scores. The first type of parent is highly inelastic to school quality
as approximated by average test scores. Student of this type of parent will be served by
their local school, and will stay with that local school even in the face of potentially large
losses to relative school quality. The second type of parent is very elastic with respect to
school quality - willing to travel over a relatively broad geography for a modest gain in
school scores.11 These underlying characteristics of the preference distribution have
important implications for demand-side pressure for competition on school quality which
we will discuss further in Section VIII.


Racial Composition
        While student preferences for school racial composition are not the focus of this
paper, we must account for racial composition since it is correlated with average test
scores of the school. To capture the racial composition of a school, we included the
percent black in the school and its square. When the quadratic term has a negative
coefficient (which was always the case), this specification can be interpreted in terms of
an implied bliss point (where the quadratic peaks) for preferences over racial mix of a
school, and a quadratic loss function for differences from this bliss point. In Table IV,
we report the estimates for the linear and quadratic terms, along with the implied bliss
point. We allowed for a random coefficient on the linear term but not the squared term,
which is equivalent to allowing for unobserved heterogeneity in the bliss point but not the


11
  Interestingly, casual interviews of parents in CMS revealed this same pattern. Parents either seemed to
choose their neighborhood school with out much knowledge of other schools in the district, or parents
seemed to know a lot about academic outcomes for many schools in the district, and based on that, tended
to select a preferred school that was typically not their neighborhood school.


                                                    20
quadratic loss around that bliss point. Other specifications, such as dummies for ranges of
percent black or a spline in percent black, yielded similar results.
        Not surprisingly, there were large differences between the races in their valuation
of a school’s racial composition (and little difference by lunch-subsidy status). The mean
bliss point for whites was around 30% black, while the mean bliss point for non-whites
was around 80% black. Thus, the average preferred school for each racial group was one
in which 70%-80% of the school was their own race. The quadratic term was negative for
all demographic groups, but was larger for whites than non-whites, and larger for free-
lunch ineligible than for eligible. These results are quite consistent with an earlier
literature highlighting racial differences in stated preferences regarding the racial
composition of neighborhoods. In that literature (surveyed in Armor (1995)), whites
preferred neighborhoods that were 10 to 30 percent black and blacks preferred
neighborhoods that were roughly 50 percent black.
        The focus of this current paper is on preferences for school quality rather than
preferences for racial composition. Given the history of bussing for integration in CMS,
and the higher-than average private school attendance of whites in the district, it is not
clear that these racial preference estimates generalize outside of settings similar to this
one.12 However, because school test score is negatively correlated with the percent black
in the school (with a correlation coefficient of approximately -.67), failing to deal with
explicit racial preferences would lead us to understate black student valuation of school
scores since they prefer schools with above-average black enrollment. Failing to account
for school racial composition would have led to the false conclusion that whites care
much more about school scores than black students.


VII. Robustness Checks


        There are a number of reasons that the estimates in Table IV may not accurately
represent student preferences. In this section we present a series of robustness checks that
address three particularly important concerns that could lead our estimates to understate


12
 Approximately 12-15% of students attend private schools in CMS compared with 8-9% in the state of
North Carolina, and 9-10% in the U.S as a whole.


                                                 21
the strength of preferences for academic quality at a school. These specification checks
do not find evidence that the preference estimates in Table IV are biased by any of these
three important concerns.


Alternative Measures of Academic Quality
       In Table IV, we used average base-year (2002) test scores among students
attending the school in 2003 as a measure of academic performance that influences
parents’ choices. However, if this is a crude or incorrect proxy for the information
available to parents, then our estimates may understate the extent to which parents care
about academic performance in choosing a school. Table V presents mixed logit results
for our original measure plus three alternative measures of school academic performance.
To preserve space, we only report the coefficients on the measure of school academic
performance (and its interactions with income and student baseline score), along with the
log likelihood for each model as an indicator of overall fit. The first panel replicates our
baseline specification. This specification assumes that parents correctly forecasted which
students would choose each school, and used these students’ scores from the prior year as
an indicator of how good the school would be in terms of academics. The second panel
uses the average score in 2003 of the students in the school in 2003. This measure implies
that parents correctly foresaw student sorting and outcomes and made their choices based
on that. The third panel uses the 2002 average scores for students in each school in 2002.
This measure implies that parents used historical student assignment and outcomes as the
best indicator of future school performance. The final panel uses a “value-added”
measure of each school’s impact on academic achievement in the prior year. We
estimated each school’s “value-added” by regressing a student’s test score performance
in 2003 on math and reading performance in the prior year, demographic characteristics,
grade fixed effects, and fixed effects for each school. The fixed effect estimated for each
school represents our estimate of a school’s average impact on student performance.
       The results in Table V show that the preference estimates across the three
measures of average test scores are quite similar. The specification in panel 1, using our
base specification, has the highest likelihood value, and in this sense fits the choice data
best. The value-added measure in Panel 4 does not fit the observed choice data well at all.



                                             22
This may not be surprising since this statistic is not available to parents and is not easy to
calculate given the available average score statistics. Cullen, Jacob, and Levitt (2006)
report that high-demand schools in Chicago’s high school choice program tend to be
schools with high average test scores, not high value-added. Note that our specifications
using test score levels do allow parents to make a crude race-adjusted ‘value-added’
calculation when choosing a school (since these specifications separately control for
racial makeup of the school).
        Overall, the results from Table V suggest that our preference estimates are not
particularly sensitive to the use of reasonable alternative measures of school academic
performance. Because our baseline specification provides the best fit of the data, we will
rely on this specification for the final simulations.


Strategy
        As noted above, parents may have had an incentive to misrepresent their true
preferences. If they understood the allocation mechanism, a parent with an undesirable
home school might want to hedge against being assigned to the home school. They would
do so by picking less desirable schools than they actually prefer – trading off desirability
for increased chance of being admitted. This strategy could make it appear that low-
income families (with lower-performing home schools) under-value academics even
though they do not. They pick lower performing schools in order to increase their chance
of admission, not because they place a lower weight on academics. However, it is not at
all clear that parents had the information or experience in the first year of choice to
understand how to exploit the incentives of the allocation mechanism. Parents did not
know their lottery numbers or the assignment mechanism. In addition, parents were
instructed by the district to list the schools they wanted on their choice form.13
        We test for the presence of strategic behavior in the first year of choice by
exploiting the redrawing of school boundaries. Many of those who lived in the same
contiguous school assignment zone in 2001-02, were given different school assignments

13
  This stands in contrast with other long-standing and limited choice programs, such as the Boston Public
School choice program which told parents to consider carefully what schools they chose to list
(Abdulkadiroglu et. al (2006)). Abdulkadiroglu et. al (2006) also show that many parents appear to behave
non-strategically in Boston Public Schools limited and long-standing school choice program, and that these
parents would benefit most from strategizing on their first choice by picking a less popular school first.


                                                   23
in 2002-03. Hence, among those with the same school assignments who lived in the same
neighborhood in 2001-02, some students experienced positive or negative shocks to the
quality of their guaranteed school. Table VI shows the average difference for students
who had positive versus negative shocks to their home school quality given that they
lived in a 2001-2002 contiguous assignment zone that was split into new assignment
zones. The table shows that the difference in scores was large and significant for many of
the students affected by redistricting. If strategy was a major component of parental
choices, we would expect to see very different choices for those with negative versus
positive shocks to the quality of their home school, given a contiguous 2001-2002 school
assignment zone. In particular, we should see significantly lower weight placed on
average test scores for students who had a negative shock to the average quality of their
home school.
         Table VII presents a simple conditional logit specification using the first choices
for the sub-sample of students who lived in 2001-2002 assignment zones that were split
by redistricting. The results are estimated on the sample of those students who had a
positive shock and those that had a negative shock to their home school quality. Standard
errors are clustered at the prior-year’s school assignment zone. The results show that
there is no significant difference in the school-score preference estimates for redistricting
losers versus winners.14 In addition, the point estimates do not follow the expected
pattern if strategy was a key component in choosing schools. Preferences for test scores
are higher (in bold) as often as they are lower for the redistricting losers.
         Overall, we do not see evidence that parents with poorer home school
assignments hedged their bets. It is possible that such strategic behavior may develop
over time as parents became more familiar with the system.15 Our evidence, suggests that



14
   We also tested for differences in preferences using a reduced form regression of the average test score of
the chosen school on the average test score at the home school, controlling for 2001-2002 school
assignment fixed effects and student demographic information. This compares the average scores of 1st
choice schools within 2001-2002 assignment zones across students with positive and negative shocks to
home school quality. We find no significant difference in the average scores of schools chosen across
redistricting winners and losers.
15
   Evidence from laboratory experiments using simple extensive-form games between small numbers of
players indicates that it takes time for players to learn how to play the game. In games with incomplete
information on other’s pay-offs, learning and convergence to the perfect equilibrium is slower and
sometimes does not occur (Roth and Erev (1995)).


                                                     24
there is little evidence of hedging behavior in the first year of choice when parents most
likely did not understand the allocation mechanism.


Residential Sorting
        The exogenous redistricting of nearly half of the students in the district is also
useful for testing the extent to which residential sorting affects our preference estimates.
Residential sorting may lead us to overstate preferences for proximity if parents had
already sorted to live next to the schools they prefer. What we interpret as a strong
preference for proximity influencing school choice may actually be the opposite – strong
preference for a school influencing proximity. Both redistricting and the multiple choices
in our data will help identify preferences for proximity from preferences for other school
characteristics.
        To test for the potential effects of residential sorting on our estimates, we re-
estimate our model for the sub-sample of students who were redistricted (whose school
assignments under the bussing plan in 2001-2002 were different from their home school
in 2002-2003). 16 Table VIII provides summary statistics comparing the redistricted
sample to the sample of students who were not redistricted. Because of the nature of the
prior system of bussing, students who were redistricted were much more likely to be non-
white and eligible for lunch subsidies. (The busing plan often assigned students living in
neighborhoods with large concentrations of minority students to attend school in
neighborhoods with lower concentrations.) But within the four demographic groups, the
redistricted students looked similar to those who were not redistricted in terms of baseline
test scores and median income. More interestingly, the redistricted students were much
less likely to choose their home school or their last year’s school, and much more likely
to list three choices. These facts are not necessarily evidence that redistricted students
have less preference for their home school: Students who were not redistricted were more
likely to have their home school be their last year’s school, making it very likely that they
would choose that school. In contrast, redistricted children faced a less clear choice since
their last year’s school was no longer their home school.

16
  These students include both students who’s 2001-2002 school assignment zone was split into two new
home school zones as well as those who’s entire 2001-2002 school assignment zone was reassigned to a
new home school.


                                                  25
        Table IX reports results from the mixed logit model estimated on the sample of
students who were redistricted. The most striking feature of these estimates is their
similarity to estimates from the full sample. Estimates of the mean and standard deviation
of all the preference parameters are qualitatively and quantitatively similar. The mean of
the parameter for home school is actually higher for all demographic groups in the
redistricted sample, while the means for the distance and choice zone parameters are
about equally likely to increase as decrease in the redistricted sample.
        Overall, these estimates suggest that endogenous residential location is not a
major source of bias in this data. In addition, the similarity of the results is not too
surprising if we believe our model is using the information in multiple choices to identify
preferences. Recall from Table I that a substantial fraction of parents who listed their
home school as their first choice also listed subsequent choices. For these parents,
multiple choices simulate redistricting whether or not they were actually redistricted.


Other Robustness Checks
        A range of alternative specifications yielded similar quantitative and qualitative
results. We have pooled elementary and middle school students for simplicity, but
estimating the model separately for elementary and middle schools yielded similar
parameter estimates. As already mentioned, we experimented with alternative
specifications for the racial composition of the school, including dummy variables and
splines in percent black. The spline estimates were very consistent with the more
parsimonious quadratic specification.
        We also specified distance to each school in terms of driving time (based on
expected speed on each class of road) rather than driving distance, yielding nearly
identical results. In addition, estimations using splines in distance indicated that the linear
functional form used in our model was appropriate. We experimented with a range of
alternative proxies for academic quality of a school. Using closely related measures such
as the average percentile score resulted in nearly identical estimates. Allowing for non-
linearities in the effect of school scores, through a quadratic or spline term, did not
change the qualitative implications of the parameter estimates. However these models fit
the data poorly in the tails of the distribution, and for this mechanical reason they



                                              26
generated implausible results when used in simulations. In addition, estimates using
splines in school test scores indicated that the linear model fit the data well for most
segments of the population. Including separate terms for the school average test scores of
whites and non-whites separately resulted in all students, both white and non-white,
placing similar weights on the two scores, with both racial groups placing a larger weight
on white test score performance. Again, the implications of the results were unchanged
across these specifications. Finally, including a separate dummy variable for schools that
were academic magnets (e.g. International Baccalaureate, Math and Science magnets)
reduced the mean coefficient on school test scores about in half. This result highlights
that average test scores are a proxy for the academic focus of a school, and not
necessarily the sole causal factor driving demand.
       Finally, when we estimated a general mixed-logit model with full covariance
terms for the parameters, we found that some covariance terms became unstable in some
specifications. For example, when we included a covariance between racial preferences
and preferences for other characteristics could often be unstable, yielding corner solutions
in some circumstances. However, the means and standard deviations of the preference
parameters were largely unchanged, and the implications of the estimates in the demand
simulations were very similar. This suggests that some of the covariance terms are poorly
identified, but that these terms are not of first order importance to simulations of demand.


VIII. Simulations


       In the discussion of the results above, we focused primarily on the mean weight
attached to various school attributes. However, the aggregate response to any policy
change will depend not only on the mean parameter estimate, but also on the variance or
distribution of that parameter in the population. As noted in the introduction, a key issue
in the policy debate over school choice is the elasticity of demand with respect to school
test scores. In order to shed some light on this question, we took each school individually,
added .33 average student-level standard deviations to its mean school score holding all
else equal, and simulated the change in the number of students listing that school as a




                                             27
first choice.17 The simulated change in demand was a local approximation (based on the
derivative of demand), so these simulations should be interpreted as the impact of a small
change in school test scores.
         Figures 2a and 2b plot the change in number of students listing a school as a first
choice by the school’s original average score (each point in the figure is the result of a
simulation for a different school: 2a plots elementary schools, 2b middle schools).
Because of the difference in size, we plot the results separately for elementary and middle
schools. The demand response is quite different for schools that were originally high and
low-scoring. The upward sloping relationship implies that the demand response is
greatest among schools that were already high scoring. This result reflects the parameter
estimates in the mixed logit model. Parents with high preferences for school scores, and
thus low preferences for their neighborhood school, are sensitive to changes in school
scores and willing to consider schools over a relatively broad geography. These parents
are both likely to only consider high scoring schools for their children and willing to
change schools in response to an increase in score at another high scoring school, even
one that is located further away. These results imply that the incentives to focus on
student performance are larger for higher performing schools, since schools above a
critical performance level compete intensely on academic quality for the quality-elastic
segment of the population.
         Figures 3 and 4 plot differences in mean characteristics between the marginal
students (those who are drawn in by the .33 average student-level standard deviation
score increase) and students who previously enrolled in each school. The incentive for
any school to improve its performance would be dampened if, in doing so, they were
swamped by lower-performing and or lower-income students, who would bring down
mean performance and potentially be more costly to educate. Figure 3 compares marginal
and average students in the percentage receiving lunch subsidies; Figure 4 compares
mean test scores for the marginal and average student. The points below the 45° degree
line in the Figure 3 indicate schools where a lower proportion of the marginal students
received lunch subsidies than the average student. It is evident in graph that the marginal


17
   This is approximately equivalent to a 10 point increase in the average percentile score for students
attending that school.


                                                     28
students had lower rates of lunch subsidy receipt than the students already enrolled. In
other words, the marginal students were more affluent than the students already enrolled
in most schools. Figure 4 reports differences in mean test score between the marginal
student and the average student previously enrolled in the school. The fact that most
points were above the 45° line implies that the marginal students, on average, were higher
performing than the students already enrolled.
       The key features of the simulations reported in Figures 2-4 appear to be driven
primarily by the estimated heterogeneity in preferences, rather than other details of the
specification. In all the alternative specifications we have estimated that allowed for
heterogeneity in preferences, we found that an increase in school test scores had a much
larger effect on demand in high scoring schools, and attracted higher-performing and
higher-income students to the school (particularly at low scoring schools). Eliminating
unobserved heterogeneity in preferences (estimating a conditional logit) reduces the
simulated difference in demand response to higher performing schools by roughly 15%.
Eliminating preference heterogeneity through observable characteristics (income, race,
lunch-subsidy status and baseline test scores) further decreases the difference in demand
response across high and low performing schools, leading to a low demand response
across all schools. Thus, heterogeneity in preferences appears to be a key element in
understanding the properties of parental demand for schools and their implications for
student sorting and demand-side pressures for school quality in a public school choice
program.
       The implications of these simulations are very interesting for school choice policy
design. On one hand, they suggest that the absolute enrollment responses to
improvements in performance are small at schools that start out low-performing. The
enrollment responses are much larger at schools that start out higher performing -
suggesting that demand-side forces may lean toward greater vertical separation on test
scores. In the long run, the new equilibrium will depend on the incentives provided to
school managers and steps districts can take to influence demand for school quality
particularly among low-income households. If a greater percentage of resources are
directed towards high demand and high performance schools, top tier schools will have
strong incentives to improve student performance, while lower-tier schools may not.


                                             29
However, district policies that commit to close schools or replace principals in schools
with shrinking enrollments coupled with financial incentives for performance may
minimize the degree of vertical separation. For example, North Carolina has provided
bonuses to teachers in schools with test score improvements and, with the No Child Left
Behind Act of 2001, the federal government has required states to penalize schools with
poor test performance. Moreover, the district has replaced principles at schools with low
enrollments and moved to close and reorganize schools at the lowest end of performance
(and enrollment). In addition, marketing and outreach efforts that increase the choice
responsiveness of low-income and minority families to academic achievement may
increase the pressure on all schools to provide quality education under public school
choice, abating the tendency towards increased stratification of schools.


VII.   Conclusion


       This paper used a school choice policy experiment and detailed student-level data
to examine parental preferences for key school characteristics. We employed a mixed
logit demand estimation approach which allowed parents’ preferences to vary with
observable characteristics as well as idiosyncratically. We show that preferences for
measures of academic achievement are increasing in income and baseline academic
ability. In addition, parents who have a low idiosyncratic preference for their
neighborhood school have a higher idiosyncratic preference for school test scores.
       The distribution of preferences has important implications for school choice.
Simulations based on our preference estimates indicate disparate demand-side pressure
for schools to improve academic performance. High performing schools serve families
who value academics, and receive a large demand response to increases in average test
scores. Consumers of low-performing schools are local families who are less responsive
to changes in school academic performance. These ‘local monopolist’ schools face little
demand-side pressure to improve and serve, on average, families with lower income and
lower baseline academic achievement.
       By using unique data and a large school-choice policy experiment, we were able
to take a demand-estimation approach to understanding competition in a school choice



                                            30
program. This approach has several benefits. First, it contrasts with prior approaches
which use HHI’s to measure competition in the market for schools and predict the effects
on achievement of increased parental choice. In a differentiated products market,
preferences play a key role in determining demand and competition. By estimating
preferences we can examine models of consumer choice implicitly excluded by models
relying on HHI’s and similar measures of market concentration. Secondly, understanding
preferences can elucidate policy measures that may increase competition in a school
choice program. For example, school districts may design information systems, school
choice guides, or counseling resources to increase the value that low-income families
place on academic performance. Districts may also use demand-response as a basis for
school closure and reorganization decisions, adding powerful supply-side pressure to
school administrators. Preference estimates can also be used to examine placement of
new schools for maximal impact on competitive pressure. Furthermore, preferences may
assist in theoretical simulations of expanded choice plans and alternative assignment
mechanisms. Finally, the gains to students from exercising choice are likely to depend on
parents’ objectives when choosing schools, and heterogeneity in preferences may explain
disparate impacts of school choice on student academic achievement (Hastings, Kane,
and Staiger, 2006). Thus, preferences drive parental (consumer) choice, and their
distribution in the population affects competition, sorting, and gains to academic
achievement in school choice programs.




                                            31
References:

Abdulkadiroglu, Atila and Tayfun Sonmez “School Choice: A Mechanism Design
      Approach”, American Economic Review, 93(3):729-747, June 2003.

Abdulkadiroglu, Atila, Parag A. Pathak, Alvin E. Roth, and Tayfun Sonmez “Changing
      the Boston School Choice Mechanism: Strategy-proofness as Equal Access,”
      working paper, Harvard University, May 2006.

Anderson, Simon P., André de Palma, and Jacques-François Thisse, Discrete Choice
      Theory of Product Differentiation, The MIT Press: Cambridge, Massachusetts,
      1992.

Armor, David J. Forced Justice: School Desegregation and the Law (Oxford: Oxford
      University Press, 1995).

Armor, David J. and Peiser, B.M. “Interdistrict Choice in Massachusetts” in Paul
      Peterson and Bryan Hassel (eds.) Learning from School Choice. (Washington,
      DC: Brookings Institution Press, 1998).

Bayer, Patrick, Fernando Ferreira and Robert McMillan, “Tiebout Sorting, Social
       Multipliers and the Demand for School Quality,” NBER Working Paper No.
       10871 (2004).

Belfield, Clive and Henry Levin, “The Effects of Competition on Educational Outcomes:
        A Review of US Evidence,” Working Paper (2002), National Center for the Study
        of Privatization in Education.

Berry, Steven, J. Levinsohn and A. Pakes (2004), “Differentiated Products Demand
       Systems from a Combination of Micro and Macro Data: The New Vehicle
       Market,” Journal of Political Economy, 112(1), 68–104.

Berry, Steven, J. Levinsohn and A. Pakes (1995), “Automobile Prices in Market
       Equilibrium,” Econometrica, 60(4), 889–917.

Borland, M.V. and R.M. Howson, “Students’ Academic Achievement and the Degree of
       Market Concentration in Education,” Economics of Education Review,
       Vol(11):31-39, 1992.

Cullen, Julie Berry, Brian A. Jacob and Steven Levitt (2006), “The Effect of School
       Choice on Student Outcomes: Evidence from Randomized Lotteries”
       forthcoming, Econometrica.

Dagsvik, John, “Discrete and Continuous Choice, Max-Stable Processes, and
      Independence from Irrelevant Attributes,” Econometrica, 62(5):1179-1205,
      September 1994.


                                           32
Dahl, Gordon, “Mobility and the Return to Education: Testing a Roy Model with
       Multiple Markets,” Econometrica, 70(6):2367-2420, November 2002.

Dubin, J. and D. McFadden, “An Econometric Analysis of Residential Electric Appliance
       Holdings and Consumption,” Econometrica, 52:345-362, 1984.

Epple, Dennis and Richard Romano (1998), “Competition Between Private and Public
       Schools, Vouchers, and Peer-Group Effects.” American Economic Review,
       Vol(88) no.1: pp.33-62.

Epple, Dennis and Richard Romano (2002), “Educational Vouchers and Cream
       Skimming,” NBER Working Paper No. W9354.

Farrell, Joseph and Carl Shapiro, “Horizontal Mergers: An Equilibrium Analysis,”
        American Economic Review, Vol.(80) no.1.: pp.107-126, 1990.

Glazerman, Steven, “Determinants and Consequences of Parental School Choice”
      Unpublished working paper, University of Chicago, Harris School of Public
      Policy, (December 21, 1997).

Glazerman, Steven and Robert H. Meyer, “Public School Choice in Minneapolis,” in
      T.A. Downes and W.A. Testa, eds., Midwest Approaches to School Reform.
      Proceedings of a conference held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 1994,
      pp.110-126.

Hanushek, Eric and Steven Rivkin, “Does Public School Competition Affect Teacher
      Quality?” in Caroline Minter Hoxby (ed.), The Economics of School Choice
      (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003), pp. 23-47.

Hastings, Justine S. Thomas Kane and Douglas Staiger (2006), “Preferences and
       Heterogeneous Treatment Effects in a Public School Choice Lottery,” NBER
       Working Paper No. 12145.

Hausman, J., and D. Wise (1978): "A Conditional Probit Model for Qualitative Choice:
     Discrete Decisions Recognizing Interdependence and Heterogeneous
     Preferences," Econometrica, 46, 403-426.

Hoxby, Caroline M. “Does Competition among Public Schools Benefit Students and
      Taxpayers?” American Economic Review (2000) Vol. 90, No. 5, pp. 1209-1238.

Hoxby, Caroline M. “Do Private Schools Competition for Public Schools?” NBER
      Working Paper No. 4978, 1994.




                                          33
Kagel, John H. and Alvin Roth, “the Dynamics of Reogranization in Matching Markets:
       A Laboratory Experiment Motivated by a Natural Experiment,” Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, February (2000), pp. 201-235.

Karp, Jeffrey A. and David Brockington, “Social Desirability and Response Valitdity: A
       Comparative Analysis of Over-reporting Voter Turnout in Five Countries,”
       Journal of Politics, Vol. 67 no.3, pp. 825-840.

Kleitz, B., G.R. Weiher, K. Tedin, and R. Matland “Choices, Charter Schools and
        Household Preferences” Social Science Quarterly (1998) Vol. 81, No. 3, pp. 846-
        854.

Manski, Charles F. and David A. Wise College Choice in America (Cambridge, MA:
      Harvard University Press, 1983).

McFadden, D. and K. Train (2000). “Mixed Multinomial Logit Models for Discrete
     Response.” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 15(5): 447-470.

Neal, Derek “How Vouchers Could Change the Market for Education,” Journal of
     Economic Perspectives, Vol (16) no. 4, pp.25-44, Fall (2002).

Nechyba, Thomas (1999), “School Finance Induced Migration Patterns: The Impact of
    Private School Vouchers.” Journal of Public Economic Theory. Vol(1):1, pp.5-50.

Nechyba, Thomas (2000), “Mobility, Targeting and Private School Voucher,” American
    Economic Review. Vol (90) no.1, pp.130-146.

Nechyba, Thomas (2003), "School Finance, Spatial Income Segregation and the Nature
    of Communities," Journal of Urban Economics 54(1), 61-88.

Roth, Alvin E. and I Erev, “Learning in Extensive Form Games: Experimental Data and
     Simple Dynamic Models in the Intermediate Term,” Games and Economic
     Behavior, Special Issue: Nobel Symposium, Vol. 8, January (1995), pp.164-212.

Schneider, M., M. Marschall, P. Teske and C. Roch “School Choice and Culture Wars in
       the Classroom: What Different Parents Seek from Education” Social Science
       Quarterly (1998) Vol 79, No. 3, pp. 489-501.

Train, Kenneth E. Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation. Cambridge University
       Press (2003).

Vanourek, G., B.V. Manno, and C.E. Finn, “Charter Schools as Seen by Students,
      Teachers and Parents” in Paul Peterson and Bryan Hassel (eds.) Learning from
      School Choice. (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 1998).




                                          34
Table I: Summary Statistics of Students and Choices
                                         Not Receiving        Receiving Lunch
                                        Lunch Subsidies          Subsidies
                                       White    Black        White     Black
Student Characteristics
 Average Test score                     0.6384     -0.0905    -0.0851    -0.6128
   (St. Dev.)                          (0.8249)   (0.8395)   (0.8480)   (0.7996)
 Neighborhood Income                    73,812     50,635     52,734     36,459
   (St. Dev.)                          (25,866)   (21,506)   (22,329)   (16,241)

Choice Characteristics
 Percent Listed 1st Choice Only         0.5123    0.2768     0.3311     0.2065
 Percent Listed 2 Choices               0.1985    0.1778     0.2057     0.1664
 Percent Listed 3 Choices               0.2892    0.5454     0.4631     0.6271
 Percent Chose Home School 1st          0.6443    0.4251      0.514     0.3827

Student-Choice Characteristics
   Home School Average Test Score       0.2131     -0.1864    -0.1711    -0.3919
   (St. Dev.)                          (0.4035)   (0.3613)   (0.3739)   (0.3247)
   Distance to Nearest School in the
                                        2.5664    2.6616     2.4523     2.1272
    Top Quartile
   (St. Dev.)                          (1.6134)   (1.4828)   (1.4359)   (1.2000)




                                       35
 Figure 1a: Thematic Map of Charlotte Mecklenburg County with Census Block
 Groups by Race and School Location by Average Test Score




Figure 1b: Close View of Block Groups and School Choices by Average Test Score




                                      36
Table II: Explanatory Variable Definitions
Variable         Description

Distance          Driving distance from student i to school j calculated using
                  MapInfo with Census Tiger Line files.

School Score      Average of the 2001-2002 student-level standardized scale score
                  for End of Grade Math and Reading exams for students in school
                  j in the 2002-2003 school year. This is the average test score
                  variable described below across all students in school j.

Test Score        The sum of student i's scale score on End of Grade math and
                  reading exams in baseline year 2001-2002 standardized by the
                  mean and standard deviation of district-wide scores for students
                  in his or her grade.

Income            The median household income reported in the 2000 Census for
                  households of student i's race in student i's block group. Income
                  is demeaned by the county-wide average of approximately
                  $51,000 and is reported in thousands of dollars.

Percent Black     The percent of students in school j who are black according to
                  2002-2003 school year administrative data.




Table III: Explanatory Variable Summary Statistics
Summary Statistics Using First Choice Data
Variable                   Obs.       Mean        Std. Dev.   Min          Max
Distance                    2342254    13.0151      6.7548        0.0010     42.4069
Last-year School            2342254      0.0149     0.1213        0.0000       1.0000
School Score                2342254     -0.1120     0.4531       -0.9427       1.9410
Test score                  2342254      0.0559     0.9885       -2.9113       3.0255
Test score*School-Score     2342254     -0.0035     0.4633       -2.7013       5.8724
Income                      2342254      5.0913    27.5661      -48.5010    149.0010
Income*School-Score         2342254     -0.5635    13.0757     -140.4703    251.7595
Percent Black               2342254      0.5279     0.2515        0.0584       0.9801




                                          37
Table IV: Estimates from Mixed Logit Model
                                                             Parameter Estimates*

                                               Not Receiving Lunch              Receiving Lunch
                                                    Subsidies                      Subsidies
Variable            Preference                  White       Black              White       Black
                    Parameter

Distance**          Mean (lognormal)              -0.3464      -0.2707         -0.3655     -0.2814
                    Std. Dev.
                    (lognormal)                   0.0623        0.0412          0.1007      0.0620
Last-year
School              Mean                           3.8770       3.5848          3.5790      2.9589
                    Std. Dev.                      2.5569       2.9919          3.4261      3.5589
Home School         Mean                           2.0558       1.7103          1.9302      1.7441
                    Std. Dev.                     -0.8081       0.0691         -0.7966     -1.2545
Choice Zone         Mean                           1.2648       1.3015          1.9021      1.5866
                    Std. Dev.                      0.8838       1.2214          1.4936      1.2084
School Score        Mean                           1.6627       2.3404          0.6504      1.2669
                    Std. Dev.                      0.2530       0.2810          0.6478      0.3474
Test score *
School Score        Mean                          0.4752        0.3981          0.2888      0.3438
                    Std. Dev.                     --             --              --         --
Income*School
Score               Mean                          0.0139        0.0139           --         --
                    Std. Dev.                     --             --              --         --
Percent Black       Mean                          3.7166        5.8296          2.3117      3.4708
                    Std. Dev.                     2.8234        1.8174          2.2885      1.1362
Percent Black
Squared             Mean                          -5.2588      -3.6604         -3.6392     -2.2540
                    Std. Dev.                      --            --              --         --

Implied Mean Preferred % Black                    0.3534        0.7963          0.3176      0.7699
                 Std. Dev.                        0.2684        0.2483          0.3144      0.2520

Estimated Correlation Coefficients:
  Corr(Distance, School Score)                     0.5808      -0.3273          0.4585     -0.6747
  Corr(Distance, Home School)                      0.1041       0.0006         -0.1935     -0.1061
  Corr(School Score, Home School)                 -0.1727      -0.9424         -0.8235     -0.3731

* All estimates are significant at the 1% level or higher
** Distribution of preference on distance follows a log normal distribution.




                                                38
Table V: Comparing Alternative Measures of School Academic Achievement
                                                                 Not Receiving Lunch            Receiving Lunch
                                                                 Subsidies                      Subsidies
                                Preference
                                Parameter White          Black        White                                    Black
Score Measure: Spring 2002 scores of student in school in Spring
2003
          - log likelihood                      41311.12 32954.29       9241.04                                 80209.13
         School Score           Mean              1.6627       2.3404     0.6504                                  1.2669
                                St. Dev.          0.2530       0.2810     0.6478                                  0.3474
         Test score * School
         Score                  Mean              0.4752       0.3981     0.2888                                    0.3438
                                St. Dev.      --           --         --                                       --
         Income* School Score Mean                0.0139       0.0139 --                                       --
                                St. Dev.      --           --         --                                       --
Score Measure: Spring 2003 scores of student in school in Spring
2003
          - log likelihood                      41458.57 33201.53       9246.13                                 80402.94
         School Score           Mean              1.3855       1.9640     0.5656                                  1.0616
                                St. Dev.          0.4259       0.2421     0.6985                                  0.3867
         Test score * School
         Score                  Mean              0.4852       0.4415     0.2763                                    0.3233
                                St. Dev.      --           --         --                                       --
         Income* School Score Mean                0.0136       0.0119 --                                       --
                                St. Dev.      --           --         --                                       --
Score Measure: Spring 2002 scores of student in school in Spring
2002
          - log likelihood                      41809.18 33758.23       9306.37                                 80777.08
         School Score           Mean              0.9107       1.0208     0.4068                                  0.4837
                                St. Dev.          0.5060       0.0914     0.6163                                  0.4471
         Test score * School
         Score                  Mean              0.4824       0.4586     0.2641                                    0.3057
                                St. Dev.      --           --         --                                       --
         Income* School Score Mean                0.0096       0.0085 --                                       --
                                St. Dev.      --           --         --                                       --
Value Added: Average regression adjusted gains in test scores from 2002-2003*
          - log likelihood                      42452.06 34120.71       9286.52                                 80858.73
         School Score           Mean             -1.0668      -0.5114    -0.7711                                 -0.7896
                                St. Dev.          1.4638       0.5670     0.9681                                  0.8189
         Test score * School
         Score                  Mean              1.5659       1.3402     0.2098                                    0.2062
                                St. Dev.      --           --         --                                       --
         Income* School Score Mean                0.0161      -0.0047 --                                       --
                                St. Dev.      --           --         --                                       --

*Value Added calculated as school fixed effects in a regression of 2003 standardized test scores on 2002 standardized
scores, controlling for student characteristics such as race, lunch recipient status and grade level. Empirical Bayes
measures of Value added were calculated and were correlated with Value-added 0.95.




                                                          39
Table VI: Differences in Scores Across Redistricted Polygons
Average Difference in 2002-2003 Home School Scores within a
Given 2001-2002 School Assignment Polygon
                                         Mean         Stdev
Not Receiving       White               0.2925       0.3165
Lunch Subsidies      Not white          0.2570       0.2552
Receiving Lunch     White               0.2891       0.2836
Subsidies            Not white          0.2866       0.3111



Table VII: Seemingly Unrelated Regression Conditional Logit Estimates of
Preferences for Academics Across Redistricting Winners and Losers
                                                  Lost with        Won with
                                                  Redistricting    Redistricting
White        Not Receiving Lunch Subsidies
                                  School Score            2.5224             2.2739
                                                        (0.4593)           (0.3498)
                                  Test score *
                                  School Score            0.1345             0.4714
                                                        (0.1210)           (0.1388)
                                  Income*
                                  School Score           -0.0022             0.0137
                                                        (0.0080)           (0.0115)
                                  Joint Test P-Value:                           0.23
Not-White    Not Receiving Lunch Subsidies
                                  School Score            2.6227             3.0614
                                                        (0.1449)           (0.1470)
                                  Test score *
                                  School Score            0.3625             0.4712
                                                        (0.1051)           (0.1009)
                                  Income*
                                  School Score            0.0144             0.0205
                                                        (0.0053)           (0.0045)
                                 Joint Test P-Value:                            0.15
White        Receiving Lunch Subsidies
                                 School Score             0.8037             1.4041
                                                        (0.3939)           (0.3720)
                                  Test score *
                                  School Score            0.7460             0.1472
                                                        (0.2027)           (0.2408)
                                 Joint Test P-Value:                            0.13
Not-White    Receiving Lunch Subsidies
                                 School Score             1.4594             1.3982
                                                        (0.1510)           (0.1993)
                                  Test score *
                                  School Score            0.4731             0.4189
                                                        (0.0858)           (0.0849)
                                  Joint Test P-Value:                           0.83




                                         40
Table VIII: Summary Statistics Comparing Redistricted and Non Redistricted Students
                          Overall                          No Lunch Subsidies                                       Lunch Subsidies
                                                   White                       Black                        White                      Black
                    No                      No                           No                        No                         No
                  Redist. Redistricted    Redist.     Redistricted     Redist.     Redistricted   Redist.     Redistricted   Redist.     Redistricted
%White,
                  0.5419        0.2892
Non-Lunch
%White, Lunch     0.0674        0.0461
%Non-White,
                  0.1569        0.1903
Non-Lunch
%Non-White,
                  0.2338        0.4744
Lunch
Median Income     61,311        48,267    73,325         71,564        52,132         48,523      41,770        33,647       41,770        33,647
Average
                  0.2215       -0.1870    0.6486         0.5747        -0.0344       -0.1540      -0.5144       -0.6720      -0.5144       -0.6720
Z-Score
Percent Chose
                  0.6921        0.3105    0.7693         0.4070        0.5913         0.2667      0.5687        0.2734       0.5687        0.2734
Home 1st
Percent Chose
Last Year         0.6609        0.4042    0.7196         0.4692        0.6141         0.4264      0.5557        0.3507       0.5557        0.3507
School
Percent Made 3
                  0.3872        0.5814    0.2551         0.3727        0.5100         0.6057      0.6025        0.7019       0.6025        0.7019
Choices
Score of New
                  0.0119       -0.2410    0.2065         0.1224        -0.1511       -0.2552      -0.2884       -0.4557      -0.2884       -0.4557
Home School
Score of Old
                  0.0119       -0.1675    0.2065        -0.0778        -0.1511       -0.2459      -0.2884       -0.1827      -0.2884       -0.1827
Home School
Average Score
Difference:       0.0000       -0.0733    0.0000         0.2025        0.0000        -0.0115      0.0000        -0.2713      0.0000        -0.2713
Old -New




                                                                       46
Table IX: Mixed Logit Estimates for Redistricted Sub-sample of Students
                                                             Parameter Estimates*

                                                   No Lunch                          Lunch
                                                   Subsidies                       Subsidies
Variable            Preference                  White      Black               White       Black
                    Parameter

Distance**          Mean (lognormal)              -0.3763      -0.2745         -0.3061     -0.2801
                    Std. Dev.
                    (lognormal)                   0.0661        0.0408          0.0395      0.0589
Last-year
School              Mean                          3.5422        3.4251          3.5870      3.0111
                    Std. Dev.                     2.3087        2.8449          2.8059      3.4437
Home School         Mean                          2.3071        1.8390          2.0496      1.8338
                    Std. Dev.                     0.8174        1.1331          1.5804      1.5533
Choice Zone         Mean                          1.1425        1.3133          1.7984      1.6011
                    Std. Dev.                     0.7629        1.0372          1.2424      0.9999
School Score        Mean                          1.5587        2.4388          0.3785      1.1470
                    Std. Dev.                     0.4442        0.5068          0.4040      0.6688
Test score *
School Score        Mean                          0.5371        0.4270          0.0928      0.3071
                    Std. Dev.                     --             --              --         --
Income*School
Score               Mean                          0.0196        0.0197           --         --
                    Std. Dev.                     --             --              --         --
Percent Black       Mean                          3.5729        5.5543          0.9015      2.3149
                    Std. Dev.                     2.8769        1.8569          1.8622      0.7953
Percent Black
Squared             Mean                          -5.2151      -3.4869         -2.5284     -1.4146
                    Std. Dev.                      --            --              --         --

Implied Mean Preferred % Black                    0.3426        0.7965          0.1783      0.8182
                 Std. Dev.                        0.2758        0.2663          0.3683      0.2811

Estimated Correlation Coefficients:
    Corr(Distance, School Score)                   0.3951      -0.3571          0.5111     -0.6070
    Corr(Distance, Home School)                    0.1344      -0.0063         -0.1847     -0.1083
    Corr(School Score, Home School)               -0.6297      -0.7740         -0.7727     -0.4230

* All estimates are significant at the 1% level or higher
** Distribution of preference on distance follows a log normal distribution.
Figure 2a: Elementary Schools: Simulated Change in Number of Students Choosing
School j when the Average Standardized Score at School j increase by 0.33 points.
                     80
                     60
  Change in Demand
                     40
                     20
                     0




                           -1   -.8   -.6   -.4     -.2    0      .2     .4   .6   .8   1
                                                  School Average Score



Figure 2b: Middle Schools: Simulated Change in Number of Students Choosing
School j when the Average Standardized Score at School j increase by 0.33 points
                     350
                     300
                     250
  Change in Demand
                     200
                     150
                     100
                     50
                     0




                           -1   -.8   -.6   -.4     -.2    0      .2     .4   .6   .8   1
                                                  School Average Score
Figure 3: Percent of the Additional Students who Choose School j in Response to a
0.33 point Increase in Standardized Percentile Score at School j who qualify for Free
Lunch.
                                      1
                                      .9
  Percent Lunch in Increased Demand
                                      .8
                                      .7
                                      .6
                                      .5
                                      .4
                                      .3
                                      .2
                                      .1
                                      0




                                            0    .1    .2    .3       .4     .5     .6       .7   .8   .9   1
                                                                   Percent Lunch in School

Figure 4: Average 2002 St.Dev Scale Score for the Additional Students who Choose
School j in Response to a 0.33 point Increase in Ave. Score at School j.
                                      1
                                      .8
  Ave. Score for Increased Demand
                                      .6
                                      .4
                                      .2
                                      0
                                      -.2
                                      -.4
                                      -.6
                                      -.8
                                      -1




                                            -1   -.8   -.6   -.4      -.2     0      .2      .4   .6   .8   1
                                                                   Average Score in School
APPENDIX TABLES:

Table A.I: Standard Errors for Parameter Estimates in Table IV
                                      No Lunch Subsidies       Lunch Subsidies
                                      White      Black         White       Black

Standard Errors on Mean Preferences
        Distance                      0.0002485    0.0000020   0.0000055   0.0000021
        Last-year School              0.0003436    0.0000015   0.0000059   0.0000291
        Home School                   0.0002006    0.0000394   0.0000194   0.0000280
        Choice Zone                   0.0006687    0.0000019   0.0000040   0.0000211
        School Score                  0.0012939    0.0000888   0.0000192   0.0000704
        Test score * School Score     0.0004424    0.0000018   0.0000190   0.0000543
        Income*School Score           0.0000521    0.0000003       --          --
        Percent Black                 0.0357668    0.0002074   0.0003098   0.0007694
        Percent Black Squared         0.0378734    0.0000378   0.0002692   0.0006274

Standard Errors on Standard Deviations
        Distance                     0.0000359     0.0000093   0.0000049   0.0000005
        Last-year School             0.0001151     0.0001092   0.0000413   0.0000178
        Home School                  0.0004402     0.0000702   0.0000112   0.0000530
        Choice Zone                  0.0023968     0.0000583   0.0000124   0.0000459
        School Score                 0.0008831     0.0000249   0.0000140   0.0000272
        Percent Black                0.0084486     0.0000289   0.0001043   0.0002395

Standard Errors on Correlation Coefficients
        Corr(Dist., Score)             0.0000613   0.0003647   0.0000121   0.0002664
        Corr(Dist., Home Schl.)        0.0000817   0.0001029   0.0000046   0.0000073
        Corr(Score, Home Schl.)        0.0051998   0.0000999   0.0000125   0.0001219
