                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              AN INVESTIGATION OF RISK AND RETURN
                  IN FORWARD FOREIGN EXCHANGE



                       Robert J. Hodrick


                       Sanjay Srivastava




                     Working Paper No. 1180




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                           August 1983




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #1180
                                                August 1983



                    An Investigation of Risk and Return
                       in Forward Foreign Exchange




                                 ABSTRACT

       This paper examines the determination of risk premiums in foreign

exchange markets. The statistical model is based on a theoretical model

of asset pricing, which leads to severe cross-equation constraints.

Statistical tests lead to a rejection of these constraints. We examine

the robustness of these tests to time variation in parameters and to the

presence of heteroskedasticity. We find that there is evidence for

heteroskedasticity and that the conditional expectation of the risk

premium is a nonlinear function of the forward premium. Accounting f or

this nonlinearity, the specification appears to be time invariant. Out

of sample portfolio specu1aton f.s profItable but risky.




Robert 3. Hodrick                             Sanjay Srivastava
Graduate School of Industrial                 Graduate School of Industrial
 Admirtis tration                               Administration
Carnegie-Mellon University                    Carnegie-Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213                          Pittsburgh, PA 15213

(412) 578-3583                                (412) 578—3703
    Since the advent of generally flexible exchange rates for the major

currencies of the world in 1973, there has been considerable interest

among policy makers, commercial firms, and research economists into

questions related to the efficiency of the forward foreign exchange

market.1     Policy makers and their advisors are concerned that the

volatility of spot exchange rates reflects an incorrect amount of

speculation in the forward market, and evidence on the predictive

ability of forward exchange rates in forecasting future spot exchange

rates is used in arguments for or against intervention by central banks
                           2
in the exchange markets.       Commercial firms are concerned with obtaining

accurate information on the price that they pay to hedge exchange risx

where the price of hedging is the deviation between the forward exchange

rate and the firm's expected future spot rate.         In response to this

demand, a large number of advisory services now sell forecasts of future

spot rates.3

    Academic and other research economist-s have contributed a

substantial literature on the question of the efficiency of the forward

market.    Early empirical studies by Frenkel (1971) and Levich (1979a)

were interpreted by the profession as providing considerable support for

the proposition that the forward rate was an unbiased predictor of the

future spot rate which was taken as an indication of the efficiency of

the market. Indeed, the unbiasedness hypothesis continues to command a

substantial following within the profession.         On the other hand, a

burgeoning empirical literature suggests that this hypothesis can be

rejected at all but the smallest of marginal levels of significance for

a variety of currencies and sample periods.       Of course, this does not
                                  2



imply that the market operates inefficiently. A recognized alternative

hypothesis is that a risk premium exists, although inefficiency

certainly is an alternative hypothesis.

    Within the profession there are now several well—defined positions

on these issues. Many of' those who continue to defend the unbiasedness

hypothesis take refuge in the fact that the empirical studies which

reject the hypothesis are often based on asymptotic distribution theory

and hence may be subject to small sample bias.    A particularly common

criticism is that the studies may be subject to the "peso problem."

Such a criticism is not totally unwarranted, although longer sample

periods and Monte Carlo studies may serve to resolve the issue.

Presumably, the prevalence of the assumption of uncovered interest rate

parity in most of the current theoretical models of international

macroeconomics must be predicated on such an assumption.

    A second position which provides another reason why the profession

continues to ignore the rejection of the unbiasedness hypothesis has

been articulated by Frankel (1982).       He argues that. most. of the

rejections of the unbiasedness hypothesis fail to provide evidence into

the nature of a risk premium separating the forward rate from the

expected future spot rate.        They merely demonstrate that some

information available to investors at the time the forward rate is set

is potentially useful in predicting the forward rate forecast error. In

Frankel's theory of the risk premium, which is the popular portfolio

balance model of macroeconomics, the outstanding quantities of nominal

government bonds are important fundamental determinants of the deviation

of the forward rate from the expected future spot rate. Since he was

unable to reject unbiasedness using the outstanding stocks of government
                                   3




bonds, Frankel (p. 263) concluded that "These results carry some weight

against those who argue that the case for a risk premium has been firmly

established."   Given this finding, many researchers using portfolio

balance models may feel justified in assuming that nominal government

assets denominated in different currencies are perfect substitutes which

is equivalent to the uncovered interest parity assumption, although the

model of the risk premium discussed in this paper is inconsistent with

such a proposition.

   The third distinct position within the profession on the efficiency

of the forward market has been articulated by Bilson (1981).     In his

investigation of the "speculative efficiency" hypothesis which is the

unbiasedness proposition, Bilson (p. 1449) found that information in the

forward premium could be used to develop a trading strategy which nas

the property that "the profit/risk ratio appears to be too large to be

accounted for in terms of risk aversity."

   A somewhat related position has been taken by Dooley and Shafer

(1982) who demonstrate the out—of—sample profitability of certain filter

rules without discussing the riskiness of the strategies.    The filter

rules borrow depreciating currencies and lend appreciating currencies.

After investigating various rules, Dooley and Shafer (p. 24) stated that

"many currencies either were not efficient in their use of price

information or real interest differentials were large and variable

during the sample period."

   The final position within the profession is occupied by those who

explicitly recognize the possibility that time—varying risk premia can

separate the forward rate from the expected future spot rate. The

theoretical models of Hodrick (1981) and Stulz (1981) demonstrated this
possibility, but these models did not lend themselves to easy empirical

implementation.   These theoretical models also demonstrate that the

expected real interest rate differential between nominal riskiess assets

denominated in two different currencies is exactly the same as the risk

premium separating forward rates from expected future spot rates.

    In order to construct statistical tests about the nature of the

divergence of forward exchange rates from expected future spot rates,

Hansen and Hodrick (1983) relied on the first order conditions of a

rational representative investor.       Since they placed auxiliary
assumptions on the endogenous variables, they were unable to claim that

their statistical tests were direct tests of an equilibrium model.

Nevertheless, since they were unable to reject one of their restricted

statistical models, they concluded (p. 33): "using a single beta latent

variable model to measure risk, we found risk premiums to be important

in at least two of the five currencies studied."

    The purpose of this paper is to reexamine the conclusions of Hansen

and Hodrick (1983) and to investigate further the potential role of risk

premiums in explaining the rejection of the unbiasedness hypothesis. In

Section II, we discuss the nature of the risk premium in a complete

dynamic general equilibrium model of interest rate and exchange rate

determination developed by Lucas (1982).         We show that the model

discussed by Hansen and Hodrick (1983) (henceforth abbreviated to HH) is

consistent with that of Lucas, and in Section III, we test the

restrictions of the HH model with nonoverlappirig monthly data that

includes twenty—one months of additional data.
                                      5



       In Section IV, we examine the unconstrained HH model for
heteroskedasticity, and test for the time—invariance of the
specification. In Section V, we examine the risk—return trade—off from

following the trading strategy proposed by Bilson (1981) for our data

set. Conclusions from our study are presented in Section VI.



II. The Lucas Model

       In this section we describe some implications of the model developed

in Lucas (1982) for the relationship between forward exchange rates and

expected future spot rates. The Lucas model is a complete, dynamic, two

country, general equilibrium model which provides some useful insights

into the possible nature of risk premiums in the forward foreign

exchange market. Given the highly stylized nature of the model and the

generality of its stochastic structure, direct empirical tests of the

model are impossible without additional restrictions. We do not pursue

that strategy here; rather, we use the implications of the Lucas model

to motivate a reexamination of the empirical analysis of Hansen and

Hodrick and the trading strategy of Bilson.

       In the Lucas model, the world consists of two countries whose agents

have identical preferences but different stochastic endowments of the

two consumption goods. In period t, citizens of country 0 are endowed

with      units of commodity x, and nothing of y, and citizens of country

1 are endowed with        units of commodity y, and nothing of x.      Each

agent of country i wishes to maximize




(1)         EttE Btu(xy)} 0 < B < 1
                                        6




where x and         are the representative agent's consumptions in country

i in period t of good x and y, respectively. The function U is assumed

to be bounded, continuously differentiable, increasing in both
arguments, and strictly concave, and 3 is a constant discount factor.

The current real state of the system is given by s =         tnt)    which is

assumed to be a realization of a known Markov process with transition

function F(s+1 ,s) where              represents next periods real state.   In

the equilibrium, agents pooi risk perfectly, and each representative

agent consumes half of the endowment of each country.             In such an

equilibrium, the relative price of y in terms of x, P(St) depends only

on the real state of the system and is given by the ratio of the

marginal utility of y to the marginal utility of x:




                          t'
(2)        p Cs )
               t      ,itlr
                      x'2   "t' 2
                                  I
       In the flexible exchange rate version of the model, agents are

required to purchase the endowment of a country only with the money of

that country. The timing of trade is such that all uncertainty about

the state of the economy is realized prior to trade in securities and

goods.    Given this, the finance constraint is binding for all agents,

and the nominal prices of goods x and y are simply




           p(st,Mt)       Mt/ct
and

                      =
(Li)
                          Nt/nt
                                      7




where M and N are "dollars" and "pounds," the monies of country 0 and

country 1, respectively.

      There is also nominal uncertainty in the world. In each period t

there is a lump sum dollar transfer, wotMti, to agents of country 0 and

a lump sum pound transfer, wiNti, to agents of country 1.                The

transition function for the two monies is also characterized by a known,

exogenous Markov process, K(wti,w,si,s), where w o,wi) is
the vector of stochastic growth rates for the two monies between periods

t—1 and t.

      Given the relative price of the two goods in (2) and the dollar and

pound prices of x and y in (3) and (J4),   the   equilibrium exchange rate is

given by the arbitrage equation:




(5)
                           P(t,Mt)           Mtrt
             e(s,M,Nt)
                         P(st,Nt)            Nt
      Asset pricing in this world is similar to the intertemporal asset

pricing models of Rubinstein (1975), Lucas (197d), Brock (1980), and

others.6 The equilibrium price of an asset is such that the marginal

utility foregone by purchasing the asset is equal to the conditional

expectation of the marginal utility of the return from holding the

asset.    The conditional expectation is taken with respect to the

distribution functions F and K in this case.

      Consider, for example, the derivation of the dollar price in period

t of a claim to one dollar with certainty in period ti-i.       Such a claim

is equivalent to h1'px(St+iiMt+i) =
                                      M(1+wotiY11          a      units of x

in period t+1 which is an uncertain amount that depends on the

purchasing power of the dollar,             The rr4 units of x will be
                                               8




valued by agents in period t+1 at the marginal utility of x,

which must be discounted back to period t by multiplication by the

discount factor B.       The x—unit price of the claim to one dollar is

therefore Et[8U(St+i)fl+iU(St)1] which is obtained by taking the

conditional expectation of the marginal value of the payoff on the asset

and dividing by the marginal utility of x in period t since the

opportunity cost of the investment is its x—unit price times the

marginal utility of x in period t.                 The dollar price of the investment

is then obtained by multiplication of the x—unit price by                          or

division by ir. Therefore, the period t dollar price of a discount bill

paying one dollar in period t+1 is



                                               M
                               BU(st+i
(6)
          b(swt) Et[                      M
                                                   L
                                U (
                                 x    5t 11t



Similarly, by replacing x with y in the above argument, the period t

pound price of a claim to one pound in the next period is found to be




                               U (s      )11N
           s ,w /    -
                     —
                           r    Y t+1 t+i
          y t t
                                 ytt
where U(s) is the marginal utility of y in period t and II is the

purchasing power of the pound in terms of y.

      The discount bill prices in (6) and (7) are conditional
expectations of the intertemporal marginal rates of substitution of

dollars and pounds, respectively.                  Since these random variables are
                                          9



central    to the discussion of risk in a monetary economy, we define them

as




                      U X( t+1 )Mt+1                  IJ (s         )Nt+1
                                       and        -    y      t+1
             t+1 -            M               t+1 -                   M
                                                        U(s)II
The intertemporal marginal rate of substitution of money is an index

that weights the change in the purchasing power of the money by the

intertemporal marginal rate of substitution of goods between the two

periods. Since the exchange rate is the relative price of two monies,

each of the rates of substitution is important in determining the risk

premium in the forward foreign exchange market.

       In order to determine the nature of the risk premium in the forward

foreign exchange market, we must derive the forward price of foreign

exchange, that is, the contract price set in period t at which one can

buy and sell foreign exchange in period t-s-1.7            If there is no default

risk on either nominal investment discussed above or on the forward

contracts, investors must be indifferent between investing in the sure

dollar denominated asset in which case the return is 1/b(st,w) per

dollar invested and the alternative covered interest arbitrage strategy

of converting dollars into pounds, investing in sure pound denominated

assets, and selling the proceeds in today's forward market at price

     st,wt,Mt,Nt) of dollars per pound.           The covered pound investment

strategy     yields                                                           per

dollar invested.           Equating the two investment strategies and

substituting from above gives
                                           10




                                                  b (s ,w )
                                 e(s,MteN)        b(st,wt)


Taking the conditional expectation of next period's exchange rate from

(5) and subtracting (9) gives an expression for the risk premium in this

model:




                        E [Mt
                                 ot÷1t+i                     —                )tt+1
(10) E (e        )—f                              (
         t t+1      t                                                     t
                            t (1 +wlt+1
                                      )
                                          t+1
                                                                 N
                                                                     tt         (QM
                                                                               t t+1
                                                                                       )




Dividing both sides of (10) by e normalizes the scale of the expression

and provides an insight into the nature of the risk premium which

depends upon the two currencies intertemporal marginal rates of

substitution:




            E(e
             t t+1
                   )—f            Q             E(Q      )

(11)                            Ej +1] —
                   t                            Et t+1


Both real and monetary uncertainty enter the determination of the risk

premium as well as the preferences of agents which act as weights in

determining the importance of the fundamental sources of uncertainty

represented by the real and monetary shocks to the two economies.

       In order to develop an empirically testable hypothesis regarding

the possibly time—varying risk premium in (11), Hansen and Hodrick

(1983) exploited the fact that covered and uncovered investments in the

pound—denominated riskless nominal return yield two dollar denominated

returns that must satisfy the representation of the risk—return

trade—off given by a conditional capital asset pricing model based on
                                       11




the conditional mean—variance frontier.      That is, in equilibrium any

dollar—denominated return, Rt÷i , must satisfy



(12)
            Et(Rt+i_R+1)


where                                 R1 is the dollar—denominated return

on an appropriately chosen benchmark return on the conditional mean

variance frontier, and R1 is the return on an asset that is
conditonally uncorrelated with the return on the benchmark asset.9 When

there exists a riskless nominal investment such as the one period bill

described above, RZ        can be chosen to be the nominal return R1'
                    t+1                                             t+1
1 /b(s,w).

       Hansen, Richard and Singleton (1982) establish that any return on

the conditional mean variance frontier is an appropriate benchmark

return, and each of these returns satisfies:



(1              —
                           + (1
                                     t+i

where R1 is the minimum second moment return conditioned on the
informaton set of agents, and        is a possibly random weight that may

depend on the conditioning set and which has the property that the

probability of the event twtO} is zero.      When markets are complete as

in the Lucas model, one can think of agents having the opportunity to

trade an asset with nominal return



(1L)
           R1
                                     12




and it is easily verified that this return is the minimum second moment
          10
return.

       Now consider the dollar denominated returns mentioned above,

covered and uncovered investments in pounds.     Each return must satisfy

(12), and taking the difference of the two returns gives



(15)
               EtE(e+1_f)/et]


where           =                                      This alternative
                    CE(e+1_ft)/et;R+1]/Vt(R+1).
represenation of the risk premium is perfectly consistent with the

representation in (11), and it is representation (15) that Hansen and

Hodrick (1983) exploited in their empirical tests.

       The next section of the paper discusses extensions of the empirical

model of HH to longer sample periods.



III. The Hansen—Fiodrick Model

       In (15), the beta is conditional on the information set of' agents.

Without a more detailed specification of the stochastic properties of

the exogenous processes of a model such as the Lucas model, an

assumption that the beta is constant is strictly an empirical hypothesis

that allows one to proceed empirically. Consequently, while we use the

discussion of the previous section to motivate a representation of the

risk—return trade—off in the foreign exchange market, one must remember

that the tests reported here, as in the case of HH, are not tests of an

explicit equilibrium model.
                                          13




        The empirical specification of the HH model begins with an

assumption that the betas on several forward foreign exchange contracts

that satisfy (15) are constant. The expected return on the benchmark

portfolio in excess of the nominal riskiess return is assumed to vary

through time and is treated as an unobserved variable. This allows the

empirical model to be written as



(16)                    3*x +
                                Ut1


where               is a vector of actual normalized forecast errors,
                    for several currencies,                       is a vector
                                                Et(R+i_R+1),
of the 8e,5            (15), and u1 is a vector of conditional expectation

forecast errors with typical element, u1 =
                                                   y1   —          The vector

stochastic process u satisfies the condition E(utu_)           3, j > 1 , and

                0 for all ht in the conditioning set, but we do not specify
E(uh)
how E (u
        t t+1 t+1 ) depends on elements in the time t information set.12
              u'

        Since        is assumed to be unobservable by the econometrician, the

empirical test is constructed by substituting into (16) the best linear

predictor of x based on a subset of the information in agentst
conditioning set. That is, let



                        +          +
(17)
                x           a'Zt

where       is a vector of instrumental variables and       is the prediction

error which has mean zero and is orthogonal to z. Substituting (17)

into (16) gives the complete model:
                                          1L



(18)                      +         +



where        =
                 u1   +       implying   that    is also orthogonal to z.

       The original sample period for the model estimated in HU was

February 1976 to December 1980.            The data were spot and one month

forward exchange rates of U.S. dollars for the French franc, the

Japanese yen, the Swiss franc, the U.K. pound, and the Deutsche mark.

The data set consisted of a semi—weekly sample in which Tuesday forward

rates predicted Thursday spot rates thirty days in the future and Friday

forward rates predicted the corresponding Monday spot rates)3 There

were 512 overlapping observations in the data set.           For purposes of

comparison across the various models of this paper, the original data

set was sampled to form 57 nonoverlapping observations, and 21
additional nonoverlapping observations were added from 1981 and 1982.

       In HH, the instrumental variables were chosen to be the five

currently occurring forward rate forecast errors, i.e., z                   In
reestimating the model with the new longer data set, we compared the

power of the original instruments against the power of using the five
current forward premiums as instruments.          Since the forward premiums

provided a more powerful test, only the results with these instruments

are reported here, i.e., z is a vector with typical element z

(f-e)/e.
       The first result to examine is the reestitnation of the model with

the forward premiums as instruments for the sample period that coincides

with the initial estimation period of HF!.       Estimation of the parameters

of (18) requires a system estimation technique, and as in RH, we applied

Hansen's (1982) Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) procedure. The
                                    15




results are presented in Table 1.   The first beta is normalized to one

reflecting the identification problem that arises when one treats the

expected return on the benchmark portfolio as an unobserved variable.

The overall test of the model's restrictions is a test statistic which

is asymptotically chi-square distributed with twenty degrees of freedom

reflecting the difference between the number of orthogonality conditions

exploited in the estimation, thirty, and the number of' estimated

parameters, ten.   The value of' the test statistic, 24.239, indicates

that the restrictions are not rejected at standard levels of
significance. These results are similar to the test statistic reported

in Table 5 of' HH in which, with the forecast errors as instruments, the

test statistic had a value of 18.83.15

     One noticeable difference between the results of the estimation of

the model with the forecast errors as instruments versus the results

with the forward premiums as instruments is in the joint tests of the

significance of the reduced form coefficients, which are defined for

each currency as              In the original HH specification with the
                      Bja1.

forecast errors as instruments, the tests of the significance of the

reduced form coefficients had low marginal levels of significance for

the Japanese yen and the Swiss franc. In Table 1, only the test of the

Swiss franc reduced form coefficients has a low marginal level of

significance. This partly reflects the fact that in the unconstrained

specification the forward premiums are not particularly powerful

explanatory variables during this sample period.

    On the basis of their inability to reject the restrictions of the

model and having found significant explanatory power in at least two

currencies, HH concluded that the latent variable model provided a
                                     16




convenient   vehicle for the interpretation of the rejection of the
unbiasednesS   hypothesis.   If investment   in the forward market is risky
in the sense described in    the previous section, investors will have to

be compensated for bearing risk.          At a point in time, the expected

returns on the various forward contracts will be proportional to each

other, but the expected return on the benchmark portfolio may vary.     The

conclusion of their study was that this proportionality remained

sufficiently stable through time that its assumed constancy could not be

rejected by the data.

     In Table 2 we investigate the model for the sample period February
                                                            observations to
1976 to September 1982 adding twenty—one nonoverlapping

those used in Table 1.       The results are very different from those in

Table 1.     The explanatory power of the constrained model is somewhat

improved.      In the tests of the significance of the reduced form

coefficients, the marginal levels of significance for the Japanese yen

and the Swiss franc are now very small. In contrast to Table 1, though,

the chi—square test of the constrained model has a value of j4.LI97,

which indicates that the restrictions of the model are rejected at all

marginal levels of significance greater than .023.      If the source of the

rejection of the unbiasedness hypothesis is a time—varying risk premium,

it appears that the assumptions of the HR model are too strong.      Either

the betas in (15) are not constant, or some other model of risk and

return is necessary to describe the risk premium.

     It is interesting to compare the results of Table 2 with the

estimation of the unconstrained model presented in Table 3.        These are

ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates of the unconstrained reduced form

coefficients.16 Note the differences between the two sets of estimates.
                                       17




In   the   OLS regressions the coefficients of the instrumental variables

that have weak explanatory power do not always have the same algebraic

sign across currencies. This is true in the case of the constant terms

and the coefficients of the forward premiums of the French franc and the

U.K. pound although in none of the cases is the set of parameters

particularly precisely estimated. Also, in the case of the coefficients

which do have strong explanatory power in the unconstrained model, that

is the coefficients of the Swiss franc and Deutsche mark forward

premiums, the rank ordering across currencies is striking, but the

proportionality is not of the same order of magnitude in each case.

Finally, the imposition of the constraints causes a relatively severe

loss in explanatory power as measured by the          for the French franc,

the U.K. pound, and the Deutsche mark.

      Given the rejection of the model of risk and return postulated in

this section, it is important to reiterate that the model was a

statistical hypothesis and not a precisely stated theory.       Ideally, we

would like to test a representation of dynamic equilibrium such asthat

set forth by Lucas and discussed in the previous section. At this point

in time, the demands on the data to test such a model make it an

exceedingly difficult task. For now, we set that task aside in order to

investigate the stability of the reduced form coefficients presented in

Table 3.    This   is done in the next section of the paper.



IV. Parameter Stability

      In this section, we investigate whether the rejection of the

constraints in the HH model, documented in the previous section, is due

to time—varying parameters and if so, why this might arise.
                                     18




        The theoretical analysis of Section II only postulates the
existence of a trade—off between risk and return at a point in time, as

in (12) and (15).        It does not impose the restriction that the

conditional covariance between the return on an asset and the return on

the benchmark portfolio is constant or that the conditional variance of

the benchmark portfolio is constant.

        We shall work with the unconstrained model, estimated in Table 3.

The reason is that even though the latent variable model is rejected

relative to the unconstrained model, the cross—equation constraints may

still be valid at any point in time as argued above, but the
coefficients of the unconstrained model may not be constant through

time.     Alternatively, the coefficients of the unconstrained model could

be constant and the restrictions of the HH model not hold under
alternative hypotheses regarding the nature of risk and return in the

forward foreign exchange market. This motivates our investigation of

the stability of the coefficients of the unconstrained model.

        There are several reasons why the coefficients of the unconstrained

model may not be constant.           For example, if we interpret the

reduced—form equation




(19)         (e1-f)/e a + Z1
                                                  +
                                                      u1

as a conditional expectation, then we are imposing the assumption that

this conditional expectation is a linear function of the variables of

the information set.        The true conditional expectation may be a

nonlinear function of the forward premiums. This could arise, for
                                   19




instance, even if the conditional expectation of the forecast error is a

linear function of variables in the complete information set of agents.

Equation (19) may always be interpreted as a linear least squares

projection; however, testing for the stability of this projection

requires assumptions on the error term which make the projection a

conditional expectation.

     Cumby and Obstfeld (1983) argue that the error terms in equations

such as (19) are characterized by the presence of conditional

heteroskedasticity.        One scenario under which conditional
heteroskedasticity might arise is the following.     In the theoretical

model of Section II, the risk premium depends on the intertemporal

marginal rates of substitution of the two currencies.        Therefore,

changes in the actual variances of monetary growth rates can lead to

time variation in the risk premium as well as the presence of

conditional heteroskedasticity.    Ignoring this potential problem in

estimation and hypothesis testing could lead one to conclude that the

coefficients were not constant when in fact they actually were.   In the

tests in Section III, the covariarice matrices of the parameters allowed

for conditional heteroskedasticity.     Here, we will demonstrate that

there is strong evidence against conditional homoskedasticity, and we

will perform a stability test that does not impose such an assumption.

    The presence of conditional heteroskedasticity can be detected by

using a test analogous to one used by Cumby and Obstfeld (1983). Under

the null hypothesis of conditional homoskedasticity, the conditional

variance of the residuals is a constant and consequently, uncorrelated

with information in the conditioning set.       The test consists of

regressing the squared residuals from the estimation in Table 3 on
                                          20



instrumental variables from the information set, and testing whether the

coefficients of these variables are significantly different from zero.

The instrumental variables we use in the test are the forward premiums

and the squared forward premiums as in the following regression:




(20) Cu1 )2
      t+1
                a. +
                 1     .
                       j1
                           Z
                                13  t
                               b. .(f3—e3)/e3 +
                                        t   t     .

                                                  j1
                                                      E
                                                           13   t
                                                          c. .[(f1_e3)/e3)2
                                                                    t   t
                                                                            +   t+1




     The results of the test are presented in Table .                   The chi—square

statistics indicate strong evidence against the null hypothesis of

conditional homoskedasticity in the case of the French franc, the Swiss

franc and the Deutsche mark. Remember that since the test of the latent

variable model in Section III is based on a covariance matrix that

allows for conditional heteroskedasticity, the finding against
conditional homoskedasticity here does not invalidate our previous test;

but it does indicate that traditional tests of structural change in

coefficients such as the Chow test and the Brown, Durbiri and Evans test

are not appropriate.

     An appropriate test for stability of coefficients in the presence

of conditional heteroskedasticity can be derived from the asymptotic

covariance matrices of the coefficients estimated over two sample

periods.      Hansen (1982) and Cumby, 1-luizinga, and Obstfeld (1983)

describe procedures for estimation which do not require the traditional

assumptions of strict exogeneity of the regressors and conditional

homoskedasticity of the error term. These procedures were followed in

the estimation of the constrained and unconstrained models of Section
                                                21




III and are described briefly in the appendix. Our test is appropriate

given their regularity conditions.

       In the unconstrained model, the GMM estimator for a sample of size

T. is strongly consistent and asymptotically normally distributed. That

is,




(21)         /r($_B*) N(O,.)


where B. is the GMM estimate of , which reduces to the OLS estimate in

this case, and                      Z.S.2.1, where the covariance matrix, 2., is

constructed from the following sample moments:



                            T.
                    1           1   11

(22)         and

                   1
                            T.
                                1   111     2
             Si - t:1 zz (u1)
                        1
                            E




where z is the vector of instruments and u1 is the corresponding

error term for the equation.                Under the maintained hypothesis of no

serial correlation in the error process, and under the null hypothesis

that     =
             2'    the test statistic



(23)




has an asymptotic chi—square distribution with tn degrees of freedom,

where rn is the dimension of 3*,                 and 2 are the estimates of 3* over
                                     22



the two subsamples, and             (1/T1 + 22/T2).17   The results are

presented in Table 5.

     We performed three sets of tests. The first test examines the HF!

conjecture that the observations from the transitional years of the

flexible exchange rate period from July 1973 when our data series begin

until the formal ratification of the Rambouillet agreement in January

1976 should be omitted.       The ratification amended the Articles of

Agreement of the International Monetary Fund to allow countries to adopt

a flexible exchange rate as their de jure system.       We performed the

tests between the periods July 1973 to January 1976 and February 1976 to

December 1980.    The latter is the sample period employed by HF!.   The

tests indicate strong evidence against the null hypothesis of constant
coefficients   for the case of the Japanese yen, the Swiss franc, and the

British pound.

     The second test examines the hypothesis that the coefficients of

the unconstrained model did not differ significantly when the twenty—one

additional observations were added to the RH sample.    The results from

these tests provide some evidence against the null hypothesis for the

British pound and the Deutsche mark.      It is interesting to note that

there is no strong evidence against the null hypothesis for the two

currencies for which we obtained the most explanatory power in the

constrained model, namely the Japanese yen and the Swiss franc.

     The third test compared the estimated coefficients before and after

the Carter intervention in October 1979 and the resulting change in

Federal Reserve Board operating procedures.       The two samples were

February 1976 to October 1979 and November 1979 to September 1982. This

appeared to be a natural point at which to perform the test given the
                                I
                                     23




change in U.S. policy. Somewhat surprisingly, we found evidence against

the null hypothesis only in the case of the French franc and the British

pound. The yen and the Swiss franc tests again demonstrate no evidence

against structural change.

        We turn next to the interpretation of these tests.   There is some

evidence against the hypothesis of no structural change.       Given only

this evidence, though, one might conclude that the linear model with

constant coefficients was a good approximation of the true conditional

expectation.     However, there is additional strong evidence that the

conditional expectations of the forecast errors are nonlinear functions

of the forward premiums.      In particular, if we also include squared

forward premiums as right—hand side variables in equation (19), we find

that the coefficients on these additional terms are highly significant.

The results of the estimation are presented in Table 6.

        Nonlinearity of the conditional expectation could be responsible

for the evidence against time—invariant parameters and also for the

evidence against conditional homoskedasticity. Some evidence for this

interpretation is provided by the fact that when the squared forward

premiums    are added as additional instruments to the specification in
(19), we cannot reject time-invariance of the   coefficients. The results

of this last test are given in Table 7. 18
     The nonlinearity of the conditional expectation of the      forecast

error   in the forward premiums is inconsistent with the assumed constancy
of the betas in the HH model which is the likely reason for its
rejection.    Since the tests of this section provide strong evidence only

against the unbiasedness hypothesis without providing a truly convincing
                                   24




model of the risk premium, we turn in the next section to an examination

of speculative trading strategies based on equations like (19).



V. Speculative Profits

       In this section, we examine Bilson's (1981) contention that the

risk—return trade—off from speculating in forward currency markets is

too favorable to be consistent with risk averse behavior.

       His strategy is to forecast spot exchange rates with a model

analogous to that represented by equation (19).    Using the covariance

matrix of the error terms in the equations, he forms a portfolio of

positions in the forward market to minimize the variance of the

portfolio subject to an expected profit constraint. Denoting by          the

estimated covariance matrix of the error terms in the equations, the

portfolio weights in period t, q, are chosen as follows:



(24)       mm          subject to qr




where r is the vector of expected forecast errors and ir    is   the desired

profit. The solution to the problem in (214) j



(25)
           q ert(relrtYh,r*


where the variance of the portfolio is given by



(26)            =
                                   25




     Note that. this model implies a linear portfolio efficient frontier

in each period and presumes that the investor cares only about the first

two moments of his forward market portfolio, and not about its

covariation with other asset returns or his consumption stream, as would

be implied by the Lucas model of Section II.

     The basis of Bilson's position is an examination of standardized

expected profits (SRE) which are defined to be expected profits divided

by the standard deviation of the portfolio and standardized actual

profits (SRA) which are analogously defined using actual profits.     In

his research, an equation like (19) was estimated using a basket of nine

currencies for the sample period July 197 to January 1980.19         The

estimated parameters were used to form expected profits which were

combined with the estimated covariance matrix to construct portfolios as

in (25). The out—of—sample profitability of following this strategy for

one year was computed. His estimates yielded an average SRE of 0.929,

and an average SRA of 0.857.    Applying a two—standard deviation rule,

this implies that expected profits are one and the two—sigma band runs

from —1.153 to 3.153, which forms the basis for his contention.

     The result that average SRE is approximately one is indeed striking

and prima facie evidence against efficiency of the market. In order to

examine the risk—return trade—off from following this strategy for our

sample, we conducted two experiments.          These are described next,

followed by a discussion of the results.



Experiment 1:   The first experiment consists of sequentially estimating

and simulating the trading strategy in the following model:
                                       26




(27)         (e1—f)/e = B0     +
                                       8..(f—e)/e   +
                                                        u1   i   1,...,5.




We used the first twenty—five observations to compute the first estimate

of       and the coefficient vector,        Combining    with the values of

the next set of forward premiums yielded            the vector of expected

values of the five forecast errors, and the first set of portfolio

weights.     The matrix     which is the covariance of the residuals in

(27), was estimated by the maximum likelihood estimator:



(28)
                  (tJiU1)/(t_1)


where         is the (t—1 by5) matrix of residuals up to time t—1. This

procedure of OLS estimation and formation of portfolios was then

repeated until the end of the sample by adding an observation at each

date.



Experiment 2:     The second experiment allows for stochastic parameter

variation through time.     It assumes that the coefficients follow the

first—order stochastic process,



(29)
             8t   ABti +


        The updated coefficients are then given by the Kalman filtering

formula:




(30)              ABti +
            8t
                                             27




where E(t)         0, and x, is the vector of right—hand side variables in
        20
(27).        The covariance matrix of             is




(31)
              Pt APt1A' +


where        is the covariance matrix of               In order to run the experi—

inent, A, B, P01           and    have to be specified.          The prior on the

coefficients, 8, was specified to be the OLS estimate of              based on the

first twenty—four periods.             was specified in the same way. Since we

did not have a prior on the matrix Q, we assumed that                           —


             which implies that the covariance of the coefficients is
APt1A'
constant over time and equal to P0.

        We measured        as in (28), and the matrix A was specified as

follows:



                            0 if i       j
(32)         A =   {a..}
                            •75 jf j




In both experiments ,r' was set equal to 1.                   This completes the

descriptions of the two experiments which were run for 83 nonoverlappin

monthly observations, and we turn now to the interpretation of the

results.

        The results of the first experiment show that over the sample,

average SRE was 0.871 and average SRA was 0.211.                The values of SRE

ranged between 0.255 and 2.516.
                                           28



       It is possible to test if profits at time t are drawn from anorinal

distribution with mean ii' and variance cit.         Let    denote the estimated

portfolio variance at t.            Assuming that the distribution of profits is

normal, standardized unexpected profit, (Trt_Tr*)I&t. has a t—distribution

with (t—6) degress of freedom.              Hence, by Liapunov's Central Limit

Theorem, the statistic



                  T

              t t
                      (t_*),t
             T
              z       (t—6)/(t—8)
            t to



has   an asymptotic standard normal distribution where t0         26 and 1    108

which are the 83 observations for the experiments.21 We tested whether

      was significantly different from one and zero.              For the null

hypothesis ir =        0,   the test statistic was 1.883 which corresponds to a

marginal level of significance of .060. For the null hypothesis ir             1,

the test statistic was —5.889 which corresponds to a marginal level of

significance smaller than .001.           Both the null hypotheses are rejected

by the data, the latter more strongly than the former.

       The results of the second experiment show that over the sample,

average SRE was 0.660 and average SRA was 0.620.              The values of SRE

ranged between 0.061 and 4.573. Once again, we tested whether                 was

significantly different from one and zero. For the null hypothesis n =

0,    the test statistic was 5.536 which corresponds to a marginal level of

significance smaller than .001.            For the null hypothesis *   = 1,   the

test statistic was —0.358 which corresponds to a marginal level of
                                     29



significance of 0.72.     In this   case,   we cannot reject the hypothesis

that 11*     1, while the hypothesis that *     0 is rejected.

       In experinent 2, since we cannot reject '       1,   it makes sense to

examine the implied risk—return trade—off as measured by the mean and

standard deviation of profits.       Applying the two standard deviation

rule, expected profits are one, and the two—sigma band runs from —2.030

to 14.030.     This is a less favorable risk—return trade—off than that

found by Bilson.      Once again, this trade-off is based on the average

SRE.       When SRE was equal to 0.061, the implied two—sigma band was

—31.787 to 33.787, and when SRE was equal to 14•573, the band ran from

0.563 to 1.1437. The latter trade—off is extremely favorable, while the

former is highly unfavorable.        It is not obvious how seriously one

should take these extreme values since they depend on the estimated

values of the parameters.       Nevertheless, it would appear from the

volatility of the risk—return trade—offs at different points in time

that a speculator in foreign exchange must be willing to bear a

considerable amount of risk, even if risk is measured in the way

described above, ignoring consumption risk, etc.



VI. Conclusions

       The analysis conducted in the paper was motivated by an attempt to

explain the now common rejection of the unbiasedness hypothesis. As was

discussed in the introduction, various explanations have been offered

for this finding.     One explanation is based on the existence of a risk

premium, and the analysis in this paper addressed the problem from this

perspective.
                                   30




     There are strong empirical and theoretical reasons for believing a

priori in the existence of a risk premium. For instance, Ibbotson and

Sinquefield (1976) have documented the existence of large differences in

the average holding period returns on a variety of assets.         Most

financial economists view these differences as reflecting risk premiums,

and one would therefore expect to find a risk premium in the forward

foreign exchange market especially given the modern approach to exchange

rate determination, which argues that foreign exchange rates are

determined in asset markets. In intertemporal asset pricing theory, the

covariation between intertemporal marginal rates of substitution on

monies and the nominal returns on assets induces a risk premium on an

asset. In the Lucas model of Section II, the risk premium on a forward

contract depends on the same covariation, since forward contracts are

risky nominal assets.

     Hansen and Hodrick (1983) point out the difficulties of testing the

equilibrium model of Section II.        As in that paper, we have not

attempted to measure the intertemporal marginal rates of substitutions

of currencies directly, nor have we attempted to specify an explicit

equilibrium econometric study. Our goals have been more modest, yet we

believe that the results presented here provide some insights into the

workings of forward exchange markets.

     We found that one reason for the rejection of the Hansen—Hodrick

model is the assumed constancy of the betas which is inconsistent with

the observed nonlinearity of the conditional expectations of the

forecast errors in the forward premiums. We observed that this could

also be responsible for the presence of heteroskedasticity reported by

Cumby and Obstfeld (1983).
                                   31




     In the introduction, we noted that since much of our work is of

necessity based on asymptotic distribution theory, proponents of the

unbiasedness hypothesis will probably remain skeptical about the

rejection of the unbiasedness hypothesis which appears throughout this

paper. Such a position is tenable, but as sample sizes have grown, the

numerous rejections of the hypothesis which are now commonplace form a

substantial body of evidence which is increasingly difficult to ignore.

     With regard to the second position within the profession, which

argues that the rejection of the unbiasedness hypothesis ought to be

related to the outstanding stocks of government bonds, we note that the

discussion of the Lucas model in Section II was independent of the

existence of such assets.   Nominal government bonds may be important

determinants of the purchasing power of a currency, in which case we

would expect them to have a role in the determination of a risk premium.

However, the lack of significant explanatory power of such assets in an

equation like (19) does not constitute evidence against the existence of

a risk premium.

    The last section of our paper investigates the claim that

particular trading strategies in the forward foreign exchange market

yield a risk—return trade—off which is too favorable to be accounted for

by risk aversion.   Upon conducting experiments based on the trading

strategy of Bilson (1981), we found that the strategy was profitable,

but it also required willingness on the part of the speculator to absorb

a substantial variance of profits.      The experiments were run over an

eight—year period and produced statistically significant out—of—sample

profits. This profitability is consistent either with the existence of

a risk premium or with market inefficiency.     In any case, it provides
                                  32




further evidence against the unbiasedness hypothesis. The volatility of

actual profits and the magnitude of average standardized profit suggest

to us that a risk premium is the likely explanation.
                                         33




                                     Appendix
       In this appendix, we describe the estimation of the parameters and

their asymptotic covariance matrices for the two models discussed in the

text. Estimation in both models is an example of the procedure referred

to by Hansen (1982) as the Generalized Method of Moments (GMM).           The

estimation procedure is also described in Hansen and Singleton (1982)

and in Hansen and Hodrick (1983).

       The Fill model is a system of five equations,




(Al)                Bc +   B*ci*?z   +




in   ten parameters, ô'      (8k' ,ci,c4').      We assume that the stochastic

process z is stationary and ergodic. The orthogonality conditions are



(A2)
            Et(zt v1) 0,

which is a thirty element vector formed from the unobservable error

term. Estimation proceeds by defining two functions of the observable

data and the parameters to be estimated:



(A3)                                          — B*c*?Z)   z
            y+1,z,5) t+l —
                           h(yt+i,zt,S) z


and by forming the moment estimator of the function, f(y+i,zt,), for a

sample of size T:
                                     3t



(An)



For large values of T, g(6) ought to be "close" to zero if the model is

true. Estimation of the parameters requires the choice of a weighting

matrix WTI and the parameters are chosen to minimize the criterion

function,



(A5)




Hansen (1982) describes the optimal choice of WT. It is optimal in the

sense of minimizing the asymptotic covariance matrix of the parameters

for the class of estimators that exploit the same orthogonality

conditions.

       The covariance matrix of the parameters is



(A6)        (6)    (D+WTDTY1



where


(A7)
            DT            (y+i,z, z
and


(A8)        WT =          yt+i,zt,yt+i,zt,6)'


in this case since we assume vt+              to be mean zero and serially
                                          1

uncorrelated. We followed the suggestion in Hansen and Singleton (1982)

of    removing the sample means g(ts)(         )'   from the cross—products
                               in   computing WT.      They note that this
                                       35



adjustment has no effect on the asymptotic properties of the estimates

or the test statistics, yet under alternative hypotheses g(is) may not

be zero. The adjustment improves the power of the test.

       Hansen demonstrates that T times the value of the criterion

function at its minimum is asymptotically chi—square distributed with

degrees of freedom equal to the number of orthogonality conditions ainus

the number of estimated parameters. This is the test statistic for the

model.

       The estimation of the unconstrained model is a GMM procedure which

reduces to equation by equation ordinary least squares. As in the above

discussion, the derivation of the covariance matrix does not impose

conditional homoskedasticity.       The covariance matrix of the parameters

for a particular equation has the same form as (A6), but DT reduces to

(1/T)Z'Z where Z is the (Txk) matrix of instruments, and       reduces to



                       T
(A9)       W
               t   T
                       z zz'u
                          t t t+1
                                      36




References



Bilson, J. F. 0., "The 'Speculative Efficiency' Hypothesis," Journal of

     Business, July 1981, 54:     L35_52.

Breeden, D. T., "An   Intertemporal   Asset Pricing Model with Stochastic

     Consumption and Investment Opportunities," Journal of Financial

     Economics, No. 3,   7: 265—96.
Brock, W. A., "Asset Pricing in an Economy with Production: 'Selective'

     Survey of Recent Work on Asset—Pricing Models," in Dynamic

     Optimization and Mathematical Economics, edited by Pan—Tai Li, New

     York: Alenuni Press, 1980.

Cumby, R. E. and M. Obstfeld, "A Note on Exchange-Rate Expectations and

     Nominal Interest Differentials: A Test of the Fisher Hypothesis,"

     Journal of Finance, June 1981, 36: 697—7O.

                                      "International Interest—Rate and

     Price—Level Linkages Under Flexible Exchange Rates: A Review of

     Recent Evidences" forthcoming in J. F. 0. Bilson and R. C. Marston,

     eds., Exchange Rates: Theory and Practice. Chicago, University of

     Chicago Press for the NBER, 1983.

Cumby, R. E., J. Huizinga and M. Obstfeld, "Two—Step Two—Stage Least

     Squares Estimation in Models with Rational Expectations," Journal

     of Econometrics, April 1983.

Dooley, M. P. and J. R. Shafer, "Analysis of Short—Run Exchange Rate

     Behavior:   March, 1973 to September, 1975," International Finance

     Discussion Paper, No. 123, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, 1976.
                                       37




________________________________     "Analysis of Short—Run Exchange Rate
     Behavior:     March, 1973 to November, 1981." Forthcoming in Bigrnan

     and T. Taya, eds., 1982.

Dhrymes, P. J. Econometrics: Statistical Foundations and Applications.

     New York: Springer—Verlag, 19714.

Fama, E. and A. Farber, "Money, Bonds, and Foreign Exchange," American

     Economic Review, September 1979, 69: 269—82.

Frankel, J. A, "The Diversifiability of Exchange Risk," Journal of

     International Economics, August 1979, 9: 379—93.

______________    "Tests of Rational Expectations in the Forward Exchange

     Market," Southern Economic Journal, April 1980, 46: 1083—1101.

______________    "In   Search of the Exchange Risk Premium: A Six—Currency

     Test Assuming Mean Variance Optimization," Journal of International

     Money and Finance, December 1982, 1: 255—74.

Frenkel, J. A., "The Forward Exchange Rate, Expectations, and the Demand

     for Money:     The German Hyperinflation," American Economic Review,

     September 1977, 67: 653—70.

_____________    "Flexible   Exchange Rates, Prices, and the Role of 'News':

     Lessons from the 1970s," Journal of Political Economy, August 1981,

     89: 665—705.

Geweke, J. F. and E. L. Feige, "Some Joint Tests of the Efficiency of

     Markets for Forward Foreign Exchange," Review of Economics and

     Statistics, August 1979, 61: 334—141.

Grauer, F., R. Litzenberger and R. Stehle, "Sharing Rules and
     Equilibrium in an International Capital Market Under Uncertainty,"

     Journal of Financial Economics, June 1976, 3: 233—56.
                                      38




Grossman, S. and R. Shiller, "Consumption Correlatedness and Risk

     Measurement in Economics with Non—Traded Assets and Heterogeneous

     Information," Journal of Financial Economics, December 1982, 10:

     195—210.

Hakkio, C. S., "The Term Structure of the Forward Premium," Journal of

     Monetary Economics, July 1981, 8: 41—58.

_____________      "Expectations and the Forward Exchange Rate,"
     International Economic Review, October 1981, 22: 663—78.

____________    "Discussion of Risk Averse Speculation in the Forward

     Foreign Exchange Market:         An Econometric Analysis of Linear

     Models," in Exchange Rates and International Macroeconomics, edited

     by J. A. Frenkel.     Chicago:    University of Chicago Press for the

     National Bureau of Economic Research, 1983.

Hansen, L. P., "Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments

     Estimators," Econometrica, July 1982, 50: 1029—54.

Hansen, L. P. and R. J. Hodrick, "Forward Exchange Rates as Optimal

     Predictors of Future Spot   Rates: An Econometric Analysis," Journal
     of   Political Economy, October 1980, 88: 829—53.

________________________________ "Risk Averse Speculation in the Forward

     Foreign Exchange Market:         An Econometric Analysis of Linear

     Models," in Exchange Rates and International Macroeconomics, edited

     by J. A. Frenkel, Chicago:       University of Chicago Press for the

     National Bureau of Economic Research, 1983.

Hansen, L. P., 3. Richard and K. Singleton, "Econometric Implications of

     the Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model," Working Paper,

     GSIA, Carnegie—Mellon University, 1982.
                                    39




Hansen, L. P. and K. Singleton, "Generalized Instrumental Variables

     Estimation of Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models,"

     Econornetrica, September 1982, 50:   1269—86.

______________________________    "Consumption, Risk Aversion and The

     Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns," Journal of Political Economy,

     April 1983, 91: 249—65.

Hodrick, R. J., "International Asset Pricing with Time—Varying Risk

     Prernia," Journal of International Economics, November 1981,    11:

     573—87.

Hsieh, D. A., "Tests of Rational Expectations and No Risk Premuiin in

     Forward Exchange Markets." Working Paper No. 83, National Bureau

     of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass., 1982.

Ibbotson, R. G. and H.      A.. Sinquefield, "Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and

     Inflation: Year—by—Year Historical Returns, 1926—1974," The

     Journal of Business, January 1976, 49:   11_147.

Kouri, P. J. K., "International Investment and Interest Rate Linkages

     Under Flexible Exchange Rates," in The Political Economy of

     Monetary Reform, edited by H. Z. Aliber, London: Macmillan, 1977.

Krasker, W. S., "The 'Peso Problem' in Testing the Efficiency of Forward

     Exchange Markets," Journal of Monetary Economics, April 1980, 6:

     269—7 6.

Levich, R. M., "Further Results on the Efficiency of Markets for Foreign

     Exchange," in Managed Exchange—Rate Flexibility: The Recent
     Experience. Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Conference Series No.

    20. Boston:   Federal   Reserve Bank of Boston, 1978.
                                               LW




____________          "On the Efficiency of Markets for Foreign Exchange," in

     International Economic Policy: Theory and Evidence, edited by R.

     Dornbusch and J. A. Frenkel, Baltimore:                   Johns Hopkins University

     Press, 1979a.

_____________         "Analyzing the Accuracy of Foreign Exchange Forecasting
     Services:           Theory and Evidence," Working Paper No. 336, NBER,

     1979b.

Longworth, D., "Testing the Efficiency of the Canadian—U.S. Exchange

     Market Under the Assumption of No Risk Premium," Journal of

     Finance, March 1981, 36: 3—9.

Lucas, R. E., Jr., "Asset Pricing in an Exchange Economy," Econometrica,

     November 1978, 6: 1429—45.

__________________         "Interest    Rates and Currency Prices in a Two—Country

     World," Journal of Monetary Economics, November 1982, 10: 335—60.

McKinnon,        R.      I.,    Money in International Exchange: The Convertible

     Currency System, New York: Oxford University Press, 1979.

RIehi, H. and R. M. Rodriguez, Foreign Exchange Markets, New York:

     McGraw—Hill, 1977.

Roll, R., "A Critique of Asset Pricing Theory's Tests: Part I: On Past

     and Potential Testability of the Theory," Journal of Financial

     Economics, 1977, : 129—76.

Roll, R. and B. Solnik, "On Some Parity Conditions Frequently

     Encountered in International Economics," Journal of Macroeconomics,

     Winter 1979, 1: 267—83.

Rubinstein, M., "The Valuation of Uncertain Income Streams and the

     Pricing of Options," The Bell Journal of Economics, Autumn 1976, 7:

     L07...25.
                                        141




Schweepe,    F. C. ,   Uncertain Dynamic Systems, New Jersey: Prentice Hall,
     1973.

Singleton, K. J., "Risk Averse Speculation in the Forward Foreign

     Exchange Market:        A Comment," in Exchange Rates and International

     Macroeconomics, edited by J. A. Frenkel. Chicago:         University of

     Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research, 1983.

Stockman, A. C., "Risk, Information, and Forward Exchange Rates," in The

    Economics of Exchange Rates, edited by J. A. Frenkel and H. G.

    Johnson, Reading: Addison—Wesley, 1978.

Stulz, R. M., "A Model of International Asset Pricing," Journal of

    Financial Economics, December 1981, 9:       383_1406.

White, H, "A Heteroskedasticity—Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator

    and a Direct Test for Heteroskedasticity," Econometrica, May 1980,

    148:     817—38.
                                     142




Footnotes



      * We   thank Lars Peter Hansen and Katherine Schipper for useful

        discussions and Ken Singleton for providing us with his computer

        program.



 1. A large literature now exists on this topic.          Major empirical

        contributions to the area have been made by Dooley and Shafer

        (1976, 1982), Frenkel (1977, 1981), Stockman (1978), Levich (1973,

        1979a), Geweke and Feige (1979), Frankel (1980, 1983), Hansen and

        Hodrick (1980, 1983), Bilson (1981), Cumby and Obstfeld (1981,

        1983), Hakkio (1981a, 1981b), Longworth (1981), and Hsieh (1932).

 2. McKinnon (1979, p. 156) has argued "that the supply of private

        capital for taking net positions in either the forward or spot

        markets is currently inadequate. Exchange rates can move sharply

        in response to random variations in the day—to—day demands by

        merchants or from monetary disturbances.    Once a rate starts to

        move because of some temporary perturbation, no prospective

        speculator is willing to hold an open position for a significant

        time interval in order to bet on a reversal——whence the large daily

        and monthly movements in the foreign exchanges and sometimes high

        bid—ask spreads.   Bandwagon psychologies result from the general

        unwillingness of participants to take net positions against

        near—term market movements that are necessarily accentuated by the

        behavior of nonspeculative merchants."

 3.     See Levich (197gb) for an analysis of commercial forecasting
        services.
                                  L3



. Michael    Mussa made this criticism at the NBER Conference on

    Exchange Rates and International Macroeconomics held in Cambridge,

    Massachusetts in November 1981.     Krasker (1980) argued that the

    existence of a particular event such as a discrete devaluation

    could bias the sampling distribution of the test statistics such

    that they are poorly approximated by their asymptotic distribution

    under the null hypothesis. This particular problem is not unique

    to studies of the foreign exchange market because it plagues much

    of modern time series analysis.

5. This point is generally acknowledged by those who reject the

    unbiasedness hypothesis.     The theoretical models of Grauer,

    Litzenberger, and Stehie (1976), Kouri (1977), Stockman (1978) Fama

    and Farber (1979), Frankel (1979), and Roll and Solnik (1979)

    provided reasons for the existence of a risk premium without

    necessarily demonstrating how or why it would vary through time.

6. See Breeden (1979) and Grossman and Shiller (1983) for a discussion

    of the conversion of these models into "consumption beta" models.

    Stulz (1981) generalized the Breeden approach to consider pricing

    of international assets.     Hansen and Singleton (1983) conduct

    econometric analysis of the intertemporal models using aggregate

    consuniption data.

7. A discussion of the determination of the forward foreign exchange

   rate and the risk premium that separates it from the expected

    future spot rate was included in early drafts but excluded from the

   published version of Lucas (1982).
                                      414




8. An alternative representation of the right—hand side of (11) is

    obtained by taking the conditional expectation of the second order
                                            N   H                     N
    Taylor series expansion of                          around Et(Qt+i) and

                               The      resulting         expression         is
    Et(Q1).
                                                                          where
     [l/Et(Qi)]2([Et(Qi/Et(Qi)]Vt(Qi) —                C(Q1;
         )   and   C(; ) are   the conditional variance and the conditional

    covariance, respectively.

9. As demonstrated by Roll (1977) and extended to conditional environ-

    ments by Hansen, Richard, and Singleton (1982), the content of the

    restriction embodied in (12) is that the benchmark return is on the

    conditional mean—variance frontier.             The static capital asset

     pricing model is often given empirical content through the

    assumption by the econometrician that measurements on an aggregate

    wealth portfolio are mean—variance efficient.          As in HH, no such

    assumption is made here.

10. Equation (14) follows immediately once one recognizes that all

    nominal dollar denominated returns satisfy Et(Rt+iQ+i) = 1.

11. Singleton (1983) is relatively optimistic about the ability of

    econometricians to estimate directly form        equations   such as (11) by

    using observations on aggregate consumption series and price

    indexes. We are suspect of what one may gain from such an approach

    given the severe measurement error problems that are encountered in

    using macro time series although see Hansen and Singleton (1983).

12. Cumby and Obstfeld (1983) argue that forward rate forecast errors

     are characterized by conditional heteroskedasticity. Hence, we do

    not assume homoskedastic disturbances. This issue is investigated

    in Section 4.
                                    L5




13. Hakkio (1983) argues correctly that the forward rates are not

     matched precisely with the appropriate value date one month in the

     future.    Riehi and Rodriguez (1977) discuss the rules which

     regulate the determination of the exact delivery day when the

     contract is to be executed. Hsieh (1982) and Cumby and Obstfeld

     (1983) match the data precisely taking account of holidays, etc.,

     with no difference in inference regarding evidence against the

     unbiasedness hypothesis.

iLl. See the Appendix for a discussion of the estimation procedure.

15. Using the forecast errors as instruments, sampling the HH data to

     form a data set of 57 observations, and reestirnating the HH model

     gives a 2(20)     18.Ll59.   Hence, the sampling procedure does not

    appear to have reduced.the power of the test significantly.

16. Note that we allow for some forms of conditional heteroskedasticity

    in the construction of the covariance matrix of the parameters.

    See the Appendix for details. Cumby and Obstfeld (1983) and Hsieh

    (1982) argue for this approach, which was proposed by White (1980).

17. Note that this is an asymptotic test, and in theory, requires two

    infinitely large, disjoint samples.

18. Note that estimation of the HH model with eleven instruments and

    five currencies would impose fifty—five orthogonality conditions in

    the estimation. At this point, this is computationally impractical

    which is why we did not attempt to reestimate the HF! model with

    this specification.
                                     L46




19.   Bilson's specification is

                                           +                +

      where superscript S and L refer to "small" and "large."       Small

      forward premia are those less than 10 percent in absolute value.

      He uses the five currencies of this study plus the Canadian dollar,

      the Belgian franc, the Italian lira, and the Dutch guilder. The

      estimation imposes the constraint that the coefficients are

      identical across currencies.

20. See Schweppe (1973).

21. See Dhrymes (1974).
                                           Table       1:       Ransen-Hodrick Latent Variable Model



                                                                     =       +                 +
                                                                                 **   'l
                             Sample Period:   February 1976 to December 1980; Number of Observations:                               57


                                                            Reduced Form Coefficients                                                    X2(5)
                                              A                      A                A                       F.              A
                   A                          e                      8                0                       8               0
                                 10               ii                 i2                   i3                   14              15
                                                                                                                                         AllOA ij 'a
                   j         (Std.Err.)   (Std.Err.)             (Std.Err.)      (Std.Err..)          (StdErr.)            (Std.Err.)    j    >= 0I
Currency        (Std.Err.)   Confidence   Confidence             Confidence      Confidence           Confidence       -   Confidence    Confidence     R2
  French                       4.916       -0.809                 -0.022          -1.441                0.837                 2.244
                 1.0          (3.754)      (0.493)                 (0.429)                                                                    4.529
l•f                                                                                (1.012)             (0.502)               (1.425)                   0.053
                               0.810        0.899                   0.040                                                                     0.524
                                                            —                       0,845               0.905                 0.885
                               7.828       -1.289                  -0.035         -2.294                1.333                 3.574
                 1.592                                                                                                                        5.270
2Jap81se                      (6.872)      (0.638)                 (0.679)         (1.797)             (0.719)               (2.241)                   0.047
   yen          (0.711)
                               0.745        0.957                   0.041           0.798               0.936                                 0.616
                                                                                                                              0.889
  Swiss                       15.498       -2.551                  -0.068         -4.541                2.639                 7.076
                 3.152
                              (9.957)      (1.070)                                                                                           27.503
3fraac          (0.664)                                            (1.352)        (2.519)              (1.060)               (3.075)                   0.154
                               0.880        0.983                   0.040           0.929               0.987                                 0.999
                                                                                                                              0.978
  U.K.           1.683         8.275       —1.362                  -0.037         -2.425                1.409                 3.778
                              (5.184)      (0.835)                                                                                            8.296
4pound          (0.664)                                            (0.727)        (1.377)              (0.804)              (2.035)                    0.000
                               0.889        0.897                   0.040           0.922                                                     0.859
                                                            —                                           0.921                 0.937
                               3.544       -0.583                  -0.016         -1.038                0.604                 1.618
  Deutsche       0.721
                              (3.993)      (0.579)                 (0.310)                                                                    1.253
    mark        (0.424)                                                           (1.074)              (0.623)              (1.611)                    0.030
                               0.625        0.686                   0.040           0.666               0.667                                 0.060
                                                                                                                              0.685

         Test of the Constrained Model:   X2(20) =      24.239; Confidence = 0.768.

Note:    The dependent variables are the forward rate forecast errors                                     —
                                                                                             U.S. dollars for the
         French franc, the Japanese yen, the Swiss Franc, the U.K.
                                                                                  y1 =             (e+1        f)/e,
                                                                   pound, and the Deutsche mark. The instrumental
         variables are the forward premia for the same five currencies. Confidence is 1 minus
                                                                                               the marginal
         level of significance. Values of the confidence term close to 1 indicate
                                                                                   evidence against the null
         hypothesis that one or a set of coefficients equals zero. All forecast errors and forward
                                                                                                    premia are
         expressed in percent at an annual rate.
                                                 Table       2:   Hansen-Hodrick Latent       Variable   Model



                                                                       =                      +
                                                                           p** +
                                                                                   p*cIzt


                                Sample Period:    February 1976 to September 1982; Number of Observations:                   78


                                                                  Reduced Form Parameters                                         x2(5)
                                    A               A                  A                A                A          A                    A
                                    e               e                  e                e                0          8             AllO            's
                                        iO              11                 i2            13              14             i5                   ij
                         i      (Std.Err,)       (Std.Err,)         (Std.Err.)      (Std.Err,)      (Std.Err.)   (Std.Err.)       j      1
                                                                                                                                        = 0
Currency           (Std.Err.)   Confidence       Confidence         Confidence      Confidence      Confidence   Confidence       Confidence             R2
                                  13.198          -0.080             -1.244          -4.467            0.450        6.080
     French                                                                                                                            5.972
                        1.0       (6.164)         (0.206)            (0.741)         (1.945)         (0.469)       (2.719)                             0.034
      franc                                                                                                                            0.691
                                   0.968           0.302      —        0.907           0.978           0.663        0.975
                                  27.181          -0.164             -2.562          —9.199            0.927      12.521
     Japanese        2.059                                                                                                            19.998
2.                                (9.052)         (0.419)            (1.113)          (2.614)        (0.870)       (3.567)                             0.153
       yen          (0.800)                                                                                                            0.999
                                   0.997           0.304_              0.979           0.999           0.713        0.999
                                  34.411          -0.208             -3.243         -11.646            1.173      15.852
     Swiss           2.607                                                                                                            22.910
                                 (11.473)         (0.524)             (1.409)         (3.066)        (1.114)       (4.138)                             0.179
3franc              (0.698)                                                                                                            0.999
                                   0.997           0.308               0.979           0.999           0.707        0.999
                                  16.188          -0.098             -1.526          —5.478            0.552        7.457
     U.K.            1.227                                                                                                             7.258
                                  (7.753)         (0.245)             (0.860)         (2.205)         (0.579)      (2.954)                             0.026
4pound              (0.373)                                                                                                            0.798
                                   0.963           0.310               0.924           0.987           0.659        0.988
                                  15.622          —0.094             —1.472          —5.287            0.533        7.196
     Deutsche        1.184                                                                                                             6.222
                                  (7.582)         (0.243)             (0.868)         (2.268)         (0.562)      (3.130)                             0.024
      mark          (0.222)                                                                                                            0.715
                                   0.961           0.302               0.910           0.980           0.657        0.979

             Test of the Constrained Model: X2(20) = 34.497; Confidence = 0.977

Note:       See Table    1.
                                                                                                5
                                         Table   3:               -            =   8       +                -
                                                           (e+i       f1)/e                                     e1)/e    +
                                                                                                Eb11(f           t   t       t+l




                            Sample Period:       February 1976 to September 1982;                         Number of Observations:               78



                                     b                 b   ,          b                b              b
                            I            ii                               13               14                      x2(6)               x2(5)
                                                        i                                              15
                          (Std.     (Std.             (Std.           (Std.         (Std.            (Std.          All            All
                        Err.)      Err.)          Err.)             Err.)           Err.)            Err.)         Coeffs.                b's
                        Confj-     Confi-         Confi-            Confi-          Confi-           Confi-           0                 > 1                   Resid.
                                                                                                                                   j            0
Currency                dence      dence          dence             dence           dence            dence                                                     Var.
                                                                                                                 Confidence        Confidence          R2
                       -8.436     -1.115         -1.535            -4.993          —1.482           10.230
  French                                                                                                           8.391
                      (19.880)    (2.085)        (1.716)           (3.053)                                                              8.329
1franc                                                                             (1.057)          (4.470)                                          0.079   1284.68
                        0.329      0.407                            0.898                                          0.789                0.861
                                                      0.629                         0.839            0.978
                       29.008     -0.195         -6.131            -6.953           1.319           12.363
23apa                 (13.238)     (0.956)                                                                        36.199               36.155
  yen                                             (1.588)          (3.184)         (1.294)          (4.437)                                          0.222   1325.61
                        0.972      0.161          0.999                                                            0.999                0.999
                                                                    0.971           0.692            0.995
                       27.568     —0.971         -2.659           -13.024           0.238           18.146
  Swiss
                      (17.401)    (1.489)                                                                         19.365               18.783
3franc                                           (2.253)           (3.676)         (1.438)          (5.775)                                          0.188   1755.74
                        0.886      0.485          0.762             0.999                                          0.996                0.998
                                                                                    0.131            0.998
                       -2.302      0.713         —1.692            —4.933          —2.793           10.161
                                                                           .
  U.K.                                                                                                            25.833
                      (11.391)    (0.584)        (1.420)                                                                               25.715
4pound                                                             (2.647)         (1.243)          (3.458)                                          0.163   1106.15
                        0.160      0.778          0.767                                                            0.999                0.999
                                                                   0.938            0.975            0.997
  Deutsche              4.857     -1.638         -2.474           -2.554            0.043            5.402
                      (18.013)                                                                                    10.006                7.928
    mark                          (1.702)        (2.141)          (3.844)          (1.470)          (6.113)                                          0.080   1630.13
                        0.213      0.664          0.752                                                            0.876                0.840
                                                                   0.494            0.023            0.623

Note:    See Table   1.
                                           Table L4



               Test for Conditional Homoskedasticity: Eqs(20)


I    Sample: February 1976 to September 1982; Number of Observations: 78
I                                I                                  I                        I
I                                I                                  I                        I

           Currency                        Test Statistic                Confidence
                                      2
                                                           0
                                      x
                                          (1o)b
      1. French franc                           32.559                       0.999
I                                I                                  I
I _____________________________ I ________________________________ I ___________________ I
I                                I
                                 I                                  I                        I
     2.    Japanese yen          I                14.I85                     0.88


      3.   Swiss  franc                        96.655
                                                                   I
                                                                            0.999
I                                I
I _____________________________ I ________________________________ I ___________________ I

      .                          I                                  I                        I
                                 I                                  I                        I
I          U.K. pound                             10.557                    0.607
                                                                                         I
I                                I                                  I
I _____________________________ I ________________________________ I ___________________ I
II                               I.
                                 I                                  I
                                                                    I
                                                                                             I
                                                                                             I

I
I
     5.    Deutsche mark
                                 I
                                                26.038
                                                                    I
                                                                             0.996
                                                                                             I
I _____________________________ I ________________________________ I ___________________ I
                                           Table 5


    I                       Tests for Constant Coefficients
    I                                  I                         I                    I
    I                                  I                                              I
    I                                  I       Test                                   I
    I        Currency                  1     Statistic               Confidence       I




    1        July 1973 to January 1976 and February 1976 to December 1980             1

    I                                  I                         I                    I
     I                                 I                         I                    I
    1        1.   French franc         1      3.725          1        0.286
    1        2.   Japanese yen         1     32.633          1        0.999           1

    1        3.   Swiss franc                14.175          1        0.972           1


    1        4.   U.K. pound        1        22.877                   0.999           1

    I        5.   Deutsche mark     1         9.220                   0.838           1
    I                               I                        I                        I




    i    February 1976 to December 1980 and January 1981 to September 1982
                                                                                  I

1            1. French franc        1         7.101                   0.688       1

1            2. Japanese yen        I         4.900      1            0.443       1

1            3. Swiss   franc       1         5.501      1            0.518       1

1            4. U.K. pound          1         10.996     1            0.911       1


1            5. Deutsche mark      1          10.942         1        0.909       1
i                                  i                     i                        I
I                                  I                     I                        I


1        February 1976 to October 1979 and November 1979 to September 1982        1



I                                  I                     I
I                                  I                     I                        I
1            1. French franc       1         17.246      1            0.991       1

1            2. Japanese yen       1          14.423     1            0.380       1

1            3. Swiss   franc      1          6.859                   0.665       1

1           4. U.K. pound          1         10.670      1            0.900       1

1           5. Deutsche mark       1          6.448      1            0.625       1
I                                  I                     I                        I
I                                  I                     I                        I
                                               Table 6




                             a + j1                       +                   + u+1
                                                              E1 c1[(f_e)/e]2

        Sample:    February 1976 to September 1982; Number of Observations: 78
I                        I                                             I                                 I
                         12 (5) b. .O j1,512              12
                                           (5) c. .=O j=1,5 (10) b..:C..O j=1,5
         Currency             ConHdence              ConHdence                  Conidelce


1      1. French        1       19.171                21.7141                    26.951
          franc                  0.998                  0.999                     0.997
I                       I                      I                      I                            I
    ___________________ I ____________________ I ____________________ I __________________________ I
I                       I                      I                       I                                 I
I                       I                      I                       I                                 I
      2. Japanese       1        9.029                   9.753                    44.527
          yen                    0.892         1         0.917         1            0.999
I                       I                      I                       I
I ____________________ I _____________________ I _____________________ I ___________________________ I
                        I                      I                       I                                 I
                        I                      I                       I
      3. Swiss                 22.782                 23.163           1          59.059
          franc                 0.999                  0.999                        0.999


      14. U.K.                   8.578                10.900                      68.693
          pound                  0.873                 0.9147                      0.999
I                       I                      I                       I                                 I
I ___________________ I ____________________ I ____________________ I __________________________ I
I                       I                      I                       I                                 I
I                       I                      I                       I                                 I
1     5. Deutsche       1       13.119                13.292           1          23.633                 1
          mark                   0.978                 0.979           1           0.991                 1

I                       I                      I                       I                                 I
I ___________________ I ____________________ I ____________________ I __________________________ I
                                              Table 7



        (e1-f)/e a. +           ?   b..(f-e)/e +            z   c1E(f-e)/e]2 +            u1

                          Period: February 1976 to October 1979
                           and November 1979 to September 1982
    I                                   I                                      I




               Currency                       Test tatistic                        Confidence
                                                   x(ll)
                                                                               I




                                        I

                                        I                                  I
    I _____________________________ I ________________________________ I ___________________
    I                                   I                                  I                       I
    I                                   I                                  I                       I
         1.   French franc                           12.807                          O.69'4
I                                   I                                      I                       I
I ________________________________ ___________________________________ I _____________________
                                    I                                      I
                                    I                                      I                       I
         2.   Japanese yen                            8.839                I         0.363
I                                   I                                      I                       I
I _______________________________ I _________________________________ I ____________________
I                                   I                                      I                       I
I                                   I                                      I                       I
         3. Swiss    franc
                                    I
                                                     13.018
                                                                           I
                                                                                     0.708
I _______________________________ I _________________________________ I ____________________ I
I                                   I                                      I                       I
 I                                  I                                      $                       I
         4.U.K. pound                               1'4.220                         0.779
I                                    I                                     I                       I
I ________________________________ I ___________________________________ I _____________________ I
I                                   I                                                              I
                                    I                                      I                       I
1        5. Deutsche    mark                        13.392                 1         0.732
I                                   I                                      I                       I
I _____________________________ I ________________________________ I ___________________ I
