                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              CASH-FLOW RISK, DISCOUNT RISK,
                                 AND THE VALUE PREMIUM

                                             Tano Santos
                                            Pietro Veronesi

                                         Working Paper 11816
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11816


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2005




We thank seminar participants at Carnegie Mellon, UCLA, Princeton University, The Federal Reserve Bank
of New York, Columbia Business School, London Business School, London School of Economics, and the
Graduate School of Business of the University of Chicago for their comments and Gene Fama, Lars Hansen,
John Heaton, and Wei Jiang for valuable suggestions. Errors, of course, remain our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2005 by Tano Santos and Pietro Veronesi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Cash-Flow Risk, Discount Risk, and the Value Premium
Tano Santos and Pietro Veronesi
NBER Working Paper No. 11816
December 2005
JEL No. G12

                                           ABSTRACT

A habit persistence, general equilibrium model with multiple assets matches both the time series
properties of the market portfolio and the cross-sectional predictability of returns on price sorted

portfolios, the value premium. Consistent with empirical evidence, the model shows that (a) value

stocks are those with higher cash-flow risk; (b) the size of the value premium is larger in “bad

times,” due to time variation in risk preferences; (c) the unconditional CAPM fails, because of

general equilibrium restrictions on the market portfolio. The dynamic nature of the value premium

rationalizes why the conditional CAPM and a Fama and French (1993) HML factor outperform the

unconditional CAPM.

Tano Santos
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 414
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
js1786@columbia.edu

Pietro Veronesi
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
fpverone@gsb.uchicago.edu
                                        I. INTRODUCTION

         Historically, stocks with high book-to-market ratios, value stocks, have yielded higher
average returns than stocks with low book-to-market ratios, growth stocks. The CAPM’s
major failure is its inability to price book-to-market sorted portfolios. A large collection of ex-
planations – both rational and behavioral – have been proposed to address this value premium
puzzle.1 These explanations though are surprisingly detached from the voluminous literature
that focuses on the properties of the aggregate market portfolio, such as the large equity pre-
mium and the high volatility and predictability of aggregate returns. In this paper we argue
that the time series behavior of the market portfolio imposes general equilibrium restrictions
on the behavior of the cross-section of average returns of price sorted portfolios. These restric-
tions are important as they provide tight implications about the cash-ﬂow characteristics of
value and growth stocks as well as about the variation over time of the value premium itself.
Our predictions are broadly consistent with empirical evidence.
         Speciﬁcally, ours is a representative agent economy where preferences are of the external
habit persistence type introduced by Campbell and Cochrane (1999). This model generates
plausible quantitative implications for the market portfolio through the time variation of the
market price of consumption risk. We follow Menzly, Santos and Veronesi (2004, MSV hence-
forth), and embed these preferences in a general equilibrium setting with multiple risky assets.
These assets have time varying expected dividend growth and diﬀer from each other in their
cash-ﬂow risk, that is, in the covariance of their cash-ﬂow with the aggregate economy. By
generalizing the model of MSV, we are able to obtain numerous predictions about the cross-
section of stock returns. In particular, we show that (a) value stocks are those with higher
cash-ﬂow risk and that cross-sectional diﬀerences in fundamentals cash-ﬂow risk generate a
value premium; (b) the time variation in risk preferences, due to habits, induces ﬂuctuations
in the value premium, which is high whenever the market premium is also high; (c) because
of general equilibrium restrictions on the total wealth portfolio, the unconditional CAPM fails
and thus a value premium puzzle obtains; and (d ) an HML factor lines up returns as it captures
aggregate diﬀerences in cash-ﬂow risk in the economy. In addition, our model sheds light on
the performance of the recently proposed conditional CAPM models.
   1
       For the value premium see Rosenberg, Reid, and Lanstein (1985) and Fama and French (1992) and Fama
and French (1998) for the international evidence. For behavioral explanations see for example Rosenberg, Reid,
and Lanstein (1985), DeBondt and Thaler (1987) and Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1994). For the rational
ones see Fama and French (1993), Lettau and Ludvigson (2001), Gomes, Kogan and Zhang (2003) among others.



                                                      1
         To understand the intuition of our results consider ﬁrst the case where all assets have
identical cash-ﬂow risk and cross-sectional diﬀerences in expected returns arise only because of
diﬀerences in the timing of their cash-ﬂows, that is, in their “durations.” We show that assets
with high expected cash-ﬂow growth are relatively more sensitive to shocks in risk preferences
than otherwise identical assets with low expected cash-ﬂow growth.2 Can these discount eﬀects
alone generate the value premium? No, rather they generate a “growth premium.” Indeed,
assets with strong expected cash-ﬂow growth have high price-dividend ratios and, as just
mentioned, a high sensitivity to changes in the aggregate discount. As a consequence they
command a higher premium and a counterfactual positive relation obtains between price-
dividend ratios and average excess returns.
         Suppose now that instead an asset has low duration and cash-ﬂows that are positively
correlated with aggregate consumption. In this case, and due to its low expected dividend
growth, the total value of this asset is mainly determined by the current level of cash-ﬂows,
rather than by those in the future. The price of the asset is then mostly driven by cash-ﬂow
shocks and the fundamental risk embedded in these cash-ﬂows drives also the risk of the asset.
Thus, when cash-ﬂows display substantial fundamental risk, the asset’s premium is higher
when the duration is lower. Can these cash-ﬂow eﬀects generate the value premium? Yes.
Assets with high cash-ﬂow risk and low duration have low price-dividend ratios. This is due to
both the fact that they are risky, and thus prices have to be low to compensate agents for the
risk they take, and because they have low expected dividend growth. Thus, potentially, the
value premium can now arise, and whether it does or not depends on how the tension between
“discount eﬀects” (high risk when the asset has a high duration) and “cash-ﬂow eﬀects” (high
risk when the asset has low duration) resolves quantitatively. An important objective of this
paper is to analyze and assess this tension.
         A second important contribution of our paper is to obtain predictions for the dynamics
of the value premium. In particular, variation in risk preferences interacts with the cross-
sectional dispersion in cash-ﬂow risk to make value stocks particularly risky during “bad”
times: Agents demand a relatively higher compensation for holding assets with cash-ﬂows that
covary positively with consumption growth when faced with adverse consumption shocks.
         To evaluate the model’s ability to yield quantitatively plausible implications we perform
   2
       This point, which is standard in the ﬁxed income literature, has been emphasized by Cornell (1999) who
builds on Campbell and Mei (1993) to note that “pure technology bets that produce cash ﬂows that are
uncorrelated with the market, but which have long durations, will have high systematic risk.”




                                                       2
an extensive simulation exercise. We choose preferences and cash-ﬂow parameters to match
the time series properties of the aggregate market portfolio and the return moments in the
cross-section respectively. Throughout we mimic the procedure employed in the literature of
sorting assets into decile portfolios formed on the basis of price-dividend ratios.3
         Our simulations show that our consumption based general equilibrium model not only
captures the properties of the aggregate market portfolio, as in Campbell and Cochrane (1999),
but also many stylized facts observed in the cross-section of stock returns. First, a substantial
value premium obtains, with value stocks earning about 5.16% more than growth stocks. This
compares well with the 5.5% premium observed in the data. Second, the model produces a value
premium that is higher in “bad times” than in “good times.” In particular, in the model, the
value premium increases to about 10% whenever the price dividend ratio of the market portfolio
is in the lowest quintile of its distribution. This compares well with the 11% value premium
that obtains when we perform the same exercise in the empirical data. Finally, the variation
over time of the value premium rationalizes also why the conditional CAPM and a Fama and
French (1993) HML factor perform much better than the unconditional CAPM, as observed in
the data as well as in our simulations. Intuitively, conditioning information variables that are
related to risk preferences, such as the consumption-to-wealth ratio of Lettau and Ludvigson
(2001), capture the increase in the relative riskiness of value stocks in “bad times.” Similarly,
the loadings on the HML factor capture cross-sectional diﬀerences in cash ﬂow risk across
portfolios, while the variation over time of the premium on HML captures the dynamics of the
relative riskiness of value versus growth stocks. Indeed, in our simulations the Fama-French
model matches to a remarkable degree its empirical counterpart.
         One important prediction of our model is that the sorting procedure naturally selects as
value stocks those with high cash-ﬂow risk, an implication empirically supported by a recent
collection of papers.4 These papers put forward some empirical measure of cash-ﬂow risk and,
invariably, show that value stocks have more cash-ﬂow risk than growth stocks. Our paper
diﬀers markedly from most of the previous literature in that by proposing a theoretical model
   3
       In our model, a notion of “book value” is not well deﬁned and so we use price-dividend ratios in lieu of
market-to-book ratios throughout (see Santos and Veronesi (2005) and Lettau and Wachter (2005)). Fama
and French (1996, Table II) and Lettau and Wachter (2005, Table I) show that sorting by earnings-to-price or
cash-ﬂow to price generates as sizable a “‘value” premium as sorting by book-to-market.
   4
     See Cohen, Polk and Vuolteenaho (2003), Campbell, Polk and Vuolteenaho (2005), Bansal, Dittmar and
Lundblad (2005), Parker and Julliard (2005), and Hansen, Heaton and Li (2005). Also Liew and Vassalou (2000)
and Vassalou (2003) show that news about forecasts of GDP growth correlate with value stock returns.



                                                        3
we can address whether value stocks have “enough” cash ﬂow risk to explain the magnitude
of the value premium.5 We perform an extensive sensitivity analysis on the parameters of
the cash-ﬂow model and show that “too large” a cross-sectional dispersion in cash-ﬂow risk
is needed to match cross-sectional properties of stock returns. We argue that this result is
partially due to some restrictive assumptions in our model and discuss possible extensions to
obtain more plausible magnitudes for the cross sectional dispersion in cash-ﬂow risk.
         The present paper is obviously related to MSV but there are several diﬀerences with that
paper. First, our model is more general than the one in MSV and the additional ﬂexibility is
instrumental in the empirical performance of the model. Second, and most importantly, we
focus on entirely diﬀerent issues. In particular, whereas MSV are concerned with the time
series predictability of industry portfolios, the present paper focuses on the cross sectional
predictability of value sorted portfolio. The focus on the value premium allows us also to shed
light on the vast literature on cross sectional predictability, something MSV did not touch
upon. Finally, as already noted, the present paper is after a quantitative assessment of the
cash-ﬂow risk eﬀects needed to generate a plausible value premium.
         Our work is also related to three recent articles. A ﬁrst paper is Campbell and Vuolteenaho
(2004) who decompose shocks to market returns into shocks to expected discount rates and
shocks to expected dividend growth rates. They show that value and growth load on these
shocks diﬀerently and this, combined with the market price of risk associated with these shocks,
generates a value premium and its corresponding puzzle. Santos and Veronesi (2005) put for-
ward a general equilibrium model with labor income and multiple ﬁnancial assets and show
that the variation in the labor income-ﬁnancial income mix aﬀects the cross-section of stock
returns. Financial assets have identical cash-ﬂow risk and diﬀer solely in the timing of their
cash ﬂows but a growth premium does not arise because they assume constant risk preferences.
The value premium arises in their model because low duration assets (value stocks) are also
those that contribute more to total dividends and therefore are riskier, thus having lower (nor-
malized) prices and commanding a higher premium relative to growth. Their model, however,
misses the time series properties of the aggregate market portfolio. Lettau and Wachter (2005)
solve this shortcoming by adding to a cash-ﬂow model similar to that of Santos and Veronesi
(2005) an exogenous stochastic discount factor. They assume that the variation in the discount
   5
       A notable exception is Hansen, Heaton and Li (2005). These authors propose a theoretical characterization
of the long run trade-oﬀ between risk and return. They model the cash-ﬂow processes of book-to-market sorted
portfolios and estimate the parameters governing the long-run cash-ﬂow covariation with consumption. They
ﬁnd that growth has low long-run covariation relative to value.


                                                        4
rate is subject to investor sentiment shocks that are uncorrelated to shocks to the aggregate
economy. As a consequence, although growth stocks, which pay far in the future, are more
sensitive to shocks in investor sentiment, they do not command a premium because discount
risk is unpriced. The value premium in Lettau and Wachter (2005) arises through the same
mechanism as in Santos and Veronesi (2005).6 Our approach in this paper is very diﬀerent. In
our framework, the value premium arises because of diﬀerences in cash-ﬂow risk across individ-
ual ﬁrms. We show that value stocks are, endogenously, those with high cash-ﬂow risk and we
measure the amount of cash-ﬂow risk needed to generate a quantitatively plausible value pre-
mium. We also show that the variation in risk preferences and the cross-sectional dispersion in
cash-ﬂow risk interact to generate rich dynamics in the value premium. Finally, in our general
equilibrium model the CAPM fails precisely because of general equilibrium restrictions, rather
than from the variation of labor income or from exogenously speciﬁed sentiment shocks.
         The paper proceeds as follows. Section II introduces the model and III the results.
Section IV evaluates the model’s ability to match basic moments of the returns data, both
in the time series and the cross section. Section V analyzes existing asset pricing models
through the lens of our model. Section VI contains the sensitivity analysis and quantiﬁes the
magnitudes of the cash-ﬂow risk eﬀects that are needed to generate the value premium. Section
VII concludes. All proofs are in the Appendix.

                                            II. THE MODEL

II.A Preferences
         There is a representative investor who maximizes
                                          ∞                  
                                      E       u (Ct , Xt, t) dt ,                                        (1)
                                               0

where the instantaneous utility function is give by
                                                     1−γ
                                         e−ρt (Ct −Xt)
                                                  1−γ                  if γ > 1
                      u (Ct , Xt, t) =                                                                   (2)
                                         e−ρt log (Ct − Xt)            if γ = 1
   6
       See also Brennan, Wang, and Xia (2004) and Brennan and Xia (2005) for a partial equilibrium model that
ties the time series to the cross-section of stock returns. An investment-based general equilibrium model of
the cross-section is also put forward by Gomes, Kogan, and Zhang (2003) who build on the partial equilibrium
model of Berk, Green and Naik (1999). See also Zhang (2005).




                                                       5
In (2), the variable Xt denotes an external habit level and ρ denotes the subjective discount
rate.7 The exact speciﬁcation of the external habit Xt is described below.

II.B Cash-ﬂows

         We consider an endowment economy with n ﬁnancial assets. Each asset has an instan-
taneous dividend stream denoted by Dti , for i = 1, .., n. The aggregate endowment available
for consumption at any time t is then equal to the sum of dividends.8 The consumption good
is immediately perishable and non-storable, which yields the equilibrium restriction
                                                                 n
                                                                 
                                                          Ct =         Dti                                  (3)
                                                                 i=1

and thus speciﬁc assumptions made on the dividend processes immediately translate into par-
ticular dynamics for aggregate consumption. Unfortunately, even relatively simple processes
for Dti imply aggregate consumption processes that are diﬃcult to work with and restrictive
assumptions need to be made for tractability.9 To better understand these restrictions and the
                                                          
nature of our assumptions below10 deﬁne Dt = Dt1 , ..., Dtn and assume that
                                           dDti
                                                = µiD (Dt ) dt + ν i dBt                                   (4)
                                           Dti
for some drifts µiD (Dt), ν i is a n × 1 constant vector, and dBt is a n × 1 vector of Brownian
motions. From equation (3) and Ito’s lemma, the process for aggregate consumption is
                                 dCt
                                        = µc (st) dt + σ c (st) dBt                        (5)
                                  Ct
                                               
where st = s1t , ..., snt = Dt1 /Ct , , ..., Dtn/Ct are shares of consumption produced by divi-
dends, and
                                          n
                                                                                          n
                                                                                           
                             µc (st ) =         sit µiD      and             σ c (st ) =         sit ν i    (6)
                                          i=1                                              i=1
   7
       On habit persistence and asset pricing see Sundaresan (1989), Constantinides (1990), Abel (1990), Ferson
and Constantinides (1991), Detemple and Zapatero (1991), Daniel and Marshall (1997), Campbell and Cochrane
(1999), Heaton (1993 and 1995) Li (2001), and Wachter (2000). These papers only deal with the time series
properties of the market portfolio and have no implications for the risk and return properties of individual
securities. For recent supportive empirical evidence on external habit preferences see Luttmer (2005).
   8
     For consistency with the data, we should consider also other forms of income such as labor income. Doing
so, however, introduces an additional state variable and thus makes the results less transparent. See Santos and
Veronesi (2005) for a discussion of the role of labor income in asset pricing.
   9
     Recently, Cochrane, Longstaﬀ and Santa Clara (2004) managed to solve in closed form the case where n = 2,
dividends are log-normally distributed, and agents are endowed with log utility.
  10
     See also Santos and Veronesi (2005).


                                                                 6
        The main diﬃculty in obtaining tractable expressions for asset prices lies in the depen-
dence of µc (st) and σ c (st ) on the shares st. Still, analytical formulas for asset prices can be
obtained by making economically plausible assumptions on the joint processes of consumption
Ct and shares st , as advanced in MSV and Santos and Veronesi (2005). Here we follow Santos
and Veronesi (2005) and assume:

      Assumption 1: Aggregate consumption is given by
                                      dCt
                                          = µc (st ) dt + σ c dBt
                                      Ct
      where
                     µc (st ) = µc + µc,1 (st)      and       µc,1 (st) = st θ CF .             (7)
                                      
      Above, θ CF   = θ 1CF , ..., θnCF , and σ c = (σc , 0, ..., 0) . The speciﬁcation of θ iCF is
      explained below.

      Assumption 2: For each i, the share sit follows the mean reverting process
                                                
                                dsit = φ si − sit dt + sit σ i (st) · dBt                       (8)

      where
                                                           n
                                                           
                                       σ i (st) = ν i −         sjt ν j                       (9)
                                                           j=1

        The cash-ﬂow model (8) imposes a structure on the relative size of ﬁrms, where “size”
is measured as the fraction of total output produced by a given ﬁrm. In particular, it imposes
the economically plausible assumption that no ﬁrm will take over the economy, as sit > 0 for
                                                               
all i. In addition, the volatility σ i (st) in (9) ensures that ni=1 sit = 1 for all t. It is worth
noting that although the form of the volatility σ i (st ) in (9) seems ad-hoc, it actually stems
from the model (4) - (5), as it is possible to verify by Ito’s lemma.

II.C Cash-ﬂow risk

        Given Assumptions 1 and 2, we can apply Ito’s Lemma to Dti = sit Ct and obtain:
                                    dDti
                                         = µiD,t dt + σ iD (st ) dBt                                   (10)
                                     Dti
where
                                                                       si
                                   µiD,t = µc + θiCF + φ                   −1                          (11)
                                                                       sit
                               σ iD (st) = σ c + σ i (st )                                             (12)

                                                    7
In these formulas,
                                                 θiCF = ν i · σ c

         First, note that when the asset’s relative share, si /sit, is low the asset’s relative contribu-
tion to total consumption is below its long term average and the asset has a higher expected
dividend growth.11 Also, the long term dividend growth of this asset is given by µc , the un-
conditional expected return of consumption growth, as well as a parameter θ iCF , which is asset
speciﬁc and it depends on the correlation of the stock shares with consumption growth.
         Second, the stochastic discount factor is only driven by shocks to consumption growth.
Thus, cash-ﬂow risk is measured by the covariance of dividends with consumption growth
                                             dDti dCt
                           σiCF,t ≡ Covt         ,            = σ c σ c + θiCF − st θ CF          (13)
                                              Dti Ct
The conditional cash-ﬂow risk of asset i, σiCF,t , will play a prominent role in this paper. The
term θiCF −st ·θ CF is parametrically indeterminate, that is, adding a constant to all θiCF leaves
                           
this term unaﬀected, as ni=1 sit = 1. Thus we are free to impose the identiﬁability restriction
                                                 n
                                                 
                                                       sj θjCF = 0,                                 (14)
                                                 j=1

and the expected covariance between asset i’s cash-ﬂow growth and consumption growth is
                                                        
                   i         i                 dDti dCt
                 σ CF = E σ CF,t = E Covt          ,       = σ c σ c + θiCF .       (15)
                                                Dti Ct
The parameter θ iCF then regulates the relative cash-ﬂow risk of individual assets. Notice that
the benchmark level of risk of an asset is the riskiness of aggregate consumption: An asset
is risky (safe) if its cash-ﬂows are more (less) risky than aggregate consumption. This is a
general equilibrium restriction as, by deﬁnition, the variance of consumption growth must be
a weighted average of its covariances with individual dividend growth. Throughout we refer
to either σ iCF or θiCF as “cash-ﬂow risk” as there is a one to one mapping between them.
         Finally note that the model is internally consistent: If we apply the general equilibrium
restriction on the drift of the consumption process, (6), to the dividend process (10)
                                       n
                                   dCt
                              Et        =    sit µiD,t = µc + st θ CF ,                            (16)
                                   Ct
                                                  i=1

which equals (7) in Assumption 1. Consumption growth then is not i.i.d. but rather has some
predictable components which are linked to variation in the vector of shares, st . Still, as we
show below there is little predictability in practice as the parameters θiCF are small.
 11
      MSV test this prediction in a set of industry portfolios and ﬁnd strong support for it.


                                                          8
II.D Habit Dynamics

      In Campbell and Cochrane’s (1999) habit model the fundamental state variable driving
the attitudes towards risk is the surplus consumption ratio, St = (Ct − Xt ) Ct−1 . To obtain
closed form solutions for prices when there are multiple securities MSV use a log habit model
and specify instead the inverse surplus St−1 as a mean reverting process. MSV’s modelling
device though cannot be applied when γ > 1 and, moreover, they only obtain approximate
formulas for the case θ iCF = 0. Thus here we opt for a diﬀerent strategy and model the process
                                                       γ
                                               Ct             −γ
                                    Gt =                   = St .                              (17)
                                            Ct − Xt
      To obtain a plausible, yet tractable, model for the dynamics of Gt, consider ﬁrst the
implications for Gt under the standard assumption that Xt is an exponentially weighted average
of past consumption levels, as in Constantinides (1990) and Detemple and Zapatero (1991),
                                          t
                                  Xt = λ      e−λ(t−τ ) Cτ dτ .
                                              −∞

An application of Ito’s Lemma to (17) yields the process

                     dGt = µG (Gt) − σ G (Gt) µc,1 (st ) dt − σ G (Gt) σc dBt1 ,               (18)

where µG (Gt) and σ G (Gt) > 0 are complicated functions of Gt, provided in equations (29)
and (30) in the Appendix. Equation (18) shows that a higher expected consumption growth
µc,1 (st ) implies a lower drift rate of Gt. Intuitively, an increase in the expected growth rate of
consumption implies a high future level of consumption relative to the current habit Xt and
thus a higher surplus consumption ratio St and, given (17), a lower expected Gt . As in MSV
and Campbell and Cochrane (1999), we make speciﬁc assumptions on µG (Gt) and σ G (Gt) in
(18) to obtain a more manageable process. In particular, we assume
                                       
                    µG (Gt ) = k G − Gt         and        σG (Gt ) = α (Gt − λ) .             (19)

      The ﬁrst component of the drift of Gt is a mean reversion component and captures the
basic idea of habit persistence models, namely that the habit Xt eventually “catches up” with
Ct . The second component, as discussed above, links the drift rate of Gt to µc,1 (st). As for the
diﬀusion component, and as in MSV, λ ≥ 1 bounds Gt from below at λ and α > 0 transmits
the innovations in consumption growth, dBt1 , to the convexity of the utility function. Note
that MSV’s model is a special case of (18) and (19) and obtains when γ = 1 and consumption
growth is i.i.d., which is achieved by setting µc,1 (st ) = 0.

                                                   9
                    III. EQUILIBRIUM ASSET PRICES AND RETURNS

III.A The total wealth portfolio

          We start by characterizing some basic properties of the total wealth portfolio as the
intuition for some of these results becomes useful later.

         Proposition 1: The price-consumption ratio, the expected excess return and dif-
         fusion terms of the total wealth portfolio are, respectively:

                     PtT W                                    γ
                               = αT0 W (st) + αT1 W (st) St                                      (20)
                      Ct
                                                     ⎧                                         ⎫
                                                     ⎨ S γ α (1 − λS γ )       n              ⎬
               Et dRTt W       = (γ + α (1 − λStγ ))      t         t
                                                                         σ 2
                                                                             +     w TW j
                                                                                        σ CF,t ⎭ (21)
                                                     ⎩ f1T W (st) + Stγ c            jt
                                                                               j=1
                                                          n
                                   Stγ α (1 − λStγ )           TW j
                      σ TR,t
                          W
                               =                     σc +     wjt σ D (st ) ,                        (22)
                                   f1T W (st) + Stγ       j=1
                                                            
         where αT0 W (st ), αT1 W (st ), f1T W (st ) and wjt
                                                          TW
                                                               are given in the Appendix.

          As in Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and MSV the price-consumption ratio of the total
wealth portfolio is increasing in the surplus consumption ratio St : A high St implies a low
local curvature of the utility function, a “less risk averse” attitude of the representative agent,
and thus a higher price-consumption ratio. Unlike Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and MSV,
the price-consumption ratio now depends on the entire vector of shares st . The reason is that
the general equilibrium restriction (5) generates a mild predictability in consumption growth
(see equation (6)). The functions αT0 W (st ) and αT1 W (st) are typically decreasing in expected
consumption growth, because in our set up the elasticity of intertemporal substitution is less
than one. Thus, this component implies that an increase in µc (st) results in lower prices.12
          As for the expected excess returns, (21), the term in parenthesis captures the fact that,
intuitively, a high curvature parameter, γ, or a low surplus, St, imply high expected returns.
The ﬁrst term of the expression in brackets is linked to discount eﬀects: As shown in the pricing
function, changes in St induce a volatility of stock returns which is perfectly correlated with
the stochastic discount factor, and thus it is priced. MSV discuss this eﬀect more thoroughly.
  12
       To review the economic reasoning, a low elasticity of intertemporal substitution implies a desire for con-
sumption smoothing. Thus, an increase in expected consumption growth yields a higher desire of current
consumption, and thus lower savings. The consumer then sell stocks and bonds, resulting in a decrease of the
price-consumption ratio of the total wealth portfolio.


                                                         10
The second term in the bracket is the premium investors require because of changes in ex-
pected consumption growth. This term is typically negative. The reason is that our modelling
device induces a mild positive correlation between shocks to consumption growth and shocks
to expected consumption growth. Thus, a negative shock to consumption growth decreases the
expected consumption growth which, as explained earlier, induces a positive impulse to the
price. As a result, this component carries a negative premium.

III.B. Prices and returns for individual securities

        Proposition 2: The price of asset i is given by
                                         Pti                                  si                      si
                                             = αi0 + αi1 Stγ + αi2 (st)             + αi3 (st) Stγ                       (23)
                                         Dti                                  sit                     sit
        where αi0 , αi1 are positive constants and αi2 (st) and αi3 (st ) are positive linear func-
        tions of the share vector st given in the Appendix.

        As before, a higher surplus consumption ratio St, which implies lower “risk aversion,” or
a higher expected dividend growth, as measured by the relative share si /sit (see (11)), result
naturally in higher price-dividend ratios. The last term in (23) shows that shocks to the
surplus consumption ratio have a stronger eﬀect on the price-dividend ratio the higher the
asset’s expected dividend growth. This is linked to the duration eﬀect that so prominent a role
plays in what follows. Finally, as it was true for the total wealth portfolio, the price of each
individual asset also depends on functions of the vectors of shares αi2 (st ) and αi3 (st) and the
intuition for the eﬀect of changes in st on prices is identical to the one discussed above.

        Proposition 3: The expected excess return of asset i is given by

                                                       Et dRit = µDISC
                                                                  i,t  + µCF
                                                                          i,t

        where
                                                 ⎛   ⎞
                                           γ
                                         S
µDISC
 i,t      = (γ + α (1 − λStγ )) ⎝  i t             ⎠ α (1 − λStγ ) σ2c                                                 (24)
                                   i  s            γ
                                 f1 si , st + St
                                ⎡⎛     t
                                                                  ⎞                              ⎤
                                             1                                
 µCF
  i,t     = (γ + α (1 − λStγ )) ⎣⎝                   i  + η iit ⎠ σ iCF,t +      η ijt σ jCF,t ⎦                       (25)
                                         i           s
                                   1 + f2 (St , st) si                        j=i
                                                                          t

        with
                                                             
                                     αi0 + αi2 (st) si /sit                                            αi2 (st) + αi3 (st) Stγ
        f1i       i
                  s   /sit , st       = i                     >0        and          f2i   (St , st) =                         > 0,
                                       α1 + αi3 (st) si /sit                                                  αi0 + αi1 Stγ

                                                                     11
      and η ijt are given in Appendix.

      Proposition 3 shows that the expected excess return of individual stocks can be divided
in two components. These two terms correspond to the two sources of shocks to returns:
discount shocks and cash-ﬂow shocks. We elaborate on them in detail next.

III.B.1 Discount risk eﬀects

      The source of this component of the risk premium, µDISC
                                                         i,t  , is the variation of the aggre-
                               γ
gate discount – proxied by St . To interpret further this term notice ﬁrst that

                                    ∂Pti /Pti           Stγ
                                              =                     .                        (26)
                                    ∂Stγ /Stγ   f1 si /sit , st + Stγ

is the elasticity of prices to shocks in the variable driving the aggregate discount, which is Stγ .
The volatility of these discount shocks is

                                             α (1 − λStγ ) σ c ,

which is the diﬀusion component of dStγ /Stγ , the inverse of our state variable Gt , as it follows
from a basic application of Ito’s Lemma to (18) . Clearly, only the component of these shocks
that covaries with the shocks to the stochastic discount factor is priced which, given (31) in
the Appendix, is
                                   [γ + α (1 − λStγ )] α (1 − λStγ ) σ2c .                     (27)

The component of the asset’s premium that is linked to discount eﬀects is then the product of
(26) and (27) .
      Cross-sectional variation in the discount eﬀects can only be driven by diﬀerences in the
                                                                                            
price elasticity (26), which is in turn driven by the behavior of the function f1 si /sit, st . We
have been unable to obtain a general characterization of this function, but for parameter values
that are empirically relevant we ﬁnd that
                                                          
                                           ∂f1 si /sit, st
                                                       < 0,
                                             ∂ si /sit

and thus assets with a higher expected dividend growth, as measured by the relative share si /sit,
display stronger discount eﬀects. The intuition is straightforward: stocks with a high expected
dividend growth pay the bulk of their proceeds far in the future. Thus, minor variations in
the aggregate discount rate – through the risk aversion of the representative investor – result


                                                     12
in large percentage variations of the price of the asset. This variation is naturally priced and
thus the higher required premium of assets with high relative shares.

III.B.2 Cash-ﬂow risk eﬀects

      The source of premia related to cash-ﬂow shocks, µCF
                                                        i,t , has two components to it, see
equation (25). The ﬁrst is related to shocks in the asset’s dividends and the second is related to
shocks in the dividends of the rest of the assets in the economy, which, as shown in (23) , aﬀect
the price of asset i as well. The logic for the sources of the premia linked to cash-ﬂow shocks
is the same as in the discount eﬀects case. First it can be easily shown that the elasticity of
the price with respect to shocks to its own dividends is,

                               ∂Pti /Pti            1
                                         =                  i  + η iit .
                               ∂Dti/Dti    1 + f2 (St , st) ssi
                                                i
                                                              t

                             i
                                           i i              
Recall also that we denote σ CF,t = covt dDt/Dt , dCt/Ct (see equation (13)). The ﬁrst term of
µCF
 i,t is then the component of the dividend shocks that covaries with shocks to the stochastic
discount factor multiplied by the eﬀect that these shocks have on the price of asset i, as
measured by the price elasticity. A similar logic applies to the second term in µCF
                                                                                 i,t . Indeed it
can be shown that
                                     ∂Pti /Pti
                                                 = η ijt   for j = i.
                                    ∂Dtj /Dtj
As before this component of the premium results from the product of this (cross) elasticity
                                                                         j
and the priced component of the shock to asset j’s dividends, σ CF,t .
      How does the current level expected dividend growth, as measured by si /sit , aﬀect the
cash-ﬂow risk component of expected stock returns? Given the conditional covariance of the
dividend of asset i with aggregate consumption, σiCF,t , the ﬁrst term of (25) is unambiguous:
Since f2i (St , st) > 0, if the asset is “risky”, that is, if σiCF,t > 0, then a high expected dividend
growth translates in a lower premium stemming from current dividend volatility. The intuition
is also clear: a stock that pays more in the future than today has a relatively low dividend
compared to the future. Thus, the risk embedded in current dividends, σiCF,t , has a relatively
low impact on the total risk of stock. In the limit, if the stocks does not pay any dividend
today, it cannot have any “cash-ﬂow risk”, as there is zero current covariance of dividends
with consumption. If instead the asset’s dividends covary negatively with consumption growth
(σiCF,t < 0), then a high expected dividend growth increases the risk premium. The argument,
of course, is the converse of the previous one.


                                                     13
      The eﬀect that the current expected dividend growth of asset i has on the second term
of the cash-ﬂow risk component of stock return (25) is more diﬃcult to tell. To quantify these
eﬀects, the top panel of Figure 1 plots the quantity µCF
                                                      i,t as a function of the unconditional
                        
                i          i
cash-ﬂow risk σ CF = E σCF,t at the steady state, that is, for the case where St = S and
st = s. As it can be seen, the cash-ﬂow component of expected return is increasing in σ iCF . Note
however, that there is a negative “bias” in this component of expected excess return. Indeed
the case σiCF = 0 still implies a negative expected excess return stemming from cash-ﬂow risk
eﬀects. This is due to the second component in (25), which is related to the time variation in
the aggregate expected consumption growth. As we discussed in the case of the total wealth
portfolio, this component carries typically a negative risk premium. Finally, the bottom panel
of Figure 1 plots µCF                     i
                   i,t as a function of σ CF for the case where St = S but for a random draw of
shares st. Although an increasing pattern in σiCF can be easily seen, cross-sectional diﬀerences
in si /sit may make the component µCF                                                      i
                                   i,t of an asset with high unconditional cash-ﬂow risk σ CF
temporarily lower than that of an asset with lower cash-ﬂow risk σ iCF .

III.C The value premium

      In order to gauge the source of the value premium in our model it is convenient to turn
to Figure 2. Panels A, B, and C plot µDISC
                                      i,t  , µCF                       i
                                              i,t , and the total Et dRt respectively against
the relative share si /sit for various levels of the asset’s unconditional cash-ﬂow risk σ iCF , which
correspond to diﬀerent values of θ iCF (see expression (15)). In all cases, the level of surplus St
is set to its steady state value S. The parameters used are those of the calibration exercise
discussed in detail in the next section.
      Start with Panel A. As discussed in Section III.B.2, the discount risk component of
expected return is increasing in the relative share si /sit , that is, with expected dividend growth
(see (11)). The reason is that assets with high relative shares are more sensitive to shocks in
the stochastic discount factor. These shocks are naturally priced and thus the higher required
premia of assets with high relative shares. In addition, the discount risk component of expected
returns does depend as well on the asset’s unconditional cash-ﬂow risk σiCF : Stocks with higher
cash-ﬂow risk σiCF have a larger discount risk component in expected returns. The intuition
is that stocks with a higher σ iCF are riskier and as a consequence have lower prices. It follows
that changes in the stochastic discount factor have a larger impact, in percentages, on the
prices of assets with higher levels of cash-ﬂow risk. Notice though that the higher the level
of the cash-ﬂow risk the lower the eﬀect of a change in the relative share on the discount risk
component of expected returns.

                                                 14
         Panel B of Figure 2 plots the cash-ﬂow risk component of expected returns which, as
discussed in Section III.B.2, is decreasing in expected dividend growth for stocks with high
cash-ﬂow risk. Finally, Panel C reports the total expected return for each asset that is obtained
by adding to the discount risk component the cash-ﬂow risk component of stock returns.
III.C.1 Discount risk eﬀects and the “growth premium”
         In our framework, and given expression (23), sorting assets according to their price-
dividend ratio is akin to sorting them on both cash-ﬂow risk, σ iCF , and expected dividend
growth, si /sit . In particular, value stocks (assets with low P/D ratios) are, on average, asso-
ciated with high σ iCF and low expected dividend growth si /sit . Consider now the case where
cross-sectional diﬀerences in cash-ﬂow risk are “small” (e.g. θ iCF ≈ 0 for all i). Then, σiCF
are roughly the same across all assets and the sorting procedure selects assets according to
expected dividend growth. In this case, discount eﬀects dominate and the total expected excess
return are as in the lower line of Panel A. Since low price-dividend ratio stocks are those with
low relative shares si /sit, value stocks are found on the left-hand side of the panel and thus have
low expected excess returns. Similarly, high price-dividend ratio stocks are those with high
si /sit and growth stocks are on the right-hand side of the panel and have high expected excess
returns. Thus, if cross-sectional diﬀerences in cash-ﬂow risk are “small,”then growth stocks
have higher expected excess returns than value stocks and a “growth premium” obtains.13

III.C.2 Cash-ﬂow risk eﬀects
         It follows from the discussion above that for a value premium to obtain there must be
suﬃciently large cross-sectional diﬀerences in cash-ﬂow risk. Indeed, consider now Panel C,
which reports the total expected return when both discount eﬀects (Panel A) and cash-ﬂow
eﬀects (Panel B) are present. Value stocks (assets with low P/D ratio) have on average high
risk (σiCF ) and low expected dividend growth (si /sit ). This combination corresponds to the
area around the top-left corner of the plot, that is, to high expected excess return. Conversely,
growth stocks (assets with high P/D ratios) must have a combination of low σ iCF and high
si /sit . This combination can be found on the bottom-right corner of the plot. As it can be seen
then value stocks will command a high premium and growth stocks a low (and even negative)
premium. Thus, if cross-sectional diﬀerences in cash-ﬂow risk are “large”, then value stocks
have higher expected excess returns than growth stocks and a “value premium” obtains.
  13
       This result is in contrast with Lettau and Wachter (2005) who ﬁnd a value premium with homogeneous cash
ﬂow risk. In their partial equilibrium setting, variation in the market price of risk is due to “investor sentiment”
and it is not priced. Thus diﬀerences in expected future cash ﬂows do not yield diﬀerences in expected returns.



                                                        15
III.C.3 The dynamics of the value premium
         The presence of discount risk eﬀects which are associated with the time series variation in
risk preferences have implications for the dynamics of the value premium. Essentially, discount
risk eﬀects interact with the cross-sectional dispersion in cash-ﬂow risk to induce ﬂuctuations
in the value premium, as shown in Figure 3. This ﬁgure plots the expected excess returns of
three assets against the surplus consumption ratio, St. The dotted line shows the expected
excess return of the market portfolio; the solid line corresponds to the expected excess return of
a representative value stock with high cash-ﬂow risk and low expected dividend growth; ﬁnally
the dash line corresponds to the premium of a representative growth stock with low cash-ﬂow
risk and high expected dividend growth. As it can be seen, when the surplus consumption ratio
is low (high), the value premium is high (low): Assets with a high value of θ iCF are particularly
riskier when the representative agent’s is highly risk averse which occurs whenever adverse
consumption growth shocks depress the surplus consumption ratio, increasing in turn the
market premium and its dividend yield. Thus in our model the value premium has a strong
predictable component, being high (low) when the market premium is high (low).

                                 IV. EMPIRICAL PREDICTIONS

         In this section we conduct a simulation study to evaluate the extent to which the model
can match the standard return moments both in the time series and the cross-section, which
can be found in Table I. The data set is standard and it is very brieﬂy described in the Notes to
Table I. Panel A shows mean and standard deviation for the returns on the market portfolio and
the risk free rate. Panel B shows the predictability regressions of Fama and French (1988) and
Campbell and Shiller (1988) for two diﬀerent sample periods, which are meant to emphasize
the sensitivity of these results to the particular period under consideration. Panel C shows the
value premium and its corresponding puzzle, the failure of the CAPM to generate the large
cross-sectional dispersion in average returns across book-to-market sorted portfolios.

IV.A Details of the simulation

         We simulate the model presented in Section II.B with 10,000 years of quarterly data for
200 ﬁrms. We sort these assets into ten portfolios according to their price-dividend ratio14 in
an eﬀort to mimic the standard procedure used in the cross-sectional literature and focus our
  14
       Our model does not have “book” so we normalize prices by our theoretical cash-ﬂow measure. The “value
premium” obtains when either earnings or cash-ﬂows are used to normalize prices. See, for instance, Fama and
French (1996, Table II) and Fama and French (1998, Table III), which also includes international evidence.


                                                      16
analysis on these ten portfolios. Table II contains the parameter values that are going to be
used throughout and which were chosen to generate moments in simulated data close to their
empirical counterparts in Table I. We set the average and standard deviation of consumption
growth at 2% and 1.5% respectively. This latter value should be measured against the value
in the postwar sample of 1.22% and the one for the longer sample starting in 1889, which is
3.32%.15 We choose γ = 1.5, which is between the values used by MSV, γ = 1, and Campbell
and Cochrane (1999), γ = 2. This choice implies a steady state value of the local curvature
                                   −1
of the utility function of γS           = 48, higher than the already high value of Campbell and
Cochrane (1999) which is 35. The minimum value of this local curvature is 27.75. Finally the
parameter k and α are similar to the values chosen by MSV.
         As for the share process, we assume that all of the 200 simulated assets have the same
steady state contribution to overall consumption, si = 1/200 = .005. Also the speed of mean
reversion is set at φ = .07, which is the value estimated by MSV for the market portfolio. The
key parameter of interest in our model is the one that controls diﬀerences in cash-ﬂow risk,
θ iCF . Our general equilibrium setting requires that this parameter is symmetrically distributed
around zero (see (14)). Then we assume

                                            θ iCF ∈ −θ CF , θCF ,

where θ CF > 0. Throughout, and with some abuse of terminology, we refer to θ CF as the cash-
ﬂow risk parameter but the reader should keep in mind that it is the support of the cash-ﬂow
risk parameters of individual assets.
         Finally we choose the vector ν i in (9) so that for each i it only has two non-zero entries:
ν i = (ν i,0 , 0, ..., 0, νi,i , 0, ..). Given θ iCF , the ﬁrst entry by deﬁnition must be ν i,0 = θ iCF /σ c . To
avoid parameter proliferation, the second entry – the idiosyncratic part – is chosen constant
across all assets according to the formula, ν 2i,i = ν 2 − max(ν 2i,0 ), where ν is a chosen parameter.
In words, ν is the maximum share volatility across assets.
         We start by discussing a baseline case with θ CF = .00345 and ν = .55 for it generates a
quantitatively plausible value premium. We investigate this case in detail and then, in Section
VI, we study the behavior of the model under diﬀerent values for θ CF and ν. We also postpone
a discussion of the size of the cash-ﬂow risk eﬀects until that section.




  15
       See Campbell and Cochrane (1999) Table 2.


                                                       17
IV.B The time series properties of the market and the value premium

      Table III is the analog to Table I but in simulated data. As shown in Panel A, the model
generates a sizable, if slightly low, equity premium and volatility of stock returns, and the risk
free rate moments are reasonable. Panel B of Table III shows the predictability regressions
for all the standard horizons. As already mentioned the model does well in this dimension:
The coeﬃcients all have positive signs and increase with the forecasting horizon as do the
t− statistics. The R2 s are relatively lower than their empirical counterparts but not far oﬀ
the mark for the case of the 1948-2001 sample. These results simply reproduce the good
performance of Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and MSV for the market portfolio.
      Panel C of Table III contains the average excess returns for the ten sorted portfolios.
The value premium obtains nicely in our setup. Indeed the value premium is a healthy 5.16%,
only slightly below the empirically observed one of 5.50%. Notice though that the average
excess returns for each portfolio are below their empirical counterparts. The reason is that, as
mentioned above, the model misses the equity premium by about 3%. This low premium also
aﬀects the Sharpe ratio, which is low relative to its empirical counterpart but, importantly,
they decrease with the price-dividend ratio, an important feature of the data (see Table I.)
                                 
      The line denoted Avge θiCF × 100 reports the average cash-ﬂow risk parameter for each
of the ten portfolios. As discussed in Section III.C, the sorting procedure picks cross-sectional
variation in the cash-ﬂow risk parameter, θiCF : Stocks in the value portfolio, portfolio 10,
have, on average, a high cash-ﬂow risk parameter whereas the opposite is true for the growth
portfolio, portfolio 1. In our framework, and in line with much of the recent empirical research
on this issue (see Section VI.A), value stocks are indeed riskier in the cash-ﬂow sense and the
strength of this eﬀect is enough to undo the natural “discount riskiness” of growth stocks.

IV.C The dynamics of the value premium

      To ascertain the time series variation of the value premium, Table IV Panel A shows
the average excess return of the ﬁrst and tenth decile portfolio as a function of whether the
market-to-book ratio of the market portfolio is above or below a certain percentile, denoted
by c. For instance, the ﬁrst line shows that the average excess rate of return of the ﬁrst
decile (growth) portfolio is 13.18% if the market-to-book of the market portfolio is below the
15th percentile of its empirical distribution and that of the tenth decile (value) portfolio is
23.57%. The value premium is then 10.38%. Instead when the market-to-book is above the
15th percentile the ﬁrst decile portfolio has an average excess return of 5.73% and the tenth


                                               18
portfolio has one of 10.35% for a total value premium of 4.62%, which is considerably lower
than the previous one. This pattern holds for any cut-oﬀ point: The value premium is higher
whenever the market-to-book of the market portfolio is low which are also periods where the
                                                                                    M
average excess return of the market is high, as shown in the columns headed by R .
      Panel B of Table IV reports the same calculations as in Panel A but in simulated data.
The only diﬀerence is that, naturally, instead of using the market-to-book we use the price-
dividend ratio of the market portfolio to identify the state. The pattern is indeed very similar
with the only exception of the level of the premia which is, as already discussed, lower than in
the data. The value premium is higher when the price-dividend ratio of the market portfolio is
low than when it is high. For instance, when the price-dividend ratio of the market portfolio
is below the 15th percentile the value premium is 10.90% whereas when it is above is only
4.15%, very close to their empirical counterparts. In summary then, the discount risk eﬀects
needed to replicate the time series properties of the market portfolio interact with the cross-
sectional dispersion in cash-ﬂow risk to generate variation in the value premium. Value stocks
are particularly risky during bad times, periods when the aggregate market premium and its
dividend yield are high relative to their unconditional mean, an eﬀect that is present both in
the data and the model.

            V. THE CAPM AND OTHER ASSET PRICING MODELS

      A central ﬁnding of the empirical asset pricing literature is the inability of CAPM of
Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965) to explain the value premium. In our setup the CAPM
does not hold but the question remains as to whether it performs well in simulated data. We
address this issue in Section V.A. In Sections V.B and V.C we investigate the extent to which
our framework is consistent with two popular and successful models designed to address the
value premium puzzle: The Fama and French (1993) model and the conditional asset pricing
models proposed of late of which Lettau and Ludvigson (2001) is the foremost example. In
particular, given that in our set up all these models are misspeciﬁed, what is the feature of
the data that these models capture that generates the “good ﬁt” relative to the CAPM?
V.A The CAPM
V.A.1 The CAPM and the value premium puzzle
      The value premium puzzle can be seen in the last line of Table I Panel C (CAPM β).
The beta of the sorted portfolios is ﬂat if not slightly decreasing in the market-to-book, at



                                              19
odds with the strong increasing pattern in average returns.16 The CAPM produces no cross-
sectional dispersion in its measure of risk when confronted with substantial variation in average
returns. To do this more formally we turn to Table V Panel A where we report the results of
time series regressions of the excess returns on each of the ten portfolios on the excess returns
on the market portfolio,

                             p                     p
                           Rt = α + β M RM
                                         t +       t        for   p = 1, 2, · · · , 10.

We do this for both empirical (Panel A-1) and simulated data (Panel A-2). The panel shows
the intercepts in the time series, α, and its corresponding t−statistic, t (α) . It also reports the
                                                          
beta on the market portfolio, β M and its t−statistic, t β M . We have omitted the t−statistic
on the loading for the case of simulated data because, as in the empirical data, they are all
strongly signiﬁcant (well above 100).
         Start with the case of the empirical data, Panel A-1. The intercepts, “alphas” of the
CAPM time series regressions are large and statistically signiﬁcant. Growth stocks have large
negative intercepts whereas value stocks have large positive ones. The poor performance of
the CAPM can also be seen in line 1 of Panel A in Table VI, where we report the standard
Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional regressions. The coeﬃcient is not statistically signiﬁcant, enters
with the wrong sign and the R2 is just 11%.
         Turn next to the time series regressions in simulated data, Panel A-2 of Table V. Unlike
the case in the empirical data, the betas cross-sectionally correlate positively with average
excess returns, an important issue on which more below. Still the cross-sectional dispersion
in betas is not enough to match the cross-sectional dispersion in average returns generated by
the model. Indeed the pattern and statistical signiﬁcance of the intercepts in simulated data is
similar to its counterpart in empirical data. A visual impression of this result can be obtained
by looking at the bottom panel of Figure 4, which shows the average excess returns for the ten
decile simulated portfolios plotted against the CAPM ﬁtted returns. As it can be seen, while
average returns range between 3.07% for high price-dividend ratio stocks and 8.23% for low
price-dividend ratio stocks, the “ﬁtted” returns only range between 3.67% and 5.50%. That
is, the model not only generates the value premium but also the value premium puzzle.
  16
       The inability of the CAPM to explain the cross section of average returns is pronounced in the postwar
sample used in this paper. Recently though Ang and Chen (2005) and Fama and French (2005) show that the
behavior of the CAPM in the earlier sample covering 1927-1963 is much better. Still Daniel and Titman (2005,
Table 3) and Fama and French (2005) perform triple sorts, on ME, BE/ME and (preformation) market beta to
ﬁnd variation in average returns unrelated to beta thus rejecting the CAPM also in the long sample.


                                                       20
V.A.2 Fama-MacBeth regressions in simulated data

         In our simulated data, the CAPM betas correlate positively with average excess returns.
Thus cross-sectional regressions that impose no constraints on the level of estimated market
premium may immediately induce a good ﬁt as measured by the R2 . This can be seen in line 5 of
Panel B in Table VI, where we run the Fama-MacBeth regression in artiﬁcial data: The CAPM
produces a good ﬁt with an R2 of 91%. Moreover the market enters signiﬁcantly and with the
right sign. The estimated quarterly market premium though is 2.56%, which corresponds to
an annualized value above 10%. This number should be compared to the market premium in
our model which is 4.35% (see Table III Panel A.) Thus the CAPM “works” in our model at
the expense of an unreasonable level in the market premium.17

V.B The Fama and French (1993) model

V.B.1 Cash-ﬂow risk eﬀects, discount risk eﬀects, and HML

         The Fama and French (1993) model has become a standard benchmark in asset pricing
tests. How well does it work in our set up? To answer this question we construct an HML
factor in artiﬁcial data that is long the three top decile portfolios and short the bottom three
shown in Table III Panel C. This panel also reports the average cash-ﬂow risk parameter θiCF
for each of the decile portfolios. There is a clear ordering of the average cash-ﬂow risk across
decile portfolios: Value stocks have a much larger value of θ iCF than growth stocks. HML then
captures cross-sectional variation in θ iCF across price-dividend sorted portfolios. In addition, as
shown in Figure 3, it is important to emphasize that diﬀerences in cash-ﬂow risk θiCF also yield
diﬀerences in the impact that discount eﬀects have on expected returns. HML then captures
both cash-ﬂow risk and, partly, discount risk.

V.B.2. Time series and cross-sectional regressions evidence

         Table V Panel B presents the results of time series regressions,

                  Rpt = α + β M RM           HM L
                                 t + β HM L Rt    +        p
                                                           t      for     p = 1, 2, · · · , 10.

Panel B-1 shows the results in the case of the empirical data. The results are well known.
The intercepts go down considerably and only one of them is statistically signiﬁcant; value
  17
       This message has recently been emphasized by Lewellen and Nagel (2005) and Daniel and Titman (2005):
A small but slightly positive cross-sectional covariation between betas and average returns can result in the
unwarranted support of asset pricing models that fail to impose economically based restrictions on the size of
the premia of the proposed factors.


                                                     21
(growth) stocks have a large (small) loading on HML and the inclusion of HML in the time
series regression collapses the betas on the market portfolio around 1 (see Fama and French
(1993, page 21-26)).
         Panel B-2 shows the time series regression in simulated data. Again we do not report
the t−statistic on the loadings on the market and HML as they are all above 100. Turning
ﬁrst to the loadings on the market portfolio, notice that, as it was the case in the empirical
sample, adding HML to the time series regressions has the eﬀect of reducing the spread in the
estimates of β iM and collapse them around 1. As Fama and French (1993) note this pattern is
related to the negative correlation between the market and the returns on HML.
         As for the loading on the HML portfolio notice that it has a strong cross-sectional
variation which reﬂects the cross-sectional variation in the underlying cash-ﬂow risk of the
diﬀerent portfolios. Indeed the loading on HML of the growth portfolio is −.28 whereas that
of the value portfolio is 1.07. Also the size of the intercepts of the time series regressions drop
considerably relative to the size of the intercepts when only the market portfolio is present.18
Moreover there is no longer any pattern in the variation of the intercept across decile portfolios,
and their t-stats are much lower than in Panel A, which shows that HML is capturing the
systematic pattern of misspricing documented in Panel A.
         The evidence in the Fama-MacBeth regression conﬁrms the time series evidence. Line 2
of Table VI Panel A shows that HML enters signiﬁcantly and the estimated size of the premium
on HML is very close to the average excess return of the HML portfolio. This is also the case in
our simulated regression, which is shown in line 6 of Panel B in Table VI. The coeﬃcient on the
loading on HML is very similar to its empirical counterpart and, once annualized, close to our
estimated average excess return on the HML portfolio, which is 3.21%. The only caveat is that
the market portfolio is signiﬁcant in our simulated Fama-MacBeth regressions whereas it is not
in the empirical data. Yet, this table shows that the inclusion of HML in the cross-sectional
regression aligns the portfolios correctly, as the intercept is now close to zero (with t−statistics
equal to −1.64 even with 40,000 observations) and the (quarterly) market premium equals
1.31%, which annualized is 5.24%, still higher than the average market return in simulation
(4.35%), but much smaller than the one obtained for the CAPM case.



  18
       Notice that the value-weighted sum of the alphas should be equal to zero. Given that the only negative
alpha is that of the growth portfolio, it must be the case that some of the assets in the growth portfolio must
have extreme prices. We thank Gene Fama for pointing out this to us.


                                                      22
V.C Conditional asset pricing models

         Conditional asset pricing models have been proposed recently to address the inability
of the CAPM to explain the value premium. The idea, as advanced by Hansen and Richard
(1987), is that the CAPM may fail unconditionally but may hold conditionally and thus tests
of the CAPM that ignore conditioning information are misspeciﬁed. Researchers have reacted
to this observations by using as a proxy for investors’ information set variables that are known
to forecast returns in the time series.19 Typically this has led to tests of multifactor model
where the additional factor, other than the market, is the market itself interacted with the
proposed conditioning variables.
         Lines 3 and 4 in Panel A of Table VI shows that conditioning by the dividend yield of
the market portfolio and the cay variable of Lettau and Ludvigson (2001) results also in a
coeﬃcient for the instrumented market that is strongly signiﬁcant. In addition the R2 is an
impressive 83% and 81% respectively. Panel B, line 7 shows that our model does also well in this
dimension. When we interact the returns of the market portfolio with the simulated dividend
yield of the market portfolio we obtain a strongly signiﬁcant coeﬃcient and, once again, of
similar magnitude to its empirical counterpart.20 The intuition behind these conditional asset
pricing models is that they capture the fact that value stocks become relatively riskier in bad
times, as shown in Table IV and Figure 3. In our setup the conditional CAPM does not
hold but is mechanically bound to do better than its unconditional counterpart because it
captures the conditional eﬀects that arise out of the interaction of discount eﬀects with the
cross-sectional dispersion in θ iCF .

                                              VI. DISCUSSION

VI.A Do value stocks have larger cash-ﬂow risk?
         An important prediction of our model is that value stocks have larger cash-ﬂow risk
than growth stocks. Is this the case? A ﬂurry of recent papers argues that this is indeed the
case. For instance, Cohen, Polk and Vuolteenaho (2003) obtain cash-ﬂow betas by regressing
diﬀerent measures of ﬁrms’ cash-ﬂows on the corresponding measures of market cash-ﬂows,
such as
                    R−1
                                                                     R−1
                                                                      
                           j        p               p          p             j            p
                          ρCP V   ∆dt+j,j+1   =   β CF,0   + β CF,1         ρCP V ∆dmkt
                                                                                    t+j + εt+R−1          (28)
                    j=0                                               j=0
  19
       See, among others, the conditional asset pricing models of Jagannathan and Wang (1996), Ferson and
Harvey (1999), Lettau and Ludvigson (2001), and Santos and Veronesi (2005).
 20
    We do not report the results for cay as in our setting, cay is perfectly correlated with log(D/P ).


                                                            23
for each time t and each portfolio p = 1, ..., 10. Here, ∆dpt+j,j+1 is the dividend growth at time
t + j of the portfolio p which was formed j + 1 years earlier, that is, at t − 1. Similarly, ∆dmkt
                                                                                               t+j
                                                               j
is the dividend growth of the market at time t + j. Finally, ρCP V = .95 is a discount, and R is
the number of years over which the average growth rate is computed. They call the regression
coeﬃcient β pCF,1 the cash-ﬂow beta. Their results are in Table VII.
      Notice ﬁrst that, irrespective of the cash-ﬂow measure used, value stocks have higher
cash-ﬂow betas than growth stocks, though magnitudes diﬀer across measures. If either (ac-
                                        p
cumulated) return on equity, 4j=0 ρj ROEt+j,j+1 , or (accumulated) dividend growth is used
as a measure of cash-ﬂow growth, the regression coeﬃcients roughly double when we go from
growth to value stocks. If instead we use (accumulated) earnings growth relative to market
                      
         p        p           p
value, Xt+4,4 − Xt−1,0   /M Et−1,0 , the coeﬃcients increase by a factor of 10. Finally if (ac-
                                                                    
                                                    p           p
cumulated) earnings relative to market, 4j=0 ρj Xt+j,j+1  /M Et+j−1,j   , is used they increase
almost by a factor of 20.
      In a recent study, Campbell, Polk and Vuolteenaho (2005) conﬁrm these ﬁndings and
extend them to diﬀerent sample periods. These authors show that value stocks’s proﬁtability
covaries with the aggregate market cash-ﬂow news more than growth stocks (see their Tables 6
and 7). A similar exercise is performed by Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2005) who regress
market-to-book sorted portfolios’ dividend growth on a moving average of consumption growth
rates, and ﬁnd that indeed cash-ﬂow betas are larger for value sorted portfolios (see Table 1,
Panel A). Finally, Hansen, Heaton and Li (2005) show that growth stocks have low long-run
cash-ﬂow covariation with consumption relative to value.
      In summary, there is substantial empirical evidence that indeed value stocks have “more”
cash-ﬂow risk than growth stocks. We turn next to the question of whether they have “enough
of it” to generate a quantitatively plausible value premium.
VI.B Sensitivity analysis: Asset Pricing
      The simulations performed in Section IV and V are based on the particular set of pa-
rameters for the share process reported in Table II. We study next the impact that diﬀerent
values for ν and θ CF have on the time series and the cross-section of stock returns. In Section
VI.C we analyze what these diﬀerent values imply for the properties of individual dividends.
      Table VIII reports results in simulations under three values of the share volatility, ν,
and ﬁve values of the cash-ﬂow parameter, θCF . Recall that the latter parameter deﬁnes the
interval [−θ CF , θCF ] in which individual ﬁrms’ cash-ﬂow risk are uniformly distributed.



                                               24
VI.B.1 Sensitivity analysis: The market portfolio

          For each level of ν, the average market premium and volatility decline as we move from
low to high values of θCF . Instead the properties of the market portfolio are largely unaﬀected
as we vary ν. For instance, when ν = .25, the average market premium and the volatility decline
from 9.90% and 24.16% to 3.97% and 10.23% respectively as we increase the cross sectional
dispersion in cash-ﬂow risk from θCF = 0 to θCF = .00345. Similarly, the level of interest rate
and its volatility also decline, although the diﬀerence is much less striking and, in all cases,
rather reasonable (see Table I for comparison). Finally, the predictability of aggregate excess
returns weakens as we increase θ CF . For instance, the R2 of the three year return regression
declines from 23% when θ CF = 0 to 4.4% when θ CF = .00345.
          To understand why changes in θ CF aﬀect market returns in our model, recall ﬁrst that
our framework implies a mild predictability of consumption growth.21 Moreover, it can be
shown that consumption growth and expected consumption growth are positively correlated.
Since in our model the representative agent has a low elasticity of intertemporal substitution
and thus a preference for consumption smoothing, we obtain an eﬀect on prices that is absent
from the habit persistence models of Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and MSV, which assume
that consumption growth is i.i.d. Assume for instance that a negative shock to consumption
growth occurs. The intuition of habit persistence models is that this negative shock induces an
increase in the representative agent risk aversion and thus a decline in the stock price that is
sharper than in the case without habit. This eﬀect is mitigated in our present model, however,
because a negative consumption shock is associated, on average, with a drop in expected
consumption growth as well. Preferences for intertemporal consumption smoothing imply
that the representative agent will attempt to save more when expected consumption growth
decreases, increasing his demand for stocks and bonds. This additional demand for assets thus
reduces the initial drop in prices, its corresponding volatility and eﬀectively reduces both the
equity premium and the predictability. In our model, the size of this counterbalancing eﬀect
depends on the “size” of the term µc,1 (st) = st θ CF , which governs the variation in expected
consumption growth, see Assumption 1 and the general equilibrium restrictions (6) and (16).
If all θ iCF are close to zero, as it is the case when θ CF is low, then this eﬀect is negligible,
but if they are large – as it is necessary to obtain substantial cash-ﬂow eﬀects – then the
intertemporal substitution eﬀect will be large.

  21
       The predictability is indeed mild: Regressing the log(D/P ) on future consumption growth in artiﬁcial data,
we obtain R2 between 0.4% and 0.6%. No other predictor improves upon this one in our model.


                                                         25
VI.B.2 Sensitivity analysis: The value premium and the performance of the CAPM

         The last two columns of Table VIII report the implications of various levels of ν and
θ CF for the value premium and the corresponding CAPM ﬁt. For any value of ν, a low level
of θCF tends to generate a growth premium, rather than a value premium. For instance,
when ν = .25 and θCF = 0, the column 10 − 1 shows a value premium of −2.44%, that is, a
growth premium. This eﬀect can also be seen in Panel A of Figure 5, which plots the average
log of the price-dividend ratio of the ten sorted portfolios versus their corresponding average
excess returns.22 As discussed in earlier sections, an increase in the dispersion of cash-ﬂow risk
generates a value premium: For ν = .25 the value premium goes from −2.44% for θ CF = 0 to
7.10% for θ CF = .00345.
         We saw above that the properties of the market portfolio are largely unaﬀected by
changes in ν. The most striking eﬀect of a higher level of volatility is in the inability of the
CAPM to price our set of test portfolios. To understand why is this the case, notice that in
our model the CAPM with respect to the total wealth portfolio holds neither conditionally
nor unconditionally as the total wealth portfolio is not perfectly correlated with the stochastic
discount factor. Indeed, the time variation in expected consumption growth induces a variation
in prices of the total wealth portfolio that is uncorrelated with consumption shocks. Assump-
tion 1, which follows the general equilibrium restriction (6), implies that a higher idiosyncratic
volatility of shares would generate a higher volatility of expected consumption growth that
is not correlated with consumption shocks and thus a worse CAPM performance.23 This is
exactly what the last panel of Table VIII shows: When ν = .55 the model can replicate the bad
performance of the CAPM when the value premium is quantitatively plausible (θCF = .00345).
         The value premium puzzle though is not a robust feature of the data. For instance Ang
and Chen (2005) and Fama and French (2005) show that the CAPM performs much better
in a similar set of test portfolios when using a long sample that starts in 1927.24 We chose
ν = .55 and θ CF = .00345 to illustrate the model’s ability to replicate both the value premium
and its corresponding puzzle. But if the CAPM’s performance is not an issue, the volatility
  22
       This ﬁgure corresponds to the parameter choice ν = .55, to make it comparable with Figure 4.
  23
       More generally, the CAPM is violated in our setting whenever expected consumption growth is (mildly)
time varying, and this variation is uncorrelated with consumption shocks. It is possible to extend the model in
this direction by simply assuming that µc in Assumption 1 is time varying. We do not pursue this extension
here, as the model becomes signiﬁcantly more complicated but the intuition of the results would be the same
in this case.
  24
     See also footnote 16.



                                                      26
parameter can be lowered to ν = .25 and the cash-ﬂow risk parameter, θ CF can now be between
.002 and .003. Notice also that this would also improve notably the model’s performance in
what refers to the market portfolio. The reason is that lower values of the cash-ﬂow risk
parameter attenuate the intertemporal substitution eﬀects discussed above. Thus lower values
of ν, which are feasible if the value premium puzzle is not a concern, improve considerable
the overall performance of the model and lower, if only slightly, the cash-ﬂow risk parameters
needed to generate the value premium.
VI.C Sensitivity analysis: Dividend Growth
      As shown in Table VIII, the model can generate plausible quantitative properties for
both the market portfolio and the cross-section of stock returns. But what do the speciﬁc
parameter choices mean for the properties of the individual dividend processes?
      To answer this question Table IX reports the range of correlation coeﬃcients between
the dividend growth of individual assets and consumption growth and the average dividend
growth volatility across the simulated assets for each value of ν and θ CF . The next two columns
report the cash-ﬂow betas of Cohen, Polk and Vuolteenaho (2003), described in equation (28)
in Section VI.A, for the growth portfolio (portfolio 1) and the value portfolio (portfolio 10);
the remaining coeﬃcients simply grow linearly from the minimum to the maximum. Finally,
the last column in Table VIII reports the average volatility of individual ﬁrms’ stock returns.
      Consider ﬁrst the case where ν = .25 and θCF = 0. In this case the range of correlation
coeﬃcients between individual dividend and consumption growth is very low, between .04
and .07. Recall that in this case all assets have, by construction, the same cash-ﬂow risk as
consumption itself. This is also apparent in the next two columns: The cash-ﬂow betas are,
naturally, very close to 1. Finally, the volatility of dividend growth is reasonable, about 24%,
while the volatility of returns for individual stocks is about 27.6%. But, as shown in Table
VIII, the case θ CF = 0 is one that generates a growth premium rather than a value premium.
As we increase θCF in order to obtain the value premium, the range of correlation coeﬃcients
between dividend growth and consumption growth widens substantially, to reach the range
[−.89, .91] for the case ν = .25 and θ CF = .00345. In addition, the volatility of both dividend
growth and stock returns decline to about 16% for both and the cash-ﬂow betas range from
−9.6 for growth stocks to 7.94 for value stocks.
      As we increase the volatility of shares ν, as one would need to do if the value premium
puzzle is to obtain, some features of the cash-ﬂow dividend growth improve but at the expense
of others. For instance, the range of correlations of dividend growth and consumption growth

                                               27
when ν = .55 and θ CF = .00345 is now [ −.37, .42], still large, but better than for the case
where ν = .25. The cash-ﬂow betas marginally improve as well, although their spread is still
too large compared to the results obtained by Cohen et al (2003). The most salient eﬀect
of increasing the volatility of shares from ν = .25 to .55, however, is the large increase in
the volatility of dividend growth, which now reaches 52.60%. Instead the average volatility
of individual stock returns increases slightly, from 16.68% to 22.96%. These last results are
obviously hard to reconcile with the empirical evidence.
VI.D But is it all bad news? Some intuition on the magnitude of θ CF
      The previous section suggests that in order to generate a quantitatively plausible value
premium and the observed poor performance of the CAPM (see Table VIII), we have to assume
a large cross-sectional dispersion of cash-ﬂow risk (see the last row of Table IX). We discuss
next some intuition on why does our model need these extreme parameters as well as some
potential extensions to address these problems.
      First notice that the sign of the cash-ﬂow betas is negative for growth stocks and positive
for value stocks in simulated data whereas Cohen et al. (2003) obtained positive numbers
throughout. This is due to our counterfactual assumption that all the sources of consumption
are ﬁnancial, and assumption that it is easy to relax. Indeed dividends make up only about
10% of total consumption in the data. In Santos and Veronesi (2005) we explored the role of
labor income in asset pricing tests and argued that it is less risky than consumption so that
it has a negative θCF . In that model then all ﬁnancial assets can have a positive θCF , and,
as consequence, the cash-ﬂow betas would be positive across the ten sorted portfolios. Here
we abstract from adding labor income to the model as it would introduce one additional state
variable, and the analysis and the intuition of the model would become substantially more
complicated.
      Focusing next on the the magnitude of the cash-ﬂow risk dispersion, part of the diﬀerence
between simulated and empirical data may be due to measurement error, which is of course
absent in our simulations. This measurement error in the cash-ﬂow properties of the market
portfolio biases towards zero the cash-ﬂow beta as deﬁned by the regression in Cohen et al.
(2003). For instance, in our simulations for the case θCF = .00345 and ν = .55, if we add
a level of noise to the market dividend growth that is of the same magnitude as its actual
volatility (=.03), we ﬁnd that, in Table IX, the cash-ﬂow betas are given by β 1CF,1 = −3.79
and β 10
      CF,1 = 2.39, that is, the spread between value and growth is cut by about half. If the
noise is twice the value of its actual volatility then β 1CF,1 = −1.48 and β 10
                                                                             CF,1 = 0.92, which are


                                                28
much closer to their empirical counterparts.25
          Relevant as they are, alternative sources of income and measurement problems are not
likely to fully address the large magnitudes of cash-ﬂow risk needed to generate a sizable value
premium. Indeed these large magnitudes are required to “undo” the discount risk eﬀects that
are in turn important to generate quantitatively plausible properties for the market portfolio.
To elaborate further, in Santos and Veronesi (2005) we used a similar cash-ﬂow model as the
one described in Section II, but the representative agent is assumed to have the standard
CRRA preferences. Moreover, the agent receives income from both ﬁnancial and non ﬁnancial
assets. As mentioned, in that model, labor income (in average, about 90% of total income) has
a negative θjCF , while all of the ﬁnancial assets have identical positive cash-ﬂow risk θ iCF . Thus,
a value premium obtains even with identical cash-ﬂow risk parameters across ﬁnancial assets.
The drawback of that model, though, is that it is unable to generate reasonable properties
of the aggregate market portfolio: the predictability of stock returns – which is induced by
the variation over time of the labor income-to-consumption ratio – is small compared to the
data, and the volatility of stock returns is just 6.2%. That is, in Santos and Veronesi (2005)
a sizable value premium obtains but the assumption of a standard CRRA utility function for
the representative agent makes it impossible to generate enough predictability or volatility of
the aggregate market.
          Campbell and Cochrane’s (1999) key contribution is precisely to show how a strong
variation in risk preferences is able to generate the main time series properties of the market
portfolio. But an unexpected drawback of this modelling device is to induce a growth premium
in the cross-section, unless cross-sectional diﬀerences in cash-ﬂow risk are “large enough.” The
“size” of these cash-ﬂow risk eﬀects then can only be assessed in a model where the strong
discount risk eﬀects required to generate the time series properties of the market portfolio are
present, otherwise one would underestimate the magnitudes of the cash-ﬂow risk eﬀects that
are in turn needed to obtain the value premium.
          It follows from the previous discussion that one possible direction to generate more
plausible magnitudes of the cash-ﬂow risk parameter is to generate variation in the discount
that is unpriced in the cross section. Thus growth stocks would comove more with the discount
than value stocks but this does not result in a growth premium. This is exactly the route chosen
by Lettau and Wachter (2005). The problem, of course, is the interpretation of this source of
  25
       This is a “rough” calculation: To properly perform this exercise, we should keep the volatility of aggregate
dividend (= consumption) constant across noise levels.



                                                         29
variation in the discount. They refer to this exogenous source of variation in the discount as
“investor sentiment” though it is hard to assess quantitatively this eﬀect.
      Alternatively, the duration of the growth assets may not be as long as suggested by the
model. Indeed, an important limiting feature of the model is that assets are inﬁnitely lived.
But growth stocks though can have shorter duration if they are more likely to disappear than
value stocks, which, on average correspond to more established ﬁrms. In this case then the
diﬀerences in duration between growth and value are less pronounced than implied by the model
and thus there will less of a value premium. These two last alternatives oﬀer fruitful venues
for future research and can potentially relax the pressure on the cash-ﬂow risk parameters.

                                   VII. CONCLUSIONS

      Two sources of risk combine to determine the time series properties of the market portfo-
lio and the cross-sectional properties of stock returns: discount risk and cash-ﬂow risk. Camp-
bell and Cochrane (1999) argue that time variation of the market price of risk - i.e. discount
risk - is important to reconcile many empirical facts about the aggregate market portfolio.
We show that this channel though imposes tight restrictions on the cash-ﬂow properties of
value versus growth stocks. Speciﬁcally, value stocks are (endogenously) those with high cash
ﬂow risk relative to growth, that is, their dividends covary more with the aggregate economy
than the dividends of growth stocks, a prediction consistent with recent empirical evidence.
Our model is able not only to match the time series properties of the aggregate portfolio, as
in Campbell and Cochrane (1999), but it also generates a large value premium and its cor-
responding value premium puzzle, that is, the documented inability of the CAPM to price
value-sorted portfolios.
      In addition, our model also generates a time variation of the value premium over the
business cycle that lines up well with the data. This variation of the value premium stems
from the fact that the discount risk eﬀects that drive the time series properties of the market
portfolio interact with the cross sectional dispersion of cash-ﬂow risk to make value stock
particularly riskier than growth stocks in bad times, that is, when the market premium is
high. This dynamic aspect of the value premium allow us to explain the source of recent
empirical “successes” in explaining the value premium puzzle, such as the multi factor model
of Fama French (1993) and the conditional CAPM model of Lettau and Ludvigson (2001).
Although these models are misspeciﬁed in our general equilibrium setting, they pick up this
dynamic variation in cross-sectional risk due to the interaction of discount risk eﬀects and the


                                              30
cross-sectional dispersion in cash ﬂow risk.
      We have shown that the model seems to require a large cross sectional dispersion of
cash-ﬂow risk to explain the value premium, one that seems at odds with the data. We have
argued for possible extensions of the model to address this excessive magnitude. We view our
model as a ﬁrst step into understanding the sources of risk that explain both the time-series
and the cross-section of stock returns. Indeed, an important message of this paper is that we
cannot study one set of empirical facts independently of the other: any story that attempts
to quantitatively explain the cross-section of stock returns must also be consistent with the
time series properties of the market portfolios. Otherwise, the parametrization that is used to
obtain quantitative predictions at the cross-sectional level may be quite misleading.




                                               31
                                      REFERENCES

Abel, Andrew B. (1990) “Asset Prices Under Habit Formation and Catching Up with the Jones,”
    American Economic Review, 80, 38-42.

Ang, Andrew and Joseph Chen (2005) “CAPM over the Long Run: 1926-2001,” manuscript,
    Columbia University.

Bansal, Ravi, Robert F. Dittmar, and Christian T. Lundblad (2005), “Consumption, Divi-
    dends, and the cross-section of Stock Returns,” forthcoming, Journal of Finance.

Berk, Jonathan, Richard C. Green, and Vasant Naik (1999) “Optimal Investment, Growth
    Options, and Security Returns,” Journal of Finance , October, 1553-1607.

Brennan, Michael J., and Yihong Xia (2005) “Risk and Valuation under an Intertermporal
    Capital Asset Pricing Model,” Journal of Business (forthcoming.)

Brennan, Michael J., Ashley W. Wang, and Yihong Xia (2004) “Estimation and Test of a
    Simple Model of Intertermporal Capital Asset Pricing,” Journal of Finance , August, 1743-1775.

Campbell, John Y. and Robert Shiller (1988) “The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations of
    Future Dividends and Discount Factors,” Review of Financial Studies, 1, 195-227.

Campbell, John Y. and Jianping Mei(1993), “Where do Betas Come From? Asset Price Dynamics
    and the Sources of Systematic Risk,” Review of Financial Studies, 6, no. 3, 567-592.

Campbell, John Y. and John H. Cochrane (1999), “By Force of Habit: A Consumption Based
    Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, 107, 2, 205-251.

Campbell, John Y. and Tuomo Vuolteenaho (2004), “Bad Beta, Good Beta,” American Eco-
    nomic Review, December.

Campbell, John Y., Chirstopher Polk, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho (2005), “Growth or Glam-
    our?” manuscript, Harvard University.

Cochrane, John H., Francis Longstaﬀ, and Pedro Santa-Clara (2004), “Two Trees,” manuscript,
    University of Chicago.

Cohen, Randolph B., Christopher Polk, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho (2003), “The Price is
    Almost Right,” manuscript, Harvard University.

                                               32
Cohen, Randolph B., Christopher Polk, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho (2003), “The Value Spread,”
    Journal of Finance, LVIII (2), 609-641.

Constantinides, George (1990), “Habit Formation: A Resolution of the Equity Premium Puzzle,”
    Journal of Political Economy, 98, 519-543.

Cornell, Bradford (1999), “Risk, Duration, and Capital Budgeting: New Evidence on Some Old
    Questions,” Journal of Business, 72 no. 2, 183-200.

Daniel, Kent and David Marshall (1997), “The Equity Premium Puzzle and the Risk-Free Rate
    Puzzle at Long Horizons,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 1 (2), 452-484.

Daniel, Kent and Sheridan Titman (2005), “Testing Factor-Models Explanations of Market
    Anomalies,” manuscript, Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University.

DeBondt, Werner F. M. and Richard H. Thaler, (1987), “Further evidence on investor overre-
    action and stock market seasonality,” Journal of Finance, XLII, pp. 557-581.

Detemple, Jerome B. and Fernando Zapatero, (1991), “Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy
    with Habit Formation,” Econometrica, Vol. 59, pp. 1633-1657.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French (1988), “Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns,”
    Journal of Financial Economics, 22, 3-27.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French (1989), “Business Conditions and Expected Returns
    on Stocks and Bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics, 25, 23-39.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French (1992), “The cross-section of Expected Stock Returns,”
    Journal of Finance, 47, 2, 427-465.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French (1993), “Common Risk Factors in the Returns on
    Stocks and Bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics, 33, 3-56.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French (1996), “Multifactor Explanations of Asset Pricing
    Anomalies,” Journal of Finance, LI, 1, 55-84.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French (1998), “Value versus Growth: The International
    Evidence,” Journal of Finance, LIII, 6, 1975-1999.




                                                 33
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French (2005), “The Value Premium and the CAPM,”
    manuscript, Graduate School of Business University of Chicago.

Ferson, Wayne and George Constantinides, (1991), “Habit Persistence and Durability in Ag-
    gregate Consumption: Empirical Tests,” Journal of Financial Economics, 29, 199-240.

Ferson, Wayne and Campbell Harvey, (1999), “Conditioning Variables and the cross-section of
    Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance, LIV, 1325-1361.

Gomes, Joao, Leonid Kogan, and Lu Zhang (2003), “Equilibrium cross-section of Returns,”
    Journal of Political Economy, 111(4) August, 693-732.

Hansen, Lars P. and Scott F. Richard (1987), “The Role of Conditioning Information in Deducing
    Testable Restrictions Implied by Dynamic Asset pricing Models ,” Econometrica, 50, 1269-1288.

Hansen, Lars P., John C. Heaton, and Nan Li (2005), “Consumption Strikes Back?,” working
    paper, University of Chicago.

Heaton, John C. (1993), “The Interaction Between Time-nonseparable Preferences and Time Ag-
    gregation,” Econometrica,vol. 61 no. 2, 353-385.

Heaton, John C. (1995), “An Empirical Investigation of Asset Pricing with Temporally Dependent
    Preference Speciﬁcations,” Econometrica,vol. 63 no. 3, 681-717.

Hodrick, Robert. (1992), “Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns: Alternative Procedures
    for Inference and Measurement,” Review of Financial Studies, 5, 357-386.

Jagannathan, Ravi and Zhenyu Wang (1996), “The Conditional CAPM and the cross-section of
    Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance, 51 March, 3-53.

Lamont, Owen (1998), “Earnings and Expected Returns,” Journal of Finance, vol. 53, October ,
    1563-1587.

Lettau, Martin and Sydney Ludvigson (2001), “Resurrecting the (C)CAPM: A cross-sectional
    Test When Risk Premia Are Time-Varying” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 109 (6), 1238-
    1287.

Lettau, Martin and Jessica Wachter (2005), “Why is long-horizon equity les risky? A duration-
    based explanation of the value premium” manuscript, NYU, Stern School of Business.



                                               34
Lewellen, Jonnathan and Stefan Nagel (2003), “The Conditional CAPM Does Not Explain
    Asset-Pricing Anomalies” Manuscript,MIT.

Li, Yuming (2001), “Expected Returns and Habit Persistence,” The Review of Financial Studies, 14,
    861-899.

Liew, Jimmy and Maria Vassalou (2000), “Can Book-to-Market, Size, and Momentum be Risk
    Factors that Predict Economic Growth” Journal of Financial Economics, 57 (2), 221-245.

Lintner, John (1965), “The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky investments in stock
    portfolios and capital budgeting,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 47, 13-37.

Luttmer, Erzo F. P. (2005), “Neighbors as Negatives: Relatives Earnings and Well-Being ,” Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics, vol. CXX, 963-1002.

Menzly, Lior, Tano Santos and Pietro Veronesi (2004) “Understanding Predictability,” Journal
    of Political Economy, February, 1-47.

Parker, Jonathan and Christian Julliard (2005), “Consumption Risk and the cross-section of
    Expected Returns,” Journal of Political Economy, 113 (1) February, 185–222.

Rosenberg, Barr, Kenneth Reid, and Ronald Lanstein (1985), “Persuasive Evidence of Market
    Ineﬃciency,” Journal of Portfolio Management, 11, 9-17.

Santos, Tano and Pietro Veronesi (2004), “Conditional Betas,” manuscript, University of Chicago.

Santos, Tano and Pietro Veronesi (2005), “Labor Income and Predictable Stock Returns,” forth-
    coming, The Review of Financial Studies.

Sharpe, William F.. (1964), “Capital asset prices: a theory of market equilibrium under conditions
    of risk,” forthcoming, Journal of Finance, 19, 425-442.

Sundaresan, Suresh (1989), “Intertemporal Dependent Preferences and the Volatility of Consump-
    tion and Wealth,” The Review of Financial Studies, 2, 73-88.

Vassalou, Maria (2003), “News Related to Future GDP Growth as a Risk Factor in Equity Returns”
    Journal of Financial Economics, 68 (1), 47-73.

Wachter, Jessica (2000), Habit Formation and the cross-section of Asset Returns, Unpublished
    Doctoral Dissertation, Ch. 4, Department of Economics, Harvard University.

Zhang, Lu (2005), “The Value Premium” Journal of Finance, 60, 67-104.

                                               35
                                                   APPENDIX
                                             !t
         The habit dynamics: If Xt = λ −∞ e−λ(τ −t) Cτ dτ we have dXt = λ (Ct − Xt ) dt. Deﬁne then Gt =
                                γ
f (Ct , Xt ) = (Ct / (Ct − Xt )) . We then have
                                               1
                           fC   =   −γGt Gtγ − 1 Ct−1
                                                                                          "
                                                      1        2            1       1 +1
                       fCC      =                     γ
                                        γ (γ − 1) G Gt − 1                  γ
                                                                   + 2γ Gt − 1 Gt   γ
                                                                                               Ct−2

                                              1
                           fX   =   γGt
                                          (Ct − Xt)
                 1                            1
where we used Gtγ = Ct / (Ct − Xt) and Gtγ − 1 = Xt / (Ct − Xt). Ito’s Lemma then yields
                                 #                             $
                           dGt = µG (Gt ) − σG (Gt ) µc,1 (st ) dt − σG (Gt ) σ c dBt1



       where
                                                 1             2                1     1
                                  1                                                       +1
           µG (Gt )    =    γλGt + γ (γ − 1) G Gtγ − 1             σ2c + γ Gtγ − 1 Gtγ         σ 2c − σG (Gt ) µc   (29)
                                  2
                                    1
           σ G (Gt )   =    γGt Gtγ − 1                                                                             (30)



Proof of Propositions
        Our strategy to obtain prices and returns in our economy is standard. Given (2) , the stochastic discount
factor is given by
                                      mt = e−ρt (Ct − Xt )−γ = e−ρt Ct−γ Gt .
We use Ito’s Lemma and our assumptions on the dynamics of Ct and Gt = St−γ to obtain
                                               dmt
                                                   = −rtf dt + σ m dBt ,
                                               mt
where the ﬁrst, and only non-zero, entry in the diﬀusion component vector, σ m , is given by
                                            σ1m = − [γ + α (1 − λStγ )] σc .                                        (31)
Then we exploit our assumptions on the dynamics of Ct , Gt = St−γ and sit to solve for
                                  ∞                      ∞                    
                           i             mτ     i                  mτ      i
                         Pt = Et              Dτ dτ = Et                  sτ Cτ dτ                                  (32)
                                    t    mt                   t    mt
in closed form. We then use (32) to compute returns and calculate the expected excess returns
                                                   dmt
                                  Et dRit = −cov        , dRi = −σ m σ iR ,                                        (33)
                                                     mt

where σ iR is the diﬀusion component associated with the returns of asset i.

       Proof of Proposition 1. This is a corrollary to Proposition 2, and it is proved below.

       Proof of Proposition 2. Part (a). Pricing Formula. The pricing formula is
                                        ∞                              
                                                      uc (Cτ , Xτ ) i
                            Pti = Et        e−ρ(τ −t)              Dτ dτ
                                         t            uc (Ct , Xt)
                                               ∞                         
                                      γ −1            −ρ(τ −t) 1−γ
                                = Ct Gt Et          e         Cτ Gτ siτ dτ
                                                          t



                                                          36
We divide the proof in two parts: First, we obtain a general pricing formula which depends on the state variables.

Second, we obtain analytical solutions for the coeﬃcients of these state variables.
       Part a.1: A pricing formula. For this proof, it is convenient to rewrite the share processes in its general
form as
                                            n                            
                                     dsit =     sjt λji dt + sit ν i −st ν dBt
                                                     j=1
                i                                                                                 
where λji = φs , for i = j, and λii = − j=i λij = −φ                          j=i   sj = −φ 1 − si = φsi − φ. Deﬁne the two
quantities
                                    qti = Ct1−γ Gt sit and                      pit = Ct1−γ sit
and the 2n × 1 vector yt = [qt , pt]. An application of Ito’s Lemma and tedious algebra shows
                                                           % y yt dt + Σy,t dBt
                                                     dyt = Λ

where                                                     &                               '
                                                                     %q
                                                                Λ + Θ      % qp
                                                                            Θ
                                                   %y =
                                                   Λ                                          ,
                                                                0                %p
                                                                            Λ + Θ
                  % i for i = q, p, qp are diagonal matrices with ii element given by
Λ =φ (s × 1n ) , Θ
                      i                             1
                     %
                     θq   =         (1 − γ) µc −      γ (1 − γ) σ2c − k − (1 − γ) σ 2c α + (1 − γ) θi − αθi
                                                    2
                     i
                    %
                    θqp   =         kG + (1 − γ) σ2c αλ + αλθi
                     %i                         1
                     θp   =         (1 − γ) µc − γ (1 − γ) σ2c + (1 − γ) θi
                                                2
and Σy,t is an appropriate matrix. Assuming existence of the expectation in the pricing function, we can apply
Fubini’s theorem
                                     ∞                            ∞   
                    Pti = Ctγ G−1
                               t Et      e−ρ(τ −t) yτi dτ = Ctγ G−1
                                                                 t      Et e−ρ(τ −t) yτi dτ
                                               t                                          t
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                  % y , eω (τ −t)
The expectation in the integral can be computed as follows: Let ω be the vector of eigenvalues of Λ
the diagonal matrix with ii element given by eωi (τ −t) and U the matrix of associated eigenvectors. Then, we
can write
                                                                      
                                                                        2n 
                                                                           2n
            Et e−ρ(τ −t) yτi = ιi · U· eω (τ −t) · U−1 · yt e−ρ(τ −t) =       uik e(ω k −ρ)(τ −t) u−1
                                                                                                   jk yjt
                                                                                         k=1 j=1
        
where u−1
       jk is the jk element of U −1 . Substituting into the expectation, and taking the integral, we ﬁnd
                                                                              
                                   ∞                                 2n uik u−1
                                                                     2n                              
                                                                                                      2n
                                                                                jk
                                        Et e−ρ(τ −t) yτi dτ =                                 yjt =         bij yjt
                                t                                    k=1 j=1
                                                                                ρ − ωk                j=1

where                                                                     
                                                                    2n uik u−1
                                                                           kj
                                                          bij   =
                                                                          ρ − ωk
                                                                    k=1

Below, we obtain these coeﬃcients in closed form. Note, however, that by substituting yjt = qjt for j = 1, ..., n




                                                                      37
and yjt = pj−n,t for j = n + 1, .., n we obtain
                                                                                                     (   n                        n
                                                                                                                                                       )
                                                            ∞                                                                       
                        Pti    =   Ctγ G−1
                                        t Et                    e−ρ(τ −t) yτi dτ       =   Ctγ G−1
                                                                                                t                    bi1j qj,t   +         bi2j pj,t
                                                        t                                                   j=1                      j=1
                                               (                                                                )
                                                                  
                                                                  n                        
                                                                                           n
                               =   Ctγ G−1
                                        t          Ct1−γ Gt             bi1j sjt + Ct  1−γ
                                                                                                     bi2j sjt
                                                                  j=1                          j=1
                                        n 
                                                                   
                               =   Ct          bi1j + bi2j Stγ sjt
                                        j=1



        Part a.2: Analytical formulas for bi1,j and bi2,j . We ﬁnally obtain a closed form formula for bij ’s, and
thus, of bi1j and bi2j . First, note that we can write
                                                               
                                               bij = ιi · U· Ω−1 · U−1 ιj
                                                                                                       
where Ω is the matrix with the eigevalues of Iρ− Λ % y on the principal diagonal. But then, since U· Ω−1 ·U−1 =
         −1
       %y
  Iρ − Λ      we have that for i = 1, ..., n and j = 1, ..., 2n
                                                                                  −1
                                                                                %y
                                                                bij = ιi · Iρ − Λ      · ιj
                                                             −1
                                                           %y
We now explicitly compute these quantities. Deﬁne B = Iρ − Λ      , so that
                                                                              
                                                                             %y = I
                                                                        B Iρ−Λ

Making this explicit, for every i = 1, .., n (row) we have

                                                                  
                                                                  2n             
                                                                               % y = ιi
                                                                        bij Iρ−Λ
                                                                                           j
                                                                  j=1
                                                               
where          %y
            Iρ−Λ                                 %y
                            is the jth row of Iρ−Λ                    and ιi is a (1 × 2n) row vector with 1 in ith position, and zero
                        j
elsewhere. For every i, we have a system of equations that pins down bij for all j = 1, .., 2n. We now solve
this system of equation. To limit the number of indices involved, we do this exercise for i = 1. Of course, the
methodology works for every i. For i = 1 we have then the following two systems of equations. The ﬁrst holds
for j = 1, .., n and the second for the remaining n rows:
                                                            1
                                                                
                                                                 n
                                         b11 ρ − φs1 + φ − %
                                                           θq −    b1j φsj                              =       1                    (row 1)
                                                                                   j=2
                                                            2
                                                                
                                                                 n
                              −b11 φs1 + b12 ρ − φs2 + φ − %
                                                           θq −    b1j φsj                              =       0                    (row 2)
                                                                                   j=3

                                                                                                                ..
                                                                                                                 .
                                         n−1
                                                                          n
                                                                              
                                     −         b1j φsj + b1n ρ − φsn + φ − %
                                                                           θq                           =       0                    (row n)
                                         j=1




                                                                               38
                                                           1
                                                               
                                                                n
                           −b11 θ1qp + b1n+1 ρ − φs1 + φ − %
                                                           θp −   b1n+j φsj                                   =   0    (row n + 1)
                                                                                       j=2
                                                          2
                                                              
                                                               n
              −b12 θ2qp − b1n+1 φs1 + b1n+2 ρ − φs2 + φ − %
                                                          θp −   b1n+j φsj                                    =   0    (row n + 2)
                                                                                       j=3

                                                                                                                  ..
                                                                                                                   .
                                        
                                        n−1                                    n
                                                                                  
                           −b1n θn
                                 qp −          b1n+j φsj + b12n ρ − φsn + φ − %
                                                                              θp                              =   0    (row 2n)
                                        j=1

The ﬁrst set of equation is readily solved. In fact, we can write
                                                                              
                                                                              n
                                        b11     =      α1q + α1q × φ                b1j sj
                                                                              j=1

                                                                   
                                                                   n
                                        b1k     =      αkq × φ            b1j sj        for        k = 2, .., n
                                                                   j=1

where
                                                                                   1
                                                             αiq =             i
                                                                                              
                                                                          ρ+φ−%
                                                                              θq

Multiply both sides of each row k = 1, ..., n by sk and sum across rows to obtain
                                    n                   n
                                                                ( n        )
                                        1 j     1 1
                                                          j j
                                                                    1 j
                                       bj s = s αq +      st α q φ    bj s
                                              j=1                          j=1                    j=1

Deﬁne the constants
                                                         
                                                         n
                                                                                                 1
                                                Hq =           sj αjq and Kq =
                                                         j=1
                                                                                              1 − φHq
              n     1 j
Solving for     j=1 bj s   we obtain the quantity
                                                             n
                                                             
                                                                    b1j sj = s1 α1q Kq
                                                             j=1

Thus

                                        b11     =      α1q + α1q × φs1 α1q Kq                                                        (34)
                                        b1k     =      αkq   × φs   1
                                                                        α1q Kq             for     k = 2, .., n                      (35)

Hence, the ﬁrst term in the P/C ratio obtained earlier, i.e.

                                                      Pt1    1 j  1 j γ
                                                               n                       n
                                                          =     b1j st +     b2j st St
                                                      Ct    j=1          j=1

is given by
                                               
                                               n                                                  
                                                                                                  n
                                                     b11j sjt = α1q s1t + φs1 α1q Kq                    αkq sjt
                                               j=1                                                j=1

where recall that for j = 1, ..., n we deﬁned earlier b11j = b1j .
       We now turn to the second system of equations, which for k = 1, ..., n can be rewritten as
                                                                        
                                                                        n
                                                                                                  k
                                                    b1n+k = αkp φ             b1n+j sj + b1k αkp%
                                                                                                θqp
                                                                        j=1



                                                                           39
with
                                                                                         1
                                                                     αkp =          k
                                                                                                         
                                                                               ρ+φ−%
                                                                                   θp

and b1k given in (34) - (35). Substitute b1k ﬁrst, to obtain
                                                                     n
                                                                     
                                       b1n+1        =        α1p φ         b1n+j sj + α1pq + α1pq × φs1 α1q Kq
                                                                     j=1

                                                                     
                                                                     n
                                       b1n+k        =        αkp φ         b1n+j sj + αkpq φs1 α1q Kq
                                                                     j=1

where
                                                                                   k
                                                                       αkpq = αkp %
                                                                                  θqp αkq
As before, for k = 1, .., n multiply both sides by sk and sum across k’s to obtain
                      n
                                            ( n       ) n             ( n         )
                          k 1       1 1
                                               k k        1      j
                                                                         k k
                          s bn+k = αpq s +       s αp φ      bn+j s +       s αpq φs1 α1q Kq
                       k=1                                       k=1                j=1                                   k=1

Let                                                                            (                       )
                                                                                   
                                                                                   n
                                                                                             k
                                                                     Hp =                s       αkp
                                                                                   k=1
                n
and solve for    k=1   sk b1n+k to ﬁnd
                                       n
                                                                                   (   n
                                                                                                                )
                                                                                      
                                             sk b1n+k        =   α1pq s1 Kp    +                 s   k
                                                                                                         αkpq       φs1 α1q Kq Kp
                                       k=1                                             k=1

where
                                                                                     1
                                                                       Kp =
                                                                                 (1 − φHp )
Substitute back into b1n+1 and b1n+k and ﬁnd

                                                                  b1n+1      =      α1pq + s1 g11
                                                                 b1n+k       =      s1 gk1

where for k = 1, ..., n
                                                        (                     (                         )                  )                   "
                                                                                   
                                                                                   n
                             gk1   =   α1q φ       αkp       α1p θ1pq Kp   +             s   j
                                                                                                 αjpq        φKq Kp               +   αkpq Kq
                                                                                   j=1



        Thus, the second part in the price-consumption ratio is given by
                                                         
                                                         n                                             
                                                                                                       n
                                                                 b12j sjt = α1pq s1t + s1                       gk1 skt
                                                         j=1                                           k=1



        Generalizing the above derivations for every i = 1, ...,n, we can ﬁnally write

                                       Pti                                               si                                     si
                                           = αi0 + αi1 Stγ + αi2 (st )                                   + αi3 (st )                  Stγ
                                       Dti                                               sit                                    sit




                                                                                 40
where
                                                                 1
                                             αi0    =   αiq =      i
                                                                      
                                                               ρ+φ−%
                                                                   θq
                                                                              i
                                                                            %
                                                                            θpq
                                             αi1    =   αipq =           i
                                                                                   i
                                                                                       
                                                                ρ+φ−%    θq ρ + φ − %
                                                                                    θp
                                                                      
                                      αi2 (st )     =   φαiq Kq st αq
                                      αi3   (st )   =   st gi

where                                              i                            
                                 gki = αiq φ αkp αip%
                                                    θpq Kp + s αpq φKq Kp + αkpq Kq
and

                           %i                                        1
                           θq     =    (1 − γ) µc − (1 − γ)            γ + α σ2c − k + (1 − γ − α) θi
                                                                     2
                           i
                          %
                          θqp     =    kG + (1 − γ) σ2c αλ + αλθi
                             i                     1
                           %
                           θp     =    (1 − γ) µc − γ (1 − γ) σ2c + (1 − γ) θi
                                                   2



        Proposition 3: The diﬀusion component of stock returns is given by
                                           ⎛                              ⎞
                    Stγ α (1 − λStγ )                  1                                  i j
                                        c +⎝                     + η it ⎠ σ iD (st ) +
             i                                                         i
           σ R,t =                  σ                                                       ηjt σ D (st )                        (36)
                         i                                        i
                   f1i ssi , st + Stγ        1 + f2i (St , st ) ssi                      j=i
                           t                                              t

In fact, we can write                                                                    
                                  Pti = Ct αi0 sit + αi2 (st ) si + αi1 sit + αi3 (st ) si Stγ

Deﬁne by S*t = Stγ = G−1                                                                  *
                      t . Using Ito’s Lemma, it is immediate to see that the diﬀusion of dS is given by

                                                    σ S (S γ ) = Stγ α (1 − λStγ ) σ c

Thus, an application of Ito’s Lemma shows that the diﬀusion term of Pti is given by
                                            i i                 
                     i                       α1 st + αi3 (st ) si Stγ α (1 − λStγ )
                   σ R,t = σ c + i i                                                σc
                                       α0 st + αi2 (st ) si + αi1 sit + αi3 (st ) si Stγ
                                             i                                          "
                                 n
                                                α0 + αi1 Stγ 1{i} + φαiq Kq αkq + gki
                               +         i i                    
                                                    i (s ) si + αi si + αi (s ) si S γ
                                                                                        skt σ k (st )
                                 k=1
                                         α 0 s t + α2    t          1  t     3    t      t


where 1{i} is the indicator function for k = i. Since σ iD (st ) = σ c + σ i (st ), and since by construction
                                                                                  "
                            n
                                      αi0 + αi1 Stγ 1{k=i} + φαiq Kq αkq + gki
                                   i i                                          skt = 1
                            k=1
                                   α0 st + αi2 (st ) si + αi1 sit + αi3 (st ) si Stγ

we can rewrite
                                                                                                               "
                        Stγ α (1 − λStγ )         n
                                                            αi0 + αi1 Stγ 1{k=1} + φαiq Kq αkq + gki
        σ iR,t   =                        σc +        i i                        i i                     γ  skt σ kD (st )
                     f1i si /sit ; st + Stγ       k=1
                                                         α0 s t + αi
                                                                   2 (s t ) si
                                                                               +     α 1 s t + αi
                                                                                                3 (st ) s i
                                                                                                             St
                                                  ⎧                                  ⎫
                                                  ⎨                                  ⎬                i
                        Stγ α (1 − λStγ )                     1                  i
                 =                        σ c +                         +  η         σ i (st ) +        ηk,t σ kD (st )
                     f1i si /sit ; st + Stγ
                                                  ⎩ 1 + f (S; s ) si             i,t
                                                                                     ⎭ D
                                                                 2    t       sit                    k=i



                                                                     41
where
                                                                                                       
                                                                                  αi0 + αi2 (st ) si /sit
                                                 f1i si /sit ; st         =                              
                                                                                  αi1 + αi3 (st ) si /sit
                                                                                  αi2 (st ) + αi3 (st ) Stγ
                                                          f2 (S; st )     =
                                                                                       αi0 + αi1 Stγ
and                                                                i                 
                                                                   φαq Kq αkq + gki skt
                                         ηik,t   =                                                
                                                    αi0 sit + αi2 (st ) si + αi1 sit + αi3 (st ) si Stγ
Note that also that
                                                                                  αi2 (s)  αi       1
                                               f1 < 0 if and only if                     < 0i =
                                                                                                 αip%
                                                                                    i
                                                                                  α3 (s)   α1       θpq
Q.E.D.

         Part (b) of Proposition 3: The Expected Return
         The expected return is obtained immediately from σ R,t by using the formula
                                                                 dm
                                         Et dRit = −Covt dRit ,
                                                                  mt



         Q.E.D.

      Proof of Proposition 1: (a) The price consumption ratio of the total wealth portfolio can be obtained
by simply adding the prices of individual securities. In particular, we ﬁnd
                                   n
                                                        n
                                                                           n
                                                                                                       
                 αT0 W (st )   =             αiq sit +         φsi αiq Kq         αkq sjt = 1 + φKq s αq αq st
                                       i=1               i=1                j=1

                                   
                                   n                      
                                                          n         n 
                                                                                                                 
                 αT1 W (st )   =             αipq sit +         φsi     αkp αipq Kp + sα pq φαiq Kq Kp + αkpq αiq Kq skt
                                       i=1                i=1       k=1

Algebra shows
                                                 1
                                        αT0 W (st )  α q st
                                                           =
                                             1 − φHq
                                                 1
                              αT1 W (st ) =          ((αp st ) Kpφsαpq + αpq st )
                                             1 − φHq
                                                                                  
Part (b). An application of Ito’s Lemma to PtT W = Ct αT0 W (st ) + αT1 W (st ) Stγ implies that the diﬀusion part
of the TW portfolios is given by
                                         αT1 W (st )
        σ TP,t
            W
                  =    σc +                                  S γ α (1 − λStγ ) σ c
                               αT0 W(st ) + Stγ × αT1 W (st ) t
                               αq + Stγ (Kpφsαpq α p + αpq )
                       +                                                I (st ) σ (st )
                          αq st + Stγ × ((αp st ) Kpφsαpq + αpq st )
                                                                # j                          $                    
                             S γ α (1 − λStγ )         n
                                                                 αq + Stγ Kp φsα pq αjp + αjpq sjt
                  =    σ c + tT W             γ σ c  +      n    #         γ                     $ k ν j − s · ν
                                                             k=1 αq + St × Kp φsαpq αp + αpq
                             f1 (st ) + St                           k                    k      k   st
                                                       j=1

                        Stγ α (1 − λStγ )       n
                                                     TW
                  =                       σ c +     wjt σ D (st )
                        f1T W (st ) + Stγ       j=1

with
                                                                                   αT0 W (st )
                                                                 f1T W (st ) =
                                                                                   αT1 W (st )

                                                                              42
and where                                       #                            $
                                    TW           αjq + Stγ Kp φsαpq αjp + αjpq sjt
                                   wjt = n      #         γ
                                                                                  $ k
                                              k=1 αq + St × Kp φsα pq αp + αpq
                                                     k                    k      k   st
                                TW
are weights such that       j   wjt = 1. Given the form of the stochastic discount factor, we obtain
                                                         dmt
                  Et dRTt W           =   −Covt dRTt W ,
                                                          mt
                                                                                                  "
                                                        γ     Stγ α (1 − λStγ )      n
                                                                                          T W jc
                                      =   (γ + α (1 − λS ))                     σc +     wjt σCF,t
                                                              f1T W (st ) + Stγ      j=1

Q.E.D.




                                                            43
                                         Table I
                        Basic moments in empirical data: 1948-2001

                        Panel A: Summary statistics for the market portfolio

                                      M
                                    R         vol(RM )      rf      vol(rf )

                                    7.71%     16.25%      1.44%     3.08%


                                   Panel B: Predictability regressions

                 Panel B-1: Sample 1948-2001                        Panel B-2: Sample 1948-1995

    Horizon
                4         8          12        16                  4            8        12         16
    ln DP
                 .13        .2        .26       .35                 .28          .48       .63        .78
    t−stat.    (2.13)     (1.65)     (1.34)    (1.29)             (4.04)       (4.00)    (4.49)     (5.41)
        2
      R          .09       .10        .11       .14                 .19          .32       .43        .54

                                     Panel C: The value premium
               Growth                                                                                     Value
   Portf.          1           2         3       4          5        6        7           8          9     10
   R (%)         6.86        7.77      7.67    7.63       8.53     9.96     8.39        11.00     11.39   12.36
  M E/BE         5.05        2.68      2.00    1.63       1.38     1.18     1.01         .86        .70    .45
    P/D         43.47       31.38     26.87    24.65     22.65    21.62    20.64        19.95     20.00   21.77
Sharpe Ratio     .352        .450      .452    .461       .555     .640     .522        .657       .644   .600
  CAPM β         1.13        1.02      1.01     .95        .88      .89      .88         .91        .92    .98


                                                                                         M
Notes to Table I. Panel A: Summary statistics for the market portfolio. R is the annualized
                                                                                             
average excess returns of the market portfolio over the three month Treasury Bill. vol RM is
the annualized standard deviation of the returns on the market portfolio. rf is the average risk
free rate, as measured by three-month Treasury Bill rate, and vol(rf ) is its annualized standard
deviation. Panel B: Predictability quarterly regressions of excess returns at the 1, 2, 3, and
4 year horizon on the log of the price dividend ratio of the market portfolio. t−stat denotes
the Newey-West t− statistic where the number of lags is the double of the forecasting horizon.
Panel C: R is the annualized average excess returns of each of the decile portfolios, M E/BE
is the average market-to-book and P/D the average price dividend ratio. CAPM β is obtined
by running time series regressions of excess return on each of the ten decile portfolios sorted
on M E/BE on the market excess return, where M E is the market equity and BE is the book
value. Quarterly dividends, returns, market equity and other ﬁnancial series are obtained from
the CRSP-COMPUSTAT database. The sample period is 1948-2001. The construction of the
BE/ME sorted portfolios follows the standard procedure of Fama and French (1992): Each year t
portfolios are sorted into 10 BE/ME sorted portfolios using book-to-market ratios for year t − 1.
Returns on each of these portfolios are calculated from July of year t to June of year t + 1.




                                                    44
                                           Table II
                             Model parameters used in the simulation

                         Panel A: Consumption and preference parameters

                       µc      σc        γ     ρ      γ/S    min{γ/St }    α    k

                       .02    .015    1.5     .072    48       27.75       77   .13

                      Panel B: Share process parameter in the base line model

                                     n        θCF      si     φ        ν

                                     200     .00345   .005   .07   0.55



Notes to Table II. Panel A: µc is the annual average growth rate of the consumption process, σc
is the standard deviation of consumption growth, γ is the coeﬃcient controlling the local curvature
of the utility function, ρ is the subjective discount rate, G, λ, α and k are the parameters controlling
the dynamics of the process Gt = St−γ , where St = (Ct − Xt )Ct−1 is the surplus consumption ratio
and the process for Gt is given by
                                     
                   dGt = k G − Gt − α (Gt − λ) µc,1 (st ) dt − α (Gt − λ) σc dBt1 .                (37)

Panel B: The share process for i = 1, 2 · · · , n is
                                                    
                                dsit = φ si − sit + sit σ i (st )dB t

n = 200 is the number of assets in our artiﬁcial economy. θiCF is the parameter controlling the
cash-ﬂow risk. Each assets is assigned a value of θiCF , which are distributed uniformly in the range
above. si is the fraction that each assets constributes to consumption in the steady state and φ is
the speed of mean reversion+  of the share process. Finally, σ i (st ) = ν i − st ν where ν i are vectors
with ν i,0 = θiCF /σ c , ν i,i = ν 2 − ν 20,i , and the remaining entries equal to zero. The simulation
consists of 10,000 years of daily data.




                                                      45
                                              Table III
                                    Basic moments in simulated data

                           Panel A: Summary statistics for the aggregate portfolio

                                           M
                                          R        vol(RM )        rf      vol(rf )

                                        4.35%       13.03%        .69%     4.36%


                                      Panel B: Predictability regressions

                                Horizon
                                               4          8           12        16
                                ln DP
                                                .25        .38          .43       .47
                                t−stat.       (29.11)   (34.68)       (37.58)   (39.46)
                                R2 (%)          5.74      7.82         7.57      7.06


                                          Panel C: The value premium
                       Growth                                                                                     Value
      Portf.              1          2             3            4          5       6         7       8       9      10
      R (%)             3.07       3.58          4.37         4.77       5.27    5.45      5.84    6.00    6.43    8.23
    ln (P/D)            6.38       5.07         4.613         4.35       4.12    3.90      3.68    3.44    3.15    2.68
 Avge(θiCF ) × 100     −.2858     −.1589       −.0665        −.0083     .0295   .0568     .0787   .0958   .1128   .1431
  Sharpe Ratio          .260       .271          .307         .313       .331    .328      .336    .330    .334    .366
    CAPM β               .84        .91           .98         1.05       1.10    1.13      1.16    1.20    1.22    1.26
CAPM ﬁtt. ret. (%)      3.67       3.94          4.28         4.55       4.78    4.91      5.05    5.21    5.29    5.50


                                                                                           M
   Notes to Table III. Panel A: Summary statistics for the market portfolio. R is the annualized  
   average excess returns of the market portfolio over the three month Treasury Bill. vol RM is the
   annualized standard deviation of the returns on the market portfolio. rf is the average risk free rate
   and vol(rf ) is its annualized standard deviation. Panel B: Predictability quarterly regressions of
   excess returns at the 1, 2, 3, and 4 year horizon on the log of the price dividend ratio of the market
   portfolio. t−stat denotes the Newey-West t−statistic where the number of lags is the double of
   the forecasting horizon. Panel C: Annualized average returns R, average log price-dividend ratio,
   ln (P/D), and CAPM β. CAPM ﬁtted returns are the returns resulting from multiplying the
   CAPM betas from the previous line by the average excess return of the market portfolio reported
   in Panel A. Avge(θiCF ) × 100 refers to the average θiCF (multiplied by 100) for the assets in the
   corresponding decile portfolio.




                                                        46
                                          Table IV
                              The dynamics of the value premium

.                  Panel A: Annualized average excess returns (%) in empirical data

    Market-to-book of market portfolio < c             Market-to-book of market portfolio > c

                                       M                                                 M
     c        1      10     10-1      R                 c      1       10     10-1     R
    15%    13.18    23.57   10.38    15.40             15%    5.73   10.35    4.62     6.34
    20%    10.57    21.70   11.14    13.41             20%    5.95   10.06    4.11     6.31
    25%     5.51    19.16   13.64    9.89              25%    7.31   10.11    2.80     6.99
    30%     6.97    19.49   12.51    10.50             30%    6.82    9.32    2.50     6.62
    35%     8.19    18.65   10.45    11.14             35%    6.15    8.98    2.83     5.87



                   Panel B: Annualized average excess returns (%) in simulated data

     Price-dividend of market portfolio < c            Price-dividend of market portfolio > c

                                       M                                               M
      c       1      10     10-1      R                 c      1      10     10-1     R
     15%    7.37    18.27   10.90    10.43             15%    2.30   6.46    4.15     3.27
     20%    6.56    16.07   9.51      9.22             20%    2.19   6.26    4.07     3.13
     25%    5.96    14.60   8.64      8.36             25%    2.10   6.10    4.00     3.01
     30%    5.50    13.46   7.96      7.67             30%    2.02   5.98    3.96     2.92
     35%    5.13    12.60   7.47      7.18             35%    1.95   5.87    3.92     2.82




Notes to Table IV. Panel A: Annualized average excess returns in empirical data of the growth
(portfolio 1) and value (portfolio 10) portfolios depending on whether the market-to-book of the
market portfolio is below or above the c percentile of its empirical distribution. Panel B: Annu-
alized average excess returns in simulated data of the growth (portfolio 1) and value (portfolio
10) portfolios depending on whether the simulated price-dividend ratio of the market portfolio is
                                                                           M
below or above the c percentile of its distribution in simulated data. R is the average excess
return on the market portfolio in empirical data (Panel A) and simulated data (Panel B).




                                                 47
                                                 Table V
                         Asset pricing models: Time series regressions (quarterly)

                      Panel A: Time series regression Rpt = α + β M RM
                                                                     t +
                                                                                 p
                                                                                 t   for p = 1, 2, · · · , 10
    .
                                              Panel A-2: Empirical data
              Growth                                                                                                         Value
 Portf.          1           2        3           4            5          6             7                8            9        10
    α          −.46         −.03     −.02        .07          .44        .78           .40              .99         1.07      1.20
  t(α)        (−2.00)      (−.18)   (−.14)      (.32)        (2.07)    (3.73)         (1.51)          (3.73)       (3.32)    (2.65)

    M
  β           1.13       1.02       1.01       .95           .88       .89           .88             .91          .92        .98
 t βM         (39.80)     (43.68)   (42.56)    (30.32)       (27.24)   (27.27)       (21.38)         (21.33)      (17.56)    (14.16)

                                              Panel A-2: Simulated data
              Growth                                                                                                          Value
 Portf.          1           2         3          4            5          6             7                8           9          10
    α          −.15        −.09       .02        .06          .12        .13           .20              .20         .29        .68
  t(α)       (−14.25)     (−5.95)    (1.52)     (3.27)       (6.99)    (6.87)         (9.12)          (8.35)      (10.32)    (17.56 )

   βM           .84         .91       .98        1.05         1.10      1.13           1.16            1.20         1.22      1.26

             Panel B: Time series regression Rpt = α + β M RM
                                                            t +β
                                                                 HM L HM L
                                                                     Rt    +                  p
                                                                                              t   for p = 1, 2, · · · , 10

                                              Panel B-1: Empirical data
              Growth                                                                                                          Value
 Portf.          1            2        3          4             5         6            7                 8          9          10
    α           .20          .17      .02        −.12          .19       .28          −.40              .01        −.08       −.36
  t(α)        (1.13)       (1.05)    (.14)      (−.61)        (.87)    (1.58)        (−2.15)           (.09)      (−.43)     (−1.23)

    M
  β M         1.04        .99       1.00       .98           .91       .96           .99             1.05        1.09        1.20
 t β          (43.68)     (51.25)   (46.13)    (35.28)       (30.25)   (38.66)       (39.90)         (48.04)      (39.61)    (29.85)

   HM L
 β HM L      −.42        −.12      −.03        .12          .16        .31           .50             .61          .72        .97
t β          (−12.13)     (−2.37)   (−.68)      (1.88)       (3.62)    (8.85)        (10.35)         (15.52)      (21.04)    (14.14)


                                              Panel B-2: Simulated data
              Growth                                                                                                         Value
 Portf.          1            2        3          4            5          6             7                8            9        10
    α          −.01          .02      .07        .06          .09        .10           .11              .03          .07      .13
  t(α)        (−1.15)      (1.24)    (4.50)     (3.44)       (5.26)    (4.85)         (5.38)          (1.57)       (2.97)    (5.38)

   βM           .93         .97       1.01       1.05         1.08      1.11           1.11            1.10         1.09       .93

 β HM L        −.28        −.21      −.09       −.01           .06       .08            .16             .31          .41      1.07


   Notes to Table V. Panel A: Time series regressions in empirical (Panel A-1) and simulated
   (Panel A-2) data of returns on each of the book-to-market sorted portfolios on the market excess
   return. Simulation parameters are contained in Table II. α denotes the intercept of the time
   series regression and β M the regression coeﬃcient. t(α) and t(β M ) denote the heteroskedasticity
   corrected t−statistic. Panel B: Time series regressions in empirical (Panel B-1) and simulated
   (Panel B-2) data of returns on each of the book-to-market sorted portfolios on the market excess
   return and the returns on HML, where β HM L is the regression coeﬀcient on HML. The t−statistics
   in simulated data have been omitted as they are all well above 100 for the case of the regression
   coeﬃcients, β M and β HM L .




                                                        48
                                      Table VI
             Asset pricing models: Fama-MacBeth regressions (quarterly)

                                    Panel A: Empirical data

            Const.      Mkt.     SMB        HML        Mkt×log(D/P)     Mkt×cay     Adj. R2
       1.    4.69      −2.52                                                         11%
            (3.21)    (−1.65)
       2.     .36       1.63      −.31       1.05                                    80%
             (.23)      (.99)    (−.31)     (2.16)
       3.    2.72       −.87                               1.71                      83%
            (2.24)     (−.65)                             (2.46)
       4.    3.06      −1.37                                               .06       81%
            (2.48)    (−1.01)                                            (2.34)


                                    Panel B: Simulated data

                        Const.      Mkt.      HML        Mkt×log(D/P)     Adj. R2
                 5.     −1.45       2.56                                   91%
                      (−19.93)    (32.45)
                 6.      −.17       1.31       .94                          99%
                       (−1.64)    (11.85)    (28.69)
                 7.      .63        .38                      1.16           98%
                        (3.56)     (2.00)                   (10.11)



Notes to Table VI. Panel A: Fama-MacBeth regressions in empirical data. Line 1, CAPM
regressions where Mkt. represents the average excess return of the market portfolio. Line 2, Fama
and French (1993) model, where SMB is the return on “small minus big” and HML is the return
on “high minus low”. Line 3, conditional CAPM regression where the dividend yield, log(D/P),
of the market portfolio is used as a conditioning variable. Line 4 conditional CAPM regression
where the variable cay of Lettau and Ludvigson (2001) is used as a conditioning variable. Panel
B: Fama-MacBeth regressions in simulated data. t−statistic in parenthesis and Adj. R2 is the
adjusted R2 .




                                                 49
                                               Table VII
                           Cash-ﬂow betas: Cohen, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2003)

Cash-ﬂow deﬁnition          Growth                                                                                                 Value
                               1           2          3         4        5          6            7               8        9         10
4               p
  j=0    ρj ROEt+j,j+1        .72         .91        .94       .95      .96        .97          .98            1.12     1.28       1.51
     .
         std. err.           (.52)       (.31)      (.12)     (.25)    (.14)      (.12)        (.14)           (.25)    (.32)      (.29)

4             Xp
  j=0      ρj M Et+j,j+1
                  p           .35         .65       .92       1.17      1.26      1.63         1.93            2.97     4.15       11.26
                 t+j−1,j
         std. err.           (.31)       (.31)      (.17)     (.16)    (.28)      (.69)       (1.01)           (2.26)   (3.26)    (10.76)
     p              p
  Xt+4,j+4 −Xt−1,0
            p
         M Et−1,0
                              .21         .66       1.46      1.61      .24       1.83         2.74            5.50     2.38       2.64
         std. err.           (.19)       (.08)      (.52)     (.28)    (.61)      (.60)       (1.24)           (2.69)   (.60)     (1.65)
4
     j=0  ρj ∆dpt+j,j+1       .79         .90        .96      1.03     1.34       1.44         1.14            1.44     1.39       1.28
         std. err.           (.19)       (.13)      (.10)     (.13)    (.28)      (.46)        (.31)           (.88)    (.77)      (.91)



     Notes to Table VII. This table reports the results of Cohen, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2003, Table
     II Panel B) for the following regressions with annual data for each of the ten decile portfolios sorted
     on market-to-book,

                            
                            4                                                   
                                                                                4
                                  ρj ROEt+j,j+1
                                        p
                                                     =      β pCF,0 + β pCF,1         ρj ROEt+j
                                                                                            M
                                                                                                +          p
                                                                                                           4
                            j=0                                                 j=0

                            
                            4         p                                         
                                                                                4            M
                                    Xt+j,j+1                                               Xt+j,j+1
                                ρj      p            =      β pCF,0 + β pCF,1         ρj      M
                                                                                                    +          p
                                                                                                               4
                            j=0
                                   M Et+j−1,j                                   j=0
                                                                                           M Et+j−1
                             p            p                                       M      M
                           Xt+4,j+4 − Xt−1,0                                     Xt+4 − Xt−1
                                    p                =      β pCF,0 + β pCF,1          M
                                                                                                       +        p
                                                                                                                4
                                M Et−1,0                                           M Et−1
                              
                              4                                                 
                                                                                4
                                    ρj ∆dpt+j,j+1    =      β pCF,0 + β pCF,1         ρj ∆dM
                                                                                           t+j +
                                                                                                      p
                                                                                                      4.                         (38)
                              j=0                                               j=0

     ROE denotes the ratio of clean surplus earning (Xt = BEt − BEt−1 + Dt where BEt−1 is the
     beginning of the period book equity and Dt are the dividends from CRSP) to BEt−1 . M Et−1
     denotes the market value at the beginning of the period and ∆dpt+j,j+1 is the log of dividend
     growth of decile portfolio p. The ﬁrst subscript refers to the year of observation and the second to
     the number of years after the portfolio formation in the sorting procedure. Similar quantities are
     deﬁned for the market portfolio. GMM standard errors computed using the Newey-West formula
     with four lags and leads are reported in parenthesis. ρ is a constant, linked to one minus the
     dividend yield, set at .95.




                                                                50
                                           Table VIII
                    Cash-ﬂow risk, the market portfolio and the value premium

 Cash-ﬂow risk                Market portfolio                      Predictability           Value premium
                        M                          
 ν   θCF × 100        R      vol(RM )    rf    vol rf         b12    R212 b16 R216       10 − 1 CAPM 10 − 1
.25      .0           9.90    24.16    1.16     5.44          .76    23.1 .78 22.4       −2.44        −2.53
         .1           9.69    23.62    1.12     5.32          .75    22.2 .77 21.6       −1.27        −1.42
         .2           8.95    21.79    1.00     4.97          .72    18.9 .74 18.1        2.40         2.34
         .3           7.02    17.22     .79     4.46          .58     9.6   .58    8.2    7.51         7.45
        .345          3.97    10.23     .67     4.20          .38     4.4   .43    4.1    7.10        6.70

.40         .0        9.90     24.16     1.16     5.44        .76    23.1   .78   22.4   −3.22      −3.37
            .1        9.69     23.63     1.12     5.33        .75    22.1   .77   21.4   −2.56      −2.77
            .2        8.96     21.83     1.00     4.99        .71    18.6   .73   17.9   −.07       −.25
            .3        7.06     17.37     .80      4.49        .58     9.8   .59    8.6   4.91       4.62
           .345       4.09     11.14     .68      4.23        .46     7.0   .51    6.5   6.29       4.57

.55         .0        9.90     24.16     1.16     5.44        .76    23.1   .78   22.4   −3.67      −3.86
            .1        9.70     23.66     1.13     5.34        .74    21.9   .76   21.2   −3.27      −3.48
            .2        8.99     21.95     1.01     5.05        .70    18.2   .72   17.3   −1.49      −1.70
            .3        7.15     17.85     .81      4.60        .58    10.1   .59    9.0   2.83        2.19
           .345       4.35     13.03     .69      4.36        .43     7.6   .47    7.1   5.16        1.83


      Notes to Table VIII. This table reports basic moments of the returns for three diﬀerent values
      of ν, which determines the maximum volatility of share process across assets, and the measure
      of cash-ﬂow risk, θCF ≥ 0, which determines the support on which the cash-ﬂow risk parameters
                                                                              M
      of individual ﬁrms are uniformly distributed, θiCF ∈ [−θCF , θCF ]. R is the annualized
                                                                                                   average
      excess returns of the market portfolio over the three month Treasury Bill. vol RM is the annual-
      ized standard deviation of the returns on the market portfolio. r f is the average risk free rate and
      vol(rf ) is its annualized standard deviation. All these numbers are in percentages. b12 and b16
      are the regressions coeﬃcients of the quarterly predictability regressions of excess returns on the
      log of the price dividend ratio of the market portfolio for the three and four year horizons. R212
      and R216 are the corresponding R2 s. The t−stats are omitted but they are all well above standard
      signiﬁcance levels. 10-1 denotes the value premium, in percentages, deﬁned as the diﬀerence be-
      tween the average return on the value portfolio, portfolio 10, and the growth portfolio, portfolio
      1. CAPM 10-1 is the ﬁtted CAPM value premium, where the betas are calculated the standard
                                                                                M
      way in simulated data and the market premium is the corresponding R in each line.




                                                         51
                                                Table IX
                                 The properties of the cash-ﬂow process
                                                                                                   
             ν      θCF × 100           [ρ, ρ]      Avge σiD          β 1CF,1       β 10
                                                                                      CF,1     Avge σiR
            .25          0            [.04, .07]      24.88            1.04           .96        27.67
                        .1           [−.21, .32]      24.29             .04          1.89        27.33
                        .2           [−.48, .57]      22.44           −3.30          4.15        26.11
                        .3           [−.76, .81]      18.92           −8.14          6.70        22.88
                      .345           [−.89, .91]      16.39           −9.62          7.94        16.68

            .40             0         [.02, .05]       40.04           1.09          .96         31.33
                           .1        [−.13, .20]       39.65            .43         1.49         31.02
                           .2        [−.29, .36]       38.50          −1.80         3.10         29.88
                           .3        [−.46, .52]       36.55          −6.37         5.22         26.66
                          .345       [−.53, .59]       35.40          −8.63         5.73         19.83

            .55             0         [.01, .04]       56.20          1.17           .99         34.86
                           .1        [−.10, .15]       55.87           .69          1.28         34.55
                           .2        [−.21, .26]       54.96          −1.01         2.40         33.41
                           .3        [−.32, .37]       53.47          −4.79         4.28         30.10
                          .345       [−.37, .42]       52.60          −7.40         4.73         22.96

Notes to Table IX. For each value of ν and θCF the table reports several moments of the cash-
ﬂow process in simulated data. [ρ, ρ] stands for the range of the correlation coeﬃcients between
                                                             
individual dividend growth and consumption growth; Avge σiD stands for the average standard
deviation of dividend growth across the 200 individual assets in percentages. β 1CF,1 and β 10
                                                                                            CF,1
correspond to the regression coeﬃcients of the time series regression in simulated data

                  
                  4                                         
                                                            4
                        ρj ∆dpt+j,j+1 = β pCF,0 + β pCF,1         ρj ∆dM
                                                                       t+j +
                                                                                p
                                                                                4    for     p = 1, 10
                  j=0                                       j=0


for the Growth (p = 1) and Value (p = 10) portfolios and should be compared to the coeﬃcients
in the corresponding regression run by Cohen, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2003) in empirical data
(see equation (38) in the Notes to Table V.) Avge σiR stands for the average standard deviation
of returns across the 200 individual assets in percentages.




                                                       52
                  Figure 1: The Cash Flow Component of Expected Return
                           (A) The cash flow risk component of expected returns − steady state
         0.025


          0.02


         0.015


          0.01


         0.005
  μCF




            0


        −0.005


         −0.01


        −0.015


         −0.02


        −0.025
             −4       −3          −2          −1           0           1            2            3           4
                                           Unconditional Cash Flow Risk σi                           x 10
                                                                                                            −3
                                                                            CF

                      (B) The cash flow risk component of expected returns − random relative share
         0.04



         0.03



         0.02



         0.01
 CF




           0
  μ




        −0.01



        −0.02



        −0.03



        −0.04
            −4        −3         −2          −1            0           1            2            3           4
                                          Unconditional Cash Flow Risk σi                               −3
                                                                                                     x 10
                                                                           CF




      The top panel plots the steady-state cash ﬂow component of individual assets’ expected
                                                             i
                                                                                      
return against the unconditional cash ﬂow risk parameter σCF     = E cov dD i /Di, dC/C . For
each asset, relative share is assumed equal to one, si /sit = 1, and suplus consumption ratio is
assumed equal to its steady state value St = S. The bottom panel reports the same quantities,
but under a random selecetion for relative shares si /sit .
                       Figure 2: Expected Returns and Expected Dividend Growth
                                         (A) The discount risk component of expected returns
           0.055
                                   High cash flow risk

            0.05


           0.045


            0.04


           0.035
  μDISC




            0.03


           0.025


            0.02
                                  Low cash flow risk


           0.015


            0.01
                   0      0.2    0.4         0.6         0.8       1        1.2           1.4   1.6   1.8   2
                                                   Expected dividend growth (sbari / s i)

                                        (B) The cash flow risk component of expected returns
            0.06

                                        High cash flow risk


            0.04




            0.02
  CF




               0
  μ




           −0.02




           −0.04
                                         Low cash flow risk




           −0.06
                   0      0.2    0.4         0.6         0.8       1        1.2           1.4   1.6   1.8   2
                                                   Expected dividend growth (sbari / s i)

                                                          (C) Expected returns
            0.12


                                       High cash flow risk
             0.1



            0.08



            0.06
  E[ R ]




            0.04



            0.02



              0



           −0.02
                                       Low cash flow risk


           −0.04
                   0      0.2   0.4         0.6         0.8       1        1.2           1.4    1.6   1.8   2
                                                  Expected dividend growth (sbari / s i)




      The top panel plots the theoretical discount component of individual stock returns
plotted against the relative share si /sit , which proxies for expected dividend growth. This
                                                                                            i
quantity is computed for various levels of the asset unconditional cash ﬂow risk σCF            =
       i i          
E cov dD /D , dC/C . The middle panel plots the cash ﬂow risk component of stock re-
turns, plotted against the relative share si /sit , again for various levels of unconditional cash
ﬂow risk. The bottom panel reports the total conditional expected return for individual assets.
                      Figure 3: Expected Returns and Surplus Consumption Ratio
                                                Expected returns
             0.3
                                                                                        Market
                                                                                        Value
                                                                                        Growth
            0.25




             0.2




            0.15
  E[ R ]




             0.1




            0.05




               0




           −0.05
               0.02        0.025    0.03       0.035         0.04        0.045   0.05        0.055
                                           Surplus Consumption Ratio S


      This ﬁgure shows the theoretical expected return for the market portfolio (dotted line),
a representative value stock (solid line), and a representative growth stock (dash dotted line),
plotted against values of the surplus consumption ration St . The vertical dotted line is the
median value of the surplus consumption ratio St. The representative value (growth) stock is
chosen with low (high) expected dividend growth and high (low) cash ﬂow risk θCF .
                              Figure 4: The Cross-Section of Stock Returns in Simulated Data
                                                         (A) P/D Ratio
                      7

                      6
  log(P/D)




                      5

                      4

                      3

                      2
                          3           4           5           6           7          8         9
                                                        mean return (%)

                                                          (B) Return
                      9

                      8
  fitted return (%)




                      7

                      6

                      5

                      4

                      3
                          3           4           5           6           7          8         9
                                                        mean return (%)

      The top panel plots the average log price-dividend ratio (y-axis) of P/D sorted portfolios
versus their unconditional average return (x-axis) in artiﬁcial data, under the assumption
                                                                          i
that assets diﬀer cross-sectionally in their cash ﬂow risk parameter θCF     . Under the same
assumptions, the bottom left panel plots the “ﬁtted” average return according to the CAPM,
i.e. E[ Returni ] = βCAP
                      i
                          M E[ Return
                                        mkt
                                            ], on the y-axis against the average return on the
x-axis.
 Figure 5: The Cross-Section of Stock Returns with only Discount Risk Eﬀects
                                                  (A) P/D Ratio
                        4.5

                         4
  log(P/D)




                        3.5

                         3

                        2.5

                         2
                              8   8.5   9   9.5         10        10.5   11     11.5       12
                                                  mean return (%)

                                                   (B) Return
                        13

                        12
    fitted return (%)




                        11

                        10

                         9

                         8
                              8   8.5   9   9.5         10        10.5   11     11.5       12
                                                  mean return (%)

      The top panel plots the average log price-dividend ratio (y-axis) of P/D sorted portfolios
versus their unconditional average return (x-axis) in artiﬁcial data, under the assumption that
                                                              i       j
assets have no cross-sectional diﬀerences in cash ﬂow risk, σCF   = σCF = σc2 . Under the same
assumptions, the bottom panel plots the “ﬁtted” average return according to the CAPM, i.e.
E[ Returni ] = βCAP
                 i
                     M E[ Return
                                  mkt
                                      ], on the y-axis against the average return on the x-axis.
