                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                MEDICAL EXPENDITURE AND
                               HOUSEHOLD PORTFOLIO CHOICE

                                             Dana Goldman
                                             Nicole Maestas

                                         Working Paper 11818
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11818


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2005




We thank Tony Bernardo, Jay Bhattacharya, David Card, Amy Finkelstein, Darius Lakdawalla, Neeraj Sood,
and seminar participants at UC Irvine, the NBER Health Economics Workshop, UC Berkeley Labor Lunch,
UC Berkeley Demography Brown Bag, and RAND Labor and Population Brown Bag for many helpful
comments and suggestions. Baoping Shang, Abby Alpert, and Qiufei Ma provided excellent research
assistance. We are especially grateful to the National Institute on Aging for funding and to Weiss Ratings,
Inc. for providing us with Medigap price data. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Dana Goldman and Nicole Maestas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Medical Expenditure Risk and Household Portfolio Choice
Dana Goldman and Nicole Maestas
NBER Working Paper No. 11818
December 2005
JEL No. I0

                                           ABSTRACT

As health care costs continue to rise, medical expenses have become an increasingly important
contributor to financial risk. Economic theory suggests that when background risk rises, individuals
will reduce their exposure to other risks. This paper presents a test of this theory by examining the
effect of medical expenditure risk on the willingness of elderly Medicare beneficiaries to hold risky
assets. We measure exposure to medical expenditure risk by whether an individual is covered by
supplemental insurance through Medigap, an employer, or a Medicare HMO. We account for the
endogeneity of insurance choice by using county variation in Medigap prices and non-Medicare
HMO market penetration. We find that having Medigap or an employer policy increases risky asset
holding by 6 percentage points relative to those enrolled in only Medicare Parts A and B. HMO
participation increases risky asset holding by 12 percentage points. Given that just 50 percent of our
sample holds risky assets, these are economically sizable effects. It also suggests an important link
between the availability and pricing of health insurance and the financial behavior of the elderly.

Dana Goldman
RAND Graduate School
1700 Main Street
P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
and NBER
dgoldman@rand.org

Nicole Maestas
RAND Graduate School
nicole.maestas@rand.org
I. Introduction

          As health care costs continue to rise, medical expenses have become an increasingly

important contributor to financial risk. One recent study finds that medical expenses were cited

in half of all personal bankruptcy filings in five federal courts in 2001 (Himmelstein et al.,

2005). Medical expenditure risk is especially important for older individuals who as they age

face worsening health.           Although nearly all Americans age 65 and older have Medicare

coverage, benefit gaps—especially for catastrophic losses—place them at-risk for large out-of-

pocket medical expenses.1 In 2000, Medicare beneficiaries without additional coverage had a 5

percent chance that out-of-pocket expenses would exceed $6,367 and a 1 percent chance that

they would exceed $31,751. Because of these potentially high costs, many individuals seek

supplemental insurance, either through their former employers, a Medigap policy, or by

enrolling in a Medicare HMO.                These insurance arrangements offer different degrees of

protection, but do not fully insure against the risk of large out-of-pocket medical expenses.

          Because medical expenditure risk is not fully insurable and is largely beyond one’s

control, it can be thought of as background risk.                   According to economic theory, when

individuals face background risk, they should be less willing to bear other risks (Kimball, 1993).

For example, theory predicts that an exogenous increase in uninsurable medical expense risk

would cause an individual to reduce his exposure to other risks, such as rate-of-return risk.

          In this paper, we test the effects of background risk on portfolio allocations by examining

the effect of exogenous medical expenditure risk on the decision to hold risky assets. In our




1
    As of 2005, Medicare does not cover prescription drugs, requires 20 percent coinsurance on many services, and
    charges a deductible of $912 for a single hospital stay of up to 60 days. After 60 days, beneficiaries are
    responsible for $228 per day until day 90, and $456 per day for days 91-150. After 150 days, the beneficiary is
    responsible for all costs (CMS, 2004).

                                                              2
analysis, variation in medical expenditure risk comes from different supplemental insurance

arrangements for Medicare beneficiaries.        Because supplemental insurance choices are

potentially endogenous, we jointly model ownership of risky assets and the supplemental

insurance decision, allowing for arbitrary correlation in the unobserved heterogeneity affecting

both outcomes. Identification comes from factors that explain the decision to hold supplemental

insurance but not the decision to hold risky assets; namely, the price of Medigap insurance, the

market penetration of HMOs in the non-elderly market, and state supplemental insurance

regulations. We find that having Medigap or employer supplemental insurance increases risky

asset holding by 6.2 percentage points relative to those enrolled only in basic Medicare Parts A

and B. Medicare HMO participation increases risky asset holding by 11.6 percentage points.

Both effects are statistically significant. Given that just 50 percent of our sample holds risky

assets, these represent economically important effects.

       This research also raises important policy issues. The elderly hold a disproportionate

share of wealth in the U.S. (Rosen and Wu, 2004), yet are known to invest relatively

conservatively. If changes in medical expenditure risk affect their willingness to hold wealth in

risky assets, reforms to the Medicare system could have important spillover effects on financial

markets. For example, the Medicare Modernization Act of 2003 will institute a prescription drug

benefit into Medicare in 2006. These results suggest that the attendant reduction in medical

expenditure risk could increase demand for riskier financial assets. Furthermore, as medical

spending continues to absorb a larger fraction of household resources, the financial behavior of

households will be increasingly distorted. Families with less wealth also tend to have less health

insurance coverage; if they are also investing in less risky assets, then their lower wealth




                                                    3
accumulations at older ages could further exacerbate differences between high and low wealth

households.



II. Theory and Evidence of Background Risk

           In practice, individuals make economic decisions in an environment characterized by

multiple risks. It makes intuitive sense that an individual facing one risk should be less willing

to bear another risk, even if the two risks are independent. Kimball (1993) formalized this

intuition as standard risk aversion, building on Pratt and Zeckhauser’s (1987) notion of proper

risk aversion.2 An implication of standard risk aversion is that any undesirable background risk

lowers the absolute value of the optimal level of investment in any other (endogenous) risk

(Kimball, 1993).3 Whether an increase in background risk also causes precautionary saving to

rise is theoretically ambiguous: the direct effect of an increase in background risk both increases

precautionary saving and reduces investment in the endogenous risk, but the induced reduction

in the endogenous risk may in turn reduce precautionary saving (Elmendorf and Kimball, 2000).

Empirically, researchers have found that precautionary saving is positively associated with




2
    A utility function characterized by standard risk aversion is formally equivalent to one with the property of
    decreasing absolute prudence (DAP), which in turn implies the weaker condition of decreasing absolute risk
    aversion (DARA). DARA describes risk aversion that decreases as wealth rises, whereas DAP describes a
    precautionary saving motive that decreases as wealth rises. DARA says that a nonrandom reduction in wealth
    should increase an individual’s sensitivity to risk, whereas DAP says that any undesirable risk should increase an
    individual’s sensitivity to risk, whenever a nonrandom reduction in wealth would. In other words, undesirable
    risks effectively increase risk aversion just as reductions in wealth do. DAP and DARA describe many commonly
    used utility functions, such as the class of CRRA utility functions. Standard risk aversion is closely related to
    proper risk aversion. Formally, proper risk aversion states every undesirable risk aggravates every statistically
    independent undesirable risk, while standard risk aversion states every loss-aggravating risk aggravates every
    statistically independent undesirable risk (Kimball, 1993). In other words, standard risk aversion expands the
    class of risks that may aggravate an undesirable risk to include not only other undesirable risks but also the larger
    set of loss-aggravating risks.
3
    An exception would be if the background risk were negatively correlated with the endogenous risk (Elmendorf
    and Kimball, 2000).

                                                                 4
income risk (Carroll and Samwick, 1998, Gollier, 2002, Gourinchas and Parker, 2001, Guiso et

al., 1992, Lusardi, 1998) and medical expenditure risk (Kotlikoff, 1986, Levin, 1995, Palumbo,

1999).4 We focus on portfolio allocation rather than saving behavior, since by age 65 many

(though not all) households are dissaving, and precautionary saving appears to be negligible

(Gourinchas and Parker, 2001).

          The literature finds that background risk has at least a small effect on the willingness of

individuals to bear avoidable risks, such as investing in risky assets. In a cross-sectional study of

Italian households, Guiso, Japelli and Terlizzese (1996) found that households facing above-

average subjective income risk held 2.4 percentage points more of their financial assets in risky

assets. In a panel data analysis of Dutch households, Hochguertel (2003) found an economically

small effect of moderate income uncertainty on the demand for risky assets, but surprisingly no

effect of high income uncertainty. We focus on medical expenditure risk since for the elderly the

most important background risk is arguably medical expenditure risk stemming from health and

mortality risk. Indeed, labor income risk among individuals age 65 and older is relatively

unimportant since most are retired.5 We are not aware of any work that has investigated medical

expenditure risk directly; however, two recent studies have examined the effect of health risk on

demand for risky assets in older households. Rosen and Wu (2004) found that individuals in fair

or poor health hold lower portfolio shares in risky assets and are less likely to own risky assets.




4
    An exception is Starr-McCluer (1996) who found that those facing greater medical expenditure risk (defined as
    those lacking health insurance coverage) had lower net worth in a simple bivariate selection model designed to
    control for the endogeneity of health insurance coverage.
5
    Fewer than 5 percent of respondents in our sample of HRS respondents age 65 and older are working full-time in
    2000. Another 9 percent work part-time.

                                                             5
Edwards (2002) calculated that a one standard deviation increase in subjective health risk

reduced risky portfolio shares by anywhere between 5-25 percentage points.

           Health risk is an important determinant of medical expenditure risk, but consideration of

health risk does not obviate the need to study the effect of medical expenditure risk. Medical

expenditure risk is a function of not only health risk but also health insurance coverage. In

models that included both health status and insurance coverage, Rosen and Wu (2004) found that

both variables retained independent effects on the demand for risky assets. This suggests that

health status and medical expenditure risk are related but potentially distinct sources of

background risk. Suppose health risk has an indirect effect on portfolio behavior operating

through medical expenditure risk, and a direct effect operating through the marginal utility of

consumption or the rate of time preference (Edwards, 2002, Rosen and Wu, 2004).6 The total

effect of health risk on portfolio behavior will include both components, making it difficult to

assess the role of medical expenditure risk itself. Even if we could isolate the indirect effect of

health risk, it would not necessarily reveal an accurate picture of medical expenditure risk, since

individuals obtain health insurance precisely to offset part of this risk.

           This paper presents an analysis of medical expenditure risk by comparing the demand for

risky assets among individuals with different forms of Medicare supplemental insurance. The

next section describes in detail the different forms of supplemental insurance and how each

serves to offset medical expenditure risk.




6
    Because health status may affect the marginal utility of consumption, Hurd (2002) describes health risk as “utility”
    risk.

                                                                6
III. Supplemental Health Insurance

           Nearly all Americans age 65 and older (96 percent) receive health insurance coverage

through the Medicare program. Although Medicare coverage is fairly comprehensive, it has

some important gaps. Medicare does not cover prescription drugs (but will starting in 2006), has

been slow to offer coverage for preventive care, requires 20 percent coinsurance on many

services, and charges a deductible of $840 for a single hospital stay of up to 60 days.7

           Because Medicare beneficiaries are still at risk for large out-of-pocket medical

expenditures, many choose to purchase supplemental insurance policies known as Medigap

plans. As the name suggests, Medigap plans are designed to fill the gaps in Medicare coverage.

Since 1992, the federal government has required standardization of Medigap policies in 10

different plans ranging from Plan A, which covers coinsurance payments (but not deductibles),

to Plan J, which covers coinsurance payments, deductibles, some prescription drugs and some

kinds of preventive care.8 Despite standardization, prices of Medigap policies vary widely across

local markets, and even within local markets. For example, in 2000 the annual premium for Plan

F in Maricopa County, Arizona ranged from $998 to $2,003 (with a mean of $1,406 and standard

deviation of $259) and the annual premium for Plan F in Palm Beach County, Florida ranged

from $960 to $2,521 (with a mean of $1,687 and standard deviation of $331).9 Medicare

beneficiaries are guaranteed access to Medigap policies during a 6-month open enrollment


7
    Medicare also does not cover long-term care expenses, but neither do the supplemental insurance policies
    considered here. Long-term care remains an important source of medical expenditure risk, but one that does not
    vary over the insurance choices studied here. While Medicaid does cover long-term care, the asset limitations
    effectively preclude beneficiaries from holding risky assets.
8
    Three states are exempt from the national standards because they had standardized plans prior to 1992:
    Massachusetts, Minnesota, and Wisconsin.
9
    Some of the within-market variation is explained by differences in rating methods (e.g., community rating,
    attained age rating, and issue age rating); however even conditional upon rating method, substantial price variation
    remains. One potential explanation for the variation is search costs.

                                                                7
period, which begins when the individual enrolls in Medicare Part B, usually at age 65.10 During

this period, policies are either community- or age-rated; insurers are prohibited from either

denying coverage or charging higher prices to those with pre-existing conditions. Once the open

enrollment period has passed, insurers may take the individual’s health history into account in

determining whether to offer coverage and at what price.11

       Another source of supplemental insurance comes through employers in the form of

retiree health insurance. Employer supplemental policies generally offer more coverage at less

cost than Medigap. For example, annual premiums averaged $600 in 2001, and virtually all

retiree health plans offered by employers had prescription drug coverage (Kaiser, 2001).

Although employer supplemental policies are not standardized, they operate under the same

insurance model as Medigap, acting as secondary payer for Medicare-covered services. Some

firms offer retirees a choice of either an employer-sponsored supplemental policy or a subsidy

payment with which to purchase a Medigap policy.

       Medicare HMOs offer a third way of filling the gaps in traditional fee-for-service

Medicare. Whereas Medigap and employer-provided retiree health insurance act as secondary

insurance, Medicare HMOs are an alternative to the traditional fee-for-service Medicare

program. They provide the basic services of traditional Medicare as well as supplemental

benefits such as lower copayments, unlimited hospitalization, prescription drugs, some

preventive care, vision, and dental. Most HMO’s require little or no premium over and above the




10
  If an individual delays enrollment in Part B past his 65th birthday because he has health insurance coverage
 through his current employer, the beginning of the Medigap open enrollment period is also delayed.
11
  Exceptions are made for those whose former employers terminate retiree health benefits, those who voluntarily
 leave a Medicare HMO within one year of becoming eligible for Medicare, and those whose Medicare HMO has
 withdrawn from their service area.

                                                          8
premium for Medicare Part B, but require individuals to obtain medical services from providers

within the HMO’s network. HMOs eliminate the need for a supplemental policy, and insurers are

prohibited by law from selling Medigap policies to Medicare HMO enrollees. Finally, Medicaid

provides supplemental insurance coverage for indigent Medicare beneficiaries who meet

Medicaid’s strict asset and income limitations.

       In terms of risk exposure, Medicare HMO’s are most protective, followed by employer

coverage and Medigap. Because there is heterogeneity in the generosity of employer coverage

and the 10 standardized Medigap plans, it is not obvious whether employer coverage is more

protective than Medigap on average.

       Table 1 shows supplemental insurance coverage rates in 2000 for Medicare beneficiaries

in the Health and Retirement Study (HRS).12 The table shows that 15 percent of Medicare

beneficiaries had no supplemental coverage of any kind (i.e., they had only Medicare Parts A

and B), 16 percent were enrolled in a Medicare HMO, 33 percent had supplemental coverage

through their employer, 29 percent had a Medigap policy, and 8 percent received supplemental

coverage through Medicaid. From here forward we drop Medicaid recipients from our analysis

since they do not generally invest in risky financial assets owing to the program’s strict asset

limitations. Table 2 shows a number of interesting differences across the supplemental insurance

groups. Those without any supplemental coverage tend to be somewhat older, have markedly

less education (10.6 years), are much more likely to be Black and unmarried, and have lower

income and net worth. Nearly 95 percent of those with Medigap coverage are white, and

Medigap enrollees have the highest net worth ($467,611) followed by those with employer



12
  Our sample includes individuals aged 65 and older in 1998, drawing from the HRS, AHEAD, and CODA birth
 cohorts, and constitutes a nationally representative sample of the U.S. population age 65+ in 1998.

                                                       9
coverage ($400,515). Surprisingly those without any supplemental coverage are no more likely

to have ever been diagnosed with a major health condition (defined as cancer, lung disease, heart

disease, or stroke) and the groups show similar probabilities of having experienced a major

health shock over the last two years.13 Nevertheless, those without supplemental coverage are

much more likely than the other groups to report themselves in fair or poor health. Notably,

reported rates of diabetes are somewhat higher in this group and suggest an elevated risk of

diabetes-related complications.14

IV. Medical Expenditure Risk

           Table 3 shows the unadjusted distributions of annual out-of-pocket expenses by

supplemental insurance status tabulated from pooled cross-sections of the 1999 and 2000

Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey (MCBS).15 Mean annual expenses are highest for those

without any supplemental insurance ($2,066), and lowest for those enrolled in a Medicare HMO

($942). Those with Medigap pay on average $1,544 per year, while those with supplemental

insurance from their employer pay on average $1,217.                       Examining different points of the

distribution’s right tail, we note that those without any supplemental insurance always incur the

most out-of-pocket expenses, reaching $31,751 at the 99th percentile. In contrast, the 99th

percentile of expenses ranges from $9,750 for those with Medigap to $8,548 for those with

employer insurance to $7,778 for those enrolled in a Medicare HMO.




13
     Our classification of major health conditions follows Smith (2003).
14
  Diabetes ranks as the fourth most common cause of death among blacks in the U.S., following heart disease,
 cancer, and stroke (Sahyoun et al., 2001).
15
  For data on out-of-pocket medical expenses, the MCBS is preferable to the HRS. The MCBS asks very detailed
 questions about service use and reconciles respondent reports with claims data.

                                                               10
           Another way to assess the degree of risk households face is to compare average annual

out-of-pocket expenses to wealth. Median net worth in the 2000 wave of the HRS is $148,000,

with an interquartile range of $46,300 to $362,000. The 95th percentile of expenses for someone

without supplemental coverage is 4 percent of median wealth and 13 percent of 25th-percentile

wealth. The 99th percentile of expenses for someone without supplemental coverage is 21 percent

of median wealth and 69 percent of 25th-percentile wealth. These figures suggest medical

expenditure risk is sizeable, especially considering that wealth is a stock, and medical expenses

are a flow likely to be correlated over time.

           Figure 1 shows the density of log out-of-pocket expenses across the four insurance

groups. Compared to those without supplemental insurance (A&B Only), the distribution of out-

of-pocket expenses has noticeably less spread, and also less mass in the right tail. Although the

distribution for Medicare HMO enrollees has more spread than the distributions for Medigap and

employer insurance, the center of the distribution is noticeably lower. Pair wise Kolmogorov-

Smirnov tests reject equality of the distributions.

           These descriptive statistics do not control for health status and other characteristics;

however they make the basic point that individuals without any supplemental insurance are at

significantly greater risk of large out-of-pocket medical expenses than are those with

supplemental insurance.16 Even among those with supplemental insurance, the figures suggest

variation across coverage types in line with the relative generosity of each type: HMO enrollees

appear to be most protected, followed by those with employer insurance, and lastly those with




16
     Goldman and Zissimopoulos (2003) reach a similar conclusion based on models that control for covariates.

                                                             11
Medigap policies.17 The distributions for employer insurance and Medigap are most similar

(though still statistically different from one another).

V. Household Portfolios of Older Americans

        We next turn to an overview of the portfolio holdings of older Americans. We restrict our

analysis to liquid financial assets since illiquid assets (such a primary home or business) are by

their very nature less readily adjustable to changes in background risk. We divide liquid assets

into two categories: safe and risky assets.18 Safe assets are checking, saving, and money market

accounts, certificates of deposit, government savings bonds, and treasury bills. Risky assets are

stocks, bonds, and IRA and Keogh accounts.19

        Demand for risky assets can be analyzed on the intensive margin—the share of assets

held in risky assets—or the extensive margin—whether the individual owns any risky assets.

Our analysis concentrates on the extensive margin (asset ownership) for three reasons. First,

even within the category of risky assets, the true riskiness of any particular portfolio is

unknowable in the survey data and may vary substantially. For example, one portfolio might be




17
  An alternative explanation for the lower out-of-pocket costs experienced by HMO enrollees is the possibility that
 HMO’s either deliberately encourage or tend to attract enrollments by healthier individuals. In a comparison of
 HMO enrollees with traditional fee-for-service enrollees, Riley et al. (1989) found that new enrollees at three
 HMO’s were healthier than their fee-for-service counterparts. Nevertheless, the benefit packages typical of
 Medicare HMO’s are generally more generous than Medigap policies, and at least as generous as employer
 supplemental policies.
18
  The justification for considering just two asset categories comes from a two-fund separation theorem stating that
 all individuals with mean-variance preferences will hold the same proportionate mixture of risky assets regardless
 of the overall fraction of their wealth held in risky assets. Although mean-variance preferences imply the absence
 of a precautionary saving motive (which is defined by a positive third derivative of utility), the literature continues
 to follow this convention.
19
  It is common to also include defined contribution plans in the definition of risky assets, but analysis of the HRS
 self-reported pension data reveals that only a handful of observations in our 65+ sample have a defined
 contribution plan with a positive balance in 1998. A natural explanation is that such plans were less common
 among older cohorts (our HRS sample includes individuals born between 1896-1934 making up the AHEAD,
 CODA, and part of the original HRS cohorts). It is also possible that some plans were rolled over into IRA’s or
 cashed out at retirement.

                                                              12
invested in less risky income producing mutual funds, whereas another might be more heavily

invested in aggressive growth stocks. Focusing on the extensive margin avoids this problem

since it is less ambiguous to conclude that someone who owns risky assets is exposed to more

financial risk than someone who does not. Second, the extensive margin is inherently interesting

since it relates to one of the more persistent puzzles in empirical finance: why do so many

households fail to hold risky assets at all? Known as the equity allocation (or stock-holding)

puzzle, this is the microeconomic analog of the equity premium puzzle, and is viewed as the key

issue in portfolio analysis (Gollier, 2002, Miniaci and Weber, 2002). Third, variation at the

extensive margin represents actual behavior, whereas variation in asset shares reflects both

behavior and exogenous price changes.

       Table 4 describes the household portfolios of HRS respondents in 2000 by supplemental

insurance status. The left panel considers asset ownership, while the right panel shows portfolio

shares. Generally, asset ownership of any type is lowest among the group without supplemental

coverage and highest among those with supplemental coverage through their employer. This

pattern holds even among safe assets, where more than one-quarter of those without

supplemental insurance do not own a checking, saving or money market account, compared to

just seven percent of those with employer coverage.        The stock-holding puzzle is readily

apparent: just 50 percent of the sample participates in the stock market. About one-third own

stocks directly, whereas another one-third own stocks through an IRA. Bond ownership is

relatively low, even among those with employer coverage. Turning to portfolio shares

conditional on ownership, we note that checking, saving and money market accounts are the

dominant liquid financial asset across all groups. Among those with no supplemental coverage,

checking accounts comprise 60 percent of liquid assets, while for those with employer coverage


                                                  13
they amount to 40 percent of liquid assets. Not only are those with employer coverage more

likely to own risky assets, but they also invest the largest portfolio share in such assets (46

percent), followed by those with Medigap (42 percent), HMO enrollees (38 percent), and those

without supplemental coverage (26 percent).

       Our analysis of out-of-pocket expenses showed that those without supplemental

insurance are at most risk of realizing large out-of-pocket medical expenses. Those without

supplemental insurance are also least likely to own risky assets, and conditional on ownership,

hold the smallest share of their portfolios in risky assets. This is consistent with standard risk

aversion—that those facing greater background risk reduce their exposure to avoidable risks.

However, if we look within categories of supplemental insurance, we note that HMO’s appear to

offer the most protection, followed by employer insurance and Medigap policies. By the logic of

standard risk aversion, those in HMO’s should have the highest stock market participation rates,

and the largest portfolio shares invested in risky assets. Instead, the descriptive statistics show

that HMO participants are less likely than the two other groups to hold risky assets. The same

pattern holds for portfolio shares. In the next section, we will show that once we account for the

endogeneity of health insurance choices econometrically, this pattern reverses.

VI. Research Design

       As the descriptive analyses in the previous sections show, supplemental insurance status

is correlated with a number of observable characteristics, and is likely to be correlated with

unobservable characteristics such as risk aversion. To address the endogeneity of supplemental

insurance status, we jointly estimate equations for ownership of risky assets and supplemental

insurance, allowing for arbitrary correlation patterns in the unobserved heterogeneity across

equations. We divide supplemental insurance coverage into two groups: those who participate in


                                                    14
a Medicare HMO and those who hold either Medigap or employer coverage. We combine the

Medigap and employer insurance choices since they are based on the same insurance delivery

model (unlike HMOs), and offer a similar degree of protection against medical expenditure risk.

        Our research design is cross-sectional. Since the HRS is a panel data set, it would seem

natural to take advantage of the longitudinal aspect of the data; however, several data limitations

make panel data methods less desirable in this context. The main drawback is that the data show

little movement in and out of any risky asset ownership between 1998 and 2000. Just 11.3

percent of households transition in or out of holding any risky assets during the two-year period

between waves.20 One way to increase the number of transitions observed in the data would be

to use additional survey waves. The earlier waves are not so useful since the survey did not

become nationally representative of the population age 65 and older until 1998, when the

AHEAD cohort (which previously had a separate survey) merged with the original HRS cohort

and a key new cohort was added (the Children of the Depression (CODA) cohort). In waves

prior to 1998, the HRS cohort was mostly too young to be eligible for Medicare (though some

spouses were already eligible). There do exist two prior waves of data for the AHEAD cohort,

but the youngest member of this cohort is already age 70 at the first interview in 1993, and our

sample size would be reduced by about 50 percent. The best alternative would be to incorporate

future waves as they become available.

        In contrast to asset ownership, there is much more movement in asset shares across the

1998 and 2000 waves, but the use of asset shares over time is perhaps even more problematic.



20
  Two-year transition rates in and out of HMOs or supplemental coverage are also low. Only 9.5 percent either join
 or leave an HMO, and 16.5 percent either newly obtain or cancel a Medigap policy. This is not surprising since
 individuals are guaranteed community- or age-rated prices only during their open enrollment period, which occurs
 when they first enroll in Medicare Part B, or under special circumstances such as if their employer terminates
 retiree health benefits or their Medicare HMO withdraws from their service area.

                                                           15
First, much of observed changes over time in portfolio shares are passive changes due to changes

in stock and bond prices, not active investor behavior. In the HRS, it is not possible to know how

much of an observed change in risky assets is due to active portfolio rebalancing. Second, as

noted earlier, we have no information about the true riskiness of a given investment portfolio,

and any active reallocations made within class (i.e., reallocations made among subcategories of

risky assets) would be impossible to identify even if we could distinguish the behavioral

component of the change. Third, exacerbating the usual measurement error problem with wealth

data is the fact that the wealth data in the HRS are heavily imputed, and all imputations are done

on a cross-sectional basis, not over time. We calculate that in both 1998 and 2000 fully 32.8

percent of observations have an imputed value on at least one of the variables used to compute

portfolio shares.21 It is well known that differencing two variables measured with error

exacerbates the measurement error present in each alone. An alternative would be to exclude the

imputed observations, but this is rarely a satisfactory approach given the potential for non-

random item non-response.

       We identify the effects of health insurance on portfolio decisions using geographic

variation in the price of Medigap supplemental insurance and non-Medicare HMO market

penetration. We obtained county-level prices for Medigap plans as of January 1, 2000 from

Weiss Ratings, Inc. Insurance companies voluntarily report their current market prices to Weiss,

and approximately 90 percent of the market is represented in their data.22 The Weiss data reveal




21
  In contrast, asset ownership is generally measured with less error and many fewer observations have been
 imputed. Just six percent of observations have an imputed value on any one of our liquid asset ownership items.
22
  For our purposes, the Weiss data are superior to data produced by the National Association of Insurance
 Commissioners, which includes total premium volume and number of covered lives, but not actual market prices
 at specific points in time.

                                                          16
that there is a single market leader—United Healthcare—with fully 19 percent of the market

nationwide (as measured by premium volume).23 The second-ranked insurer, Mutual of Omaha

Plaza, has just 5 percent of the national market. We use as our instrumental variable the

countywide price of United Healthcare’s Medigap Plan F for males ages 65-75 as of January 1,

2000.24 United Healthcare’s Medigap policies are community-rated, which means the initial

purchase price and any subsequent price increases do not vary with age. Medigap Plan F is the

most popular of the 10 standardized plans (Gao, 2001).25

           The ideal instrumental variable would be load rather than price, since price reflects not

only load but also the cost of care in the county. Price variation induced by county differences in

the cost of care is potentially problematic variation since it could be correlated with average

health in the county, which may in turn affect demand for risky assets. Thus, we also include

per capita Medicare expenditures (Part A and B) in the county to control for county variation in

the cost of care in all model specifications.26

           As a robustness check, we re-estimate our models using an alternative source of

variation: the presence of state laws requiring mandatory community rating or prohibiting

attained age rating. Currently, 7 states require mandatory community rating and another 3 states




23
     United Healthcare underwrites Medigap policies sold through American Association of Retired Persons.
24
  Although we use county-level prices, inspection of the data reveals that most price variation occurs across states,
 rather than within states.
25
  Medigap Plan F is a mid-level plan covering: Parts A and B coinsurance, skilled nursing coinsurance, Parts A
 and B deductibles, Part B balance billing, and foreign travel emergency. It does not cover home health care,
 prescription drugs, or preventive medical care. Massachusetts, Minnesota, and Wisconsin are omitted from the
 national standards on account of already having their own standardization schemes prior to 1990. For counties in
 these states, we calculate the price for the plan nearest in coverage to Plan F.
26
  The Medicare Part A and B expenditure is determined by lagged expenditures plus an adjustment for geographic
 variation in factor prices.

                                                             17
prohibit Medigap insurers from using attained age rating.27 Since premiums for community

rated policies are typically higher than premiums under other rating methods, we expect demand

for supplemental insurance to be lower in these states.

       We computed county-level non-Medicare HMO market penetration in 1998 from the

2003 Area Resource File. Market penetration is defined as the percent of population under age

65 enrolled in an HMO. Non-Medicare HMO market penetration is a good instrument for

Medicare HMO participation because Medicare HMOs have historically entered markets in

which the parent firm was already operating an HMO, and there is little reason to expect a

contemporaneous correlation between the market penetration of non-Medicare HMOs and

ownership of risky assets by the elderly.

       Figure 2 depicts our first stage results at the county level. In the upper left-hand panel we

show that a 10 percentage point increase in the 1998 county market share of non-Medicare

HMOs is associated with a 5 percentage point increase in 2000 county Medicare HMO

participation by HRS respondents. The slope coefficient is significant (t=13.0). The upper right-

hand panel shows that a $100 increase in the price of United Healthcare’s Medigap Plan F is

associated with a 2.4 percentage point increase in Medicare HMO enrollment (t=8.2). This

confirms that Medicare HMOs and Medigap policies are substitutes; as the price of the Medigap

policy increases, individuals substitute toward Medicare HMOs.

       In the lower left-hand panel, we see that the supplemental insurance coverage rate falls as

the non-Medicare HMO market share in the county rises; a 10 percent increase in non-Medicare

HMO participation yields a 2.5 percent decrease in supplemental insurance coverage (t=-4.4).


27
  The seven states requiring mandatory community rating are Arkansas, Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts,
 Minnesota, New York, and Washington. The three states prohibiting attained age rating are Florida, Georgia, and
 Idaho (Lutzky et al., 2001).

                                                          18
The lower right-hand panel shows that demand for supplemental insurance falls as the price of

United Healthcare’s Medigap Plan F increases; a $100 increase in price is associated with a 3

percentage point decline in supplemental insurance coverage (t=-9.9).28                         Overall, Figure 2

suggests a very robust first stage.

           Finally, Figure 3 presents the reduced form relationships between county-level risky asset

ownership and our instruments. The fraction holding any risky asset in the county is negatively

related to the price of United Healthcare’s Plan F, and positively related to the non-Medicare

HMO market share in the county. In both cases, the slope coefficients are significantly different

from zero (t=-2.0 for Plan F price and t=4.8 for HMO market share). Figures 2 through 3 are

consistent with the idea that lower Medigap prices and greater non-Medicare HMO market

penetration increase supplemental insurance coverage and Medicare HMO enrollment, which in

turn reduce medical expenditure risk and increase risky asset holding. It is unlikely that these

reduced form relationships would exist in the absence of the supplementary insurance coverage

mechanism.29

VII. Estimation Strategy

           In our model, we have three discrete endogenous variables: whether the individual owns

any risky assets, whether the individual is enrolled in an HMO, and whether the individual has

purchased a Medigap policy or holds supplemental insurance through an employer. We employ

a mixture maximum likelihood technique in which the distribution of the error terms are

decomposed into correlated and uncorrelated components. The uncorrelated components are



28
     The implied price elasticity is 1.57.
29
  One alternative story for the existence of these relationships is that county differences in urbanicity could account
 for both more insurance options (and hence lower prices) and greater financial sophistication. In our estimation
 models, we address this by controlling for county population size.

                                                              19
assumed to be independent and normally distributed. A discrete factor approximation for the

correlated component enables identification of clustering in the unobserved components. Kiefer

and Wolfowitz (1956) prove the consistency of this estimator. Monte Carlo experiments in a

simultaneous equation setting demonstrate that these estimators compare favorably to maximum

likelihood estimators when the likelihood function is correctly specified, and outperform

maximum likelihood when the model is misspecified (Mroz and Guilkey, 1999). Using data

from self-selected and randomly assigned populations, Goldman, Leibowitz and Buchanan

(1998) show that such estimates can effectively recover the structural parameters of the

underlying models.

       Similar methods have been used to study patterns of unemployment duration (Heckman

and Singer, 1984) and the effects of training on employment (Card and Sullivan, 1988, Gritz,

1993). In a very similar application, Bhattacharya, Goldman, and Sood (2003) estimate the

impact of private and public insurance on mortality in an HIV-infected population.

             *
       Let Ri represent an index function that measures the propensity to hold risky assets for

individual i. Then we write:

       (1)       Ri* = c1 + γ 1 ⋅ suppi + γ 2 ⋅ hmoi + β1 ' X i + ρ risky ,i − ε risky ,i

       The vector Xi represents observed exogenous covariates that determine asset holdings,

such as age, gender, and education. Asset holdings are also affected by insurance status, where

suppi represents whether the individual was covered by Medigap or employer supplemental

insurance, and hmoi represents whether the individual was covered by HMO insurance. Asset

holdings are also assumed to depend on an unobservable heterogeneity component ρ risky ,i that

will also relate to insurance choices. It is useful to think of this as unobserved financial

sophistication or attitudes towards risk, and it is assumed to be orthogonal to the covariates Xi.
                                                                   20
There is also a random error ε risky ,i that is uncorrelated with Xi and insurance status. We want to

consistently estimate the parameters c1, β1, γ1 and γ2, after accounting for the heterogeneity.

         We define Ri as an indicator variable that represents whether individual i holds any

risky assets:

                     1             if Ri* > 0
        (2)     Ri = 
                     0             if Ri* ≤ 0

        We assume ε risky ,i is distributed normally with zero mean and unit variance. This

assumption implies a probit model for Ri, where the probability of holding risky assets,

conditional on observed characteristics {suppi , hmoi , X i } and unobserved characteristics ρ risky ,i

is:

        (3)     P[ Ri = 1 |       {suppi , hmoi , X i } , ρrisky ,i ] = Φ(c1 + γ 1 ⋅ suppi + γ 2 ⋅ hmoi + β1 ' X i + ρ risky ,i )
Here Φ (⋅) is the cumulative distribution function for the standard normal distribution.

        We model insurance choices using the standard random indirect utility approach.

Individuals choose among supplemental status j = {supplemental ,hmo,none} on the basis of a

random indirect utility function:

        (4)     V j*,i = c j + β j ' Z j ,i + ρ j ,i + ε j ,i

        Here Z j ,i represents variables that determine insurance status including our set of

instrumental variables (that is, variables that belong in each insurance equation, but not in the

asset equation); and ρ j ,i is a individual-specific random intercept that reflects the individuals’

propensity for insurance status j that is unobserved by the researcher. The parameters c j and β j

are additional parameters to be estimated; and ε j ,i represents the orthogonal error term.


                                                                   21
          Individuals choose the insurance status that maximizes their indirect utility. We assume

that εj,i are independently and identically distributed according to the Type II extreme value

distribution. This distributional assumption and normalizing {cnone , β none , ρ none ,i } to zero yields a

multinomial logit model for insurance choice.

                                                                     exp ( csupp + β supp ' Z supp ,i + ρ supp ,i )
          (5)         Pr  suppi = 1| Z j,i , ρ supp , ρ hmo  =
                                                                     1+      ∑         exp ( c j + β j ' Z j ,i + ρ j ,i )
                                                                            j ≠ none



                                                                     exp ( chmo + β hmo ' Z hmo ,i + ρ hmo ,i )
          (6)         Pr  hmoi = 1| Z j,i , ρ supp , ρ hmo  =
                                                                     1+     ∑         exp ( c j + β j ' Z j ,i + ρ j ,i )
                                                                           j ≠ none



          To complete the model and allow for correlation between asset holdings and insurance

choices, we need to assume a joint distribution for the unobserved heterogeneity vector

ρ = ( ρ risky , ρ supp , ρ hmo ) .      Our approach is semi-parametric.                                  We allow the unobserved

heterogeneity in each equation to take one of three values—intuitively, there are three types of

people that occur with probabilities p1 , p2 , and 1 − p1 − p2 . The effect of being a certain type

has different effects on each outcome: ρ risky
                                         1
                                               , ρ ris
                                                   2
                                                        (
                                                      ky , ρ risky
                                                             3
                                                                                         )   for asset holdings, ρ supp
                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                        , ρ supp
                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                 , ρ supp
                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                            )
for supplemental insurance, and ρ hmo
                                  1
                                      , ρ hmo
                                          2
                                               (
                                              , ρ hmo
                                                  3
                                                                       )
                                                      for Medicare HMOs. For example, there is a

p1 probability that a person will be of the first type, which would imply realizations of ρ risky
                                                                                            1
                                                                                                  for

the propensity to hold risky assets, ρ supp
                                       1
                                            for the propensity to have supplemental insurance, and

ρ hmo
  1
      for the propensity to be in a Medicare HMO.

          This discrete factor distributional approach has several advantages over specifying a

continuous parametric density for the unobserved heterogeneity vector. First, an incorrect

specification of the parametric density function might lead to biased parameter estimates. The

                                                                            22
discrete factor density allows us to approximate any underlying distribution of heterogeneity. In

fact, Monte Carlo studies show that discrete factor distributions with two to four points of

support adequately model many distributions (Heckman, 2001, Mroz 1999). Second, discrete

factor models are computationally simpler than parametric models as they avoid multiple

numerical integration in the construction of the likelihood function.

       Since all three outcome equations—asset holdings, supplemental insurance, Medicare

HMO—have intercept terms, we normalize the mean of each heterogeneity component to be

zero. This implies that the third point of support in each equation is not “free.” Thus our

distributional assumption on the unobserved heterogeneity adds eight additional parameters: two

points of support in the asset holdings equation (ρ1risky , ρrisky
                                                             2
                                                                   ) , two points of support in the

supplemental insurance equation (ρ1supp , ρ2supp ) , two points of support in the HMO equation

(ρ1hmo , ρhmo
          2
              ) , and two probabilities ( p1 , p 2 ) . The resulting variance-covariance matrix for the

unobserved heterogeneity may be written as:

                                                                                                               
                                                      (
                                                 ∑ pk ρrisky   ) ∑pρ                         ∑pρ
                                                                2
                                                        k
                                                                         k
                                                                             k
                                                                             risky   ρksupp        k
                                                                                                       k
                                                                                                          ρkhmo 
                                                                                                       risky
                                                 k                  k                         k
                                                                                                                
               Var ( ρrisky , ρ supp , ρhmo ) =                     ∑ p (ρ )                 ∑k pk ρsuppρhmo 
                                                                                         2
                                                                                k                    k     k
       (7)
                                                                    k
                                                                         k      supp

                                                                                                               
                                                                                                       (
                                                                                              ∑k pk ρhmo    )
                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                       k

                                                

       This model not only allows non-zero covariance across asset holdings and insurance

propensities but also allows non-zero covariance between the propensities to have supplemental

and HMO insurance. Thus our model relaxes the independence of irrelevant alternatives

assumption of the standard multinomial logit model and allows a more general variance-

covariance matrix. The key correlations in our model may thus be written as:



                                                                23
                                                               2

                                                           ∑p ρ       k
                                                                          k
                                                                          hmo    ρ risky
                                                                                   k


       (8)      Corr ( ρ hmo , ρ risky ) =                 k =1
                                                     2                    2 2
                                                 ∑ pk ρhmo (              ) ∑ p (ρ )
                                                                                                           2
                                                       k                                          k
                                                                                          k       risky
                                                 k =1                       k =1


                                                                2

                                                           ∑p ρ       k
                                                                           k
                                                                           supp     ρ risky
                                                                                      k


       (9)      Corr ( ρ supp , ρ risky ) =                    k =1
                                                     2                     2 2
                                                 ∑ pk ρ supp   (          ) ∑ p (ρ )
                                                                                                           2
                                                        k                                          k
                                                                                          k        risky
                                                 k =1                       k =1


                                                               2

                                                           ∑p ρ       k
                                                                          k
                                                                          supp   ρ hmo
                                                                                   k


       (10)     Corr ( ρ supp , ρ hmo ) =                  k =1
                                                     2                    2 2
                                                 ∑ pk ρsupp(              ) ∑ p (ρ )
                                                                                                           2
                                                       k                                          k
                                                                                          k       hmo
                                                 k =1                       k =1




       The model is estimated using maximum likelihood. We have six possible outcomes for

the dependent variables: a person can either hold or not hold risky assets, denoted by Ri, while

being in one of three insurance states {supplemental,hmo,none}. (“None” refers to the case

where the individual is covered by Medicare Parts A and B only and is denoted by (1-supp)(1-

hmo)). To construct the contribution to the likelihood function for each individual, we first

obtain the likelihood of observing that value of the dependent variables conditional on a

realization k of the unobserved heterogeneity ρk = ρrisky
                                                    k
                                                          , ρksupp , ρhmo
                                                                      k
                                                                                (
                                                                          . We then sum over all the                       )
possible realizations to obtain the contribution of individual i to the likelihood function:


                             (                             ) × (1 − Pr  R = 1| ρ                                         )
                      2                                         Ri                                                         1− Ri
                li = ∑ pk Pr  Ri = 1| ρ risky
                                          k
                                                                                            i
                                                                                                           k
                                                                                                           risky
                                                                                                                                   ×
                     k =1


                ( Pr  supp = 1| ρ , ρ  ) × ( Pr hmo = 1| ρ , ρ  )
                                                           suppi                                                                         hmoi
       (11)                  i
                                      k
                                      supp
                                                 k
                                                 hmo                                          i
                                                                                                               k
                                                                                                               supp
                                                                                                                               k
                                                                                                                               hmo              ×

                (1 − Pr  supp = 1| ρ , ρ  − Pr hmo = 1| ρ , ρ  )
                                              k          k
                                                                         (                            k               k
                                                                                                                                     1− suppi )(1− hmoi )
                                 i            supp       hmo                          i               supp            hmo




                                                                             24
       Finally we obtain the weighted log-likelihood function by summing the log-likelihood

across individuals:

                           N
       (12)     ln ( Γ ) = ∑ wi ln ( li )
                           i =1


Γ is the vector of model parameters; wi are the analytic sample weights and N is the sample size.

Because it is difficult to interpret the magnitude of the parameter estimates directly, we also

report the average predicted values if the entire sample had supplemental insurance, Medicare

HMO, or neither.

VIII. Estimation Results

       In Table 5, we present a simple probit model of ownership of risky assets in 2000 in

which we do not account for the endogeneity of insurance status. Supplemental insurance

coverage (through Medigap or an employer policy) and HMO participation are both positively

related to ownership of risky assets. The coefficient on supplemental insurance is large and

highly statistically significant, whereas the HMO coefficient is about half the size and

statistically significant at only the 6% level.      Although the coefficients suggest that both

supplemental insurance coverage and HMO participation increase demand for risky assets, they

also suggest that supplemental insurance does so relatively more than HMO participation, even

though, as we showed earlier, supplemental insurance is less protective against medical

expenditure risk. Thus in this simple model the data do not support the more refined hypothesis

that variation in risk should relate negatively to variation in the demand for risky assets.

       The model also includes a number of controls for demographic characteristics and health

status. Those with more education (high school/GED, some college, college) are significantly

more likely to hold risky assets than those without a high school degree, and minorities (black,



                                                     25
Hispanic, other) are less likely than whites to hold risky assets. Compared to married

respondents, those who are divorced or widowed are less likely to hold risky assets. Conditional

on marital status, household size is negatively related to ownership of risky assets. Interestingly,

the coefficients on female gender and age are not significant once we control for health and other

demographic characteristics.

       We model health status by including indicators for having ever been diagnosed with a

chronic disease (i.e., high blood pressure, diabetes, cancer, lung disease, heart disease, stroke,

psychiatric problems, or arthritis), as well as an indicator for self-reported fair or poor health. To

mitigate potential endogeneity of health status, we use two-year lags of the health variables from

the 1998 survey. We also include an indicator for having had a serious health shock between

1998 and 2000, which we define as onset of cancer, lung disease, heart disease, or stroke. Most

serious health conditions are significant and negatively related to ownership of risky assets,

which is consistent with the notion that elevated background health risk should reduce exposure

to avoidable risks. An exception is cancer, which is positively related to ownership of risky

assets and highly significant. This result is surprising, but may reflect a survivor bias. The

coefficient on high blood pressure is insignificant, suggesting people may not fully internalize

future health risk, although such an inference warrants further scrutiny. The health shock

coefficient is small and statistically insignificant. This may indicate that people take time to

adjust their portfolios in response to changes in background health risk. Our measure for overall

health status—the indicator for fair or poor health—is negative and highly significant.

       We also include indicators for quartiles of net worth and non-capital income. (Our

results are not sensitive to whether wealth and income are included or excluded from the model.)

To mitigate simultaneity bias, we use their two-year lagged values, but we note that this is likely


                                                     26
inadequate given the substantial inertia in risky asset ownership over time. The coefficients

show that wealth and income are positively related to ownership of risky assets and highly

significant.   The specification also includes controls for geographic characteristics such as

county population and the average Medicare expenditure in the county in 2000 (Parts A and B).30

        Table 6 shows results from our three-equation discrete factor model accounting for the

endogeneity of insurance status.       In the risky asset ownership equation (column 1), both

supplemental insurance and HMO participation are statistically significant, and the HMO

coefficient is nearly two times larger than the supplemental insurance coefficient, which is itself

a bit smaller in magnitude than in the probit model. The results suggest that the HMO coefficient

is substantially biased downward in the probit model, perhaps due to omitted risk aversion,

whereas the bias in the supplemental insurance coefficient is relatively small. The model

includes the same set of covariates as the probit model in Table 5, and the coefficients on the

exogenous variables are qualitatively similar. In the supplemental insurance equation (column

2), the Plan F premium is highly significant and takes the expected sign. The “cross-price”

effect of the non-Medicare HMO market share is not statistically significant once we control for

the Plan F premium. In the HMO participation equation (column 3), the non-Medicare HMO

market share is highly significant, but the “cross-price” effect of the Plan F premium is not quite

statistically significant.

        The pattern of coefficients on the other exogenous variables in columns 2 and 3 tells a

story similar to Table 2. Individuals who are married, white and have higher education are more

likely to choose supplemental insurance over no insurance, whereas individuals enrolled in



30
  We obtain average Medicare expenditures from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services and county
 population from the 2003 Area Resource File.

                                                      27
HMOs are demographically similar to those with no supplemental insurance. There are also

some interesting differences by disease status; for example, individuals with cancer, heart

disease, or arthritis are more likely to choose supplemental insurance over no insurance whereas

those with lung disease or stroke are less likely to choose supplemental insurance, controlling for

SES. Those with diabetes are significantly more likely to choose an HMO over no insurance.

Consistent with Table 2, those who say they are in fair or poor health are less likely to by

covered by either supplemental insurance or an HMO even after controlling for other covariates.

       As we noted earlier, the Plan F premium may reflect undesirable factors such as county

health risk, in addition to load. Although we control for average Medicare expenditures in the

county, it is possible that this is insufficient. To assess the robustness of that approach, we re-

estimate the model using an alternative source of variation: state variation in the presence of

mandatory community rating laws. Table 7 presents a comparison of results from the two

estimation strategies.    Comparing the right- and left-hand panels, the results are notably

unchanged, with the effects of supplemental insurance and HMO participation being only

slightly larger in the alternative model.

       Because the coefficient estimates give little sense of the economic importance of these

effects, we show in columns 1-3 of Table 8 the predicted probabilities of risky asset ownership

for each insurance category and across the different model specifications presented in Tables 5-

7. Implied marginal effects are shown in columns 4 and 5. The discrete factor model including

the Plan F premium predicts that those with supplemental insurance are 6.2 percentage points

more likely to hold risky assets than those with just Medicare Parts A and B. Those in a

Medicare HMO are 11.6 percentage points more likely to own risky assets. In the alternative




                                                    28
model with the mandatory community rating instrument, these effects are slightly stronger, rising

to 6.5 and 11.8 percentage points respectively.

        We undertake a second robustness check by re-estimating our discrete factor models on a

sample that is limited to one respondent per household. Because the HRS surveyed both spouses

in married couples, our original sample includes some respondent pairs whose unobservables

may be correlated.31 Rather than clustering our standard errors, we re-estimate the model on a

reduced sample in which we select a random spouse in the case of married respondents. Our

results are largely unchanged and the correctly estimated standard errors are such that statistical

significance is retained (Appendix Table 1).                Table 8 shows that the marginal effects of

supplemental insurance and HMO participation on risky asset ownership in the restricted sample

are a bit smaller in the model based on the mandatory community rating instrument.

        Finally, as noted in equations 8-10, the discrete factor model has three implied

correlations between the unobserved heterogeneity components in each equation.                                   The

correlation in unobservables for risky asset ownership and supplemental insurance is positive at

0.126, suggesting that the implied marginal effect of supplemental insurance from the simple

probit model is biased upward by an unobserved factor that is positively correlated with both

risky asset ownership and the propensity to hold supplemental insurance.                          This is readily

apparent from comparison of lines 2 and 3 of column 4 in Table 8. One plausible candidate

might be financial sophistication or awareness, such that financially sophisticated individuals are



31
  In the HRS data, household wealth and its components are measured at the household level, implying that
 husbands and wives have the same values on the dependent variable. They do not, however, have identical values
 on the insurance status variables or on the demographic (except marital status) and health variables, though of
 course these items are correlated. In the model results based on the full sample, standard errors are not adjusted to
 account for correlation in the errors of individuals in the same household. However, the standard errors in the
 models based on the restricted sample do not require adjustment, and though somewhat larger, are not large
 enough to change inference.

                                                             29
more likely to both invest in risky assets and hold insurance. On the other hand, the correlation

in unobservables for risky asset ownership and HMO participation is negative at -0.152,

suggesting that the HMO effect implied by the probit model is biased downward by an

unobserved factor that is negatively correlated with risky asset ownership but positively

correlated with HMO participation. This too is evident from the pattern of marginal effects

across models reported in column 5 of Table 8. A likely candidate is risk aversion, such that risk

averse individuals are less likely to invest in risky assets, but more likely to hold insurance.

Finally, the correlation between the unobservables in the supplemental insurance and HMO

equations is near zero in all model specifications. The implied correlations from the restricted

model with one observation per household are similar.

IX. Conclusion

       Our results offer strong evidence in support of the theory of standard risk aversion. We

find that individuals who face less medical expenditure risk, as measured by their enrollment in a

Medicare HMO or a supplemental insurance policy, are more likely to hold risky financial

assets. Consistent with the evidence that HMOs offer the most protection against catastrophic

medical expenses, the marginal effect of HMO participation on ownership of risky assets is

larger than the effect of supplemental insurance. We find that HMO participation increases risky

asset holding by 11.6 percentage points relative to those enrolled in only traditional fee-for-

service Medicare, whereas supplemental insurance increases risky asset holding by 6.2

percentage points. Given that just 50 percent of our sample holds risky assets, these represent

sizable effects in percentage terms. We identify the effects of supplemental insurance and HMO

participation using exogenous geographic variation in United Healthcare’s Medigap Plan F and

non-Medicare HMO market penetration. Our results suggest that simple probit estimates that do


                                                   30
not account for the endogeneity of insurance choices may be biased by factors such as

unobserved risk aversion and unobserved financial sophistication, and the bias can be quite

large. Finally, our results suggest that reforms to the Medicare system that appreciably change

the degree of medical expenditure risk older households face have the potential to affect demand

for risky assets in the economy.




                                                  31
                                           References

Bhattacharya, Jayanta; Goldman, Dana and Sood, Neeraj. "The Link between Public and
Private Insurance and Hiv-Related Mortality." Journal of Health Economics, 2003, 22(6), pp.
1105-22.
Card, David and Sullivan, Daniel G. "Measuring the Effect of Subsidized Training Programs
on Movements in and out of Employment." Econometrica, 1988, 56(3), pp. 497-530.
Carroll, Christopher D and Samwick, Andrew A. "How Important Is Precautionary Saving?"
Review of Economics and Statistics, 1998, 80(3), pp. 410-19.
CMS. "Medlearn Matters: Information for Medicare Providers," Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, 2004.
Edwards, Ryan D. "Health Risk and Portfolio Choice," UC Berkeley, Department of
Economics, 2002.
Elmendorf, Douglas W and Kimball, Miles S. "Taxation of Labor Income and the Demand for
Risky Assets." International Economic Review, 2000, 41(3), pp. 801-33.
GAO. "Medigap Insurance: Plans Are Widely Available but Have Limited Benefits and May
Have High Costs," Washington, DC: United States General Accounting Office, 2001.
Goldman, D. P. and Zissimopoulos, J. M. "High out-of-Pocket Health Care Spending by the
Elderly." Health affairs (Project Hope), 2003, 22(3), pp. 194-202.
Goldman, Dana P; Leibowitz, Arleen and Buchanan, Joan L. "Cost-Containment and
Adverse Selection in Medicaid Hmos." Journal of the American Statistical Association, 1998,
93(441), pp. 54-62.
Gollier, Christian. "What Does Theory Have to Say About Household Portfolios?," L. Guiso,
M. Haliassos and T. Jappelli, Household Portfolios. Cambridge and London: MIT Press, 2002.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Parker, Jonathan A. "The Empirical Importance of
Precautionary Saving." American Economic Review, 2001, 91(2), pp. 406-12.
Gritz, R Mark. "The Impact of Training on the Frequency and Duration of Employment."
Journal of Econometrics, 1993, 57(1-3), pp. 21-51.
Guiso, Luigi; Jappelli, Tullio and Terlizzese, Daniele. "Earnings Uncertainty and
Precautionary Saving." Journal of Monetary Economics, 1992, 30(2), pp. 307-37.
____. "Income Risk, Borrowing Constraints, and Portfolio Choice." American Economic Review,
1996, 86(1), pp. 158-72.
Heckman, James and Singer, Burton. "A Method for Minimizing the Impact of Distributional
Assumptions in Econometric Models for Duration Data." Econometrica, 1984, 52(2), pp. 271-
320.
Himmelstein, D. U.; Warren, E.; Thorne, D. and Woolhandler, S. "Marketwatch: Illness and
Injury as Contributors to Bankruptcy." Health affairs (Project Hope), 2005.
Hochguertel, Stefan. "Precautionary Motives and Portfolio Decisions." Journal of Applied
Econometrics, 2003, 18(1), pp. 61-77.
Hurd, Michael D. "Portfolio Holdings of the Elderly," L. Guiso, M. Haliassos and T. Jappelli,
Household Portfolios. Cambridge and London: MIT Press, 2002.




                                                32
Kiefer, J. and Wolfowitz, J. "Consistency of the Maximum Likelihood Estimator in the
Presence of Infinitely Many Incidental Parameters." Ann. Math. Statist, 1956, 27(4), pp. 887-
906.
Kimball, Miles S. "Standard Risk Aversion." Econometrica, 1993, 61(3), pp. 589-611.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J. "Health Expenditures and Precautionary Savings," National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper: 2008, 1986.
Levin, Laurence. "Demand for Health Insurance and Precautionary Motives for Savings among
the Elderly." Journal of Public Economics, 1995, 57(3), pp. 337-67.
Lusardi, Annamaria. "On the Importance of the Precautionary Saving Motive." American
Economic Review, 1998, 88(2), pp. 449-53.
Lutzky, Steven; Alecxih, Lisa Maria B.; Pankaj, Veena; Laud, Stephanie and Schaab,
Genevieve. "Restricting Underwriting and Premium Rating Practices in the Medigap Market:
The Experience of Three States," Washington, D.C.: The Lewin Group/AARP, 2001.
Miniaci, Raffaele and Weber, Guglielmo. "Econometric Issues in the Estimation of Household
Portfolio Models," L. Guiso, M. Haliassos and T. Jappelli, Household Portfolios. Cambridge and
London: MIT Press, 2002.
Mroz, T. A. and Guilkey, D. K. "Discrete Factor Approximations in Simultaneous Equation
Models: Estimating the Impact of a Dummy Endogenous Variable on a Continuous Outcome."
Journal of Econometrics, 1999, 92(2), pp. 233-74.
Palumbo, Michael G. "Uncertain Medical Expenses and Precautionary Saving near the End of
the Life Cycle." Review of Economic Studies, 1999, 66(2), pp. 395-421.
Pratt, John W and Zeckhauser, Richard J. "Proper Risk Aversion." Econometrica, 1987,
55(1), pp. 143-54.
Riley, G.; Rabey, E. and Kasper, J. "Biased Selection and Regression toward the Mean in
Three Medicare Hmo Demonstrations: A Survival Analysis of Enrollees and Disenrollees."
Medical Care, 1989, 27(4), pp. 337-51.
Rosen, Harvey S and Wu, Stephen. "Portfolio Choice and Health Status." Journal of Financial
Economics, 2004, 72(3), pp. 457-84.
Sahyoun, Nadine R.; Lentzner, Harold; Hoyert, Donna and Robinson, Kristen N. "Trends
in Causes of Death among the Elderly. Aging Trends No. 1," Hyattsville, Maryland: National
Center for Health Statistics, 2001.
Smith, James P. "Consequences and Predictors of New Health Events," National Bureau of
Economic Research, Inc, NBER Working Papers:, 2003.
Starr-McCluer, Martha. "Health Insurance and Precautionary Savings." American Economic
Review, 1996, 86(1), pp. 285-95.




                                                 33
Figure 1. Densities of Out-of-Pocket Medical Expenses by Supplementary Insurance Status


                                A&B only                                          Emp. Supp.
             1
             .5
             0
   Density




                                Medigap                                         Medicare HMO
             1
             .5
             0




                  0         5              10              15    0               5             10              15
                                             log(1 + OOP expenses)
                                                        Density
                                                        normal log_oop

Notes: Data are from the 1999 and 2000 MCBS Cost and Use files and are in 2000 dollars. Spending in 1999 is
inflated to 2000 dollars using the consumer price index for medical care. Expenditures for inpatient services,
outpatient services, home health care, medical equipment, prescription drugs, dental services, hospice care, skilled
nursing facilities, and institutional care are included.
Figure 2. County-Level First Stage Relationships
                1




                                                                                                                             1
                             .8




                                                                                                                                         .8
   Fraction in a Medicare HMO




                                                                                                               Fraction in a Medicare HMO
                     .6




                                                                                                                                 .6
           .4




                                                                                                                       .4
  .2




                                                                                                              .2
                0




                                                                                                                             0
                                  0                   20             40                60            80                                       1000                         1500                   2000           2500
                                                   Non-Medicare HMO Market Share in County (%)                                                                      Price of United Healthcare Medigap Plan F
                                  Note: Weighted by no. of obs. in county (slope=.005, t=12.96).                                               Note: Weighted by no. of obs. in county (slope=.0002, t=8.19).
                1




                                                                                                                        1
                             .8




                                                                                                                                     .8
  Fraction with Supp. Policy




                                                                                                          Fraction with Supp. Policy
                  .6




                                                                                                                          .6
         .4




                                                                                                                 .4
                .2




                                                                                                                        .2
                0




                                                                                                                        0




                                  0                   20             40                60            80                                   1000                            1500                   2000            2500
                                                   Non-Medicare HMO Market Share in County (%)                                                                     Price of United Healthcare Medigap Plan F
                                  Note: Weighted by no. of obs. in county (slope=-.0025, t=-4.44).                                            Note: Weighted by no. of obs. in county (slope=-.0003, t=-9.93).
Figure 3. County-Level Reduced Form Relationships




                                                                                                                      1
                1




                                                                                                        Fraction Owns Any Risky Asset
  Fraction Owns Any Risky Asset




                                                                                                                                   .8
                             .8




                                                                                                                          .6
                    .6




                                                                                                                  .4
            .4




                                                                                                        .2
  .2




                                                                                                                      0
                0




                                  0                   20             40                60          80                                   1000                         1500                   2000            2500
                                                   Non-Medicare HMO Market Share in County (%)                                                                Price of United Healthcare Medigap Plan F
                                  Note: Weighted by no. of obs. in county (slope=.0026, t=4.84).                                         Note: Weighted by no. of obs. in county (slope=-.0001, t=-2.01).
Table 1. Health Insurance Coverage of Medicare Beneficiaries, HRS 2000



Medicare A & B Only                                               14.8
Medicare HMO                                                      16.2
Medicare + Individual Medigap Policy                              28.5
Medicare + Employer Insurance                                     32.6
Medicare + Medicaid                                                8.0


Notes: Sample includes respondents in the 2000 wave of the HRS who were age 65 or
older in 1998. N=8522
Table 2. Sample Means by Insurance Status, HRS 2000

                                                                                  Medicare           Medicare       Medicare +        Medicare +
                                                                         All      A&B Only              HMO           Medigap          Employer

Age                                                                 75.7              77.3              75.0              76.4               74.8
Male                                                                42.3              39.8              40.6              40.5               45.9
Years of Education                                                  12.1              10.6              12.0              12.2               12.8
White                                                               88.6              74.0              84.8              94.9               91.6
Black                                                                6.9              17.4               7.4               2.8                5.5
Hispanic                                                             3.1               6.5               6.2               1.5                1.5
Married                                                             57.1              44.4              57.2              55.2               64.5
Completely Retired                                                  84.1              85.9              83.7              81.6               85.7
Income                                                           $37,860           $27,204           $31,549           $39,085            $44,756
Net Worth                                                       $376,100          $220,591          $307,848          $467,611           $400,515
Ever Diagnosed with High Blood Pressure                             55.4              54.1              55.2              54.4               56.9
Ever Diagnosed with Diabetes                                        15.4              17.0              16.8              14.0               15.2
Ever Diagnosed with Major Health Condition                          51.6              49.8              50.2              53.2               51.7
Major Health Shock in Last 2 Yrs                                    11.9              11.8              12.0              12.8               11.1
Fair or Poor Health                                                 28.2              37.5              28.3              27.1               24.7

No. of Observations                                                   7774              1324              1375              2324              2751

Notes: Sample includes respondents in the 2000 wave of the HRS who were age 65 or older in 1998. Major health conditions are cancer, lung disease,
heart disease, and stroke. Major health shock refers to onset of a major health condition. Completely Retired respondents include those who report
themselves as completely retired and not working for pay, those who say they are "not in the labor force," and those who report themselves as disabled.
Table 3. Distribution of Out-of-Pocket Medical Expenses by Supplementary Insurance Status

                                                                                 Percentile of OOP Expenses
                                                               Mean            50th        90th      95th                99th

Medicare A & B Only                                           $2,066          $705        $3,869        $6,367       $31,751
Medicare HMO                                                   $942           $423        $1,883        $3,067        $7,778
Medicare + Individual Medigap Policy                          $1,544          $973        $3,221        $4,657        $9,750
Medicare + Employer Insurance                                 $1,217          $682        $2,575        $3,948        $8,548


Notes: Data are from the 1999 and 2000 MCBS Cost and Use files and are in 2000 dollars. Spending in 1999 is inflated to
2000 dollars using the consumer price index for medical care. Expenditures for inpatient services, outpatient services, home
health care, medical equipment, prescription drugs, dental services, hospice care, skilled nursing
facilities, and institutional care are included.
Table 4. Household Financial Portfolios in Liquid Assets, HRS 2000


                                                         Ownership                                                                    Portfolio Shares
                                         Medicare        Medicare Medicare + Medicare +                                 Medicare       Medicare Medicare +            Medicare +
                              All        A&B Only         HMO      Medigap   Employer                         All       A&B Only         HMO         Medigap          Employer

Safe Assets
 Checking                    84.7           73.6            87.5            89.1           93.6              46.7          60.8           49.0            40.0            40.2
 CDs/T-bills                 32.1           21.6            31.1            39.2           39.1              14.2          13.2           12.9            18.0            13.9

Risky Assets
 Stocks                      34.1           19.3            32.3            38.5           46.1              18.3          12.6           16.8            19.7            22.0
 Bonds                       9.6            5.3             8.0             11.9           12.8              2.2            1.6            1.8             2.9             2.4
 IRA/Keogh Plans             34.5           16.9            35.6            39.2           45.2              18.6          11.7           19.4            19.5            21.6

  Any Risky Assets           50.4           30.2            49.7            57.1           65.4              39.1          26.0           38.0            42.0            45.9

Notes: Sample includes respondents in the 2000 wave of the HRS who were age 65 or older in 1998. The category denoted "Checking" also includes saving and money market accounts.
Portfolio shares are computed conditional on ownership.
Table 5. Probit Model of Risky Asset Ownership in 2000

                                                                      Coef.         St. Err.
Supplemental Insurance                                                0.286         (0.051)
HMO Participation                                                     0.118         (0.062)
Age                                                                   0.007         (0.055)
Age Squared/1000                                                      -0.169        (0.350)
Female                                                                0.011         (0.037)
HS Grad/GED                                                           0.236         (0.044)
Some College                                                          0.368         (0.053)
College or More                                                       0.543         (0.060)
Black                                                                 -0.597        (0.081)
Hispanic                                                              -0.490        (0.118)
Other Races                                                           -0.194        (0.148)
Divorced                                                              -0.076        (0.076)
Widowed                                                               -0.191        (0.049)
Never Married                                                         0.108         (0.113)
Household Size                                                        -0.108        (0.022)
High Blood Pressure 1998                                              0.036         (0.037)
Diabetes 1998                                                         -0.087        (0.044)
Cancer 1998                                                           0.109         (0.043)
Lung Disease 1998                                                     -0.213        (0.051)
Heart Disease 1998                                                    0.029         (0.037)
Stroke 1998                                                           -0.122        (0.053)
Psychiatric Problems 1998                                             -0.055        (0.050)
Arthritis 1998                                                        0.001         (0.038)
Health Shock Since 1998                                               -0.020        (0.045)
Fair or Poor Health 1998                                              -0.188        (0.040)
Non-Capital Income Quartile 2 1998                                    0.204         (0.053)
Non-Capital Income Quartile 3 1998                                    0.255         (0.056)
Non-Capital Income Quartile 4 1998                                    0.394         (0.061)
Net Worth Quartile 2 1998                                             0.545         (0.054)
Net Worth Quartile 3 1998                                             1.276         (0.055)
Net Worth Quartile 4 1998                                             1.780         (0.061)
Average County Medicare Expenditure (A & B)                           0.425         (0.248)
County Population/1000                                                0.031         (0.135)
N=7621
Notes: Sample includes respondents in the 2000 wave of the HRS who were age 65 or older in 1998.
Standard errors are shown in parentheses.
Table 6. Discrete Factor Model of Risky Asset Ownership in 2000


                                                             Ownership                   Supp. Insurance                 HMO Participation
                                                                   (1)                            (2)                         (3)
Supplemental Insurance                                    0.232         (0.064)                   --                              --
HMO Participation                                         0.436         (0.154)                   --                              --
United Healthcare Plan F Premium in County                         --                   -0.0009 (0.0002)                 0.0011 (0.0006)
Non-Medicare HMO Market Share in County                            --                   0.0009         (0.003)            0.097    (0.010)
Age                                                       0.007         (0.055)          0.083         (0.106)           -0.004    (0.277)
Age Squared/1000                                          -0.171        (0.356)          -0.681        (0.674)           -0.373    (1.782)
Female                                                    0.009         (0.038)          0.085         (0.083)            0.172    (0.188)
HS Grad/GED                                               0.245         (0.044)          0.458         (0.092)            0.095    (0.217)
Some College                                              0.367         (0.054)          0.313         (0.116)            0.311    (0.278)
College or More                                           0.562         (0.061)          0.462         (0.139)           -0.368    (0.303)
Black                                                     -0.610        (0.082)          -1.062        (0.124)           -0.509    (0.393)
Hispanic                                                  -0.502        (0.119)          -1.042        (0.195)           -0.416    (0.540)
Other Races                                               -0.194        (0.150)          -0.745        (0.273)           -1.436    (0.821)
Divorced                                                  -0.083        (0.077)          0.171         (0.158)            0.048    (0.388)
Widowed                                                   -0.187        (0.050)          0.252         (0.108)           -0.439    (0.251)
Never Married                                             0.126         (0.115)          0.380         (0.240)           -0.804    (0.679)
Household Size                                            -0.112        (0.022)          -0.050        (0.039)            0.142    (0.112)
High Blood Pressure (1998)                                0.039         (0.037)          0.161         (0.081)            0.076    (0.182)
Diabetes (1998)                                           -0.096        (0.044)          -0.010        (0.098)            0.484    (0.232)
Cancer (1998)                                             0.114         (0.044)          0.319         (0.105)            0.249    (0.218)
Lung Disease (1998)                                       -0.212        (0.052)          -0.122        (0.111)           -0.508    (0.272)
Heart Disease (1998)                                      0.031         (0.038)          0.238         (0.082)            0.181    (0.185)
Stroke (1998)                                             -0.126        (0.054)          -0.265        (0.108)           -0.189    (0.262)
Psychiatric Problems (1998)                               -0.054        (0.051)          0.110         (0.111)            0.131    (0.253)
Arthritis (1998)                                          -0.001        (0.039)          0.265         (0.082)            0.545    (0.191)
Health Shock Since 1998                                   -0.019        (0.046)          0.176         (0.103)            0.032    (0.231)
Fair or Poor Health (1998)                                -0.188        (0.041)          -0.218        (0.086)           -0.353    (0.202)
Non-Capital Income Quartile 2 1998                        0.212         (0.053)          0.345         (0.099)           -0.257    (0.257)
Non-Capital Income Quartile 3 1998                        0.269         (0.057)          0.840         (0.118)           -0.150    (0.281)
Non-Capital Income Quartile 4 1998                        0.420         (0.062)          1.286         (0.152)           -0.448    (0.333)
Net Worth Quartile 2 1998                                 0.556         (0.054)          0.667         (0.098)            0.242    (0.264)
Net Worth Quartile 3 1998                                 1.302         (0.057)          0.893         (0.113)           -0.008    (0.293)
Net Worth Quartile 4 1998                                 1.183         (0.064)          1.218         (0.133)            0.299    (0.318)
County Average Medicare Expenditure (A & B)               0.114         (0.275)          -1.300        (0.654)            2.256    (2.158)
County Population/1000                                    -0.078        (0.143)          0.472         (0.334)           16.898 (2.984)
N=7621
Notes: Sample includes respondents in the 2000 wave of the HRS who were age 65 or older in 1998. Standard errors are shown in
parentheses. Specification also includes a constant.
Table 7. Comparison of Discrete Factor Model with Alternative Instrument


                                                                 Instruments Include Plan F Premium (Table 6)                      Instruments Include Community Rating Indicator

                                                                                                                    HMO                                                           HMO
                                                               Ownership             Supp. Insurance                              Ownership             Supp. Insurance
                                                                                                                 Participation                                                 Participation
                                                                    (1)                       (2)                     (3)                (4)                     (5)                (6)
Supplemental Insurance                                      0.232         (0.064)              --                      --        0.241        (0.064)            --                 --

HMO Participation                                           0.436         (0.154)              --                      --        0.445        (0.148)            --                 --
United Healthcare Plan F Premium in County                           --              -0.0009 (0.0002)         0.0011 (0.001)             --                      --                 --
Mandatory Community Rating in State                                  --                        --                      --                --             -0.192 (0.084)        0.910 (0.249)
Non-Medicare HMO Market Share in County                              --               0.001         (0.003)    0.097 (0.010)             --             0.0008        0.003   0.105 (0.010)
N=7621

Notes: Selected coefficients shown. Standard errors are in parentheses. Specification is same as in Table 6 except as noted.
Table 8. Predicted Probabilities and Marginal Effects for Different Model Specifications


Model                                           Supp. Insurance      HMO            None   Diff Supp-None   Diff HMO-None
                                                       (1)             (2)           (3)        (4)              (5)

1. Raw Means                                          61.6            50.0          30.7        30.9            19.2
2. Simple Probit                                      56.7            52.1          48.9        7.8             3.2

Instruments Include Plan F Premium

3. DF Model                                           54.7            60.1          48.5        6.2             11.6
4. DF Model, One Obs per HH                           51.9            58.0          45.6        6.3             12.4

Instruments Include Community Rating Ind.

5. DF Model                                           54.8            60.1          48.3        6.5             11.8
6. DF Model, One Obs per HH                           51.9            57.2          46.3        5.5             10.9
Appendix Table 1. Comparison of Discrete Factor Models: One Observation per Household Sample


                                                                         Instruments Include Plan F Premium                                Instruments Include Community Rating Indicator

                                                              Ownership            Supp. Insurance         HMO Participation               Ownership           Supp. Insurance HMO Participation
                                                                   (1)                      (2)                 (3)                             (4)                    (5)                     (6)
Supplemental Insurance                                     0.232        (0.075)             --                      --                  0.228        (0.094)            --                     --
HMO Participation                                          0.462        (0.169)             --                      --                  0.451        (0.190)            --                     --
County Price of United Plan F                                      --             -0.0009 (0.0002)         0.0012 (0.0007)                      --                      --                     --
Community Rating in State                                          --                       --                      --                          --              -0.162 (0.092)        0.917         0.277
Non-Medicare HMO Market Share in County                            --               0.002        (0.004)    0.101     (0.011)                   --              0.001 (0.004)         0.104 (0.011)
Age                                                        -0.029 (0.061)         -0.0262 (0.119)           0.028     (0.304)           0.005        (0.068)    -0.019 (0.112)        -0.128 (0.318)
Age Squared/1000                                           0.057        (0.387)     0.024        (0.750)   -0.570 (1.947)              -0.185        (0.437)    -0.011 (0.705)        0.448 (2.040)
Female                                                     -0.009 (0.045)           0.077        (0.101)    0.234     (0.231)           0.032        (0.048)    0.057 (0.093)         0.409 (0.231)
HS Grad/GED                                                0.230        (0.051)     0.511        (0.106)    0.062     (0.249)           0.298        (0.060)    0.495 (0.097)         0.051 (0.252)
Some College                                               0.380        (0.061)     0.329        (0.132)   -0.078 (0.311)               0.435        (0.070)    0.339 (0.123)         0.010 (0.331)
College or More                                            0.594        (0.070)     0.530        (0.164)   -0.283 (0.352)               0.712        (0.080)    0.489 (0.149)         -0.584 (0.359)
Black                                                      -0.597 (0.091)          -1.082        (0.140)   -0.684 (0.434)              -0.760        (0.131)    -1.083 (0.135)        -0.590 (0.456)
Hispanic                                                   -0.504 (0.133)          -1.046        (0.223)   -0.129 (0.596)              -0.532        (0.151)    -1.062 (0.213)        -0.001 (0.680)
Other Races                                                -0.117 (0.175)          -0.946        (0.310)   -1.770 (0.858)              -0.161        (0.188)    -0.883 (0.285)        -1.454 (0.892)
Divorced                                                   -0.101 (0.082)           0.155        (0.173)   -0.118 (0.409)              -0.124        (0.091)    0.184 (0.164)         0.303 (0.427)
Widowed                                                    -0.200 (0.056)           0.218        (0.127)   -0.456 (0.278)              -0.242        (0.062)    0.230 (0.116)         -0.355 (0.293)
Never Married                                              0.099        (0.118)     0.341        (0.259)   -0.682 (0.710)               0.079        (0.131)    0.296 (0.224)         -0.005 (0.755)
Household Size                                             -0.115 (0.024)          -0.051        (0.043)    0.048     (0.124)          -0.139        (0.029)    -0.056 (0.042)        0.154 (0.131)
High Blood Pressure (1998)                                 0.042        (0.042)     0.163        (0.092)    0.013     (0.204)           0.058        (0.046)    0.156 (0.085)         -0.118 (0.214)
Diabetes (1998)                                            -0.128 (0.053)          -0.073        (0.117)    0.518     (0.276)          -0.124        (0.058)    -0.072 0.108          0.354 (0.278)
Cancer (1998)                                              0.122        (0.051)     0.383        (0.128)    0.365     (0.254)           0.128        (0.056)    0.348 (0.113)         0.491 (0.267)
Lung Disease (1998)                                        -0.188 (0.061)          -0.088        (0.134)   -0.443 (0.306)              -0.197        (0.068)    -0.131 (0.120)        -0.505 (0.322)
Heart Disease (1998)                                       0.045        (0.044)     0.218        (0.097)   -0.074 (0.216)               0.063         0.048     0.219 (0.090)         -0.069 (0.223)
Stroke (1998)                                              -0.122 (0.064)          -0.233        (0.130)   -0.176 (0.320)              -0.166        (0.074)    -0.303 (0.119)        -0.171 (0.321)
Psychiatric Problems (1998)                                -0.065 (0.059)           0.039        (0.132)    0.032     (0.290)          -0.079        (0.065)    0.047 (0.119)         0.091 (0.295)
Arthritis (1998)                                           -0.017 (0.044)           0.283        (0.094)    0.502     (0.216)          -0.017        (0.048)    0.230 (0.086)         0.618 (0.225)
Health Shock Since 1998                                    -0.009 (0.054)           0.206        (0.124)    0.248     (0.269)          -0.015        (0.059)    0.148 0.112           0.165 (0.285)
Fair or Poor Health (1998)                                 -0.157 (0.047)          -0.124        (0.100)   -0.381 (0.234)              -0.186        (0.053)    -0.135 (0.093)        -0.526 0.244
Non-Capital Income Quartile 2 1998                         0.220        0.057       0.347        (0.107)   -0.253 (0.276)               0.269        (0.066)    0.399 (0.103)         -0.152 (0.285)
Non-Capital Income Quartile 3 1998                         0.262        (0.062)     0.878        (0.139)   -0.159 (0.311)               0.297        (0.071)    0.829 (0.124)         0.121 (0.322)
Non-Capital Income Quartile 4 1998                         0.365        (0.070)     1.375        (0.194)   -0.366 (0.389)               0.416        (0.077)    1.222 (0.151)         0.034 (0.362)
Net Worth Quartile 2 1998                                  0.567        (0.059)     0.675        (0.109)    0.265     (0.289)           0.677        (0.080)    0.665 (0.104)         0.118 (0.302)
Net Worth Quartile 3 1998                                  1.274        (0.063)     0.911        (0.131)    0.041     (0.319)           1.431        (0.093)    0.831 (0.117)         0.008 (0.332)
Net Worth Quartile 4 1998                                  1.788        (0.072)     1.286        (0.163)    0.277     (0.358)           1.959        (0.101)    1.108 (0.138)         0.160 (0.363)
County Average Medicare Expenditure (A & B)                0.044        (0.307)    -1.330        (0.734)    0.791     (2.490)           0.022        (0.349)    -2.354 (0.664)        4.914 (2.141)
County Population/1000                                     -0.082 (0.016)           0.384        (0.375)    1.620     (3.235)          -0.050        (0.172)    0.091 (0.371)         14.91         (3.37)
N=5769

Notes: Sample includes one observation per household. Standard errors are in parentheses. In married couple households, a random spouse was selected. Specifications are same as in Table 7.
