           HOW MUCH IS TOO MUCH?
   THE INFLUENCE OF PRESCHOOL CENTERS ON
CHILDREN’S SOCIAL AND COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT

                Susanna Loeb
               Margaret Bridges
               Daphna Bassok
                 Bruce Fuller
               Russ Rumberger

              Working Paper 11812
                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              HOW MUCH IS TOO MUCH?
                      THE INFLUENCE OF PRESCHOOL CENTERS ON
                   CHILDREN’S SOCIAL AND COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT

                                              Susanna Loeb
                                             Margaret Bridges
                                             Daphna Bassok
                                               Bruce Fuller
                                             Russ Rumberger

                                          Working Paper 11812
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11812


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2005




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Susanna Loeb, Margaret Bridges, Daphna Bassok, Bruce Fuller, and Russ Rumberger. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Much is Too Much? The Influence of Preschool Centers on Children’s Social and
Cognitive Development
Susanna Loeb, Margaret Bridges, Daphna Bassok, Bruce Fuller, and Russ Rumberger
NBER Working Paper No. 11812
December 2005
JEL No. I2, I3

                                             ABSTRACT

Previous research has demonstrated that attending center care is associated with cognitive benefits
for young children. However, little is known about the ideal age for children to enter such care or
the "right" amount of time, both weekly and yearly, for children to attend center programs. Using
national data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study (ECLS-K), this paper asks whether there
are optimal levels of center care duration and intensity and whether these levels vary by race or
income. We consider pre-reading and math skills as measured by assessments administered at the
beginning of kindergarten, as well as teacher-reported social-behavioral measures. We find that on
average attending center care is associated with positive gains in pre-reading and math skills, but
negative social behavior. Across economic levels, children who start center care between ages two
and three see greater gains than those who start centers earlier or later. Further, starting earlier than
age 2 is related to more pronounced negative social effects. Results for center intensity vary by
income levels and race. For instance, poor and middle-income children see academic gains from
attending center intensively (more than 30 hours a week), but wealthier children do not; and while
intense center negatively impacts Black and White's social development, it does not have any
negative impact for Hispanic children.

Susanna Loeb                                            Bruce Fuller
224 CERAS, 520 Galvez Mall                              b-Fuller@uclink4.berkeley.edu
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305                                      Russ Rumberger
and NBER
sloeb@stanford.edu

Margaret Bridges
mbridges@berkeley.edu

Daphna Bassok
dbassok@stanford.edu
1. Introduction
Young children – at least those from low-income families - benefit from exposure to preschool
or child-care centers in terms of cognitive growth and school readiness. Experiments such as the
Perry Preschool or the Abecedarian Project have long shown sustained effects on cognitive
growth for children from poor Black families (Campbell et al., 2002). Larger public programs,
such as the Chicago Child-Parent Centers, also show encouraging results, as do center-based
programs of naturally varying quality spread across different states (Loeb et al., 2004; Reynolds
& Temple, 1998).
       What we don’t know is whether the effects of preschool centers vary by intensity of
exposure and for children from different backgrounds. This paper extends recent work by
Magnuson, Ruhm, & Waldfogel (2004) to consider the effects of different child-care
arrangements on children’s cognitive and social proficiencies at the start of kindergarten,
estimating the effects of the duration and intensity of children’s participation. We also focus on
how effects vary across children from different social classes and ethnic groups. These issues are
directly germane to debates over whether extending free preschool to all children is a cost-
effective policy, whether full or half-day programs are advisable, and which groups of children
would likely benefit from them.
       Our analyses, drawing on data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study (ECLS-K),
starts by asking the question: does exposure to center care in the years before kindergarten
improve children’s cognitive and social-behavioral outcomes at kindergarten entry? Next we ask
how the relationships between center care and development vary for children from differing
income and ethnic groups. Finally, we focus on the effects of the intensity and duration of center
attendance—as measured in years, months per year and hours per week—on child outcomes.
Never before has the field been able to test these relationships with a large and nationally
representative sample of young children with such rich background data on their families.
       Does exposure to center-based care in the year before kindergarten improve
children’s outcomes in kindergarten? Almost two-thirds of all four-year-olds now attend
center programs before starting kindergarten (U.S. Department of Education, 2003), although the
length and intensity of their exposure, and the quality of these local programs, vary dramatically.
Exposure to these diverse preschool programs, often called center-based child-care programs,
benefits children’s cognitive development, and appears to be one of the most effective
interventions for advancing poor children’s learning (Heckman, 2000; Shonkoff & Phillips,
2000). The cognitive benefits appear to be modest to strong for some groups; however
researchers estimating effects on children’s social-behavioral outcomes have found largely
negative social effects (NICHD ECCRN & Duncan, 2003).
       How does the relationship between center-based care and development vary by
family income and ethnicity? Disparities in early cognitive proficiencies are starkly evident
across social class and ethnic groups, as children enter kindergarten. The difference between
Black and White children in their early language and cognitive development is equal to the
approximate amount that children learn during two to three months of kindergarten (Reardon,
2003). English-proficient Hispanic five-year-olds in California score about 0.38 of a standard
deviation (SD), or about three months, behind White youngsters in pre-reading and math skills
(Rumberger and Arellano, 2003).
       Similar early learning gaps exist between children from poor and affluent families.
Children in the lowest socioeconomic group are several months behind their middle-class peers
in pre-reading and pre-math skills at kindergarten entry. This gap almost triples when poor
children are compared to the most affluent fifth (Bridges et al., 2004). The disparities between
groups often grow even larger over the course of children’s schooling (Fryer & Levitt, 2004).
       Attending high-quality child care appears to boost children’s developmental trajectories,
leading to speculation about the possibility of its closing achievement gaps (Barnett, 1995;
Bridges et al., 2004). Researchers have compared various care arrangements – including centers,
Head Start preschools, licensed homes, or individual caregivers – to determine which might hold
the most promise for improving cognitive and social-behavioral outcomes. Center programs
appear to offer the most benefits for poor children (Loeb et al., 2004), with participation in
carefully controlled and expensive, “boutique” preschools generating immediate and long-term
benefits (Barnett, 1995; Campbell & Ramey, 1995). Evidence for Head Start, distinguished by
the poor children it serves and by its centralized regulations, is mixed (Garces et al., 2002).
       If exposure to center programs boosts poor children’s development, this intervention
strategy could help to close the achievement disparity. This leads to the empirical question of
whether or not the effects of center exposure vary across social-class and ethnic groups.
However, center-based programs appear to raise cognitive proficiencies for middle-class children
as well as for children from low-income families (Magnuson et al., 2004ab). An analysis for the


                                                                                                   2
California sub-sample of the ECLS-K data also found significantly higher cognitive proficiency
levels for English-proficient Hispanic children from middle-class homes when they had attended
center-based programs in the year before kindergarten (Bridges et al., 2002).
        Yet, several studies indicate that children from disadvantaged homes may exhibit the
greater gains from participating in center-based programs (Burchinal et al., 1997; Campbell &
Ramey, 1994; Magnuson et al., 2004a). Center programs also may benefit English-language
learners differentially, given that these children are less likely to experience the types of early
literacy practices in the home which have been found to facilitate early language and cognitive
development (August & Hakuta, 1999; Snow, Burns, & Griffin, 1998).
        Differing rates of access to center programs continue to concern policy makers and hold
implications for taking into account selection processes when estimating effects of centers on
child development. Participation rates in center programs rise with social class: children from
affluent families are much more likely to enroll than children from other SES groups (O’Brien-
Strain et al., 2003). More than 70 percent of upper middle-class children attend center-based
programs before starting kindergarten, compared with 45 percent of those from low-income
families (Hofferth et al., 1995). However, expansion of Head Start and state preschools has
dramatically increased participation by children from poor families since the 1960s (Smith et al.,
2003). In fact, it may be that working-class families have less access to centers than their poor
counterparts, because they earn just above income eligibility cutoffs for subsidies yet they cannot
afford high fees (Fuller et al., 2004).
        Ethnic disparities in preschool access also remain stark. Hispanic parents enroll their
children in centers at a rate 23 percentage points below the rate for Black children, and 11
percent below Whites, even after taking into account maternal employment status (Liang et al.,
2000). Asian American children participate in preschool at substantially lower rates than Whites
or Blacks, though they show quite high pre-reading and math proficiencies (NCES, 1998).
        What are the effects of the intensity and duration of center attendance on children?
A concern for parents and policy makers is how much time children should spend in preschool or
child-care programs; yet, little empirical work has focused on the effects of the length of
exposure to center programs between the ages of two and five years, nor on the intensity of
exposure in terms of hours per day. The effects of different child care arrangements are likely
based in part on the amount of time children are exposed to them. Exposure can be seen as a


                                                                                                      3
“dosage” effect and can be conceptualized as the age at entry and intensity of attendance.
Children entering at younger ages or attending for more hours per week may exhibit greater
benefits (or detriments) than those with later or less exposure. Little is known about the amount
of exposure that maximizes cognitive gains or guards against detrimental social-behavioral
effects.
           Research to date on cognitive outcomes generally shows that earlier intervention is best,
at least for children from poor families (Shonkoff & Phillips, 2000). Preschool may be atypical
of interventions, however, as it entails both separation from parents and exposure to variable yet
potentially enriched learning environments. The evidence on the effects of early entry into child
care is mixed. Entering center-based care in infancy may not be a detriment to poor children’s
cognitive outcomes (Vandell & Ramanan, 1992); but it may for White or middle-class children
(Han, Waldfogel, & Brooks-Gunn, 2001; NICHD ECCRN, 2002). Later entry appears to
diminish these potential negative effects on cognitive development and in fact provide benefits.
Initial work with the California sub-sample of the ECLS-K data indicates that starting center-
based care at age three provides a boost to children’s early reading and math skills, in
comparison to starting later (Bridges et al., 2004). Clements, Reynolds, & Hickey (2004) echo
this finding for children attending Chicago Child-Parent Centers (CPCs), with two years of
preschool—starting at three—providing more benefits to children at school entry than just one
year, although these increases were no longer significant in first grade.
           In contrast, entering child care early may hold negative social-developmental outcomes,
including disruptive and aggressive behavior in centers and later in school (Belsky, 2002; Han et
al., 2001). These negative effects on social behaviors also have been observed for children who
begin center programs later (age four), and they may be associated with the cumulative amount
of time in child care, rather than the age of initial entry (Colwell et al., 2001). For example,
children spending longer hours or more months in center care each year exhibit greater problem
behaviors, including elevated levels of aggression and less effective impulse control (Bates et al.,
1994; NICHD ECCRN, 2003). Belsky (2002), using the largely middle-class NICHD sample,
found a linear and positive relationship between hours in child care and externalizing behavior.
           Han et al. (2001) examined related questions about time in child care and behavior
problems with the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth. They found that White children
whose mothers worked within the first nine months of their lives, and thus presumably attending


                                                                                                       4
non-maternal care, displayed higher rates of externalizing behaviors by age seven or eight. Given
that this association is between maternal employment, not child care per se, and children’s
externalizing behavior, it may be the long separation from parents and not attending child care
which increases behavior problems.
        While this evidence suggests that time spent in center programs may increase behavioral
problems, it is not clear that these effects are seen across children from different backgrounds.
Clements, Reynolds, & Hickey (2004) found positive effects on the social-emotional and
behavioral outcomes of children in the Chicago CPC program, which entailed children’s
participation of about 15 hours per week. The benefits were significant and sustained over time:
participants had better behavioral outcomes in school and lower rates of delinquency and
criminal behavior years later. While these results are encouraging, this intervention was
conducted with very poor children and had more comprehensive services than standard center
programs offer, including home-visiting components and more intensive parent involvement.
        The present study contributes to this literature in several ways. In addition to using a
representative sample of English-proficient U.S. children, it assesses the duration effect of
center-care experiences to ask, what is the optimal age for children to enter center programs?
Second, it looks at the intensity effect, asking whether there is some number of hours per week
of attendance that holds an optimal effect. Third, it examines both of these effects by the income
of the child’s family and by racial groups, asking whether center care experiences are more or
less important for children from different groups. All three of these questions are central to the
current debate over universal preschool.


2. Data
Our analysis uses data from the ECLS-K. These data were drawn from interviews with a
nationally representative sample of parents with young children, along with direct assessments of
their five year-olds and interviews with kindergarten teachers. We analyzed data for 14,162
children who entered kindergarten for the first time in 1998. We excluded children with missing
scores on any of the assessments and children with no child care information.1



1
 We dropped students who were missing child care information (3,190), children who were not first-time
kindergarteners (867), or missing any one assessment (3,041). We ran specification checks with missing values
imputed using best-subset regression and found no meaningful difference in the results of interest.


                                                                                                                5
         Child Care Measures. In the fall of kindergarten, parents were asked a series of questions
regarding their child’s care arrangement in the previous year. Based on their responses, we
categorize children into four mutually exclusive child-care types: (non-Head Start) center
program, Head Start program, parental care, and non-parental care. The non-parental care group
includes care by non-parent relatives and non-relatives such as a babysitter. Though parents
were asked to specify whether their child attended a day care center, a preschool, a nursery
school, or a pre-K program, we were concerned that the differences between the four center
types were difficult for parents to distinguish. We therefore created a single center care group
that includes children who went to any type of child care center with the exception of Head Start.
If parents indicated that their child received care at multiple settings, we coded them as follows:
if a child attended center care in combination with parental or non-parental care, he/she was
placed in the center care group. Similarly, if a child attended Head Start in combination with
parental or non-parental care, he/she was placed in the Head Start group. Finally, if a child
participated in center care and a Head Start program, we placed him/her in the group in which
she spent more hours per week.2
         To test whether the amount of center exposure made a difference in children’s outcomes,
we created a series of age of entrance and intensity variables. To get at the impact of early
entrance, we created indicator variables for the child’s age at first entry to center care (age 0-1,
1-2, 2-3, 3-4, 4-5, greater than 5, and unknown).3 We also created two intensity variables: the
first dichotomous variable indicates whether the child attended center care for 15 to 30 hours per
week and nine months out of the year; the second, raises the weekly hours to at least 30 hours per
week and at least nine months.4 Approximately 21 percent of children who use a center as their
primary care type are in the first, moderate intensity, group; 30 percent are in the high intensity
group. While we created these distinctions in keeping with the typical half-day program and the




2
  If center hours and Head Start hours were equal, we considered the child a Head Start attendee. NCES
independently confirmed Head Start attendance, so we assigned to the center care group those who reported
attending Head Start but were not confirmed as attending Head Start. For these children, we assumed that the
parent-reported age at Head Start entry as well as the weekly hours variable referred to center care provision.
3
  Parents were asked to indicate their child’s age on initial entry to a particular type of care. However, age at entry
does not necessarily imply continual enrollment: a child may have entered center care at age two for several months,
withdrawn, and then re-entered at age four. The data do not include parents’ reports on continuous usage of care.
4
  The majority of children who attended a center for more than 15 hours a week also attended for 9 months per year
or more (78%).


                                                                                                                      6
typical full-day program, this categorization is not the only one worth considering; therefore we
ran a number of specification checks with alternative definitions of intensity.
         Child Outcomes. NCES field staff conducted one-on-one child assessments, in the fall of
kindergarten, to measure reading and mathematics ability. The reading assessment measures a
variety of skills including print familiarity, letter and word recognition, beginning and ending
sounds, rhyming sounds, vocabulary, and comprehension. The math test evaluates each child’s
knowledge of numbers as well as their spatial sense and problem solving abilities (Early
Childhood, 1998-99). The assessments in each subject area were administered in two stages; the
first involved a routing test, and the second involved items at the appropriate difficulty level. In
our analyses we used standardized T-scores. These scores are transformations of raw scores that
have been rescaled with a mean of 50 and a standard deviation of 10. T-scores are norm-
referenced measures of early learning for specific domains and provide an indicator of how each
individual child performs relative to the national average.
         We also examined children’s social-behavioral skills and problems as reported by
kindergarten teachers for each child. Teachers were asked to evaluate the social skills of the
sampled children in their classroom on a scale from one to four with respect to their motivated
engagement of learning activities, self-control, and a variety of interpersonal skills. Using factor
analysis we created a composite score that combines measures of self control, interpersonal
skills, and externalizing behavior (Cronbach’s alpha of 0.87). The behavior score is standardized
with mean of zero and a standard deviation of one, so reported coefficients are readily
interpretable as effect sizes.
         Other Predictors and Control Measures. In order for the results to be comparable with
Magnuson, Ruhm, & Waldfogel (2004), we use the same set of ECLS-K variables as controls for
family background characteristics. In order to capture neighborhood effects, we also include a
set of zip code level variables, aggregated from the long form of the 2000 Decennial Census.5

5
  ECLS variables were: age, gender, birth weight, weight , height, race/ethnicity , number of children, family
structure, urban, region, mother’s employment , parental education/employment, English, income-to-needs,
expectations, importance of skills, choice of location, home learning activities , number of children’s books in home,
number of music tapes, CDs, or records in home, reading , school activities, parenting stress/depression, spanking ,
eating habits, computer, TV, visiting, other non-school activities, neighborhood. Zip code data from the 2000 long
form of the decennial census were: total population, % Black/Pacific/Other/Asian/Hispanic/Mixes, % Urban , %
Native, % 5 and under, % children under 5 in poverty, % population over 16 in the labor force who are
unemployed, % of children 0-6 living with single mothers/fathers, % Hispanic, % of women with children 0-6, in
the labor force/unemployed, % households in which Spanish is sometimes or always spoken, % women over 25 with
less than a HS diploma, % households in which a language other than English is sometimes or always spoken, %


                                                                                                                    7
        Table 1 gives the means and standard deviations of a subset of the variables for the full
sample and separately for youngsters attending each type of child care. We see that 64 percent
of the children attended center care, compared with 17 percent in parental care, eight percent in
Head Start and 12 percent in other non-parental care. Children in Head Start were somewhat
more likely to come from the South and much more likely to be Black. Center programs are
more evenly distributed across the country, but Hispanic children are less likely to attend. Large
differences in socio-economic status are evident across child care types, as well.
        Children in Head Start, not surprisingly, had lower birth weight, were more likely live in
a single-parent family, have parents without high school degrees, and have participated in WIC,
compared with all other children in the ECLS sample. Parents who provided the sole care for
their children were, not surprisingly, less likely to be single parents and less likely to work full
time. Children in center care were more likely to speak English only at home and have more
highly educated parents. Children with other non-parental care were more likely to come from
families in which the mother works full time.
        In addition to these differences in social status, children in different care settings differ in
their home lives. For example, children in Head Start have the least number of children’s books
in their home, while those in other centers have the most. Children in Head Start watch the most
television, while those in centers watch the least. Children in Head Start are most likely to be
spanked, while those in center care are least likely. Parents of children in Head Start are least
likely to attend a parent-teacher conference during kindergarten or volunteer at school; those in
center care are most likely.


3. Method
        These prior differences in family background must be taken into account as we estimate
the discrete effects of exposure to center programs on children’s social and cognitive
development at the start of kindergarten. The heart of our analysis relies on the rich measures of
children and families available in the ECLS-K to adjust for differences across child care settings
using a regression framework. Equation 1 summarizes this approach:


women over 25 with a HS diploma, % households that are linguistically isolated (no one over 14 speaks English), %
of women over 25 with a BA or more, % of family households with 6 or more members, % 3 and 4 year olds in
preschool/nursery school, % non-citizen population, % 3 and 4 year olds in PUB preschool/nursery school. Full
details are available from the authors.


                                                                                                                8
                       Yizs = α 0 + C izsα 1 + X izxα 2 + Z zsα 3 + π s + ε izs     (1)

         The outcome (Y) of child (i) in zipcode (z) and state (s) is a function of child care type
(C), child and family characteristics (X), demographic attributes of the zip code in which the
child resides (Z), state fixed effects ( ), and a random and normally distributed error term ( ).6
Child care type in the base model is a series of three dummy variables for center care, Head Start
and other non-parental care in comparison to parental care. In the models assessing duration,
child care type is expanded to include the duration of center care.
         The center program dummy variable in this case is replaced by seven dummy variables
measuring starting center care at age zero to one year, one to two years, two to three years, three
to four years, four to five years, greater than five years, and start date unknown. In the model
assessing intensity the center care dummy is supplemented by mutually exclusive dummy
variables for attendance of 15 to 30 hours per week for at least nine months per year and for
attendance of at least 30 hours per week for at least nine months per year.
         Notwithstanding family background controls, it is easy to mis-specify a regression model.
For example, many regression models assume a linear relationship among variables when the
relationship is meaningful but non-linear. The bias created by this misspecification can be larger
when there is less overlap across treatments, as is the case here. For example, we may estimate
the effect of income on child outcomes using data points that fall mostly within one income
range; the group of children in this income range will be most important for determining the
estimate. If children in a particular care type (for example Head Start) have much different
income then we may apply estimates that are inaccurate for this group. We mitigate the potential
bias from misspecification by using multiple dummy variables instead of continuous variables
for measures such as education and income. In addition we run a separate analysis using
statistical matching of children across child care type. We use kernel matching, a non-parametric
matching approach that creates matches for the treatment using (biweight) kernel weighted
averages of those not in the treatment (Heckman, Ichimura and Todd 1998).7

6
  Most analyses using ECLS-K require clustering by school for properly estimating standard error. However,
because child care attendance occurred prior to schooling, clustering is unnecessary in this case. Specification
checks using clustering at the school level show no difference in the statistical significance of estimated effects.
7
  This gives very similar results to predicting treatment probabilities, P, as a function of all the other right-hand-side
variables in Equation 1 using a probit, and then creating a weight of 1 for those in the treatment and P/(1-P) for those
not in the treatment.


                                                                                                                        9
        In addition, we reduce the possibility of omitted variable bias in our analyses by using an
unusually rich set of control variables. We also performed an instrumental variables estimation,
based on measures of child care supply, with the hypothesis that supply factors would influence
parents’ selection of child care but be unrelated to other aspects of family background that would
directly affect child outcomes. We obtained counts of child care establishments and community
organizations at the zip code level. Given the extensive set of zip code level controls from the
census in the second stage, we posited that these measures would predict center use but not child
outcomes. Due to our concern that child care establishments could act as a proxy for
unmeasured tastes, we also ran specifications that did not include this measure.
         To supplement these zip code level measures, we obtained a number of state-level
measures to capture state intervention. We created three variables that measure state-level child
care spending: each state’s 1999 spending on pre-kindergarten programs, Head Start, and the
child care component of their Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) initiative was
divided by the number of children under 5 years of age living in poverty.8 Finally, we included
measures from Schulman and Blank (2004) for the income cutoff for state child care assistance
both as a level and as a percentage of the state median. These variables were meant to capture
each state’s commitment to child care provision, particularly for poor children. We estimated a
linear probability model in the first stage. Unfortunately, while the difference between the IV
estimates and the OLS estimates were not statistically significant and the IV estimates were in
the same direction as the OLS estimates, the standard errors were too large to draw any
meaningful conclusions from the IV analyses.
        We first present the model for our full sample and then show results separately by the
children’s race and family economic status. Our full sample includes all racial groups.
However, due to limited sample sizes, we only present results for the White, Black and Hispanic
sub-samples. It is important to note that reading assessments were only administered to students
deemed minimally proficient in English. Students who could not pass an oral proficiency
screener in English were not given the full assessment in pre-reading skills. Therefore, our
results for Hispanic students are only generalizable to those students whose English ability was
above a threshold. We utilize two approaches to define economic status. As a broad measure of

8
 Head Start and state pre-K spending figures are from Blank, Schulman, & Ewan (1999). TANF spending data, for
1999, are from http://www.acf.dhhs.gov/programs/ofs/data/tableB_1999.html. The share of population under five
years of age in poverty is taken from long form of the decennial census.


                                                                                                            10
economic well-being, we group together children from families in the lowest income-to-needs
ratio quartile, the middle half, and the top quartile. We also consider a stricter measure of
poverty that includes only those children whose income-to-needs ratio is less than 0.5 or children
whose mother and father have never completed high school. This group represents about 8
percent of the full sample.


4. Results
       Table 2 presents a model that predicts child outcomes based on child-care type and the
set of prior family attributes, parental practices, zip code-level demographics, and state fixed
effects. (Full details of the estimates are available from the authors). The results provide
evidence that center care improves children’s reading and math skills but also increases
behavioral problems relative to parental care. For the full sample, center care attendance
increases reading skills by 1.1 points. The standard deviation in reading is 10.0; thus the point
estimate implies a 0.11 standard deviation increase. The results are very similar for
understanding of math concepts. Attending a center program is associated with a 1.2 point (0.12
SD) increase in math performance. The estimates for the social-behavioral index show negative
effects from exposure to center programs. Center attendance is associated with a 0.089 (SD)
point decrease in the behavior index.
       The effects associated with attending a Head Start preschool for the full sample are not
statistically different from zero for either pre-reading or math skills, although they do suggest a
negative effect on social behavior of 0.12 SD units below children who remain in parental care.
One caution about the Head Start effects is that of omitted variable bias. Because the negative
Head Start effects drop significantly as additional controls are included in the model, we may
have not fully accounted for selection effects and that additional controls are needed.
       Many studies have postulated that the effects of center programs will differ across diverse
groups of families. For example, children in households with many resources for advancing
early language, pre-reading, and math skills may not benefit as much from center care as those in
families without such resources. To examine whether child care choices have differing impacts
by family income, we also estimated our model for children from families in the lowest income-
to-needs ratio quartile, the middle half and the top quartile. We see no statistically significant
difference across these three income groups. With few exceptions, center programs appear to


                                                                                                      11
advance pre-reading and math concepts while under cutting social behavior. The magnitudes of
the point estimates do vary, with children from middle-income homes experiencing the biggest
gains in pre-reading skills. However, the relative magnitudes of the effects for low income
children are sensitive to the definition of low-income. With a more restrictive definition of
poverty, i.e. an income-to-needs ratio of less than 0.5 or very low parental education, we find
that the poorest children do enjoy the greatest academic returns from center programs.
        We employed both instrumental variables and propensity score matching to test the
model specification. Table 3 shows that our instruments were not strong enough to accurately
estimate child care effects: while the point estimates are larger, so are the standard errors.
However, the statistical matching results are quite similar to those discussed above. Center
attendance is associated with a 0.13SD increase in pre-reading and math performance and, again,
a decrease in the social-behavior index. We also ran the model for each of the three income
groups using weights from propensity-score matching. The results are very similar to the OLS
results, indicating that the limited overlap across child care types is unlikely to be biasing our
results. One minor difference is that the results are slightly different for pre-reading among
children in the high-income group, along with the middle-income behavior relative to social
behavior, but this is solely due to differences between parental and other non-parental care.
Parental care is the comparison group for the OLS results, while the combination of parental and
non-parental care is the comparison for the statistical matching results. The propensity score
estimates consistently produce smaller standard errors than the OLS estimates, strengthening our
confidence in the results.
        In Table 4 we present results separately for White, Black and Hispanic children. While
the estimates are similar in direction to the results presented above for the entire sample, the
magnitude of academic gains are dramatically larger for English-proficient Hispanic students.
For instance, center care is associated with a 0.23SD increase in the reading scores of Hispanic
students, almost three times the effect size for White children. This effect size is quite similar to
the learning gains observed after Tennessee lowered class sizes to 15-18 students in kindergarten
and the early grades. At the same time, center programs do not have a significantly negative
impact on the social behavior of Hispanic children. In addition, Hispanic children who attend
Head Start do better in reading than those who receive maternal care, though the Head Start
effect is smaller then the center effect.


                                                                                                     12
        Next we move to the effects associated with the duration and intensity with which
children are exposed to center programs. Table 5 gives the results of the duration measure.
Column 1 shows that for the full sample, the greatest benefit of center care for reading and math
skills accrues to children who start center-based programs between the ages of two and three.
Interestingly, those who start both before and after that time appear to gain less. Except for those
who entered after age five, attending a center remains associated with higher scores than parental
care. The results for social behavior are different, although perhaps predictable. The negative
behavioral effects are greater the earlier a child enters.
        These estimations aim to gauge causal effects from exposure to center programs.
However, it is possible that we have not controlled for some factor that affects both the age of
entry and child development (despite the rich set of controls applied). But, the difference in the
relationship between duration and achievement in comparison to duration and behavior suggests
that the results are not driven solely by a simple story of selection bias. If particularly strong
families put their kids in center care at a given age and we were not able to adjust for that with
the many controls, we would expect to see the highest scores across all three measures for
children associated with the duration of center attendance. This is not the case. The social-
behavioral effects differ from the cognitive effects.
        The middle three columns of Table 5 give the results separately for the lowest quartile,
middle half and highest quartile of families’ income-to-needs ratio. Again the results are similar
across the income groups. Almost uniformly, the strongest reading and math effects occur for
those who enter centers between the ages of two and three, and the worst behavioral effects
occur for those who enter the earliest. With only a few exceptions, the pattern that is evident
across income groups also holds for Whites, Blacks and Hispanics. (These results are available
from the authors). One notable exception is that starting a center program early does not seem to
have any negative impact on English-proficient Hispanic children in the sample.
        As well as duration, children differ meaningfully in how much time they spend in center
care during a given year. Table 6 shows the effect of intensity of care using dummy variables to
capture whether a child attended a center for 15-30 hours per week or for more than 30 hours per
week, for at least nine months per year. In this case, the coefficient on the center care dummy
variable picks up the effect of any center attendance and should be added to the coefficients on
the measures of intensity to get the total effect of intense attendance relative to parental care.


                                                                                                     13
       The first column presents the results for the full sample. These estimates suggest that
intensity – attending at least 15 hours per week – substantially increases the contribution of
center programs to cognitive growth. Attending for more than 30 hours a week is also associated
with positive cognitive skills. Consistent with previous research, we find longer hours are
associated with negative behavioral outcomes. Not only do the negative behavioral effects
appear for those with at least 15 hours of care per week, but additional care, as measured by at
least 30 hours of center care, more than doubles this negative effect, from an effect size of -0.10
SD to -0.25 SD for the full sample. For children from middle-class and affluent families these
decrements are -0.28 SD and -0.29 SD. This approximates about two-thirds the suppressing
effect experienced by children who grow-up with a moderately depressed mother.
       The estimates for the full sample obscure important differences across income groups, as
shown in the middle panel of Table 6. For the low-income group, only children who attend a
center program for more than 30 hours experience significant gains in pre-reading skills. This
same group experiences no negative social-behavioral effects from additional hours in a center.
At the other extreme, children from higher-income families do not show any significant gains
from attending centers for more than 30 hours per week and, in sharp contrast to the low-income
children, those from higher income families display increasingly negative behavior the longer
they attend a center program each week.
       The impact of intensive exposure to a center program also varies dramatically based on
the child’s race, as shown in the righthand panel of Table 6. For example, White children who
attend a center program for 15 to 30 hours a week for at least nine months a year show higher
cognitive gains than children who have more limited exposure. In contrast, Hispanic children do
not seem to gain from extra hours; in fact, more intensive exposure is associated at times with a
drop in pre-reading and math performance. The results for Black children are more mixed: high
intensity attendance is associated with increased pre-reading scores, but not math performance.
For behavior, intense exposure to a center has a negatively association for White children, but
interestingly has no discernible effect for Black or Hispanic children. It’s important to remember
that our results for Hispanic children are only generalizable for those with minimal English




                                                                                                   14
proficiency; further research would be useful in assessing whether these effects also hold for
Hispanic children with more limited English.9
         In addition, while the models presented combine months with hours, we also ran
specifications with these separated. Table 7 shows that additional hours hold a positive effect on
cognitive outcomes when they are combined with extended months in centers. Moreover,
additional months do not appear to have a detrimental affect on behavior, instead it is the long
hours of attendance each week that appears to drive the decrements in social behavior.


5. Conclusion
This study began with the question: How much might be too much when it comes to children’s
attendance at preschool centers? Our findings using the ECLS-K show that the answer depends
upon which child and which domain of child development is being examined. We found that, on
average, exposure to a center program prior to starting kindergarten is associated with about a
0.1 SD difference in pre-reading and math skills on average, though it is also associated with
approximately the same size negative effect on a teacher-reported behavioral measure that
captures approaches to learning, self-control and a variety of interpersonal skills. These
differential effects suggest further exploration of the characteristics of center attendance that
affect cognitive and social outcomes. Is there a type of center care that maximizes the positive
cognitive effects while minimizing the negative social effects? In this paper we have looked at
the amount of center care, both duration and intensity, that children experience.
         Are there optimal ages for children to enter center programs, or amounts of exposure that
are better, in order to maximize the positive cognitive effects while minimizing negative social
effects? We found consistent effects for the duration of center attendance across income groups.
The strongest cognitive benefits were enjoyed by youngsters who entered a center program
between the ages of two and three years of age. Children who started earlier did not display
greater pre-reading or math skills, and, in fact, the predicted averages are somewhat lower than
for those who started between the ages of two and three years-old.


9
 We chose the categories of hours in Tables 6 and 7 to correspond with half-day and full-day center-based
programs; however, there are numerous ways of categorizing intensity. From examination of the distribution of
hours of care for children who used center programs, there are two peaks at approximately 10 hours and 40 hours.
Based on this distribution, we re-ran the model with alternative classifications (for example, less than 20 hours, 20 to
40 hours, and greater than 40 hours) and obtained very similar estimates to those reported in Tables 6 and 7.


                                                                                                                     15
         In addition, the negative behavioral effects associated with center attendance, compared
with parental care, are much greater for those who enter a center at less than two years of age and
are particularly large for those who start at less than one year of age. For both low and high
income children, starting a center program before the age of two is not particularly beneficial for
cognitive development and appears to be detrimental for social development. One caveat to
these findings is that the ECLS data only provide information on when the child started a center,
not a complete child-care history; so, start date serves as a proxy for duration in our analysis.
         Our results for the intensity of attending a center program, measured in hours per week
and months per year, do vary across family income groups. 10 For children from low-income
families, additional hours per week are associated with some gains in reading and math and few
detrimental effects on social development. But while high income children enjoy gains in pre-
reading and math skills when attending at moderate levels (15 to 30 hours per week), they see no
cognitive gains and substantially greater behavioral problems associated with additional hours of
weekly center attendance. The study also highlights variation in effects for children of different
races. English-proficient Hispanic children seem to benefit more in terms of cognitive
development from center attendance than White or Black children with similar characteristics,
and Hispanic children’s center exposure is not associated with lower rates of social-behavioral
growth.
         Assessing the cost-benefit of universal preschool or other center-based programs is well
beyond the scope of this report. Yet we do find that exposure to at least a half-day center
program yields cognitive benefits for most children. The good news is that middle-class children
appear to benefit cognitively. The bad news is that universal access may not dramatically close
early learning gaps. Our findings also suggest that greater benefits can accrue from interventions
that start earlier than age four. Generally, children learn more when they start center care
between two and three years of age. In addition, while half day programs may be beneficial for
children from higher income families, full day programs better serve children from lower income
families, allowing them to gain pre-reading and math skills without detriment to social behavior.




10
  Note that this analysis assesses the effects of hours of attendance within a center program, not total hours of non-
parental care. In estimates not presented in this paper, we did not find a statistically significant relationship between
total hours of child care, of all types, and child outcomes.


                                                                                                                      16
References

August, D. & Hakuta, K., Eds. (1997). Improving Schooling for Language Minority Children: A
        Research Agenda. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Barnett, S. (1995). Long-term effects of early childhood programs on cognitive and school
        outcomes. The Future of Children, 5, 25-50.
Bates, J. E., Marvinney, D., Kelly, T., Dodge, K. A., Bennett, D. S., & Pettit, G. S. (1994). Child
        care history and kindergarten adjustment. Developmental Psychology, 30, 690-700.
Belsky, J. (2001). Developmental risks (still) associated with early child care. Journal of Child
        Psychology & Psychiatry & Allied Disciplines, 42, 845-859.
Belsky, J. (2002). Quantity Counts: Amount of Child Care and Children’s Social-Emotional
        Development. Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics, 23, 167-170.
Blank, H., Schulman, K., & Ewan, D. (1999). Seeds of Success. Washington, D.C.: Children’s
        Defense Fund. http://www.childrensdefense.org/pdf/seeds_of_success.pdf.
Burchinal, M. R., Campbell, F. A., Bryant, D. B., Wasik, B. H., Ramey, C. T. (1997). Early
        intervention and mediating processes in cognitive performance of children of low-income
        African-American families. Child Development, 68 (5), 935-954.
Bridges, M., Fuller, B. C., Rumberger, R., & Tran, L. (2004). Preschool for California’s
        children: Promising benefits, unequal access. PACE Policy Brief, 04-3, Berkeley, CA:
        Policy Analysis for California Education (PACE).
Campbell, F.A. & Ramey, C.T. (1994). Effects of early intervention on intellectual and academic
        achievement: A follow-up study of children from low-income families. Child
        Development 65, 684-698.
Campbell, F. A., & Ramey, C. T. (1995). Cognitive and school outcomes for high-risk African-
        American student at middle adolescence: Positive effects of early intervention. American
        Educational Research Journal, 32, 743-772.
Campbell, F. A., Ramey, C. T. Pungello, E. P., Miller-Johnson, S., & Sparling, J. J. (2002). Early
        childhood education: Young adult outcomes from the Abecedarian Project. Applied
        Developmental Science, 6 (1), 42-57.
Clements, M., Reynolds, A., & Hickey, E. (2004). Site-level Predictors of School and Social
        Competence in the Chicago Child-Parent Centers. Early Childhood Research Quarterly,
        19, 273-296.
Colwell, M. J., Pettit, G. S., Meece, D., Bates, J. E., Dodge, K. A. (2001). Cumulative Risk and
        Continuity in Nonparental Care from Infancy to Early Adolescence. Merrill-Palmer
        Quarterly, 47, 207-234.
Early Childhood Longitudinal Study, Kindergarten Class of 1998-99. ECLS-K Base Year Data
        Files and Electronic Code Book. On the Web, National Center for Educational Statistics.
Fryer, R. & Levitt, S (2004). “Understanding the Black-White Test Score Gap in the First Two
        Years of School,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, May.
Fuller, B., Loeb,S., Strath, A. and Carrol, A.B. (2004). “States Formation of the Child Care
        Sector: Family Demand and Central Policy,” Sociology of Education 77, 337-358.
Fuller, B. C., Livas, A., & Bridges, M. (2005). How to expand and improve preschool in
        California: Ideals, evidence, and policy options. PACE Working Paper 05-1. Berkeley,
        California: Policy Analysis for California Education (PACE).
Garces, E., Thomas, D., & Currie, J. (2002). Longer term effects of Head Start. The American
        Economic Review, 92, 999-1012.


                                                                                                17
Han, Wen-Jui, Jane Waldfogel and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn. 2001. “The Effects of Early Maternal
       Employment on Later Cognitive and Behavioral Outcomes.” Journal of Marriage and
       Family 63, February, pp. 336-354.
Heckman, J., Ichimura, H. & Todd, P. (1998), ‘Matching as an econometric evaluation
       estimator’, Review of Economic Studies 65, 261—294.
Hofferth, S., Shauman, K., Henke, R., & West, J. (1995). Characteristics of Children’s Early
       Care and Education Programs: Data from the 1995 National Household Education
       Survey. Washington, D.C.: National Center for Education Statistics.
Liang, X., Fuller, B., & Singer, J. (2000). Ethnic differences in child care selection: The
       influence of family structure, parenting practices, and home language. Early Childhood
       Research Quarterly, 15, 357-384.
Loeb, S., Fuller, B., Kagan, S. L., & Carrol, B. (2004). Child care in poor communities: Early
       learning effects of type, quality, and stability. Child Development, 75, 47-65.
Magnuson, K. A., Ruhm, C. J., & Waldfogel, J. (2004). Does pre-kindergarten improve school
       preparation and performance? National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
       10452. Cambridge, MA: NBER.
Magnuson, K.A., Meyers, M, Ruhm, C.J., and Waldfogel, J. (2004). "Inequality in Preschool
       Education and School Readiness." American Educational Research Journal 41: 115-157.
NICHD ECCRN & Duncan, G. (2003). Modeling the Impacts of Child Care Quality on
       Childrens Preschool Cognitive Development. Child Development, 74, 1454-1475.
NICHD ECCRN. (2002). Maternal employment and child cognitive outcomes in the first 3 years
       of Life: The NICHD Study of Early Child Care. Child Development, 73, 1052-1072.
NICHD ECCRN. (2003). Does the amount of time spent in child care predict socioemotional
       adjustment during the transition to kindergarten? Child Development, 74, 976-1005.
O’Brien-Strain, M., Moye, L., & Sonenstein, F. L. (2003). Arranging and Paying for Child Care.
       San Francisco, California: Public Policy Institute of California.
Reardon, S. (2003). Sources of educational inequality: The growth of racial/ethnic and
       socioeconomic test score gaps in kindergarten and first grade. State College, PA: Penn
       State University (Manuscript).
Reynolds, A. J., & Temple, J. A. (1998). Extended early childhood intervention and school
       achievement: Age 13 findings from the Chicago Longitudinal Study. Child Development,
       69, 231-246.
Rumberger, R. W., & Arellano, B. (2003). Understanding and Addressing the Latino
       Achievement Gap in California. Draft Report submitted to the Latino Policy Institute,
       California Policy Research Center, University of California.
Schulman, K., & Blank, H. (2004). Child Care Assistance Policies 2001-2004: Families
       Struggling to Move Forward, States Going Backward. Washington, D.C.: National
       Women’s Law Center. http://www.nwlc.org/pdf/childcaresubsidyfinalreport.pdf
Shonkoff, J. P. & Phillips, D. A., Eds. (2000). From Neurons to Neighborhoods: The Science of
       Early Child Development. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Smith, T., Kleiner, A., Parsad, B., Farris, E., & Green, B. (2003). Prekindergarten in the U.S.
       Public Schools. Washington, DC: U. S. Department of Education.
Snow, C. E., Burns, M. S., & Griffin, P. (Eds.). (1998). Preventing Reading Difficulties in
       Young Children. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Vandell, D. L. & Ramanan, J. (1992). Effects of Early and Recent Maternal Employment on
       Children from Low-Income Families. Child Development, 63, 938-949.


                                                                                             18
Table 1: Descriptives of Selected Variables by Child Care Type

                                      All        Parental     Center      Head Start     Other
Sample Size                          14162         2363         9015         1093         1691
South                                 0.37         0.38         0.36         0.44         0.34
Birth Weight                        118(21)      118(22)      119(21)      114(23)      117(21)
 Race/Ethnicity           Black       0.16         0.12         0.14         0.39         0.13
                      Hispanic        0.13         0.17         0.11         0.19         0.18
English Only at Home                  0.84         0.80         0.86         0.80         0.81
Single parent family                  0.22         0.16         0.20         0.43         0.28
Mother's Education         <HS        0.10         0.19         0.06         0.24         0.12
                             HS       0.31         0.36         0.27         0.44         0.37
                    Vocational        0.06         0.06         0.05         0.06         0.06
                             BA       0.16         0.10         0.20         0.02         0.10
                   Some Grad          0.02         0.01         0.02         0.01         0.01
                            MA        0.05         0.02         0.06         0.00         0.03
                           PhD        0.01         0.00         0.02         0.00         0.01
Mother Employed Full Time             0.46         0.24         0.48         0.44         0.65
Father Employed Full Time             0.70         0.73         0.74         0.44         0.67
WIC Participation                     0.45         0.49         0.37         0.89         0.52
 Income to Needs            < .5      0.07         0.08         0.04         0.22         0.06
                          .5-1.0      0.11         0.14         0.08         0.29         0.13
Home: # of children's books          78(59)       72(58)       85(60)       49(48)       69(56)
                      tv hours     1.84(1.20)   1.96(1.25)   1.73(1.12)   2.22(1.42)   1.98(1.28)
                visited library       0.55         0.53         0.57         0.46         0.49
                      spanked         0.20         0.22         0.18         0.27         0.23
Parent at School:
                 PTA meeting         0.34         0.36         0.35          0.30        0.27
      Parent-Tchr conference         0.86         0.83         0.88          0.79        0.84
                  Volunteered        0.50         0.50         0.55          0.31        0.42




                                                                                                19
Table 2: OLS Estimates of the Effects of Child Care Settings on Cognitive and Behavioral
Outcomes by Income (Full population, Lowest quartile, middle half and upper quartile)

                               All             Low            Middle         High           Very Low
                                                                Reading
       Center Care             1.116***        0.620          1.272***       0.806          2.015***
                               (0.224)         (0.432)        (0.304)        (0.586)        (0.770)
       Head Start Care         -0.413          -0.821         0.120          ---            0.367
                               (0.351)         (0.504)        (0.589)        ---            (0.848)
       Other Non-Parent        -0.414          -0.316         -0.280         -0.882         -0.970
                               (0.300)         (0.585)        (0.407)        (0.765)        (1.169)

       Observations            11577           2670           5891           3016           829
       R-squared               0.36            0.28           0.30           0.33           .32
                                                                 Math
       Center Care             1.196***        1.188***       1.182***       1.011*         2.191***
                               (0.215)         (0.442)        (0.289)        (0.544)        (0.799)
       Head Start Care         0.322           0.514          0.097          ---            1.138
                               (0.336)         (0.515)        (0.560)        ---            (0.880)
       Other Non-Parent        0.174           0.231          0.410          -0.495         0.045
                               (0.288)         (0.598)        (0.387)        (0.710)        (1.213)

       Observations            11577           2670           5891           3016           829
       R-squared               0.37            0.29           0.30           0.32           .31
                                                               Behavior
       Center Care             -0.089***       -0.158***      -0.014         -0.176**       -0.238**
                               (0.026)         (0.054)        (0.035)        (0.068)        (0.096)
       Head Start Care         -0.122***       -0.103         -0.141**       ---            -0.158
                               (0.041)         (0.062)        (0.067)        ---            (0.105)
       Other Non-Parent        0.105***        -0.027         0.166***       0.080          -0.224
                               (0.035)         (0.072)        (0.047)        (0.089)        (0.145)

       Observations             11577          2670           5891             3016          829
       R-squared                0.14           0.18           0.14             0.15          .27
      Standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                          20
Table 3: Specification Checks of the Effects of Child-Care Type on Children’s Cognitive
and Social Outcomes

                                                          Instrumental Variables Results
                                              Reading                Math                Behavior

        Center Care                           11.001**                  8.893*                   -0.724
                                               (5.191)                  (4.792)                 (0.570)
        Head Start Care                         -1.388                   -0.702                -1.417**
                                               (6.374)                  (5.883)                 (0.700)
        Other Non-Parent Care                    6.714                    5.693                  -0.476
                                               (4.265)                  (3.936)                 (0.468)
        R-squared (n=9490)                        0.21                     0.27                   0.04
                                                            Statistical Matching Results
                                                           Head Start Children Excluded
                                               Reading                   Math                 Behavior
        Center Care (n=10763)                  1.289***                1.255***               -0.134***
                                                (0.157)                 (0.148)                 (0.018)
        R-squared                                 0.34                     0.34                   0.13
                                                          Center Care Children Excluded
                                               Reading                   Math                 Behavior
        Head Start (n=3992)                      -.453*                   0.257               -0.155***
                                                (0.234)                 (0.234)                 (0.029)
        R-squared                                 0.34                     0.34                   0.13
Models include all child/family controls and zip controls as well as dummy variables for Head Start participation and
other non-parental care. Standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                   21
Table 4: OLS Estimates of the Effects of Child-Care Settings on Cognitive and Behavioral
Outcomes, by RACE

                                  ALL                   White             Black                 Hispanic
                                                                       Reading
Center Care                       1.116***              0.852***          1.026                 2.289***
                                  (0.224)               (0.276)           (0.694)               (0.653)
Head Start Care                   -0.413                -0.491            -1.175                1.553*
                                  (0.351)               (0.546)           (0.806)               (0.884)
Other Non-Parent Care             -0.414                -0.553            -0.687                1.195
                                  (0.300)               (0.377)           (0.918)               (0.828)

Observations                      11577                 7495              1549                  1456
R-squared                         0.36                  0.33              0.39                  0.39
                                                                        Math
Center Care                       1.196***              1.043***          1.602**               1.996***
                                  (0.215)               (0.269)           (0.645)               (0.603)
Head Start Care                   0.322                 0.703             0.173                 0.974
                                  (0.336)               (0.532)           (0.750)               (0.816)
Other Non-Parent Care             0.174                 0.067             -0.133                1.302*
                                  (0.288)               (0.368)           (0.854)               (0.764)

Observations                      11577                 7495              1549                  1456
R-squared                         0.37                  0.33              0.37                  0.37
                                                                      Behavior
Center Care                       -0.089***             -0.072**          -0.257***             -0.081
                                  (0.026)               (0.032)           (0.088)               (0.070)
Head Start Care                   -0.122***             -0.241***         -0.216**              0.028
                                  (0.041)               (0.064)           (0.102)               (0.094)
Other Non-Parent Care             0.105***              0.119***          -0.062                0.132
                                  (0.035)               (0.044)           (0.116)               (0.088)

Observations                      11577                 7495                 1549                 1456
R-squared                         0.14                  0.15                 0.18                 0.23
Standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                           22
Table 5: OLS Estimates of the Effects of Age at Center Entry on Cognitive and Social
Outcomes By Income Group
                                                  All              Low            Middle          High
                                                (11577)           (2670)           (5891)        (3061)
                                                                        Reading
               Started Center Age 0-1           0.999***       0.473           1.351**        0.242
                                                (0.374)        (0.965)         (0.534)        (0.752)
               Started Center Age 1-2           1.306***       1.161           1.171**        0.552
                                                (0.415)        (1.023)         (0.589)        (0.820)
               Started Center Age 2-3           1.952***       2.111***        1.944***       1.338**
                                                (0.328)        (0.799)         (0.485)        (0.669)
               Started Center Age 3-4           1.324***       -0.009          1.700***       1.001
                                                (0.260)        (0.555)         (0.359)        (0.619)
               Started Center Age 4-5           0.728***       0.710           0.776**        0.296
                                                (0.260)        (0.509)         (0.351)        (0.681)
               Started Center Age >5            0.475          0.244           0.814          -0.370
                                                (0.557)        (1.164)         (0.737)        (1.323)
               R-Squared                        0.36           0.28            0.30           0.33
                                                                          Math
               Started Center Age 0-1           1.404***       0.303           1.590***       1.214*
                                                (0.359)        (0.986)         (0.508)        (0.697)
               Started Center Age 1-2           1.103***       1.537           1.010*         0.471
                                                (0.398)        (1.046)         (0.560)        (0.761)
               Started Center Age 2-3           1.783***       2.731***        1.658***       1.285**
                                                (0.315)        (0.817)         (0.461)        (0.621)
               Started Center Age 3-4           1.393***       1.126**         1.357***       1.379**
                                                (0.250)        (0.567)         (0.341)        (0.574)
               Started Center Age 4-5           0.851***       1.087**         0.889***       0.157
                                                (0.250)        (0.520)         (0.334)        (0.632)
               Started Center Age >5            0.837          0.280           1.005          0.700
                                                (0.534)        (1.189)         (0.701)        (1.227)
               R-Squared                        0.37           0.29            0.30           0.32
                                                                        Behavior
               Started Center Age 0-1           -0.287***      -0.372***       -0.159***      -0.388***
                                                (0.044)        (0.119)         (0.061)        (0.087)
               Started Center Age 1-2           -0.209***      -0.203          -0.157**       -0.303***
                                                (0.048)        (0.127)         (0.067)        (0.095)
               Started Center Age 2-3           -0.157***      -0.267***       -0.068         -0.233***
                                                (0.038)        (0.099)         (0.055)        (0.078)
               Started Center Age 3-4           -0.085***      -0.154**        -0.011         -0.157**
                                                (0.030)        (0.069)         (0.041)        (0.072)
               Started Center Age 4-5           -0.026         -0.105*         0.040          -0.073
                                                (0.030)        (0.063)         (0.040)        (0.079)
               Started Center Age >5            -0.059         -0.159          -0.012         -0.056
                                                (0.065)        (0.144)         (0.084)        (0.154)
               R-Squared                        0.14           0.18            0.15           0.16
Models include all child/family controls, zip controls and state fixed effects, as well as dummy variables for Head
Start participation, other non-parental care, and unknown center start date. Standard errors are in parentheses.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                                                      23
Table 6: OLS Estimates of the Effects of Intensity of Exposure to Center Programs on Cognitive and Social-Behavioral
Outcomes by Income and Race

                                           All           Low         Middle            High              White              Black            Hispanic
                                         (11558)        (2665)       (5882)           (3011)             (7482)             (1548)            (1452)
   Reading:
   Center Care                          0.818***        0.272        0.935***           0.674            0.617**            0.295            2.450***
                                         (0.237)       (0.475)        (0.321)         (0.605)            (0.288)           (0.758)            (0.728)
   15-30 hours/week, 9 months           0.807***        0.188          0.620          0.977**           1.157***            0.205             -1.629*
                                         (0.261)       (0.659)        (0.390)         (0.433)            (0.309)           (0.939)            (0.849)
   At least 30 hours/week, 9 months     0.854***      1.495***       1.287***          -0.407             0.430           1.566***             0.897
                                         (0.241)       (0.545)        (0.350)         (0.440)            (0.304)           (0.606)            (0.822)
   R-squared                              0.36           0.28           0.30             0.33              0.34              0.39               0.40
   Math:
   Center Care                          0.928***       1.073**       0.898***          0.695            0.761***           1.376*            1.970***
                                         (0.227)       (0.486)        (0.305)         (0.561)            (0.280)           (0.708)            (0.671)
   15-30 hours/week, 9 months           0.769***        -0.049         0.467         1.296***           1.142***            -0.173             -1.112
                                         (0.251)       (0.674)        (0.371)         (0.401)            (0.300)           (0.876)            (0.783)
   At least 30 hours/week, 9 months     0.704***        0.794        1.036***          0.165             0.625**             0.553              1.117
                                         (0.231)       (0.557)        (0.333)         (0.408)            (0.295)           (0.566)            (0.758)
   R-squared                              0.37           0.29           0.30            0.32               0.33               0.37               0.37
   Behavior:
   Center Care                               -0.020      -0.122**          0.056            -0.088         -0.007           -0.155             -0.051
                                            (0.028)       (0.059)         (0.037)          (0.070)        (0.034)          (0.096)            (0.078)
    15-30 hours/week, 9 months            -0.102***        -0.062       -0.117***         -0.123**       -0.119***          -0.169             -0.054
                                            (0.030)       (0.082)         (0.044)          (0.050)        (0.036)          (0.119)            (0.091)
    At least 30 hours/week, 9 months -0.253***             -0.088       -0.279***        -0.291***       -0.287***        -0.184**             -0.069
                                            (0.028)       (0.068)         (0.040)          (0.051)        (0.036)          (0.077)            (0.088)
    R-squared                                 0.15          0.18            0.15             0.16           0.16             0.18               0.23
Standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Models include child/family and zip code level controls, as well as Head Start dummy and non-relative care dummy (excluded group is parental care). Poor,
middle, and high income models include a continuous income to needs variable.
   Table 7: Alternative OLS Estimates of the Effects of “Intense” Center Care on Cognitive
   and Behavioral Outcomes for the Full Sample

                      Reading               Math                  Behavior
center                0.826**               0.666*                0.028
                      (0.363)               (0.346)               (0.042)
15-30 hours           -1.216**              -1.198**              -0.149**
                      (0.573)               (0.545)               (0.066)
>=30 hours            -0.550                0.323                 -0.341***
                      (0.555)               (0.528)               (0.064)
nine months or more   0.391                 0.557*                0.018
                      (0.346)               (0.329)               (0.040)
15-30 hours & nine    1.704***              1.687***              -0.015
months or more
                      (0.632)               (0.602)               (0.073)
>=30 hours & nine     1.091*                0.183                 0.020
months or more
                      (0.597)               (0.568)               (0.069)
R- squared            0.35                  0.36                  0.14
