NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRADE IN IDEAL VARIETIES:
THEORY AND EVIDENCE
David Hummels
Volodymyr Lugovskyy
Working Paper 11828
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11828
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2005

We thank participants at the EIIT 2004 and NBER conferences, and seminar participants at the Universities
of Purdue, Vanderbilt, Texas, Indiana and Illinois for helpful comments. Hummels thanks Purdue CIBER
and NSF and Lugovskyy thanks Wang CIBER at the University of Memphis for financial support. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
©2005 by David Hummels and Volodymyr Lugovskyy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Trade in Ideal Varieties: Theory and Evidence
David Hummels and Volodymyr Lugovskyy
NBER Working Paper No. 11827
December 2005
JEL No. F1
ABSTRACT
Models with constant-elasticity of substitution (CES) preferences are commonly employed in the
international trade literature because they provide a tractable way to handle product differentiation
in general equilibrium. However this tractability comes at the cost of generating a set of counterfactual predictions regarding cross-country variation in export and import variety, output per variety,
and prices. We examine whether a generalized version of Lancaster's 'ideal variety' model can better
match facts. In this model, entry causes crowding in variety space, so that the marginal utility of new
varieties falls as market size grows. Crowding is partially offset by income effects, as richer
consumers will pay more for varieties closer matched to their ideal types. We show theoretically and
confirm empirically that declining marginal utility of new varieties results in: a higher own-price
elasticity of demand (and lower prices) in large countries and a lower own-price elasticity of demand
(and higher prices) in rich countries. Model predictions about cross-country differences in the
number and size of establishments are also empirically confirmed.
David Hummels
Krannert School of Management
403 West State Street
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907-1310
and NBER
hummelsd@purdue.edu
Volodymyr Lugovskyy
Department of Economics
Fogelman School of Business and Economics
University of Memphis
400 Fogelman Administrative Bldg.
Memphis, TN 38104
vlgvskyy@memphis.edu

I. Introduction
Beginning with Krugman (1979, 1980), the Dixit-Stiglitz (1977) framework of product
differentiation has become a workhorse of the international trade literature. A short list of
applications includes the literatures on intra-industry and north-north trade, economic geography,
regional integration, gravity modeling of trade flows, and multinational firms.
The model is widely used because it is highly tractable. In its most commonly used form
the model assumes constant elasticity of substitution (CES) demand, which has several important
features. Varieties are not assigned to any particular “address” and product space is effectively
infinite. As a consequence, differentiated varieties may exhibit a high or low degree of
substitutability, but this is invariant to the number of products in the market. Further, consumers
“love” variety, in the sense that increased variety improves welfare. Curiously, the marginal
utility consumers derive from new variety is not declining in entry, whether new entrants
represent the 20th or 200th variety on the market.
These assumptions carry pronounced normative implications. Trade economists are often
bemused that the gains from trade in neoclassical models are small. However, as Romer (1994)
demonstrates in a simple calibration, trade liberalization that increases the number of traded
varieties can be a source of much larger welfare gains.1 In a related empirical exercise, Feenstra
(1994) shows that under a maintained hypothesis of CES demand, variety-corrected price indices
for a set of US imports have fallen much lower than the uncorrected indices would seem to
indicate.2
In sum, the CES model’s core assumptions yield useful tractability, and the model’s
predictions about variety expansion imply tremendous welfare gains from trade in markets large

1

Klenow and Rodriguez (1997) show that the welfare gains from new variety in Costa Rica are smaller than Romer
suggests, but still larger than neoclassical gains.
2
Broda and Weinstein (2004) extend the Feenstra calculations to a broader set of US import categories.

1

and small. But are the central empirical predictions of this structure correct? Consider a few
stark implications of the model that can be shown by comparing, ceteris paribus, a large and a
small closed economy. The larger country will enjoy entry of new varieties at a rate proportional
to its country size. Because this entry does not “crowd” variety space, the own-price (and crossprice) elasticity of demand is the same as in the small country. This implies that prices, which
depend only on marginal cost and the demand elasticity, are the same in the two markets. It also
implies that the quantity per variety is the same in the two markets: fixed costs of entry are the
same in the two markets, and markups are the same, so the same quantity per variety clears zeroprofit conditions in both places. These predictions are not incidental. It is precisely this strong
symmetry in prices and quantities, and the strict proportionality between number of varieties and
market size which makes these models so tractable and widely-employed.
Hummels and Klenow (2002) use cross-country data to examine how the variety and
quantity per variety of imports co-vary with market size. They show that, while the number of
imported varieties is greater in larger markets, variety differences are less than proportional to
market size. That is, larger countries import more varieties, but also import higher quantity per
variety.3
What could cause a less than proportional expansion of import varieties with respect to
market size? Two candidates come to mind. Perhaps there are fixed costs of importing as
modeled in Romer (1994), but these are rising in market size so that the cost of new varieties at
the margin is higher for larger markets as in Klenow-Rodriguez Clare (1997). Alternatively, it
may be that goods become more substitutable as more varieties enter the market, so that the
marginal benefit of new varieties falls with market size. We emphasize the latter channel,

3

Hummels and Klenow (2002,2005) found a similar pattern for exports: variety and quantity per variety expands
with exporter size, but less than proportionally. We focus on cross-importer facts in this paper.

2

examining the empirical implications of a generalized ‘ideal variety’ model.
Lancaster (1979) originally developed a model of trade in ideal varieties in which variety
space is finite, and varieties have unique addresses in product space. This means that entry
causes “crowding” – goods become more substitutable as more enter the market so that the own
price elasticity of demand increases with market size. This has important implications for prices,
the average size of firms and the rate of variety expansion.
Again consider a ceteris paribus comparison of a large and small country. In the large
country, entry drives up the price elasticity of demand, leading to lower markups. Since firms in
the large market must be able to recoup their fixed costs of entry despite lower markups, they
must sell a larger quantity. This, in turn, implies that new variety expansion will be increasing in
market size, but less than proportionally.
We generalize the preferences in the ideal variety framework. Lancaster (1979) assumes
that the equilibrium choice of variety is independent of consumption quantities, so that
consumers get no closer to their ideal regardless of expenditures. We allow the opportunity cost
of the ideal variety to depend on consumers’ individual consumption levels. When incomes rise,
consumers increase the quantity consumed, but also place greater value on proximity to the ideal
variety. The price elasticity of demand drops and prices rise. In equilibrium, the market
responds by supplying more varieties, with lower output per variety. Essentially, economies of
scale forsaken are compensated for by the higher markups that consumers are now willing to
pay.
We examine, and confirm, these implications in three exercises focusing on cross-country
variation in average firm size, prices of traded goods, and the own-price elasticity of demand.
First, we use the UNIDO Industrial Statistics Database to measure the average value added per

3

firm for 152 3-digit ISIC sectors in 54 countries from 1990-2000. Controlling for country and
industry effects so that we exploit purely time series variation, we show that average firm size
co-varies positively with GDP, and negatively with GDP per worker (conditioning on GDP).
This result is robust to alternative measures of firm and market size.
Next, we examine the model’s predictions for prices. We use Eurostats trade data for
1990-2003 that reports bilateral export prices for 11 EU exporters selling to all importers worldwide in roughly 11,000 products. This variation allows us to relate over-time changes in prices
for an importer-exporter-product to changes in importer characteristics. We find that price
changes co-vary negatively with GDP growth and co-vary positively with growth in GDP per
capita (conditioning on GDP growth), consistent with model predictions.
Finally, we use the TRAINS database on bilateral trade and trade costs to identify the
own-price elasticity of demand and examine its co-variation with importer characteristics. We
find that the own-price elasticity of demand is increasing in importer GDP and decreasing in
importer GDP per capita, consistent with model predictions. The data reveal substantial
variation in these elasticities across importers.
This paper relates, and adds to, several literatures. First, we contribute to a relatively new
but growing literature providing empirical evidence on models of product differentiation in trade.
Most of these papers employ cross-exporter facts to understand Armington v. Krugman style
horizontal differentiation as in Head and Ries (2001) and Acemoglu and Ventura (2002), or the
importance of quality differentiation as in Schott (2003), Hallak (2004), and Hummels and Skiba
(2004), or some combination of the two, as in Hummels and Klenow (2005). We emphasize
cross-importer facts, and depart from the CES utility framework that dominates this literature.
Second, we contribute to a literature in which market entry affects the elasticity of

4

demand facing a firm. Most of the trade theory literature has emphasized oligopoly and
homogeneous goods as in Brander and Krugman (1982). The more sparse empirical literature
has focused on plausibly homogeneous goods within a single country, such as the markets for
gasoline, Barron, Taylor, Umbeck (2005) and concrete, Syverson (2004). In contrast, our model
emphasizes free-entry monopolistic competition in a general equilibrium with multiple countries
and differentiated goods. The model’s predictions for market size and the elasticity of demand
are similar to quadratic utility models as in Ottaviano and Thisse (1999). However, we also
allow for income effects operating through an intensity of preference for the ideal variety that
can potentially counteract pure market size effects.4 These income effects significantly improve
our ability to fit the model to the data.
Finally, this paper adds to the literature on price variation across markets. The literature
on Balassa-Samuelson effects emphasizes the importance of nontraded good prices in explaining
why price levels are higher in richer countries. We provide a theoretical explanation and
empirical evidence supporting the idea that prices of traded goods are also higher in richer
countries.
The literature on pricing-to-market (see Goldberg and Knetter 1997 for an extensive
review) has shown that the same goods are priced with different markups and thus have different
price elasticities of demand across importing markets. We differ from, and add to, this literature
in two ways. First, we show how markups systematically vary across importers depending on
market characteristics. Second, we provide a complementary explanation for the variation in
markups. The pricing-to-market literature focuses on movements along the same, non-CES,
demand curves (e.g., Feenstra 1989, Knetter 1993) so that variation in quantities caused by tariff

4

Perloff and Salop (1985) also include preference intensity but do not link it explicitly to observable characteristics
of consumers, or consider a trading equilibrium.

5

or exchange rate shocks yields variation in the elasticity of demand. We show that variation in
market characteristics (size, income per capita), yields different demand curves and thus different
price elasticities of demand across countries.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II uses a simplified closed
economy setting to motivate the generalization of Lancaster compensation function and to
concentrate on the comparative statics in the model with a single differentiated product.
Appendix 2 demonstrates that the key empirical predictions can also be derived in an open
economy model that nests the generalized ideal variety framework into a Ricardian continuum
model in the manner of Dornbusch-Fischer-Samuelson (1977). Sections III-V provide empirical
examinations of model implications for average firm sizes, prices, and the own-price elasticity of
demand. Section VI concludes.

II. Model
A. Demand Functions
Preferences of a consumer are defined over a homogeneous numeraire product q0 , and a
differentiated product q , which is defined by a continuum of varieties indexed by ω ∈ Ω :
(1)

U = q01− µ u ( qω | ω ∈ Ω ) 

µ

0 < µ < 1,

where subutility u ( qω | ω ∈ Ω ) is defined later in this section. The budget constraint is:
(2)

q0 + ∫

ω∈Ω

qω pω = I ,

where pω are the prices of the varieties being produced and I is income in terms of the
numeraire.
Varieties can be distinguished by a single attribute. We assume that all varieties can be

6

represented by points on the circumference of a circle, with the circumference being of unit
length.
Each point of the circumference represents a different variety. Each consumer has his
most preferred type, which we call his ‘ideal’ variety, and which we denote as ω . It is ideal in
the sense that given a choice between equal amounts of his ideal variety ω and any other variety

ω consumer will always choose ω . Moreover, utility is decreasing in distance from ω : the
further is the product from the ideal variety the less preferable it is for the consumer. These
assumptions are usually incorporated in the formal model with a help of Lancaster’s
compensation function h ( vω ,ω ) , defined for 0 ≤ vω ,ω ≤ 1 . Lancaster’s compensation function is

defined such that the consumer is indifferent between q units of his ideal variety ω and

h ( vω ,ω ) q units of some other variety ω , where vω ,ω is the shortest arc distance between ω and

ω . It is assumed that:
(3)

h ( 0 ) = 1 , h ' ( 0 ) = 0 , and h ' ( vω ,ω ) > 0 , h '' ( vω ,ω ) > 0 for vω ,ω > 0 .

The subutility of variety ω for consumer whose ideal variety is ω is usually assumed to
have the following separable form (e.g., Lancaster 1979, 1984, Helpman and Krugman 1985):

u ( qω , ω , ω ) =

qω
h ( vω ,ω )

The subutility function, which includes all varieties ω ∈ Ω , can then be formulated as
(4)

 q

ω
u ( qω | ω ∈ Ω ) = max 

ω∈Ω
 h ( vω ,ω ) 
Given the weak separability of the utility function (1), we can use a two-stage budgeting

procedure. From the second stage we find that the consumer spends µ I on the differentiated

7

product. In the first stage, we can maximize the subutility subject to the budget constraint, µ I ,
and given the prices of differentiated varieties, pω . The solution to this problem is:

(5)

qω ' =

µI
pω '

,

qω = 0

for ω ≠ ω ',

where ω ' = arg min  pω h ( vω ,ω ) | ω ∈ Ω  .
In (5), the utility maximizing variety is independent of expenditures. For example,

imagine that the consumer’s ideal beverage is apple juice, the price of which is five times higher
than the price of water: p AJ = 5 pW . Equation (5) suggests that the consumer will buy

µI
pW

units

of water if 5 > h ( vW , AJ ) . This answer holds whether income allows him to buy five cups or fifty

gallons of water.
Consider a more general formulation in which the strength of preference for the ideal
variety depends on quantities consumed. Formally, we define a generalized compensation
function, h ( qω , vω ,ω ; γ ) , having the following properties:
(6)

h2 ( qω , vω ,ω ; γ ) > 0 and h22 ( qω , vω ,ω ; γ ) > 0 for vω ,ω > 0

( 7)

h ( qω , 0; γ ) = 1 , h2 ( qω , 0; γ ) = 0

(8)

h ( 0, vω ,ω ) = 1 , h12 ( qω , vω ,ω ; γ ) > 0 for qω , γ , vω ,ω > 0

(9)

h ( qω , vω ,ω ;0 ) = h ( vω ,ω )

where the parameter γ ≥ 0 defines the degree to which the consumer is “finicky”, or willing to
forego consumption to get closer to the ideal.
The standard properties associated with the distance from the ideal variety are
represented by (6) and ( 7). By (8) we assume that the consumer is not finicky at all at a zero

8

consumption level, but when his consumption of a differentiated good increases he becomes
increasingly finicky. Finally, (9) nests Lancaster’s compensation function: if γ = 0 , the
compensation function does not depend on consumption volumes. An additional condition needs
to be introduced to address the fact that in the generalized compensation function, the quantity of
the chosen variety appears both in the nominator and in the denominator of the subutility
function (4). Consequently, while the quantity consumed increases, the cost of being distanced
from the ideal variety might increase so fast that it outweighs utility gains from the higher
consumption level of this variety. This would contradict the standard assumption of the nondecreasing (in quantity) utility function. It is easy to show that the necessary and sufficient
condition for utility to be increasing in the quantity consumed is:
(10)

h ( qω , vω ,ω ; γ ) − qω h1 ( qω , vω ,ω ; γ ) > 0

∀ω ∈ Ω

The difference between the Lancaster and generalized compensation functions is illustrated by
Figure 1.
In order to derive a closed form solution of the model, we chose a specific functional
form of the generalized compensation function:
(11)

h ( qωγ , vω ,ω ) = 1 + qωγ vωβ ,ω

β > 1, 0 ≤ γ ≤ 1,

It is easy to verify that the restrictions imposed on the parameters β and γ in (11) are
necessary and sufficient for properties (6) – (10) to hold. The corresponding subutility function
is then
(12)


qω
u ( qω | ω ∈ Ω ) = max 
ω∈Ω  1 + q γ v β
ω ω ,ω



 .


Now we can apply the two-stage budgeting procedure in order to maximize (1) subject to
(2) using a subutility function defined by (12). Given that the upper-case utility function is

9

Cobb-Douglas, the consumption of the homogeneous good and expenditure on the chosen
differentiated varieties are:
(13)

q0 = (1 − µ ) I ,

(14)

∫ω

∈Ω

qω pω = µ I .

Consumption of a differentiated variety ω ' is found by maximizing the subutility (12)
subject to budget constraint (14):

(15)

qω ' =

µI
pω '

,

qω = 0

for ω ≠ ω '

where ω ' = arg min  pω (1 + qωγ vωβ ,ω ) | ω ∈ Ω  .

B. Market Equilibrium
Each individual is endowed with z efficient units of labor, which he supplies
inelastically in a perfectly competitive labor market. The homogeneous good is produced with
constant returns to scale with labor requirement equal to one. Consequently, the wage is equal to
one in terms of the numeraire and an individual’s income is equal to his labor endowment:
(16)

I = z.
Varieties of the differentiated product are produced by monopolistically competitive

firms, with identical technology. Production requires a fixed number of workers α , payable in
each period that the variety is produced, and marginal labor requirement c . Given that the wage
equals one, α and c are also interpreted as fixed and marginal costs.
The firms play a two-stage non-cooperative game under the assumption of perfect
information. Each firm chooses a variety in the first stage and a price in the second stage. Each
variety is produced by one firm, and firms are free to enter and exit. Finally, consumer

10

preferences for ideal variety are uniformly distributed over the unit length circumference of the
circle and the population density on the circumference is equal to L .
Under these assumptions, it is possible to show that all existing equilibria are zero-profit
Nash equilibria. Moreover, there will exist symmetric Nash equilibria characterized by identical
prices and output levels for the individual firms. In these equilibria, the specification of the
varieties produced will be evenly spaced along the spectrum.5 In the following analysis, we will
focus exclusively on such symmetric equilibria in which all varieties are equally priced and
equally distributed on the circumference of the circle.
Next we solve for aggregate demand and the price elasticity of demand for variety ω .
The solution to this problem is described by Lancaster (1984) and Helpman and Krugman
(1985), and for completeness is included in Appendix 1. In the symmetric equilibrium, in which
the prices of all varieties are the same and all varieties are equally distanced from each other, the
demand for any produced variety ω ∈ Ω is:
(17)

Q=

d µ zL
,
p

where d is the shortest arc distance between any two available varieties, and p is the price of
each available variety. The corresponding price elasticity of demand is:
γ

(18)

ε = 1+

β

1  p   2  1− γ
> 1.

   +
2β  µ z   d 
2β

Knowing the cost structure and the price elasticity of demand, we can find the profitmaximizing price and zero-profit quantity for each produced variety:
(19)

p=

cε
ε −1

Q=

α
c

( ε − 1) .

5

The proof of existence and the detailed characterization of equilibria is provided by Lancaster (1979). An
extension of Lancaster’s proof for the form of the utility function in (12) is available upon request from the authors.

11

Knowing the expenditure on each product from (14), and the size of firms from (19), we can find
the equilibrium number of firms:
(20)

n=

µ zL
.
αε

The circumference length is equal to one, so the distance between the closest varieties is:
(21)

d=

1 αε
=
.
n µ zL

Now we can rewrite (18) using (19)–(21):
(22)

1
ε = 1+
2β

γ

 cε
  2µ zL  β 1 − γ
.

 
 +
−
µ
ε
αε
β
z
1
2
(
)





The equilibrium value of the price elasticity of demand is unique, since the LHS of (22)
is increasing in ε , while the RHS is decreasing in ε . From (19) and (20) we can show that the
equilibrium price, quantity per variety, and number of varieties are also unique.

C. Comparative Statics

We examine changes in population density L and the individual labor endowment z , and
their effect on the equilibrium price elasticity of demand, price, output per variety, and the
number of varieties. By implicit derivation of (22) we get

(23)

γ
∂ε L   µ z ( ε − 1) 
= 2ε 

cε
∂L ε  



 2µ zL 


 αε 

−β

−1

γ

+
+ 1 .
β ( ε − 1) 


The resulting expression is strictly positive and strictly less than one6; that is, the price elasticity
of demand is increasing in population density at a less than proportional rate.
To explain this result we follow Lancaster (1979) in defining the market width of variety
6

All addends in curly brackets are strictly positive and include the value 1, which makes their sum strictly greater
than 1. The inverse of this sum is then between zero and one.

12

ω as the portion of the total spectrum of consumers buying this variety rather than some other
variety. The extreme values of market width in this model are one and zero, which approximate
pure monopoly and perfect competition. An increase in L increases purchasing power on each
interval of the spectrum, and thus each firm needs a smaller interval to get the same total
revenue. As a result, in the new zero-profit equilibrium, the market width for each produced
variety shrinks. Consequently, the distance between the neighboring varieties decreases, thus
making consumers more sensitive to the variation in price.
Equation (19) indicates that the increase in the price elasticity of demand leads to a
decrease in the equilibrium price per variety, and an increase in the output per variety. The
intuition is straightforward. Entry crowds variety space, driving up ε and lowering the markups
firms can charge. Since prices are lower each firm must sell a higher quantity to break even.
Consequently, growth in firm size uses resources that would otherwise have been used to expand
variety; the number of varieties increases less than proportionally with labor force growth. This
can also be seen in equation (20) which shows that a rising population leads directly to an
increase in the number of varieties that is partially offset by the induced rise in ε .
These predictions are summarized in the last column of Table 1. The contrast with the
standard constant elasticity model, as in Krugman (1980), is clear. If the price elasticity of
demand is independent of market size, then prices and output per variety are also independent of
market size, and the elasticity of n with respect to market size is one.
Next we examine changes in the individual labor endowment z , which can be interpreted
both as an increase in productivity and in income per capita. By implicit derivation of (22) we
can find:

13

(24)

∂ε z  γ
= 1 −
∂z ε  β
0<

γ

   µ z ( ε − 1)   2 µ zL 
 

 2ε 
   cε
  αε 

−β

−1


γ
+
+ 1 ,
β (ε − 1) 


∂ε z
< 1.
∂z ε

An increase in z has two effects, raising ε through an increase in the aggregate labor
endowment, zL , and lowering ε by raising income per worker. The effect on the aggregate
labor endowment is captured by the inverse portion of (24). By comparing this expression with
(23), we see that this channel yields the same changes in all variables of interest as an increase in
population density.
The effect of rising income per worker, holding fixed aggregate output, is captured by the
expression

−γ

β

{...}

−1

in (24). Conceptually, compare two countries with the same GDP but

differing labor productivity. Let country A have a smaller population and more productive (and
therefore richer) workers than Country B. Then country A has a lower ε , higher prices, more
firms, and lower output per firm.
This result is interesting because it indicates that, ceteris paribus, an identical variety
produced using the same technology in both poor and rich countries will be priced higher in the
rich country. As income rises, consumers place greater value on proximity to the ideal variety
and are willing to pay a higher price for a larger degree of diversification. The market responds
by supplying more varieties, even though economies of scale are utilized to a lesser degree for
produced varieties.
These predictions are summarized in Table 1. Here, the contrast with the original
Lancaster (1970) model is instructive. Since the Lancaster model is a special case of the
generalized model, the predictions of the Lancaster model can be easily obtained from (23) and

14

(24) by setting γ equal to zero. Comparative statics with respect to market size are similar7, but
the income effect is operative only in the generalized model. In Lancaster, an increase in worker
productivity has no affect on model outcomes after controlling for market size.

D. Open economy

To this point, we have focused on closed economy comparative statics. In the closed
economy, our predictions for the number of varieties, quantity per variety, price elasticity, and
prices refer to domestic output, which is also domestic consumption. Of these, data on the
number of firms and output per firm are available from domestic data for many countries, and we
test model predictions in section III. Unfortunately cross-country domestic data on prices and
price elasticities are not available in sufficient detail for many countries to test the model. Trade
data are better in this regard, but to use them we must re-interpret the model in an open economy
context. This extension is derived in detail in Appendix 2, and described briefly here.
Solving the ideal variety model required a symmetric equilibrium in which varieties on a
circle are equally spaced and have the same prices. A trivial way to extend the model to the open
economy is to maintain this symmetry for foreign and domestic firms. That is, foreign varieties
pay some fixed cost to enter the market that is identical to that of domestic firms, and that the
delivered marginal cost of foreign varieties (inclusive of production, tariffs or other trade costs)
matches domestic production costs.
We rely on a more general solution that has been employed previously in the literature in a
two-country setting by Dornbusch, Fischer, and Samuelson (1977), and in a multi-country setting
by Eaton and Kortum (2002). In these models there is a continuum of homogeneous goods
7

That is, the signs on the market size comparative statics are the same for the Lancaster and generalized ideal
variety models are the same, but magnitudes differ.

15

arranged according to strength of comparative advantage. At any point on the continuum we can
compare the price of domestic goods to the delivered price of foreign goods and discern whether
the products will be imported, exported, or neither.
We show in Appendix 2 that it is possible to nest the ideal variety framework into the
continuum; each good is no longer a single point on the continuum, it is now a circle. The key
features of the equilibrium are that, as in Dornbusch, Fischer, and Samuelson and Eaton and
Kortum, each country will buy goods on a particular circle from only one supplier. This ensures
that all varieties in a particular product space are symmetric. We show that all our model
predictions from the closed economy case extend to the open economy case, provided that we
focus on the import or non-traded segments of the goods continuum. In this case, our
comparative statics in equations (23) and (24) now describe variation in the price elasticity of
demand facing a common exporter when selling to importers who vary in market size (GDP) and
per capita income (conditional on market size). The corresponding predictions for number of
varieties, quantity per variety, and prices go through as in the closed economy case.

III. Empirics – The Number and Average Size of Firms

In this section we examine model predictions regarding the number and size of firms
within a country. We can think of this either as a test of the closed economy version of the
model, or as a test of the open economy version when focusing only on the non-traded segments
of the goods continuum. In both cases, output characteristics within a country are determined by
demand characteristics in that country not the world as a whole. Simply, the model predicts that
the number of firms expands less than proportionally with market size so that the average size of
firms is rising in market size. Conditioning on market size, growth in income per capita leads

16

consumers to prefer a closer match to their ideal types which increases the number of firms, and
lowers their average size.
To examine these predictions we employ data from the UNIDO Industrial Statistics
Database. We have data on the number of establishments, total employment, value added, and
gross output by 152 ISIC 3-digit industries for 54 countries from 1990-2000. There are
undoubtedly important differences across countries and industries in industrial and government
regulatory structure, as well as subtle differences in data definitions (e.g. what constitutes an
“establishment”). As a consequence, cross-sectional differences in the number and size of firms
are likely to be extremely noisy. Instead, we exploit the panel structure of the data to examine
how changes in market size and income per capita affect changes in the number and size of
establishments within a country.
Our estimating equations for number of establishments is
( 25)

ln N itk = α ik + β1 ln

Yit
+ β 2 ln SIZEitk + eitk
Lit

where the dependent variable N ik is the number of establishments in country i, industry k, at
time t, SIZEitk is the size of the industry (measured variously as total employment, gross output,
or value added),

Yit
is real GDP per capita taken from the World Bank’s World Development
Lit

Indicators, and α ik is a country-industry fixed effect.
We also examine average establishment size,
( 26)

 SIZEitk
ln 
k
 N it


Yit
k
k
k
 = α i + β1 ln + β 2 ln SIZEit + eit
Lit


where SIZEitk is again measured variously as employment, gross output, or value added. We also

17

employ total market size for all sectors (ln GDP from the World Bank WDI) in place of sector
specific measures on the right hand side.
Results are reported in Table 2. In the first 3 columns we see that the prediction of the
generalized ideal variety model for number of establishments is borne out. Conditioning on a
country and industry, growth in the total size of an industry leads to a less than proportional
expansion in the number of establishments. This holds for all three measures of industry size.
The number of establishments is also rising in income per capita.
The next six columns examine the average size of firms. Regardless of the measure
employed, we see that average size of establishments is increasing in industry size and
decreasing in income per capita. The same holds true when we employ GDP instead of sector
specific measures, though the regression fits are much lower in this case.

IV. Empirics – Cross-Importer Variation in Prices

Next, we empirically examine the theoretical predictions regarding cross-importer prices:
prices should be lower in large markets and higher in rich markets after conditioning on market
size. We employ bilateral export data from the Eurostats Trade Database for the period 19902003. These data report values and quantities (weight in kilograms) of trade for each of 11 EU
exporters and over 200 importers worldwide, measured at the 8 digit level of the Harmonized
System (roughly 11,000 categories). Because we have exporter-importer-product-time
variation, we can control for many factors outside our model, and relate changes in import prices
at the border (i.e. prior to any value-added in distribution or retailing) to changes in importer
characteristics.
We write export prices as

18

pijtk = c kjtα ijk m k (aik , Yit ,

Yit
),
Lit

with indices j=exporter, i=importer, k = HS8 product, and t = time. The term c kjt captures
influences that are specific to an exporter-product-time period. These include variation in
marginal costs of production and product quality.8 The term α ijk captures time invariant
influences specific to an importer-exporter-product. For example, Hummels-Skiba (2004) show
that prices vary across bilateral pairs due to Alchian Allen effects, i.e. variation in tariffs and per
unit transportation costs induce changes in the quality mix and observed prices. Similarly, for
reasons outside the model Germany may happen to ship higher priced cars to the US than it does
to France. To the extent that these effects change little over time, they are captured in α ijk .
Finally, m() is a markup that depends on importer-commodity characteristics (such as
market or regulatory structure not captured in our model), as well as market size and per capita
income. For simplicity we approximate this markup rule as a separable log-linear function in its

( )

arguments, mitk = exp α ik (Yit )

m2k

(Yit

Lit )

m3k

This allows us to write log export prices as

ln pijtk = c kjt + α ijk + aik + m2k (ln Yit ) + m3k (ln

Yit
).
Lit

In order to eliminate variation across importer-products aik and bilateral pair-products

α ijk we take long differences of the data, examining changes in log export prices between the

8

k

Prices are the value of trade divided by weight. c jt then also includes a conversion of a common price measure

(value per kg) into commodity specific units.

19

beginning and end of the sample. Using t = 0,1, we have9
 Y
Y 
ln pijk ,1 − ln pijk ,0 = c kj ,1 − c kj ,0 + m2k (ln Yi ,1 − ln Yi ,0 ) + m3k  ln i ,1 − ln i ,0 
 L
Li ,0 
i ,1


(

)

Finally, to capture any evolution in product cost or quality that is specific to an exporter-product
and constant across importers, we employ a vector of exporter-product fixed effects, a kj . This
gives us a final estimating equation that allows us to relate changes in prices to changes in
importer market size and per capita income.
( 27)

 Y
Y 
ln pijk ,1 − ln pijk ,0 = a kj + β1 (ln Yi ,1 − ln Yi ,0 ) + β 2  ln i ,1 − ln i ,0  + eijk
 L
Li ,0 
i ,1

Initially, we pool over all commodities in our sample, which is equivalent to assuming

that the effect of market size and income per capita is identical across products. The resulting
estimate is10
 Y
Y 
ln pijk ,1 − ln pijk ,0 = a kj − .185(ln Yi ,1 − ln Yi ,0 ) + .251 ln i ,1 − ln i ,0  + eijk
(.009)
(.009 )  Li ,1
Li ,0 

The results match our theoretical predictions. Prices fall for importers for whom GDP is
growing, and rise for importers for whom income per capita is growing.
Next, we estimate equation ( 27) by pooling over all HS8 commodities within each HS
two-digit group and estimating effects for each HS2 group separately. While this eliminates
many degrees of freedom it also relaxes the assumption of identical effects across all products.
Results for each HS2 industry are reported in Table 3, along with counts of significant
coefficients. For categories representing over 80 percent of trade by value, statistically

9

We experimented with using only end years 1990 and 2003, as well as constructing average prices over two and
three year windows at the beginning and end of the sample. Results were unaffected.
10
All coefficients are significant at 1% level. Number of observations is 1,043,566 and within-R2=.001

20

significant coefficient estimates match the theory11. Conditioning on an exporter and product,
prices are decreasing in importer’s GDP growth, and increasing in importer’s GDP per capita
growth. The effects are not trivial in magnitude. Figure 2 is a histogram showing the
distribution of coefficients over the HS2 groups. Because the value of trade differs dramatically
across each HS2 group we weight the point estimates by that HS2 groups share in trade. For the
median product, a 1% increase in GDP decreases prices by 0.5%, while a 1% increase in GDP
per capita increases prices by 0.5%.
Of course, the impact of incomes on prices may be due in part to a rise in demand for
quality as incomes increase. Recall however that our estimates condition on the level of prices
for an importer-exporter pair, and on growth in prices for an exporter-commodity. This sweeps
out much of the cross-exporter quality variation found, for example, in Schott (2003), Hallak
(2004), and Hummels-Klenow (2005), and the cross-bilateral pair quality variation found in
Hummels-Skiba (2004). It may be that exporters adjust their quality mix over time and direct
changing quality differentially to specific importers depending on their changing characteristics.
However, we are unaware of any direct evidence on this point.

IV. Empirics – Own Price Elasticity of Demand

In this section we examine the generalized ideal variety model’s predictions for how the
own-price elasticity of demand varies across markets. Unfortunately, this model does not yield a
convenient structural form for estimating the own-price elasticity. Our approach is to take as the
null hypothesis that import demand is derived from a CES utility function with a common priceelasticity of demand across all markets. We then examine whether we can reject this null in

11

“Wrong-signed” and statistically significant estimates occur in categories representing only 2 percent of trade by
value.

21

favor of a model in which the elasticity varies systematically across markets. In particular,
equations (23) and (24) predict that the own-price elasticity of demand is higher in large markets,
and lower in rich markets (conditional on market size).
Our approach, detailed below, requires data on bilateral trade and bilateral trade costs for
many importers. Ideally, we would have those data in a panel in order to relate over-time
changes in the price elasticity of demand within an importer to changes in that importer
characteristics. Unfortunately, bilateral trade cost panel data are not available. Instead we use
cross-sectional data from the TRAINS database, which reports bilateral trade values and tariffs
for many importers and exporters at the 6 digit level of the Harmonized System classification
(roughly 5000 goods). While we are not able to use the time series to difference out unobserved
characteristics as in the firm size and price regressions above, we can still use multiple bilateral
observations for each importer to similar effect.

A. Methodology
We begin by constructing a test of the CES null hypothesis. The subutility function for
product k (k = 6 digit HS good), for importer i, facing j = 1…J exporting sources for k is given
by

uik

=

(∑

J

k
λ k (qijk )θ
j =1 j

)

1/ θ k

where θ k = (σ k − 1) / σ k , and

λ kj is a demand shifter, which could

represent quality differences, or (unobserved) differences in the number of distinct varieties
available from each exporter. As is well known, we can write the import demands as

( 28)

Ek
qijk = ik
Πi

 pijk
 k
 λj







−σ k

Where Eik denotes expenditures, and Π ik is the CES price index. Under the CES null, the price

22

elasticity of demand is constant across all markets, so we can write the delivered price in market
i as a function of the factory gate price at j, multiplied by ad-valorem trade costs, pijk = p kj tijk .
When estimating this for k = HS 6 digit level of aggregation, everything in ( 28) is
unobservable except the nominal value of bilateral trade and trade costs. To isolate these terms,
we multiply both sides of ( 28) by exporter prices, and sum over all importers c ≠ i to get j’s
exports to rest of the world, r.

( ) ( )

( pq ) krj = ∑ c ≠i ( pq )cjk = λ kj

σk

p kj

1−σ k

Eck k
∑ c≠i Π k tcj
c

( )

−σ k

Express i’s imports from j as a share of rest of world imports from j,
( 29)

ln sijk = ln

( pq)ijk
( pq) krj

= ln

Eik
Eck k
k
k
ln
t
ln
−
σ
−
∑ c≠i Π k tcj
ij
Π ik
c

( )

−σ k

Writing this in share terms eliminates unobserved price and quality (variety) shifters specific to
j.12 We assume trade costs take the form ln tijk = ln(1 + τ ik ) + δ k ln d ij , where τ ik is an MFN tariff
facing all exporters in importer i, product k, dij is the distance between countries, and δ k is the
elasticity of trade costs with respect to distance.
To simplify this expression, we employ importer i – product k fixed effects α ik
(implemented by mean differencing) which eliminates the importer expenditure share, the CES
price index, and MFN tariff rates. This leaves variation in bilateral distance to trace out the
variation in trade costs. The final term is exporter specific; we assume it to be orthogonal to the
distance between bilateral pair ij and include it in the error.13

12

We now have

Alternatively, we could also write ( 29) by expressing i’s imports relative to any particular importer, or set of
importers, rather than the world.
13
Since we cannot measure the price indices or the elasticity of substitution it is difficult to include this last term
explicitly. We cannot verify that trade costs between i and j are orthogonal to the real expenditure weighted sum of
trade costs between j and all other countries. However, simple proxies for this term such as a sum over nominal

23

( 30)

ln sijk = α ik − σ k δ k ln dij + eijk
In the CES model, we can interpret the coefficient on distance as β k = −σ k δ k , which is

invariant to the importer. We will test whether the constant elasticity is rejected by the data in
favor of a form consistent with the generalized ideal variety model, by interacting distance with
importer GDP and GDP per worker.
( 31)

ln sijk = α ik − β1k ln dij + β 2k ln dij ln Yi + β3k ln dij ln

Yi
+ eijk
Li

Before proceeding to the results, a few notes regarding interpretation are in order.
Ideally, we would estimate ( 31) separately for each exporter and commodity in order to examine
how the own-price elasticity of demand varies across markets for the same product. However, in
order to identify the importer-commodity fixed effects and generate sufficient data variation it is
necessary to pool over multiple exporters. Pooling in this way is equivalent to restricting the
own-price elasticity to be the same across all exporter and products over which we pool, i.e.
imports of Japanese TVs respond to a change in the price of Japanese TVs in the same way that
imports of Korean TVs respond to a change in the price of Korean TVs. In the estimates that
follow, we employ two pooling strategies. For simplicity, we first pool over all exporters and 6
digit products. Then, we pool over all exporters and 6 digit products within a particular 2 digit
aggregate. In both cases, the importer fixed effects are still calculated with respect to the 6 digit
product.
Second, the use of bilaterally varying trade costs exactly identifies price variation under
the CES null, but imperfectly identifies price variation in the variable elasticity case. With
variable elasticity preferences a rise in trade costs will be partially offset by a fall in the factory
GDP weighted distances are very weakly correlated with distances and tariffs between i and j. We show below that
our results are robust to an alternative specification in which this omitted term does not appear.

24

gate price so that only a part of the trade cost is passed through to the final price. That is, the
true destination price includes a pricing-to-market adjustment, which is an omitted variable in
our specification that is negatively correlated with trade costs. This omission will create a bias in
the price elasticity toward zero. For a similar reason, if the interaction terms are significant,
PTM will cause a bias in these estimates toward zero. This is problematic if we want to
precisely identify the own-price elasticity of demand. It is less concerning if our primary interest
lies in testing the CES null since we will be biased toward not finding a significant interaction
between tariffs and importer characteristics.

B. Results
We begin estimating equation ( 31) by pooling over all exporters and products. The
resulting estimate is14
ln sijk = α ik − .668ln dij − .057 ln dij ln Yi + .101ln dij ln
(.027 )

(.001)

(.003)

Yi
+ eijk
Li

We can immediately reject the hypothesis that the response of imports to price changes (via trade
costs) is the same in all markets, as both interaction terms are significant, with signs matching
the theory. In large markets the effect of trade costs on trade are more pronounced, that is,
demand becomes more elastic. In higher income markets, the effect of trade costs on trade are
less pronounced, that is, demand becomes less elastic.
Of course, not all products are likely to fit the model equally well, and the relevant
pooling restrictions are unlikely to be met. Accordingly, we estimate equation ( 31) separately
for each 2 digit HS product. Full details for each HS2 product are reported in Table 3, along

14

All coefficients are significant at 1% level. Number of observations is 1,183,696 and R2=.17.

25

with counts of significant coefficients. Figure 3 shows the distribution of coefficients across the
HS2 products, weighted by their value in trade.
In HS2 categories representing 84 percent of trade by value we estimate significantly
negative coefficients on the ln dij ln Yij interaction. Figure 3 shows that estimates of this
interaction term lie primarily between 0 and -0.2. In HS2 categories representing 76 percent of
trade we estimate significantly positive coefficients on the ln dij ln Yij / Lij interaction, with most
of these coefficients lying between 0 and 0.2. It is clear from these figures that, while the effect
differs significantly across industries, the basic message of the interaction from the pooled
regression comes through. The response of trade to trade costs (the price elasticity of demand) is
greater in large markets and smaller in rich markets.
The model performs well on sign and significance, but does it imply significant
differences in the price elasticity of demand across markets? A problem with interpreting these
interaction terms is that we have a product of the price elasticity and an elasticity of trade costs
with respect to distance.
( 32)

βˆ1k ln d + βˆ2k ln d ln Y + βˆ3k ln d ln (Y / L ) = δ k (σ k + σ yk ln Y + σ yk / l ln (Y / L ))

To isolate the price elasticity, we can express the combined distance and interaction terms as a
ratio for countries of different size and income. For countries 1 and 2, we have
( 33)

k
k
k
δ k (σ + σ y ln Y1 + σ y / l ln (Y / L )1 )
δ k (σ k + σ yk ln Y2 + σ yk / l ln (Y / L )2 )

Note that the elasticity of trade costs with respect to distance falls out, leaving only the elasticity
of substitution and any interaction effects with importer Y and Y/L.
For each HS 2 product we take the regression point estimates, and combine them with
importer data on Y and Y/L in order to calculate the combined interaction effects for each

26

country in ( 32). We then rank them from most to least elastic, and express the elasticity ratio in
( 33) using the 90th percentile / 10th percentile country. This gives, for each HS 2 product, a
measure of the range of elasticity over importers in the sample. For example, a value of two
means that the price elasticity of demand for the 90th percentile country is twice that of the price
elasticity for the 10th percentile country. In Figure 4 we plot a distribution of this statistic over
all HS 2 products. Most of the distribution lies between 1.2 and 2.5.

C. Robustness: tariffs as an alternative trade cost measure
Ideally we would have data on bilaterally varying ad-valorem trade costs, rather than
using a distance proxy for them. Our TRAINS also includes tariff rates for each trade
observation, but has insufficient variation across exporters for a given importer-product for us to
use this variable in estimating ( 31). There is some variation in the tariff schedule across export
sources for a given importer and six digit HS, but most of the high tariff observations correspond
to zero trade values. Of the pairs where trade is observed, in about 90 percent of the cases
TARijk = median(TARik ) . This means that tariffs in the data can reasonably be treated as identical

across exporters as we model above, in which case employing importer-product (ik) fixed effects
eliminates tariffs as a useful source of variation for trade costs
We experimented with an alternative specification that allowed us to exploit crossimporter variation in tariffs. Starting from ( 28), we multiply both sides by exporter prices to get
(observable) nominal values for bilateral trade. We include exporter j – commodity k fixed
effects, α kj , to eliminate all exporter-specific effects, including the last term in ( 29) which we
had omitted as unmeasurable in our primary specification. Finally, we proxy for real
expenditures in equation ( 29) using importer GDP and GDP per capita so that the estimating

27

equation becomes
ln pqijk = α kj + γ 1 ln Yi + γ 1 ln

( 34)

(

)

Yi
+ β 4k ln dij
Li

(

)

(

)

+ β1k ln 1 + τ ik + β 2k ln 1 + τ ik ln Yi + β 3k ln 1 + τ ik ln

Yi
+ eijk
Li

Here, the elasticity is identified using cross-importer variation in tariffs within a particular good.
The advantage of this specification is that one can read the coefficients on tariffs and its
interactions directly in terms of a price elasticity σ k , rather than as the product of two elasticities

σ k δ k . The disadvantage is that we omit the importer price index, which could plausibly affect
our estimated interaction terms.15
We estimate ( 34) by pooling over all exporters and HS6 products within an HS2
aggregate. Table 3 reports full results, and Figure 5 reports the distribution over the HS2
products of coefficients on the interaction terms. The same basic message from Figure 3 goes
through. For 75 percent of trade by value, the signs match the predictions of the generalized
ideal variety model. Larger countries exhibit a higher price elasticity of demand. Conditioning
on size, richer countries exhibit a lower price elasticity of demand.
Unlike the specification employing distance as a measure of trade costs, here we can
directly interpret the interaction coefficients in terms of their impact on the absolute price
elasticity. A coefficient of -0.5 on the GDP x tariff term implies that doubling GDP yields
demand that is 0.5 percentage points more elastic. Given the range of GDP variation in the
world, this represents substantial variation in the price elasticity across countries.

D. Robustness: Product Composition.
15

To explain, large countries are likely to have larger domestic industries. If we believe the CES null, this translates
into a lower price index due to the value of greater variety (see Feenstra 1994).

28

Even for the estimates where we provide separate estimates for each HS2 category there
is likely to be heterogeneity across HS6 products in the price elasticity of demand. We might
falsely reject the CES null if there is a systematic relationship between these elasticities and
importer characteristics. For example, suppose the price elasticity of demand is constant across
markets, but rich countries are more likely to purchase low elasticity HS6 products while poor
countries purchase high elasticity HS6 products within the same HS2. This compositional effect
would show up in our regression as a negative coefficient on the trade cost * Y/L interaction.
To address this, we experimented with allowing a different coefficient on the trade cost
variable for each HS6 product while still including the interaction terms with importer Y and
Y/L (common for all HS6 within an HS2). If the pure composition story is correct, we should
find significant differences across HS6’s within an HS2, and no significant interaction effect.
We did not. The coefficients on the interaction terms were unaltered by this change.
Finally, one might argue that the ideal variety model is appropriate for consumer goods
but not industrial inputs. We used Yeats (1998) classification to separate HS6 products into two
groups: intermediate parts and components and all other goods. We then re-estimated equation
( 31) separately for each group, and found no significant differences between them. We do not
view this result as necessarily problematic for the model. It is possible that differentiated
consumer goods are formed from undifferentiated inputs with the differentiation coming entirely
from assembly. However, we think a more likely model is that the inputs themselves are critical
to differentiating ideal consumer varieties: wines becomes suited to particular consumer tastes in
part because they use specialized grapes; laptop computers are customized by assembling
differentiated components (screen, cpu, video chips) particularly desired by consumers.

29

VI. Conclusion

We derive a generalized version of the Lancaster (1979) ideal variety model. In this
model, entry leads to a “crowding” of variety space, so that larger markets exhibit a higher ownprice elasticity of demand for differentiated goods, lower prices, and a larger average firm size.
Working against this crowding is an income effect: as consumers grow rich and quantities
consumed rise, their strength of preference for their ideal variety also rises. This gives firms
greater pricing power over consumers. Conditioning on market size, richer markets see a lower
own-price elasticity, higher prices, and fewer firms.
We provide new evidence supporting the model’s predictions. Conditioning on country
and industry and exploiting time series variation, we find that average firm size is rising for
countries with rising GDP, and falling for countries with rising GDP per capita. Conditioning
on an exporter and product and exploiting time series variation in importer characteristics, we
find that prices of traded goods fall with importer GDP growth and rise with importer GDP per
capita. Finally, conditioning on an exporter and product and exploiting cross-importer variation
in bilateral trade shares, we find that the own-price elasticity of demand is higher in large
markets, and lower in rich markets.
We see three implications of these findings. First, the theoretical and empirical literature
on product differentiation in trade has relied almost exclusively on constant-elasticity-ofsubstitution utility functions. While these models are highly tractable, they yield counter-factual
implications on central empirical questions.
Second, as has been pointed out by Romer (1994) and Feenstra (1994) and the literature
they have inspired, CES utility models imply substantial welfare gains from trade in new
varieties. Evaluating the welfare implication of new varieties in the generalized ideal variety

30

model is beyond the scope of the current paper. However, our results suggest two important
qualifications for existing welfare studies. First, variety space does appear to fill up with entry,
suggesting that the welfare gains from new variety may be substantially lower in large countries
than in small. Second, the news is not all bad in the sense that income effects partially trump the
crowding effect for some goods. Rich consumers want, and are willing to pay for, varieties
closely matched to their ideal preferences. GDP growth that occurs primarily through growth in
output per worker will still lead to substantial variety gains for some goods, albeit at the cost of
lowered economies of scale and higher prices.
Finally, we know that prices are systematically higher in rich than in poor countries, a
fact that has typically been ascribed to cross-country differences in the prices of non-traded
goods as in Balassa (1964) and Samuelson (1964). Our results show that the prices of traded
goods are also systematically higher in rich countries because the price elasticity of demand is
lower. Whether these traded goods price differences are a significant contributor to national price
levels as a whole, and constitute a challenge to the centrality of non-traded goods in explaining
them, we leave for subsequent work.

References
Acemoglu, D and Ventura, J “The World Income Distribution,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
117 (May 2002), 659-694.
Balassa, B. “The Purchasing Power Parity Doctrine: A Reappraisal,” Journal of Political
Economy, 72: 584–596
Barron, J., Taylor, B., and Umbeck, J. “Number of Sellers, Average Prices, and Price
Dispersion,” International Journal of Industrial Organization 2005 forthcoming.
Brander, J and Krugman, P. “A ‘Reciprocal Dumping’ Model of International Trade”, Journal of
International Economics, 15 (1982), pp. 313-321

31

Broda, C. and Weinstein, D. “Globalization and the Gains from Variety” NBER WP 10314,
2004.
Dixit, A. and Stiglitz, J. E. “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product Diversity.”
American Economic Review, June 1977, 67(3), 297-308.
Dornbusch R., Fischer S., and Samuelson P. A. “Comparative Advantage, Trade, and Payments
in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods.” American Economic Review, December
1977, 67 (5), 823-39.
Eaton J. and & Kortum S. “Technology, Geography, and Trade.” Econometrica, September
2002, 70(5), 1741-79.
Feenstra, R. C. “Symmetric Pass-Trough of Tariffs and Exchange Rates Under Imperfect
Competition: An Empirical Test.” Journal of International Economics, 1989, 16, 227-42.
Feenstra, R.C. “New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International Prices,” American
Economic Review 84, March 1994, 157-177.
Goldberg, P. and Knetter, M. “Goods Prices and Exchange Rates: What Have We Learned?”
Journal of Economic Literature, September 1997, 35(3), 1243-72.
Head, K. and Ries, J. “Increasing Returns versus National Product Differentiation as an
Explanation for the Pattern of U.S.-Canada Trade.” American Economic Review, September
2001, 91 (4), 858-76.
Hallak, JC “Product Quality, Linder, and the Direction of Trade” NBER WP 10877, 2004.
Helpman, E. and Krugman, P. R. Market Structure and Foreign Trade, Cambridge MA: MIT
Press, 1985.
Hummels, D. and Klenow, P. J. “The Variety and Quality of a Nation’s Trade.” NBER WP 8712
2002.
Hummels, D. and Klenow, P. J. “The Variety and Quality of a Nation’s Exports.” American
Economic Review, forthcoming, 2005.
Hummels, D. and Skiba, A. “Shipping the Good Apples Out? An Empirical Confirmation of the
Alchian-Allen Conjecture.” Journal of Political Economy, 2004.
Klenow, P. and Rodriguez-Clare, A. “Quantifying Variety Gains from Trade Liberalization”
mimeo. University of Chicago, 1997.
Knetter, M. M. “International Comparison of Pricing-to Market Behavior.” American Economic
Review, June 1993, 83(3), 473-89.

32

Krugman, P. R. “Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade.” Journal of
International Economics, November 1979, 9, 469-80.
______. ”Increasing Returns, Monopolistic Competition, and International Trade.”
American Economic Review, December 1980, 70, 950-9.
Lancaster, K. Variety, Equity, and Efficiency. New York: Columbia University Press, 1979.
______. “Intra-Industry Trade under Perfect Monopolistic Competition.” Journal of
International Economics, 1980, 11, 858-64.
______. “Protection and Product Differentiation.” In H. Kierzkowski (ed.), Monopolistic
Competition and International Trade. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1984.
Perloff, J.M. and Salop, S.C. “Equilibrium with Product Differentiation” Review of Economic
Studies, Vol. 52, No. 1 (Jan., 1985), pp. 107-120
Romer, P. M. “New Goods, Old Theory, and the Welfare Costs of Trade Restrictions.” Journal
of Development Economics, February 1994, 43(1), pp. 5-38.
Samuelson, P. “Theoretical notes on trade problems.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 46:
145–154.
Schott, Peter K., “Across-Product versus Within-Product Specialization in International Trade,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 2003.
Syverson, C. “Market Structure and Productivity: A Concrete Example”, Journal of Political
Economy, Vol 112, Num 6, Dec 2004, pp.1181-1222.
Venables, A. J. “Integration and the Export Behaviour of Firms: Trade Costs, Trade Volumes
and Welfare.” Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 1994, 130 (1), 118-32.
Yeats, Alexander. “Just How Big is Global Production Sharing” World Bank Policy Research
Working Paper 1871 (1998).

33

Table 1. Predictions across Models.
Models
Elasticity of

Number of Varieties

Output per Variety

Prices

Price Elasticity of
Demand
1

Controlling for market size.

With Respect to
Krugman (1980)

Ideal Variety,
Lancaster (1979)

Generalized Ideal
Variety

Market Size

1

0<X<1

0<X<1

Income per
worker1

0

0

0<X<1

Market Size

0

0<X<1

0<X<1

Income per
worker1

0

0

-1 < X < 0

Market Size

0

X<0

X<0

Income per
worker1

0

0

X>0

Market Size

0

0<X<1

0<X<1

Income per
worker1

0

0

-1< X < 0

Table 2: The Number and Size of Firms
Average Establishment Size
Number of Establishments
GDP per capita

1.279
(0.037)

0.774
(0.040)

0.864
(0.040)

GDP

Industry Total Employment

-1.631
(0.050)

Gross Output

-1.264
(0.036)

0.246
(0.019)
0.669
(0.009)

Industry Total Gross Output

-0.134
(0.049)

-0.703
(0.039)

0.040
(0.015)

Value Added
-0.256
(0.052)

-0.804
(0.040)

0.110
(0.016)

0.300
(0.009)
0.449
(0.008)

Industry Total Value Added

Constant

Employment

0.531
(0.008)
0.367
(0.008)

0.605
(0.008)

-0.044
(0.003)

-0.037
(0.003)

-0.037
(0.003)

0.038
(0.003)

0.039
(0.002)

0.023
(0.003)

0.038
(0.003)

0.025
(0.003)

0.038
(0.003)

Observations

21983

21014

21043

21983

21983

21014

21014

21043

21043

R2

0.229

0.163

0.131

0.053

0.090

0.000

0.166

0.002

0.213

Notes:
1. Panel regression of equations 25 and 26 includes country-ISIC3 industry fixed effects
2. All variables are in logs, standard errors are in parentheses.
3. Regression R2 are net of fixed effects

Table 3: Cross-Importer Variation in Prices and Price Elasticity

HS2

Share
of
Trade

ABBREVIATION

Significant Coefficients with Signs
matching Model Predictions

Significant Coefficients with Signs
Different from Model Predictions

LIVE ANIMALS

2

MEAT AND EDIBLE MEAT OFFAL

Y * Dist Y/L * Dist Y* tar Y/L * tar

Y/L

Simple Count

38

44

55

54

60

43

Weighted by Share of
Trade

82%

85%

84%

76%

76%

74%

Simple Count

11

6

9

10

8

15

Weighted by Share of
Trade

2%

2%

5%

4%

7%

11%

-0.28

0.42

-0.06

0.10

-0.84

0.46

-0.47

0.54

-0.06

0.10

-0.60

1.00

0.05
-.18***
-0.02
-.06***
-0.03
0
-.19***
-.13***
0.02
-.12***
-0.03
-.1***
0.04
-.09*
-.03*
-0.01
-.09***
-.1***
-.04**
-.04***
-0.02
-.03**
-.03*
0.04
-.1***
-0.02

-0.18
.59***
-.33***
.16***
0.1
-.25***
.13**
.15***
-.14***
.27***
-0.09
0.06
.12*
0.08
-0.04
-0.1
0.08
.11*
.08*
-.06*
.07*
-.11**
.19***
0.07
.08**
0.01

-0.14
.45*
-1.01***
.77***
-1.38
-1.23***
-.96***
0.05
-.54***
-0.72
-0.08
-0.39
0.29
2.25
-1.07***
-.54*
-.7***
-.59**
-.37*
-.75***
-0.1
-0.07
0
-.54**
-1.13***
-0.29

-1.68
1.97**
0.44
0.22
6.92***
3.24***
1.34**
-1.05**
-1.46***
-0.87
1.43
1.9***
2.75***
-2.37
-1.4**
-0.33
0
3.44***
1.44***
1.07**
0.46
.82**
-0.39
0.79
-0.02
10.28

3

FISH, CRUSTACEANS & AQUATIC INVERTEBRATES

4

DAIRY PRODS; BIRDS EGGS; HONEY; ED ANIMAL PR NESOI

5

PRODUCTS OF ANIMAL ORIGIN, NESOI

6

LIVE TREES, PLANTS, BULBS ETC.; CUT FLOWERS ETC.

7

EDIBLE VEGETABLES & CERTAIN ROOTS & TUBERS

8

EDIBLE FRUIT & NUTS; CITRUS FRUIT OR MELON PEEL

9

COFFEE, TEA, MATE & SPICES

10 CEREALS
11 MILLING PRODUCTS; MALT; STARCH; INULIN; WHT GLUTEN
12 OIL SEEDS ETC.; MISC GRAIN, SEED, FRUIT, PLANT ETC
13 LAC; GUMS, RESINS & OTHER VEGETABLE SAP & EXTRACT
14 VEGETABLE PLAITING MATERIALS & PRODUCTS NESOI
15 ANIMAL OR VEGETABLE FATS, OILS ETC. & WAXES
16 EDIBLE PREPARATIONS OF MEAT, FISH, CRUSTACEANS ETC
17 SUGARS AND SUGAR CONFECTIONARY
18 COCOA AND COCOA PREPARATIONS
19 PREP CEREAL, FLOUR, STARCH OR MILK; BAKERS WARES
20 PREP VEGETABLES, FRUIT, NUTS OR OTHER PLANT PARTS
21 MISCELLANEOUS EDIBLE PREPARATIONS
22 BEVERAGES, SPIRITS AND VINEGAR
23 FOOD INDUSTRY RESIDUES & WASTE; PREP ANIMAL FEED
24 TOBACCO AND MANUFACTURED TOBACCO SUBSTITUTES
25 SALT; SULFUR; EARTH & STONE; LIME & CEMENT PLASTER
26 ORES, SLAG AND ASH

Distance Elasticity Tariff Elasticity
Regressions
Regressions
Eqn (31)
Eqn (34)

Y

Simple Mean
Mean of Significant Coefficients over
HS 2
Weighted by Share of
Trade
1

Price
Regressions
Eqn (27)

0.12 -0.12 0.52
0.42 .87*** -.62***
1.07 -0.11 .24*
0.20 .23*** -.21***
0.09 0.12 -0.13
0.10 0.08 0.17
0.30 .24** -0.15
0.70 0.15
0.2
0.45 -0.02 0.11
0.48 .7** -0.46
0.04 0.35
-0.3
0.44 0.12 0.13
0.05 .54** -0.4
0.01
0.8
-0.65
0.31 -0.07 .24*
0.31
.2*
-0.05
0.15
0
0.12
0.18 .21** -0.14
0.14 0.12 0.07
0.33 -0.1 .24***
0.23 0.12 -0.02
0.21 -.71*** .76***
0.38 0.36 -0.29
0.14 .66* -0.56
0.38 0.04 -0.09
0.67 -1.06* 0.45

HS2

ABBREVIATION

27 MINERAL FUEL, OIL ETC.; BITUMIN SUBST; MINERAL WAX
28 INORG CHEM; PREC & RARE-EARTH MET & RADIOACT COMPD
29 ORGANIC CHEMICALS
30 PHARMACEUTICAL PRODUCTS
31 FERTILIZERS
32 TANNING & DYE EXT ETC; DYE, PAINT, PUTTY ETC; INKS
33 ESSENTIAL OILS ETC; PERFUMERY, COSMETIC ETC PREPS
34 SOAP ETC; WAXES, POLISH ETC; CANDLES; DENTAL PREPS
35 ALBUMINOIDAL SUBST; MODIFIED STARCH; GLUE; ENZYMES
36 EXPLOSIVES; PYROTECHNICS; MATCHES; PYRO ALLOYS ETC
37 PHOTOGRAPHIC OR CINEMATOGRAPHIC GOODS
38 MISCELLANEOUS CHEMICAL PRODUCTS
39 PLASTICS AND ARTICLES THEREOF
40 RUBBER AND ARTICLES THEREOF
41 RAW HIDES AND SKINS (NO FURSKINS) AND LEATHER
42 LEATHER ART; SADDLERY ETC; HANDBAGS ETC; GUT ART
43 FURSKINS AND ARTIFICIAL FUR; MANUFACTURES THEREOF
44 WOOD AND ARTICLES OF WOOD; WOOD CHARCOAL
45 CORK AND ARTICLES OF CORK
46 MFR OF STRAW, ESPARTO ETC.; BASKETWARE & WICKERWRK
47 WOOD PULP ETC; RECOVD (WASTE & SCRAP) PPR & PPRBD
48 PAPER & PAPERBOARD & ARTICLES (INC PAPR PULP ARTL)
49 PRINTED BOOKS, NEWSPAPERS ETC; MANUSCRIPTS ETC
50 SILK, INCLUDING YARNS AND WOVEN FABRIC THEREOF
51 WOOL & ANIMAL HAIR, INCLUDING YARN & WOVEN FABRIC
52 COTTON, INCLUDING YARN AND WOVEN FABRIC THEREOF
53 VEG TEXT FIB NESOI; VEG FIB & PAPER YNS & WOV FAB
54 MANMADE FILAMENTS, INCLUDING YARNS & WOVEN FABRICS
55 MANMADE STAPLE FIBERS, INCL YARNS & WOVEN FABRICS
56 WADDING, FELT ETC; SP YARN; TWINE, ROPES ETC.
57 CARPETS AND OTHER TEXTILE FLOOR COVERINGS
58 SPEC WOV FABRICS; TUFTED FAB; LACE; TAPESTRIES ETC
59 IMPREGNATED ETC TEXT FABRICS; TEX ART FOR INDUSTRY
60 KNITTED OR CROCHETED FABRICS
61 APPAREL ARTICLES AND ACCESSORIES, KNIT OR CROCHET
62 APPAREL ARTICLES AND ACCESSORIES, NOT KNIT ETC.
63 TEXTILE ART NESOI; NEEDLECRAFT SETS; WORN TEXT ART
64 FOOTWEAR, GAITERS ETC. AND PARTS THEREOF
65 HEADGEAR AND PARTS THEREOF
66 UMBRELLAS, WALKING-STICKS, RIDING-CROPS ETC, PARTS

Share
of
Trade

8.03
0.73
2.51
1.46
0.26
0.51
0.41
0.22
0.14
0.04
0.31
0.81
2.55
1.02
0.32
0.65
0.05
1.61
0.01
0.03
0.42
1.32
0.43
0.04
0.18
0.60
0.04
0.43
0.35
0.12
0.15
0.10
0.15
0.18
2.00
2.48
0.40
1.08
0.08
0.04

Price
Regressions
Eqn (27)
Y

Y/L

-.53** .52**
0.17 -.21*
-.21*** .27***
-.49*** .76***
-0.15
.5*
-0.11 0.05
0.13 -0.03
0.11 -0.04
.56*** -.52**
1.27*** -1.18***
-.42*** .61***
-.22** 0.06
-.23*** .27***
-.39*** .35***
-0.07 0.35
-.33*** .51***
-0.18 0.62
-0.21 .37**
1.42 -1.01
-0.11 -0.46
-1.08** 0.71
-.24*** .3***
-1.04*** 1.04***
0.22 0.05
-0.23 0.27
-0.11 .3***
-.67** .97***
-.51*** .71***
-.15** .32***
-0.11 0.19
-1.1*** .98***
-0.16
0.2
-0.14 .36***
0.11 0.02
-.87*** 1.09***
-.38*** .7***
-0.05 .21**
-1.45*** 1.45***
0.39
0
-0.04 0.02

Distance Elasticity Tariff Elasticity
Regressions
Regressions
Eqn (31)
Eqn (34)
Y * Dist Y/L * Dist Y* tar Y/L * tar
-.1***
-.09***
-.04***
0
-.11***
-.04***
0
-.07***
-.03**
-0.03
0
-.04***
-.06***
-.07***
-.06***
0
-0.04
-.08***
-0.04
-.09**
.06*
-.07***
0.01
0.02
-0.03
-.08***
-0.05
-.06***
-.06***
-.11***
0
.03*
-.1***
-.09***
-.07***
-.09***
-.04***
-.07***
.09***
0

0.02
.07***
.19***
.19***
0.03
.16***
.12***
.17***
.17***
0.14
.19***
.13***
.1***
.12***
0.02
.17***
-0.18
-.12***
.54***
0.17
.15*
.08***
.1***
.26**
-.12**
.06***
-.19*
.04*
.11***
.13***
0.05
.07*
.15***
.16***
.08***
.16***
-0.01
.23***
-0.1
.31***

0.03 4.5***
-.84*** -0.11
.48*** .69***
-0.02 2.23***
-0.55 -6.55***
-0.18 1.66***
.22** -0.14
0
2.25***
-0.24 3.19***
-1.25** -0.88
0.26 -2.08***
-1.04*** .87**
-.61*** .33*
-.22*** 2.19***
-0.2
-0.68
-1.68*** .79**
1.66*** 2.57*
-1.65*** -1.05**
1.91*** 3.88**
-2.3*** 2.01
0.46 -12.42***
-.61*** .78***
-.66*** 0.15
-0.25
0.49
-1.26*** 0.43
-1.84*** .47*
-1.37*** -1.09
-1.43*** 1.81***
-1.37*** .9***
-.99*** 0.44
-.81*** 0.14
-1.14*** 1.65***
-.45*** .69*
-1.64*** 2.36***
-1.6*** 2.14***
-1.94*** .55**
-1.86*** 0.43
-1.06*** 2.99***
-1.72*** 0.46
-1.46*** 0.15

HS2

ABBREVIATION

67 PREP FEATHERS, DOWN ETC; ARTIF FLOWERS; H HAIR ART
68 ART OF STONE, PLASTER, CEMENT, ASBESTOS, MICA ETC.
69 CERAMIC PRODUCTS
70 GLASS AND GLASSWARE
71 NAT ETC PEARLS, PREC ETC STONES, PR MET ETC; COIN
72 IRON AND STEEL
73 ARTICLES OF IRON OR STEEL
74 COPPER AND ARTICLES THEREOF
75 NICKEL AND ARTICLES THEREOF
76 ALUMINUM AND ARTICLES THEREOF
78 LEAD AND ARTICLES THEREOF
79 ZINC AND ARTICLES THEREOF
80 TIN AND ARTICLES THEREOF
81 BASE METALS NESOI; CERMETS; ARTICLES THEREOF
82 TOOLS, CUTLERY ETC. OF BASE METAL & PARTS THEREOF
83 MISCELLANEOUS ARTICLES OF BASE METAL
84 NUCLEAR REACTORS, BOILERS, MACHINERY ETC.; PARTS
85 ELECTRIC MACHINERY ETC; SOUND EQUIP; TV EQUIP; PTS
86 RAILWAY OR TRAMWAY STOCK ETC; TRAFFIC SIGNAL EQUIP
87 VEHICLES, EXCEPT RAILWAY OR TRAMWAY, AND PARTS ETC
88 AIRCRAFT, SPACECRAFT, AND PARTS THEREOF
89 SHIPS, BOATS AND FLOATING STRUCTURES
90 OPTIC, PHOTO ETC, MEDIC OR SURGICAL INSTRMENTS ETC
91 CLOCKS AND WATCHES AND PARTS THEREOF
92 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS; PARTS AND ACCESSORIES THEREOF
93 ARMS AND AMMUNITION; PARTS AND ACCESSORIES THEREOF
94 FURNITURE; BEDDING ETC; LAMPS NESOI ETC; PREFAB BD
95 TOYS, GAMES & SPORT EQUIPMENT; PARTS & ACCESSORIES
96 MISCELLANEOUS MANUFACTURED ARTICLES
97 WORKS OF ART, COLLECTORS' PIECES AND ANTIQUES

Share
of
Trade

0.08
0.27
0.32
0.46
2.73
1.60
1.45
0.63
0.15
1.08
0.04
0.10
0.04
0.14
0.45
0.38
16.27
14.99
0.21
8.82
1.93
0.35
3.52
0.26
0.10
0.06
1.56
1.33
0.27
0.22

Price
Regressions
Eqn (27)
Y

Y/L

-0.03
0.7
-.36*** .33***
-.35*** .4***
0.06 -0.05
-.62** .58*
-0.07
0
-.28*** .32***
-.21* 0.12
-.78** 1.13***
-.37*** .36***
0.11 0.22
-.88*** .96***
-.78** 1.06***
-1.37*** 1.21***
-.36*** .5***
-.15* 0.08
-.51*** .58***
-.3*** .37***
-0.4
0.25
-.83*** .98***
-1.26*** 1.41***
-0.18 0.26
-.24*** .31***
0.43 -0.26
-0.44 .69**
0.37 -0.46
0
.13**
-.16* .28***
-0.07 .18**
2.57*** -2.25***

Distance Elasticity Tariff Elasticity
Regressions
Regressions
Eqn (31)
Eqn (34)
Y * Dist Y/L * Dist Y* tar Y/L * tar
.18***
-.04***
-.05***
-.09***
.08***
-.18***
-.09***
-.13***
0.07
-.14***
-.16***
-.18***
.15**
0.02
-0.01
-.04***
-.05***
-.02***
-.15***
-.11***
-0.04
-0.01
-.01*
.05***
.11***
-0.02
-.03***
.03***
-0.01
0.05

.32***
-0.01
.1***
.11***
.11**
0
.07***
.12***
0.13
0.01
0.03
.16*
-0.21
-0.06
.09***
.05**
.12***
.06***
0.13
.13***
0.07
-0.03
.12***
-.11***
0.06
-.36***
0.02
.15***
.21***
-0.03

-2.61***
-.57***
-1.19***
-.43***
-1.38***
-1.09***
-.66***
0.08
1.84***
-.93***
1.13
-0.36
0.84
0.11
-.23***
-.47***
-.27***
-.08**
-2.02***
-.52***
-1.56**
-.91***
.14**
-0.2
-2.15***
-.43**
-1.6***
-1.41***
-.61***
-.9**

Notes:
1. Equations (27), (31), and (34) separately estimated for each HS 2 category.
2. For equation (27) price regressions, table reports coefficients on log importer GDP (Y)
and log importer GDP per capita (Y/L). For equation (31) distance elasticity regressions,
table reports coefficient on interaction between logs of distance and logs of importer Y
and Y/L. For equation (34) tariff elasticity regressions table reports coefficient on
interaction between log (1 + tariff) and logs of importer Y and Y/L.

0.95
1.61***
.59*
1.58***
-5.13***
0.57
1.73***
-.97*
-5.35***
-1.85***
1.99
-1.67
-1.06
-0.6
1.59***
2.68***
2***
.96***
-2.25**
1.13***
-6.21***
0.66
-0.02
-1.23***
2.63***
-0.69
-0.16
.52*
-0.26
-5.62***

Figure 1. Lancaster and generalized compensation functions.

Opportunity cost of
the ideal variety ω
in terms of the nonideal variety, ω

Generalized compensation functions

γ 2 > γ1

γ1 > 0
h ( vω ,ω )

Lancaster compensation function
γ0 = 0

1

1

Individual consumption of
variety ω , qω

Figure 2. The Elasticity of Price with Respect to ...
Distribution of HS 2 point estimates, weighted by value

GDP

GDP Per Capita
.34

.34
.29

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

Fraction

Fraction

.23

.1

.1

.05

.05

.01

.01
-2

-1

0

1

2

Notes:
1. From estimation of equation (27) on import prices from Eurostats trade database 1990-2003.
2. Full results in appendix table 2.

Figure 3. Importer Characteristics Interacted with Distance
Distribution of HS 2 point estimates, weighted by value

GDP

GDP Per Capita

-.2

-.1

0

.1

.2

.2

.1

.1

.05

.05

.01

.01
-.4

-.2

0

Notes:
1. From estimation of equation (31) on TRAINS bilateral trade data 1999.
2. Full results in appendix table 2.

.2

.4

.6

Fraction

.2

.38

Fraction

.38

Figure 4. Implied Range of Elasticity Over Importers
Varying both Y and Y/L
.22

.1

.05
.01
1

2

3

4

4.5

Fraction

.15

Figure 5. Importer Characteristics Interacted with Tariff
Distribution of HS 2 point estimates, weighted by value

GDP

GDP Per Capita
.42

.42

.22

.15

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

.1

.1

.05

.05

.01

.01
-15

-10

-5

Notes:
1. From estimation of equation (34) on TRAINS bilateral trade data 1999.
2. Full results in appendix table 2.

0

5

10

Fraction

Fraction

.35

Appendix 1. Derivation of the aggregate demand and price elasticity of demand for
the differentiated varieties in the symmetric equilibrium.

The derivation here is a slight modification of the corresponding derivations
provided by Helpman and Krugman (1985, Chapter 6).
First we would like to find the aggregate demand function for variety ω̂ given

that its closest competitor to the left is variety ω
 , and its closest variety to the right is ω .

The corresponding prices are denoted as pω , pωˆ and pω . Next let us choose the varieties


ω , ω ∈ d * (ω , ω ) such that
(A1)

(
)
,
(1 + q v ) = p (1 + q v )

pω 1 + qωγ vωβ ,ω = pωˆ (1 + qωγˆ vωβˆ ,ω )
pω

γ β
 
ω ω ,ω

ωˆ

γ β
ωˆ ωˆ ,ω



where d * (ω
 , ω ) is the shortest arc between ω
 and ω . We focus on the symmetric

equilibrium in which all prices are symmetric. Consequently, the market clientele for
variety ω̂ is a compact set of consumers whose ideal varieties range from ω to ω . Note
that from the first stage of the two-stage budgeting procedure we know the individual
l:
consumption levels for each produced variety ω

(A2)

qωˆ =

µz
pωˆ

ω

ω

ω

ω̂
d



ω

d

Arc distance= d
Arc distance= d

*

Figure A1.

In what follows, all varieties are identified by the shortest arc distance from
variety ω
 : variety ω̂ is represented by d , variety ω is represented by ( d − d ) where
d = vω ,ωˆ , and variety ω is represented by d + d = vω ,ω where d = vωˆ ,ω . Figure A1

illustrates these identifications graphically. Now we can update our notation and
substitute (A2) into (A1):

(

γ
β
γ
pω 1 + ( µ z ) pω−γ ( d − d )  = pωˆ 1 + ( µ z ) pω−ˆ γ d β



)
,

(A3)

(

γ
γ
pω 1 + ( µ z ) pω−γ ( d − d )  = pωˆ 1 + ( µ z ) pω−ˆ γ d β


β

)

where pω , pω , and pωˆ denote the prices of the corresponding varieties.

From (A3) we can express the boundaries of the firm’s clientele as a function of

(

)

the distance between its closest competitors’ varieties, their pricing pω and pω , the
firm’s own pricing ( pωˆ ) and variety choice (as measured by d ), and individual income
spent on the differentiated good:

d = v  pωˆ , d , pω , pω , d * , µ z 

(A4)
d = v  pωˆ , d , pω , pω , d * , µ z 
Thus we can write the demand function faced by a firm producing variety ω̂ as:
(A5)

 v (.) + v (.)  µ zL
Qωˆ = 
pωˆ

where µ IL is the aggregate expenditure on the differentiated varieties.
Next let us derive the price elasticity of demand function defined by (A5). To do
it, we will first apply the implicit derivation to (A4) in order to find the response of the
market width towards an increase in price:

( µ z ) + (1 − γ ) pω−ˆ γ d β
∂v
=−
<0
β −1
∂pωˆ
pω β pω−γ ( d − d ) + β pω1ˆ−γ d β −1
−γ

(A6)

( µ z ) + (1 − γ ) pω−ˆ γ d β
∂v
=−
<0
β −1
∂pωˆ
pω β pω−γ ( d * − d − d ) + β pω1ˆ−γ d β −1
−γ

where the nominators of both fractions are strictly positive according to assumption (10).
Recall that we are focusing on the symmetric equilibria, and thus all prices are symmetric
and ( d * − d − d ) = ( d − d ) = d = d =

d
. Combining this fact with (A6), we can derive the
2

price elasticity of demand from (A5):
(A7)

1
ε = 1+
2β

γ

β

 p   2  1− γ
>1

   +
2β
 µz   d 

Appendix 2. Open Economy

The model outlined in this section nests the generalized ideal variety model into
the Dornbusch-Fischer-Samuelson (1977) continuum of comparative advantage model.
There are two countries, Home and Foreign, which are indexed by superscripts H and

F , respectively. Consumer preferences are defined over a homogeneous product q0 and
over M differentiated products qk , k = 1, 2,..., M , where each of the differentiated
products is defined by a continuum of varieties indexed by ω ∈ Ω k :
µ

M

(A8)

U = q01− µ ∏ uk ( qiω | ω ∈ Ω k )  M

0 < µ < 1,

k =1

where subutility uk ( qkω | ω ∈ Ω k ) is defined as
(A9)


qkω
uk ( qkω | ω ∈ Ω k ) = max 
ω∈Ω k  1 + q γ v β
kω ω ,ω



 ,


and the budget constraint is
M

(A10) q0 + ∑ ∫
k =1

ω∈Ωk

qkω pkω = I .

The differentiated varieties are produced by monopolistically competitive firms,
with identical technologies. As in the closed economy model there are fixed and
marginal labor requirements. We now interpret α not as the fixed cost of production,
but as the cost of adjustment to each market. Consequently, the fixed cost is incurred for
each market the firm chooses to enter. The fixed cost of market adjustment is assumed to
be symmetric across the countries, products, and varieties:
(A11) α kHω = α kFω = α

∀ω ∈ Ω k , k = 1, 2,..., M .

In contrast, the marginal costs are assumed to differ across products and countries,

while remaining the same for all varieties of a given product and country.
In particular, we assume that the Home’s marginal cost is increasing in the index
of the product:
(A12) ckH < ckH+1

k = 1, 2,..., ( M − 1) ,

while, for Foreign, the order of marginal costs across products is the reverse:
(A13) ckF > ckF+1

k = 1, 2,..., ( M − 1) .

We assume that the parameters of the model are such that each country has a
Ricardian comparative advantage in the production of a certain subset of products, which
stimulates inter-product trade. The degree of comparative advantage differs across
products: it is decreasing in k for Home and increasing in k for Foreign.
The transportation costs for the differentiated goods are of the ‘iceberg’ form, and
they are identical for all varieties of all the products and for both directions of trade:
FH
(A14) tkHF
ω = t kω = t ≥ 1

for any ω ∈ Ω k , k = 1, 2,..., M .

The homogeneous good can be traded at no cost. It is included in the model to
guarantee balanced trade and equality of wages across countries: the numeraire sector is
assumed to be large enough for each country to produce homogenous product under free
trade.
B. Market Equilibrium
Consumers can potentially access both domestic and imported varieties. Hence,
our first step is to find out which varieties will be traded internationally. Consider a
single product l ∈ {1, 2,..., M } . We analyze whether consumption of product l in Home
consists of only domestic varieties, of only imported varieties, or both.

First, consider the case when clH > tclF . Assume that there exists a domestic firm
producing variety ω ∈ Ωl and earning nonnegative profit by selling the amount Qlω at
price plω in the Home’s market. Then there exists p < plω such that a Foreign’s
producer can sell the same amount Qlω of the identical product in Home’s market at price
p and earn a strictly positive profit. By undercutting the Home producer’s price,
Foreign’s producer will crowd out Home’s producer from the market. Indeed, because
Foreign firms have a marginal cost advantage and are free to produce anywhere they like
on the product circle, none of Home’s producers is able to earn nonnegative profit at
Home’s market of product l . All varieties of this product in the Home’s market will be
imported from Foreign.
In a similar fashion, it is possible to show that, if clH < tclF , no varieties of product
l will be imported from Foreign by Home. Finally, if clH = tclF , the varieties of product
l consumed at Home, can be produced both in Home and in Foreign. In this manner, we

guarantee that all varieties of a particular product within a market will be symmetric.
Similar analysis for Foreign can be conducted to determine the production location for
each good l consumed in Foreign.
C. Comparative Statics
How does a change in z or L affect the equilibrium? Because we have pinned
down the wage with the numeraire sector, cross-country differences in production costs

(c

H
l

, clF ) for a given product are robust to changes in z, L. As a result, changes to z, L do

not affect the division of products into imported, exported, and nontraded segments, and

are instead absorbed entirely through changes in variety within a given product circle.1
In the closed economy equilibrium defined by equations (17)-(22), zL defines a
country’s resource availability and income constraints. In the multi-good open economy
setting, the resource constraints can obviously not bind for each of the M products.
However, if we focus on products that fall in the non-traded or import segments of the
continuum, we can apply the closed economy solutions separately for each product.
Now, µzL in (16) becomes µzL/M, and defines total expenditures on each product. This
income constraint limits entry of firms, whether domestic firms for non-traded goods or
foreign firms for imports, in precisely the same way as before.
Our comparative statics can now be interpreted as a cross-importer comparison:
how is the market for a particular exporter’s variety different in import markets with
differing z and L? Given the Cobb-Douglas upper level utility, expenditure shares are
fixed across countries, while total expenditures will vary across importers due to
variation in z and L. As a result, the comparative statics within each product category
with respect to z and L will be the same in both closed and open economy settings.

1

This is in contrast to the standard DFS model where changes in L lead to wage changes and can affect the
set of traded goods.

