                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               MODELING THE OFFSHORING
                              OF WHITE-COLLAR SERVICES:
                            FROM COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE
                         TO THE NEW THEORIES OF TRADE AND FDI

                                            James Markusen

                                         Working Paper 11827
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11827


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2005




Prepared for the Brookings Forum, “Offshoring White-Collar Work: The Issues and Implications”, May 12-
13, 2005. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by James Markusen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Modeling the Offshoring of White-Collar Services: From Comparative Advantage to the New
Theories of Trade and FDI
James Markusen
NBER Working Paper No. 11827
December 2005
JEL No. F2

                                           ABSTRACT

Trade theory consists of a portfolio of models. What elements might be useful in modeling the
offshoring of white-collar services, or do these issues call for an entirely fresh approach? I try to
identifying some of the important aspects of this phenomenon and then argue that modeling could
focus on (a) vertical fragmentation of production, (b) expansion of trade at the extensive margin, (c)
fragments that differ in factor intensities and countries that differ in endowments, and (d) knowledge
or capital stocks of countries or firms that are complementary to skilled labor, and create missing
inputs for countries otherwise well suited to skill-intensive fragments. I argue that we can make good
progress by selecting a number of "modules" from existing theory. I use these to formulate a series
of simple "template" models which capture many of the characteristics of offshoring, and then use
those models to identify the effects of technological or institutional changes which allow offshoring
of white-collar services to occur.

James Markusen
Department of Economics
University of Colorado
Boulder, CO 80309-0256
and NBER
james.markusen@colorado.edu
1.     Introduction

       I have always viewed trade theory as consisting of a portfolio of models.1 There are

many underlying causes of or motives for trade, and it is probably productive to have a series of

models analyzing just a few of these at a time rather than attempt one grand model which

includes all possible bases for trade. At the other extreme, we could envision a model for every

industry and every country pair and perhaps every multinational firm. At this point, theory

coincides with case-study analysis and we learn nothing of any generality. So a parsimonious set

of models, the number of elements greater than one but less than say one thousand, is probably a

good scientific objective.

       My first question in approaching my assignment for the Brookings Forum is whether or

not we can make good progress from off-the-shelf elements of our portfolio of models, or do we

need an entirely new approach? The methodology I follow in order to answer this question is to

first ask another question: what are the important characteristics of the offshoring of white-collar

services that we wish to capture in a theory model? Having identified a number of these

characteristics, I am led toward the conclusion that we can indeed go a long way by drawing

from our portfolio of models, mixing and matching elements to create a useful, empirically

relevant, and productive sub-theory for offshoring white-collar services.

       I sketch the outlines of a number of candidate “template” models, each of which captures

some aspect of the problem. From analytical insights and numerical simulations of these

models, I am then able answer questions about the effects and consequences of technological or



       1
        I got this idea from Tjalling Koopmans’ (1957) “Three Essays on the State of Economic
Science”, which is still of great value today. Koopmans used the term “sequence of models”.

                                                  1
                                                 2

institutional innovations which permit offshoring to arise. These include effects on the national

income of each country, effects on the relative and real prices of skilled and unskilled labor in

each country, and effects on the volume of trade in goods (e.g., are trade in goods and services

complements or substitutes).

       Before proceeding, I wish to emphasize that my goal here is to suggest ways of thinking

about the issues in formal models. I was distressed following my presentation at the Brookings

conference to find many people focusing on the results of some simulations, particularly with

respect to “northern” welfare (read as US welfare). All readers should understand that no theory

says that a move from partial liberalization to full liberalization makes everyone better off. To

push the point further, I am confident that I can concoct a model to generate any result desire by

a reader with a deep pocketbook. I have tried hard to stick to reasonable and relevant structures

and assumptions, but even so, qualitative results sometimes depend on specific parameter values

as we shall see.

       In the following section, I provide a brief overview of some of our theory portfolio, and

then identify some of the crucial aspects of offshoring we wish to capture in section 3. Section 4

begins a series of template models.
                                                 3

2.      Our Theory Portfolio

        I will argue that we can usefully draw from a numbers of existing theories and models of

trade in order to make progress on offshoring. I don’t claim that the list is exhaustive or than

alternative taxonomies might not be more useful, I just believe that these particular elements will

prove useful.

        (A) Comparative advantages theories of trade in goods. Our traditional trade theory

tends to focus on differences among countries as the primary motive for trade. The Ricardian

model of trade, in which countries differ in technologies, is usually listed first. Second, the

work-horse model of trade is factor-proportions or Heckscher-Ohlin theory, in which differences

in factor intensities among goods intersect with differences in factor endowments among

countries to determine a pattern of comparative advantage and trade. This ever-popular

approach not only gives an intuitive explanation for the direction of trade, but permits a details

analysis of the distributional consequences of trade within countries in addition to aggregate

gains from trade. Other country characteristics which fit here include differences in market

distortions among countries and country (internal market) size.

        (B) Non-comparative-advantage theories of trade. This category is largely the domain of

the so-called “new trade theory”, a term I dislike: industrial-organization approach to trade is

more apt (and avoids the awkward problem of what to call the theory that comes after the new

theory). The principal motives for trade are scale economies, imperfect competition, and product

differentiation.

        A sub-category of this branch of theory involves the existence of firm-specific assets, an

especially useful approach to the theory of the multinational firm. These range from managerial
                                                  4

and technology assets to brand names and trade marks. This approach has resurfaced more

recently in heterogeneous firm models, in which (potential) firms get productivity “draws” from

some distribution that make some firms more productive than others (Melitz 2003; Helpman,

Melitz and Yeaple, 2004).. Productivity in turn determines whether firms enter foreign markets

and if so by exports or foreign production.

       (C) Trade in Factors. While trade in goods has drawn the most attention in both theory

and empirical analysis, the topic of trade in factors has always lurked in the background.

Generalization of theoretical findings are difficult, but the overall impression is that trade in

goods and factors tend to be substitutes in comparative-advantage models. Indeed, Mundell’s

(1957) early demonstration of this might explain the lack of interest in trade in factors. An

elegant treatment of this substitutability is found in Jones et. al. (1986). Later, it was shown that

trade in goods and factors tend to be complements for virtually any other causes of trade other

than factor proportions (Markusen, 1983) and even in some versions of factor-proportions

models (Neary, 1987).

       (D) Theories of foreign direct investment and arm’s length trade in firm-specific assets. I

think it is fair to say that, until the mid-1980s, FDI was just viewed as part of the theory of

capital movements in a factor-proportions world. Eventually, a huge amount of empirical

evidence, most notably that most FDI is among high-income capital-rich countries, led to new

approaches to what we are now calling offshoring.

       Theory bifurcated into two branches. One could be called the vertical or resource-

seeking approach, an early example of which is Helpman (1984). This is in fact a natural

extension of factor-proportions comparative-advantage models in which activities differ in factor
                                                 5

intensities and countries differ in factor proportions. The alternative is the horizontal or market-

seeking approach, in which firms exploit firm-specific assets in multiple markets, an early

example of which is Markusen (1984). The latter is more a part of non-comparative-advantage

theory and, while both approaches are important, does the job of explaining the large volume of

intra-industry FDI among the high-income countries. I believe that it is accurate to say that the

overwhelming weight of empirical evidence, beginning with Brainard (1993), is more consistent

with the horizontal approach.

       Intertwined with this literature on FDI is a long-standing literature on “internalization”,

now being called by its inverse name, “outsourcing”. Both terms are addressing the issue of

whether or not firms keep certain activities internal to the firm or use arm’s length contractors to

supply intermediates, assembly, services, distribution and so forth. Early analyses include

Dunning (1977). Some more recent authors seem unaware of this large literature, but it is still a

pertinent antecedent and changing the name from internalization to outsourcing doesn’t change

that fact. This literature argues that the choice between internal and arm’s-length modes depend

on issues such as moral hazzard, adverse selection, hold up, contract enforcement and

intellectual property protection.

       (E) Trade in business services (non-factor, non-trade-mediating services). There was an

earlier wave of interest in trade in business services in the late 1980s, in Canada in particular. In

my view, and I was a participant, the theory that came out of this was not very successful.

Several authors got bogged down in trying to define services, an elusive goal as Trefler has so

nicely indicated with his quote from Justice Stewart. One traditional view about business

services is that they are hard to trade, requiring the spatial and temporal proximity of supplier
                                                6

and customer. Herb Grubel (1987) in Canada went so far as to argue that all trade in services is

embodied in goods or persons. It is very clear from the topics we are considering today that this

view is at best badly outdated.

       One area where progress has been made is in the theory of the multinational. The

modern view is that parent firms are exporters of the services of knowledge-based assets to

foreign subsidiaries (although goods and intermediates are often traded as well) (Markusen,

1995, 2002).

       (F) Liberalization: trade expansion at extensive margin. Much traditional trade theory

involves liberalization expanding the volume of trade in existing traded goods. We could call

this expansion at the intensive margin. But these models don’t seem very appropriate to the

current discussion in which we are looking at new things being traded. Some existing theory

bears on this. In comparative-advantage models, liberalization expands trade at the intensive

margin, but some “middle” goods can become traded as trade costs fall, as in the Dornbusch-

Fischer-Samuelson (1977) Ricardian continuum model. Yi (2004) has a neat Ricardian model

in which goods are produced in distinct stages of production that can be geographically

fragmented. Other valuable empirical evidence is found in Hummels, Ishii and Yi (2001).

       In the theory of the horizontal multinational, investment liberalization allows intra-firm

trade in the services of knowledge-based assets, so more things are traded. For vertical

multinationals and arm’s length offshoring, innovations in technology, liberalization, or

institutions (IPP) allows fragmentation of the production chain so that more things are traded:

capital-intensive intermediates go out, labor-intensive assembly takes place abroad in labor-

abundant countries, with much of the final output shipped back to the parent’s county. In all of
                                                 7

these models, trade expands at the extensive margin.



3.     Empirical Characteristics of Offshoring of White Collar Services to Capture in Theory
       Models

       Here is a wish list of characteristics we might wish have in theoretical models of

offshoring of white-collar services.

       (A)     Expansion of trade at the extensive margin: new things traded due to innovations
               in communications and technology.

       This poses a number of challenges to theory, especially the fact that we are talking about

non-marginal changes and discrete movements of something being non-traded to potentially lots

of trade. Traditional comparative-statics analysis is of little use: they focus on marginal changes

in activities which are already in use in the benchmark.

       (B)     Vertical fragmentation of production: the new traded services tend to be
               intermediates, may be upstream, downstream, or not part of a sequence.

       Traded white-collar services often have a number of important characteristics that cannot

be captured in the simplest off-the-shelf models which assume a set of final goods. One is that

they may be firm-specific rather than bought and sold on arm’s-length markets. Another is that

they may form part of a particular production sequence, such as being a well-defined upstream

(design) or downstream (after sales service) component of overall production. A third is that

there may be crucial complementarities among different elements of the production chain, such

as between skilled labor and telecommunications equipment and infrastructure.

       (C)     Offshoring of medium-skilled or even highly-skilled services to skilled-labor-
               scarce countries. At odds with factor-proportions theories?

       The simplest off-the-shelf 2x2 Heckscher-Ohlin model is not going to offer insights as to

why relatively skilled-labor-intensive services are being offshored to very skilled-labor-scarce
                                                  8

countries. One of the most important tasks of theory, in my opinion, is to develop richer, but

empirically-plausible models as to why this phenomenon is taking place. Yet it is not

necessarily the case that the factor-proportions approach to trade has to be abandon, just that it

must be enriched to include multiple goods and/or factors, so that fragmentation and the

complementarities just discussed can be analyzed.

       (D)     Reversal in the direction of trade from existing multinationals models. New
               offshoring is exports of services back to high-income-country firms (intra-firm
               back to parents or via arm’s-length contracting).

       Trade in white-collar services is not new. The modern theory of the multinational has

emphasized that parents are exporters of white-collar services, including management and

engineering consulting, marketing, finance and so forth to their subsidiaries. One thing that is

relatively new and which has generated much of the current interest is the reversal in the

direction of trade that we are seeing. In some ways this is closely related to the previous point.

       (E)     Firms or specifically owners of knowledge-based assets, may offshore skilled-
               labor intensive activities that are complements to these assets

       A plausible worry is that skilled workers in the high-income countries are being hurt,

while their companies are profiting from offshoring. This cannot be dismissed and requires

investigation. To me, it calls for at least a three-factor model, in which firms possess specific

factors or other assets which are complements to skilled labor. An example mentioned above is

software engineers as complements to telecommunications equipment and network

infrastructure, in which the third factor is physical capital. Or it could be that software

engineers are complementary with managerial sophistication, organization infrastructure, and

marketing channels. The complementary input is knowledge-based assets.

       Without services trade, you can train an engineer in India, but there is no demand for his
                                                  9

or her skills: there is nothing useful to do. The implication is that, in the absence of offshoring,

these skilled workers are cheap even though they are relatively scarce in comparison with the

country with the complementary factors. Offshoring allowing trade in the third factor causes

that factor (or its services) to move to the skilled-labor-scarce country to combine with cheap

skilled labor there. This set up obviously has the elements of a story in which skilled labor is

harmed in the high-income country, while owners of the complementary physical or knowledge-

based assets benefit.

       This phenomenon is relatively easily modeled in either a competitive, multi-factor model,

or using Markusen’s knowledge-capital approach to the multinational. The latter approach has

also proved a useful starting point for looking at the internalization versus outsourcing decision

in relation to the offshoring decision. The idea is that transacting in knowledge-based assets

creates special problems for the owner (multinational firm). For example, there are several

labor-turnover models in which workers in the host country absorb or learn the substance of the

knowledge-based assets and can defect to start rival firms. Other issues that have been

considered in the theory literature involve asymmetric information, reputations, and hold-up.

       The next few sections of the paper construct and analyze some simple template models

that incorporate these features. All of the models presented in the paper have been coded into

numerical simulation models using GAMS. Code for these models is available from the author.

An appendix to the paper lays out the structure of Model 1.
                                                 10

4.     Model 1: a 3x2x2 Heckscher-Ohlin Model with Fragmentation

       Suppose we begin with a simple two-final-good, two-factor, two-county Hecksher-Ohlin

model and then allow one good to fragment into two separate production activities, giving three

in total. If we assume free trade, just considering free versus prohibitive fragmentation costs, we

do not need to specify which is the upstream and which is the downstream activity. For a much

more comprehensive treatment of this case, see Markusen and Venables (2005). Here are the

principal features of the model.

       (A)     Two factors of production: skilled (H) and unskilled (U) labor

       (B)     Two final goods, three production activities

               Y       -       unskilled-labor intensive

               X       -       skilled-labor intensive

               X       -       can fragment into high-tech manufacturing (M) and services (S)

                       M       -      more skilled-labor intensive than X

                       S       -      middle skill intensity: less than X, more than Y

       (C)     Two competitive, constant returns economies

               North -         high-skilled abundant

               South -         low-skilled abundant

       The service component of good X is thus chosen to have a middle factor intensity

between integrated X and good Y; specifically, the complete ranking from most to least skill

intensity is: M > X > S > Y. This choice definitely matters for the results. We are thinking here

of things like business process outsourcing or call centers which are less skill intensive than the

overall industry, but more than a developing economy’s tradition sector of comparative
                                                     11

advantage.2

        I will report and analyze the qualitative results of numerical simulations. Begin with

fragmentation banned; that is, M and S used for X must be produced in the same location. For

this case, I calibrated the model so that the two countries are initially specialized in X (North)

and Y (South) in free trade: factor endowments have a bigger spread than factor intensities.

        Now allow for the geographic fragmentation of X production. This results in some or all

of the middle-skill-intensive service activity switching from North to South, with services

exported back to the North or M export to the South to be combined with S. This doesn’t really

matter with free trade, except that measured changes in trade volume will depend on which is

which. For our purposes, it is perhaps better to think of the services as exported back to North

where they are combined with M to produce the completed good.3

        There is a fundamental tension that arises in general equilibrium when the ability to

fragment manufacturing and services is introduced.

(1)     Services, which are middle-skill intensive, shift from North to South, increasing the
        relative demand for skilled labor in both countries.

        This is an idea familiar from Feenstra and Hanson (1996ab, 1997) and also arises in

multinationals models (Zhang and Markusen, 1999). North sheds an activity that is unskilled-

labor intensive from its point of view, but South gains an activity that is skilled-labor intensive


        2
          In his discussant’s comments, Douglas Irwin quite properly wonders about the robustness of
results based on one particular ranking of factor intensities, yet also wants to avoid sliding down the
“slippery slope” into taxonomy. I agree with both thoughts. My decision is to concentrate on a central
case which I find the most empirically plausible: the offshored service has a middle intensity between Y
and integrated X production.
        3
         Furthermore, allowing the service to be provided by Southern workers is close to the same thing
as moving foreign workers to the North. If allowing the service to move results in factor-price
equalization, they are exactly the same (provided welfare of each country is that of its original residents).
                                                    12

from its point of view. Thus we expect the real and relative price of skilled labor to rise in both

countries.

(2)     However, general-equilibrium is bedeviled by terms-of-trade (TOT) effects: the North
        moves from integrated X production to exporting M and importing S. A fall in the
        relative price of M harms North, possibly outweighing efficiency gains for the North.

        The ability to fragment X production has an effect loosely related to a technical

improvement. South can produce S more cheaply than in integrated North production and North

can produce M more cheaply. But as the countries begin to specialize, their relative size will do

a lot to determine the relative price of M versus S. The equilibrium relative price of M to S is

higher, the smaller is the North. When the North is large, an adverse terms-of-trade change can

make it worse off than before fragmentation despite the efficiency gain. When the North is not

large, efficiency gains outweigh the terms-of-trade shift and both countries benefit.4

        Closely related to this are two results that emerge from the simulations. First, my results

indicated that, while skilled labor is the relative gainer in the North, both factors could suffer a

absolute loss of real income when the North is large. This occurs with a low equilibrium relative

price for M as just mentioned. Second, results indicate that skilled labor is an absolute gainer in

the South, but that it might be a relative looser when the South is large. The South shifts its

output to a more skilled-labor-intensive sector, but that sector (services) suffers a price fall

relative to the no-fragmentation case. The latter effect is large when the South is large: skilled

labor gains absolutely but loses relatively. Results from my simulations over a range of


        4
          An alternative intuiting about the terms-of-trade effect is as follows. The North has a factor
endowment that is well suited to integrated X production. When fragmentation is allowed, the
equilibrium price of X falls, harming the North which specializes in X. The question is whether or not
shifting to specialization in M more than recoups this loss. The answer is yes if North is not large.
Perhaps this intuition also shows why the South always gains: this terms-of-trade effect against X must
benefit the South.
                                                   13

parameter values can be summarized as:

        Results: Model 1

(1)     South gains, North loses if North large; both countries gain if South large5

(2)     Skilled labor is the relative gainer in North
                (but real-income loser if South small: tot effect dominates)

(3)     Skilled labor is a real-income gainer in South
                (but gains relatively less if South large: tot effect dominates)

(4)     Unskilled labor is a real-income gainer in South, loser in North

(4)     Volume of trade in goods increases: goods and services trade are complements
              (but can fall if South small: S is self-sufficient in S, doesn’t export)

        In spite of doing countless runs of this model, I cannot guarantee that there are not other

possibilities and, of course, reordering the factor intensities will change the results. What I can

say is that it is easy to find ranges of parameters that generate these results, but we should all

regard them as suggestive and not definitive.




5.      Model 2: a 3x3x2 missing input model with fragmentation

        My second model is designed to capture the idea that skilled labor can be cheap where it

is scarce. It again has three production activities, and two countries, but three factors.




        5
          A finding that North can lose is not new. Gomory and Baumol (2004) note this in a model with
increasing returns, Samuleson (2004) shows a case with constant returns and perfect competition. Many
other such cases occur in models with multinationals (Markusen, 2002). Note that some results
“guaranteeing” gains from trade compare autarky to free trade with fragmentation (Deardorff, 2005). To
me this is irrelevant: the relevant question is comparing free trade in goods to free trade in goods and
services.
                                                 14

       (A)     Three factors of production: skilled (H) and unskilled (U) labor and know-how
               (K). K could be high-tech physical capital, such as telecommunications
               equipment and networks or knowledge capital (managerial techniques,
               organization infrastructure, marketing channels)

       (B)     Two final goods, three production activities

               Y      -         unskilled-labor intensive

               X      -         skilled-labor and know-how intensive

               X      -         can fragment into high-tech manufacturing (M) and services (S)

                      M         -      more skilled-labor intensive than X

                      S         -      skilled labor and know-how intensive

       (C)     Skilled labor and know-how are complements in the production of S

       (D)     Two competitive, constant returns economies:

               North -          high-skilled and know-how abundant:

               South -          low-skilled abundant, very know-how scarce

       The complementarity between skilled-labor and know-how in producing S is crucial.

Specifically, this is modeled as a very low elasticity of substitution between H and K in

producing S. When a country is very know-how scarce, there is little for its skilled workers to

do. You can train engineers, but there are no jobs for them.

       Assume initially that K (or its services) and skilled workers cannot move between

countries. K is used with skilled workers largely in the North, which exports integrated X. The

fundamental tension from introducing trade in K and S is now going to occur between Northern

and Southern skilled workers.

(1)    Skilled-labor is initially cheap in South (even though scarce) due to lack of K to work
       with.
                                                  15

(2)    Skilled labor in North and South compete directly, introduction of trade in K moves K to
       South, shifting relative demand for skilled labor to the South.

       The introduction of the third factor, complementary with skilled labor, makes it

straightforward to create a situation where skilled labor is initially cheap where it is scarce. In

addition, the model is less sensitive to country-size issues, at least with respect to factor prices.

But as in the case of the previous model, there is terms-of-trade issue for the North. The ability

of the owners of K to move their factor to the South to work with cheap skilled labor there not

only erodes the return to skilled labor in the North, but also the North’s implicit monopoly power

over good X. The result in all of my simulations was that welfare decreases in the North when

trade in K and S are permitted and the North is large. As in the previous model, the both

countries gain when the North is not large. Here are my results for permitting trade in K and S.

       Results: Model 2

(1)    South gains, North loses when North large; both gain when North is not large

(2)    Skilled labor is real-income loser in North, absolute gainer in South

(3)    Real return to know-how rises in North, falls in South

(3)    Unskilled labor is real-income gainer in North, loser in South

(4)    Volume of trade in goods increases (complements with services)

       Losses to the North and northern skilled labor in particular are precisely two of the things

that analysts have worried about with respect to the offshoring of white-collar services. This

model potentially validates the worry that northern business owners or owners of particular

physical capital and knowledge-based assets will benefit considerably at the expense of northern

skilled workers. Of course, the model is in part deliberately designed to do that, so this is hardly

a coincidence. I cannot say with any confidence that a thorough search would not lead to some
                                                16

alternative models with quite different results. On the other hand, I would not have put this

model forward if I didn’t find it empirical plausible and relevant.



6.     Model 3: a 3x2x2 knowledge capital models of multinationals

       Now I would like to return to something close to model 1, but add in multinational firms

following the knowledge-capital model of the multinational that I developed some time ago.

This version of the model is based on Zhang and Markusen (1999) (Markusen, 2002, is the best

source for the complete development of the theory, and this section is based on Chapter 9).

       (A)     Two factors of production: skilled (H) and unskilled (U) labor

       (B)     Two final goods, three production activities

               Y       -      unskilled-labor intensive, constant returns, perfect competition

               X       -      skilled-labor intensive, increasing returns at the firm level:
                              firm and establishment-level fixed costs, constant marginal cost

               X       -      can fragment into high-tech manufacturing (M) and services (S)

                       M      -       more skilled-labor intensive than X. By assumption, only
                                      North can produce M.

                       S      -       middle skill intensity: less than X, more than Y

       (C)     Cournot output competition by X firms, free entry and exit in two firm types

               National firms:        produce M and S in the North, export X to South

               Multinational firms: produce M in the North which is exported to South where S
                                    is produced, or vice versa

       (D)     Two economies:

               North -        high-skilled abundant:

               South -        low-skilled abundant:
                                                      17

        The reader will see that this resembles model 1 insofar as X can fragment into a skilled-

labor-intensive phase and a medium skilled-labor intensive phase. I have modeled the S phase

as largely unskilled-labor intensive in marginal costs, but establishment fixed costs as having a

sizable skilled-labor component. I do not think that this affects the results.

        A nice feature of this model, aside from its probable empirical relevance, is that it avoids

the “curse of Stolper-Samuelson”6 and the terms-of-trade effects that are so important in the

competitive, constant-returns models. Because of pro-competitive effects leading to increased

firm scale and lower markups, it is entirely possible that both countries and all factors gain

following a liberalization.7

        The way this works in the present model is straightforward. Again, begin in a situation

where trade in disembodied S is not allowed: S and M must be produced together. This is

equivalent here to not allowing multinationals to enter. Having to use North’s factor endowment

for both M and S is a binding constraint on the world economy, and limits the number of firms in

free-entry equilibrium which in turn leads to a high markup and a low output per firm (high

average cost). When this constraint is relaxed by allowing firm to fragment X, much, perhaps

all of service production moves to South. This again tends to have the Feenstra-Hanson effect of

raising the relative demand for skilled labor in both countries. But now this also increases the

profitability of the existing firms which leads to entry which in turn leads to lower markups and

higher output per firm (lower average costs).


        6
         I didn’t invest this phrase, I wish I had. I think I heard it first from Ron Jones.
        7
          Alternatively, we could model the final goods or intermediate services as differentiated, using
the now well-known large-group monopolistic-competition framework. As far as welfare is concerned,
there is a benefit from increased variety analogous to the pro-competitive effect of the oligopoly model
that tends to generate large welfare gains. See Ethier (1982) and extensions by Markusen (1989).
                                                 18

       There are however, a lot of possibilities depending on relative endowments and

intensities and again on country size. Chapters 8-9 of Markusen (2002) shows that many

outcomes are possible. I can say that it is easy to find parameter values for which allowing

fragmentation leads to welfare increases for both countries and gains for skilled labor in both

countries. I have to admit that I did not find a set of parameters for which the real prices of all

four factors increase, however. I generally tended to find that the real return to unskilled labor in

the North fell following fragmentation and trade in services. Here are some typical, but not

robust, set of results for the effects of allowing multinationals to enter, equivalent here to

allowing trade in services.

       Results: Model 3 (for a range of parameterizations)

(1)    South gains, North gains

(2)    Skilled labor is relative and absolute gainer in North and South

(3)    Unskilled labor loses in the North and gains in the South

(4)    Pro-competitive effects lead to more firms, lower markups, higher output per firm




7.     Model 4: a 3x3x2 that combines the knowledge-capital model with the missing factor
       model

       Our fourth template combines the knowledge-capital model with the missing factor

model. I take the skilled labor in the North, and assume that some portion of it is factor K, which

is a complementary with skilled labor in producing establishment fixed costs. In fact, I coded

up this model first and then moved to model 3 by simply allowing the substitution between K

and H in producing establishment fixed costs to move to infinity. Otherwise, the models are the
                                                  19

same.

        In the initial equilibrium, trade in K (or the services of K) is not permitted; alternatively,

multinational firms are not permitted to enter. These results are then compared to allowing trade

in K, or equivalently allowing multinationals to enter. Again, a range of outcomes are possible.

But for the same parameterization as Model 3 just indicated, the liberalization here generates a

stronger adverse terms-of-trade effects for North. North’s welfare declines if the North is large.

As in the case of Model 2, it is now the case the skilled labor in North competes directly with

skilled labor in South. The introduction of multinationals moves K from North to work with

initially cheaper skilled labor in South. This lowers the real return to skilled labor in North with

the big beneficiary being owners of the factor K.

        Results, Model 4

(1)     South gains, North loses if North big; both gain if South big

(2)     Skilled labor is relative and real-income loser in North, gainer in South

(3)     Large gain in North for the owners of know-how.

(4)     Unskilled labor gains in both countries

(5)     Pro-competitive effects lead to more firms, lower markups, higher output per firm.



8.      The offshoring-outsourcing (internalization, mode choice) relationship

        Internalization or its inverse, outsourcing, is a decision about the boundaries of the firm

and what activities to keep inside or internal to the firm’s ownership structure and which to

contract to arm’s length firms. Multinationals offshore but do not outsource, keeping their

foreign activities within owned foreign affiliates. Firm that contract or license in some way to
                                                 20

foreign firms are engaging in both offshoring and outsourcing.

       As I indicated earlier, the internalization decision, also known as mode choice, has had a

long history of analysis, particularly in the international business literature. Its rediscovery

under the name outsourcing has coincided with many researchers overlooking this long tradition.

In any case, the traditional focus of the internalization/outsourcing decision has been on the

various transactions costs, particularly when offshoring, of doing business arm’s length rather

than internal to the firm.

       It is important to keep offshoring and outsourcing decisions distinct: they are location

choice and mode choice decisions respectively. Some factor that might encourage outsourcing

might at the same time discourage offshoring in favor of exporting from the home country or

choosing a third country.

       There are in fact a number of problems for producing abroad that do precisely this: they

encourage outsourcing but discourage offshoring. Some of these are:

       (1)     restrictions on foreign investment

       (2)     restrictions on the right of establishment

       (3)     restrictions on immigration (generally temporary) of foreign business personnel

       (4)     lack of intellectual property protection

       (5)     lack of contract enforcement

       The first three in this list generally follow from the fact that offshoring requires setting up

a foreign subsidiary which in turn requires foreign investment and the use of home-country

personnel in the host country for some period of time. Thus problems in any of these three areas

would encourage a firm to outsource to a local firm, but they also discourage offshoring relative
                                                  21

to other outside alternatives.

       Points (4) and (5) involve various aspects of moral hazzard and hold up when firms make

investments, both sunk physical capital and investments in training local workers, in connection

with establishing a subsidiary. Again, they tend to encourage outsourcing but also discourage

offshoring. The problem of transferring knowledge and skills probably exists for both modes of

offshoring, about which I will say more shortly.

         Two formal approaches found in the theory literature may be useful. The first I will

term the “labor-learning model”. Variations of this are found in Ethier and Markusen (1996),

Fosfuri, Motta and Rønde (2001), Markusen (2001), and Glass and Saggi (2002). In all of these

papers, multinationals make a foreign investment which is profitable due to knowledge-based

assets of the firm. However, workers in the host country learn this knowledge themselves, and

can later defect to start a rival firm. If binding contracts cannot be written, then the firm will

have to pay these workers a premium in subsequent periods to hold them in the firm. Thus the

multinational must share rents with local employees if contracts cannot be written or enforced.

       A second promising line of research involves the Grossman and Hart (1986) hold-up

model, which has been developed in a series of papers by Antrás (Antrás 2003, 2005, Antrás and

Helpman 2004). Here the idea is that the multinational firm and a local agent must each make

sunk, relationship-specific investments in a project. In the absence of complete contracts or

contract enforcement, this creates a bi-lateral ex-post-hold-up problem. The optimal mode of

entry is generally that ownership, defined as residual rights in assets if bargaining breaks down,

should go to the party with the larger sunk investment. As in the labor-learning model, this

approach requires the multinational to share rents with a local agent whether or not that agent is
                                                 22

the manager of an owned subsidiary or the owner of an arm’s-length contractor.

       Alternative assumptions can produce alternative correlations between offshoring and

outsourcing. Suppose that a firm wishes to supply a product X in South. If fixed costs of setting

up a foreign plant are not too large but large relative to sunk investments of the local partner,

then the firm will tend to choose both offshoring (in preference to exporting) and internalization:

a negative correlation between offshoring and outsourcing.

       A difference between the labor-learning model and the hold-up model is that, in the

latter, the both the multinational and the local manager make ex-ante sunk investments that

generate bilateral hold up. In the labor-learning model, workers acquire bargaining power ex

post as they learn. Thinking about the offshoring of white-collar services, I think that both

approaches have something to contribute. There is no question that there are a lot of training

costs for the foreign workers. For IT and BPO activities, they are often learned on the job by

workers already possessing good general skills. It is my understanding that many call-center

workers are training by independent firms prior to landing a call-center job.

        Here is my suggestion for one approach which combines the labor-learning approach and

the sunk-cost hold-up approach. Think of this as, perhaps, a model of business process

outsourcing or call centers.

       Model 5:        Template for an integrated outsourcing/offshoring approach

       (A)     Begin with the “missing input model”, two time periods

       (B)     Interpret this as firm-specific knowledge-capital ala Markusen’s knowledge-
               capital model: skilled workers in the host country are cheap because they lack
               crucial physical or knowledge-based inputs.

       (C)     With appropriate technological and institutional conditions, this asset can be
               “exported” by a firm (used abroad) in combination with local skilled workers.
                                                 23

       (D)     However, local workers “absorb” the relevant knowledge and are able to “defect”
               to start rival firms on their own in the second period.

       (E)     Also assume a capital investment in land, structures, and telecommunications is
               needed. Whoever owns this defines whether the project is a subsidiary
               (internalization) or an arm’s length relationship (outsourcing). The cost must be
               borne by the multinational.

       I suppose that many researchers in the international business field would conjecture that

given complete and enforceable contracting, the firm would prefer outsourcing on a simple cost

basis, so let’s make that as an assumption.

       Results: Model 5 (conjectures! this paper has not been written!)

(1)    Given complete and enforceable contracts, outsourcing is preferred (by assumption).

(2)    If contracts are not enforced, then the multinational will want to own the physical capital,
               i.e., internalization is chosen by the Grossman-Hart-Antrás argument.

(3)    However, even if physical capital is contractible (local firm contracts to pay a mortgage),
            the firm may still want to own it if intellectual capital (skills) transferred to local
            workers are not, in order to reduce the ex-post hold up problem of skilled workers
            threatening to leave.

(4)    On the other hand, if the learned skills of the foreign manager is relationship-specific;
              i.e., they are only useful to the contracting multinational, then there is limited
              hold up from the workers and outsourcing would be preferred. Indeed, in this
              case it seems as though the firm has ex post hold up power, and so the manager
              would want to own the capital.

       Again, these are conjectures. I am currently working on this project, but not yet certain

of the results. As a final point, recall again that the agency costs and rent sharing costs to the

firm, whether they be less in the internal or outsourcing mode, also affect the firms offshoring

choice. For firms seeking to serve the local host market, these costs may lead the firm to choose

exports rather than offshoring. For firms seeking to serve their own home market, these costs

may lead it to choose domestic outsourcing or search for a third supplier.
                                                24

9.     Summary and conclusions

       I have argued in this paper that we can make good progress in understanding the

offshoring of white-collar services at the theory level from our existing portfolio of models.

Many important features of offshoring of white-collar services can be modeled from a recipe that

mixes and matches elements from the existing inventory. Useful elements from our portfolio

include:

       (A) vertical fragmentation of production

       (B) expansion of trade at the extensive margin

       (C) fragments differ in factor intensities, countries differ in endowments

       (D) knowledge stocks of countries or firms that are complementary to skilled labor

create missing inputs for countries otherwise be well suited to skill-intensive fragments

       (E) these knowledge-based assets however create particular contractual and agency

issues for firms engaging in international business. Existing models of labor-learning and hold-

up are useful places to start in considering the outsourcing (mode) choice in relation to the

offshoring (location) choice.

       These features allow us to construct relatively simple and tractable general-equilibrium

models which predict changes induced by fragmentation on aggregate welfare, factor prices

(income distribution), the location of production activities, and the direction and volume of trade.

       While I view the paper as listing a number of plausible and empirically-relevant ways of

modeling the offshoring of white-collar services, it was clear at the conference that many people

were much more interested in specific results from these models. Unfortunately, it is hard to

offer robust conclusions, especially about the aggregate welfare of countries. Trade theorists are
                                                  25

well aware of the underlying problem: any move from partial liberalization to more liberalization

(allowing more things to be traded in our case) often does not result in Pareto improvements for

the trading partners. It would be intellectually dishonest for me to report only cases in which

everyone is better off.

        Overall, my simulation models suggest a clear gain for world welfare and for the South in

particular, but the North may lose if it is large. This result is actually very familiar to all trade

theorists in different contexts; e.g., a large country may well prefer a Nash equilibrium in tariff

rates to free trade with a small country. Stephen Magee (2005), in a recent very provocative

paper, has argued persuasively that the US is not a large country in the sense of my models,

which might give us some comfort.

        Results on factor-price changes are interesting and consistent with a range of existing

literature. In the two-factor models, skilled labor is the relative and (generally) absolute gainer

in both regions, as activities that are not skill intensive from the North’s point of view are

transferred to the South where they are. Results for unskilled labor are more mixed.

        I have been asked to indicate which model may fit reality the best, and I have to say that I

think that the three-factor “missing input” model is my favorite, preferably with multinationals.

I have called this third factor “knowhow”: it could be knowledge capital, high-tech physical

capital, or highly skilled knowledge workers, including management. I actually started working

with this model in connection with Central and Eastern Europe, where it was clear that workers

with excellent skills in math, science and engineering had very low productivity: they were

missing crucial organizational, managerial, quality control, and marketing skills needed to go

with their general skills. Many case studies I have read about East Asia suggest exactly the same
                                                 26

thing. You can educate scientists or engineers but there is nothing for them to do.

       I capture this by making the North rich in knowhow as distinct from general skilled labor,

and by making knowhow a strong complement to general skilled labor. The result is that skilled

labor is cheap in the South where it is scarce, a principal stylized fact that has generated much of

the white-collar offshoring. This model sets up a tension between the general northen skilled

labor and the southern skilled labor, perhaps routine programmers and routine business-process

workers are examples. Allowing fragmentation moves knowhow or rather the services of the

knowhow to the South, generating big gains from the owners of the knowhow and losses for

general skilled labor in the North. We should keep in mind, however, that much of the knowhow

is surely embodied in the human capital of highly skilled tech-workers, managers, marketeers

and so forth, and so this result may suggest that second-level white-collar workers are the ones

who are most at risk.

       I will close again with another caveat about theory. While it is frustrating for readers and

policy makers, strong and robust findings about welfare gains from fragmentation are not

forthcoming from a general approach to theory or, alternatively, it is usually possible to find

some strange model that generates whatever result the client wants. I have tried to construct

models that I feel are plausible and relevant, but even then there is some residual ambiguity. I

hope I have at least left us with some sense of why this ambiguity exists.
                                              27

REFERENCES

Antràs, Pol. 2003. “Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure”. Quarterly Journal of Economics

       118: 1374-1418.

Antràs, Pol. 2005. “Incomplete Contracts and the Product Cycle”. American Economic Review,

       forthcoming.

Antràs, Pol and Elhanan Helpman. 2004. “Global Sourcing”. Journal of Political Economy 112:

       552-580.

Bhagwati, Jagdish, Arvind Panagariya and T.N. Srinivasan.2004. “The Muddles over

       Outsourcing”. Journal of Economic Perspectives 18: 93-114.

Brainard, S. Lael. 1997. "An Empirical Assessment of the Proximity-Concentration Tradeoff

       between Multinational Sales and Trade". American Economic Review 87: 520-544.

Deardorff, AlanV. 2001. “Fragmentation in Simple Trade Models”. North American Journal of

       Economics and Finance 12: 121-137.

Deardorff, Alan V. 2004. “A Trade Theorist’s take on Skilled-Labor Outsourcing”. Research

       seminar in International Economics, Discussion Paper No. 513, University of Michigan.

Deardorff, Alan V. 2005. “Ricardian Comparative Advantage with Intermediate Inputs”. North

       American Journal of Economics and Finance 16: 11-34.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, Stanley Fischer and Paul A. Samuelson.1977. “Comparative Advantage,

       Trade, and Payments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods”. American

       Economic Review 67: 823-839.

Dunning, John H.1977. "Trade, Location of Economic Activity and : A Search for an Eclectic

       Approach", In Ohlin, B., P. O. Hesselborn, and P.M. Wijkman (eds.). The International
                                              28

       Allocation of Economic Activity. Macmillan.

Ethier, Wifred. 1982. “National and International Returns to Scale in the Modern Theory of

       International Trade”. American Economic Review 72: 389-405.

Ethier, Wilfred. 1986. "The Multinational Firm". Quarterly Journal of Economics 101: 805-833.

Ethier, Wilfred and James R. Markusen.1996. "Multinational Firms, Technology Diffusion and

       Trade". Journal of International Economics 41: 1-28.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson.1996a. "Foreign Investment, Outsourcing, and

       Relative Wages". in R.C. Feenstra, G.M. Grossman, and D.A. Irwin (editors), The

       Political Economy of Trade Policy: Papers in Honor of Jagdish Bhagwati, MIT Press.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson. 1996b, "Globalization, Outsourcing, and Wage

       Inequality". American Economic Review 86: 240-245.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson.1997. "Foreign Direct Investment and Relative

       Wages: Evidence from Mexico's Maquiladoras". Journal of International Economics 42:

       371-393.

Fosfuri, Andrea, Massimo Motta and Thomas Rønde.2001. “Foreign Direct Investment and

       Spillovers through Worker Mobility”. Journal of International Economics 42: 205-221.

Glass, Amy Joyce and Kamal Saggi. 2002, “Multinational Firms and Technology Transfer”.

       Scandinavian Journal of Economics 104: 495-513.

Gomory, Ralph E. And William J. Baumol.2004. “Globalziation: Prospects, Promise, and

       Problems”. Journal of Policy Modeling 26: 425-438.

Grossman, Stanford J. And Oliver D. Hart.1986. “The costs and Benefits of Ownership: A

       Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration”. Journal of Political Economy 94: 691-719.
                                              29

Grubel, Herbert. 1987. “All Traded Services are Embodied in Materials or People”. The World

       Economy 10.

Helpman, Elhanan.1984. "A Simple Theory of Trade with Multinational Corporations". Journal

       of Political Economy 92: 451-471.

Helpman, Elhanan, Mark J. Melitz, and Stephen R. Yeaple.2004. “Exports versus FDI with

       Heterogeneous Firms”. American Economic Review 94: 300-316.

Horstmann, Ignatius J. and James R. Markusen.1987. "Licensing Versus Direct Investment: A

       Model of Internalization by the Multinational Enterprise". Canadian Journal of

       Economics 20: 464-481.

Hummels, David, Jun Ishii and Kie-Mu Yi. 2001. “The Nature and Growth of Vertical

       Specialization in World Trade”. Journal of International Economics 54: 75-96.

Jones, Ronald W., I. Coelho, and Stephen T. Easton.1986. "The Theory of International Factor

       Flows: the Basic Model". Journal of International Economics, 1986: 313-327.

Koopmans, Tjalling.1957. Three Essays on the State of Economic Science, McGraw Hill.

Markusen, James R.1983. “Factor Movements and Commodity Trade as Complements”. Journal

       of International Economics 14: 341-356.

Markusen, James R.1984. “Multinationals, Multi-Plant Economies, and the Gains from Trade”.

       Journal of International Economics 16: 205-226.

Markusen, James R.1989. "Trade in Producer Services and in Other Specialized Intermediate

       Inputs". American Economic Review 79: 85-95.

Markusen, James R.1995. "The Boundaries of Multinational Firms and the Theory of

       International Trade". Journal of Economic Perspectives 9: 169-189.
                                              30

Markusen, James R. 2001. “Contracts, Intellectual Property Rights, and Multinational

       Investment in Developing Countries”. Journal of International Economics 53: 189-204.

Markusen, James R 2002. Multinational Firms and the Theory of International Trade,

       Cambridge: MIT Press.

Markusen, James R., and Anthony J. Venables. 2005. “A Multi-country Approach to Factors

       Proportions Trade and Trade Costs”. NBER working paper 11051.

McGee, Stephen P. and Kwang-Yeol Yoo. 2005. “The United States is a Small Country in World

       Trade: Further Evidence and Implications for Globalization”. University of Texas

       working paper.

Melitz, Mark J. 2003. “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggreate

       Industry Productivity”. Econometrica 71: 1695-1725.

Mundell, Robert A. 1957. "International Trade and Factor Mobility. "American Economic

       Review 47: 321-335.

Neary, J. Peter 1995. "Factor Mobility and International Trade". Canadian Journal of Economics

       28: 1995, S4-S23.

Norman, V.D and A.J. Venables. 1995. “International trade, factor mobility and trade costs”.

       Economic Journal 105: 1488-1505.

Samuelson, Paul A. 2004. “Where Ricardo and Mill Rebut and Confirm Arguments of

       Mainstream Economists Supporting Globalization”. Journal of Economic Perspectives

       18: 135-146.

Yi, Kei-Mu. 2003. “Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth of World Trade”. Journal of

       Political Economy 111: 52-102.
                                            31

Zhang, Kevin Honglin and James R. Markusen. 1999. “Vertical Multinational and Host Country

      Charateristics”. Journal of Development Economics 59: 233-252.
                                                 32

APPENDIX: Example of the simulation models used in the paper

       The models in the paper seem simple enough. The first model begins with the classic

2x2x2 workhorse model of trade theory. All students of economics learn the analytics of this

model, many of these as undergraduates. Any economist can reasonably conjecture that

introducing the ability to geographically fragment some activities should still permit analytical

solutions.

       Unfortunately, it is not nearly that simple. Let us take Case 1 as an example, our simplest

model. We go from two to four production activities: Y, M, S, and final X instead of just Y and

X. The number of possible production specialization patterns for a country goes from 3 to 15

(assumes that you have to produce some of something). In addition, there are a great many more

possible trade patterns, the number going from 2 to 14. In other words, the dimensionality of the

model increases greatly, making the simple analytical methods we are use to much less useful.

       Second, the entire model must now be formulated in terms of inequalities, not equations.

We do not know which of these will hold for a particular set of parameters (e.g., which

production activities and which trade activities are slack), and indeed the set that holds with

equality will typically change a lot when parameters are changed. Allowing fragmentation can,

for example, reverse the direction of trade in X and/or Y. The models are termed non-linear

complementarity problems in math programming language: each weak inequality is associated

with a non-negative complementary variable. If an inequality holds as a strict equality in the

solution, the complementary variable is positive; if it holds as a strict inequality (e.g., marginal

cost exceed price), the complementary variable (quantity in this case), is zero. . Traditional

comparative-statics techniques used on sets of equalities are of no use. If you read some of the
                                                   33

existing literature on production fragmentation, you will then understand why almost none of it

actually solves for a world general equilibrium.

       Thus I have chosen to approach the template models using simulations. I use software

from GAMS, which has the only powerful and robust non-linear complementarity solver in the

business. All models consist of three sets of inequalities and complementary variables. First,

there are zero-profit inequalities for each production and trade activity: marginal cost is greater

than or equal to price. The complementary variable is the output or “activity level” of that

activity. A quantity variable is complementary with the price inequality.

       Second, there are market clearing inequalities: supply of a commodity (good, factor,

import, etc.) is greater than or equal to its demand. The complementary variable is the price of

that commodity. A price variable is complementary to a quantity equations. Finally there is an

income balance equation for each country.

       In this appendix, I give the set of inequalities for model 1. There are 34 production and

trade activities, 24 “commodities” (final goods, intermediate goods, imports and exports, and

utility, which is treated as a good produced from inputs of X and Y in the code), and two income

levels. Walras’ Law makes one equation redundant: I fix the world price of Y at 1, and drop the

world market-clearing equation for Y. Thus the entire model consists of 59 weak inequalities

each with an associated non-negative variable.

       In the body of the paper, I introduced only the notation needed to describe the models in

basic economic terms. Here are the definitions of additional notation need for the formal model.

pki            producer price (i.e., marginal cost) of good k in country i

                       (k = Y, X, M, S; i = North, South)
                                                      34

pcki             consumer/import price of good k in country i

pk               world price of good k

wji              price of primary factor j in country i (j = U, H)

ck(...)          unit cost of producing good k (includes “cost” of producing utility: the unit

                         expenditure function)

EKi              exports of good k by country i

IKi              imports of good k by country i

Wi               welfare of country i

Ii               income of country i



Other:

(1)       market-clearing inequalities make extensive use of Shepard’s lemma, in which the unit

          demand for a good or factor is the derivative of the unit cost function with respect to the

          price of that good or factor.

(2)       very small trade costs, 0.05%, are used to prevent “ties” or, more formally, model

          degeneracy. This prevents, for example, it being equally profitable to both import and

          export a good, which would lead to indeterminancy of gross trade flows and possibly a

          failure to solve (infinitely many solutions differing in gross trade flows).

(3)       solutions without fragmentation permitted are computed by constraining import and

          export activities for S and M to be zero.

(4)       all production activities using more than one input are Cobb-Douglas, with shares as

          follows:
                                                 35

               Y         -     U: 0.70         H: 0.30

               M         -     U: 0.17         H: 0.83

               S         -     U: 0.60         H: 0.40

               X         -     M: 0.70         S: 0.30

       implied shares of primary factors in X produced from domestic M and S are the inverse

       of share for Y.

               X         -     U: 0.30         H: 0.70

(5)    factor endowments ratios for North and South are symmetric:

               North -         H: 0.90         U: 0.10

               South -         H: 0.10         U: 0.90

The model is thus symmetric between North and South and between X and Y without

fragmentation. Endowment ratios having a bigger spread (9/1) than intensities (7/3). If

countries are the same size, then the no-fragmentation equilibrium is symmetric with both

countries specialized, a goods terms of trade of one, factor-price ratios that are inverses in the

two countries, and equal welfare across countries.
                                           36

Inequalities               Complementary variable

zero profit inequalities         activity levels    description (no. of inequalities)

                                                    production of Y in i (2)

                                                    production of M in i (2)

                                                    production of S in i (2)

                                                    production of Xi from Si , Mi (2)

                                                    production of Xi from Sj , Mi (2)

                                                    production of Xi from Si , Mj (2)

                                                    production of Xi from Sj , Mj (2)

                                                    exports of M by i (2)

                                                    imports of M by i (2)

                                                    exports of S by i (2)

                                                    imports of S by i (2)

                                                    exports of X by i (2)

                                                    imports of X by i (2)

                                                    exports of Y by i (2)

                                                    imports of Y by i (2)

                                                    home supply of Yi to i (2)

                                                    production of welfare in i (2)
                                 37

market clearing inequalities   prices   description (no. of inequalities)


                                        supply - demand of Y prod (2)


                                        supply - demand of Y cons (2)



                                        supply - demand for Mi (2)



                                        supply - demand for imported M (2)



                                        supply - demand for Si (2)



                                        supply - demand for imported S (2)



                                        supply - demand for Xi (2)


                                        world market and price for Y (1)


                                        world market and price for M (1)


                                        world market and price for S (1)


                                        world market and price for X (1)


                                        supply - demand for utility (2)
                                38

                                        market for unskilled labor in i (2)



                                        market for skilled labor in i (2)




Income balance inequalities   incomes   description (no. of inequalities)

                                        income balance in country i (2)
