                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       EFFICIENCY AND WELFARE WITH
               COMPLEMENTARITIES AND ASYMMETRIC INFORMATION

                                       George-Marios Angeletos
                                          Alessandro Pavan

                                         Working Paper 11826
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11826


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2005




Earlier versions of this paper were entitled “Social Value of Coordination and Information.” For stimulating
discussions and useful comments, we thank Daron Acemoglu, Gadi Barlevy, Robert Barro, Olivier
Blanchard, Marco Bassetto, Eddie Dekel, Christian Hellwig, Kiminori Matsuyama, Stephen Morris, Thomas
Sargent, Hyun Song Shin, Ivàn Werning, and seminar participants at Harvard, MIT, Michigan, Northwestern,
the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the Bank of Italy, the 2005 workshop on beauty contests at the Isaac
Newton Institute, and the 2005 workshop on coordination games at the Cowles Foundation. We are grateful
to NSF for financial support (collaborative research grants SES-0519069 and SES-0518810) and to the
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis where part of this paper was completed. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2005 by George-Marios Angeletos and Alessandro Pavan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Efficiency and Welfare with Complementarities and Asymmetric Information
George-Marios Angeletos and Alessandro Pavan
NBER Working Paper No. 11826
December 2005
JEL No. C72, D62, D82

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper examines equilibrium and welfare in a tractable class of economies with externalities,
strategic complementarity or substitutability, and incomplete information. In equilibrium,
complementarity amplifies aggregate volatility by increasing the sensitivity of actions to public
information; substitutability raises cross-sectional dispersion by increasing the sensitivity to private
information. To address whether these effects are undesirable from a welfare perspective, we
characterize the socially optimal degree of coordination and the efficient use of information. We
show how efficient allocations depend on the primitives of the environment, how they compare to
equilibrium, and how they can be understood in terms of a social trade-off between volatility and
dispersion. We next examine the social value of information in equilibrium. When the equilibrium
is efficient, welfare necessarily increases with the accuracy of information; and it increases
[decreases] with the extent to which information is common if and only if agents' actions are
strategic complements [substitutes]. When the equilibrium is inefficient, additional effects emerge
as information affects the gap between equilibrium and efficient allocations. We conclude with a few
applications, including production externalities, Keynesian frictions, inefficient fluctuations, and
efficient market competition.

George-Marios Angeletos
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive, E51-251
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
angelet@mit.edu

Alessandro Pavan
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan
Arthur Andersen Hall 3239
Evanston, IL 60208
alepavan@northwestern.edu
1        Introduction

In many economic environments, such as economies with production externalities, incomplete fi-
nancial markets, or monopolistic competition, the action an agent wishes to take depends on his
expectations not only about the underlying fundamentals but also about other agents’ actions. Fur-
thermore, diﬀerent agents have diﬀerent information about the fundamentals and hence diﬀerent
beliefs about what other agents are doing. Clearly, private incentives to coordinate and information
asymmetries impact equilibrium behavior. But, are these incentives socially warranted, and is the
decentralized use of information eﬃcient? Also, does more precise information improve eﬃciency
and welfare?
        In this paper we examine equilibrium and welfare in a tractable class of concave economies
that feature rich external and strategic eﬀects–albeit a unique equilibrium–and asymmetric in-
formation.
        There is a large number of ex-ante identical small agents each taking a continuous decision
(e.g., investment). Individual payoﬀs may depend, not only on one’s own action, but also on the
mean, and possibly the dispersion, of activity in the population–this is the source of external and
strategic eﬀects in the model. Agents observe noisy private and public signals about the underlying
economic fundamentals–this is the source of information asymmetry. Finally, payoﬀs are quadratic
and information is Gaussian, which makes the analysis tractable.
        In equilibrium, strategic complementarity raises the sensitivity of actions to public informa-
tion; strategic substitutability raises the sensitivity to private information. Common noise in pub-
lic information generates volatility; idiosyncratic noise in private information generates dispersion.
It follows that complementarity contributes to higher volatility, substitutability to higher disper-
sion.1
        These are interesting positive properties but alone have no normative content–there should
be no presumption that the impact of strategic eﬀects on the use of information and thereby on
volatility and dispersion is undesirable from a welfare perspective. To address this issue, one needs
to characterize the eﬃcient use of information, which is our first main result.
        We define eﬃcient allocations as the ones that maximize ex-ante utility under the constraint
that information can not be centralized. The eﬃcient allocation for a given economy can be
represented as the equilibrium of a fictitious economy where individual payoﬀs are manipulated to
reflect social motives (that is, to internalize payoﬀ interdependencies). The slope of best responses
with respect to the mean activity in this fictitious economy measures the extent to which agents
must align their choices for eﬃciency to obtain; it defines what we call the (socially) optimal degree
of coordination. The analogue for the actual economy defines the equilibrium degree of coordination.
    1
        The amplification eﬀects of various sorts of complementarities are the subject of a vast literature. See Cooper
(1990) for a review of complete-information applications and Morris and Shin (2002, 2003) for incomplete information.


                                                            1
       We first show how the eﬃcient allocation depends on the primitives of the environment and
how it compares to equilibrium allocation. As with equilibrium, complementarity contributes to
a positive optimal degree of coordination, substitutability to a negative. But unlike equilibrium,
the optimal degree of coordination also depends on other external payoﬀ eﬀects that are irrelevant
for private incentives. In the absence of such non-strategic external eﬀects, the optimal degree of
coordination is higher than the equilibrium one when agents’ actions are strategic complements
(and lower when they are strategic substitutes).
       This result highlights the danger in extrapolating positive properties to normative implica-
tions: in economies with complementarities, the high sensitivity to public information and the
amplification of volatility featured in equilibrium can be socially desirable.
       We next relate the optimal degree of coordination to the eﬃcient use of information. Because
of payoﬀ concavity, both aggregate volatility and cross-sectional dispersion induce welfare losses.
When comparing allocations that diﬀer in their eﬀective degree of coordination–and hence in their
sensitivity to common and idiosyncratic noise–the planner eﬀectively faces a trade-oﬀ between
volatility and dispersion. The resolution of this trade-oﬀ is reflected in the optimal degree of coor-
dination: the latter increases with social aversion to dispersion and decreases with social aversion
to volatility.
       Our second main result is a characterization of the social value of information. For this purpose,
we find it useful to parameterize the information structure by the level and the composition of
noise in the agents’ forecasts of the underlying fundamentals. We identify the accuracy of available
information with the precision of these forecasts, that is, the reciprocal of total noise, and its
transparency (or commonality) with the correlation of forecast error across agents, that is, the
extent to which noise is common. Since in the absence of external eﬀects welfare depends only on
the level and not on the composition of noise, this parametrization seems most appropriate from a
theoretical point of view.2
       When the equilibrium is eﬃcient, welfare necessarily increases with the accuracy of information.
Moreover, welfare increases [decreases] with the transparency of information if and only if agents’
actions are strategic complements [substitutes]. Eﬃciency thus implies a clear relationship between
the form of strategic interaction and the social value of information.
       When the equilibrium is ineﬃcient, information may also aﬀect the gap between equilibrium and
eﬃcient allocations. Its welfare eﬀects then depend, not only on the form of strategic interaction,
but also on two key aspects of this gap: the discrepancy between optimal and equilibrium degrees of
coordination, and the correlation between first-best and complete-information equilibrium activity.
   2
       This parametrization is also appropriate for some applied questions. Think, for example, of a central banker
contemplating whether to transmit information in a transparent or ambiguous way. This need not be simply a choice
about the release of more or less information, but rather a choice about the extent to which individuals will adopt
idiosyncratic or common interpretations of the same piece of information.


                                                          2
    We conclude the paper by illustrating how our results can help understand the ineﬃciencies of
equilibrium and the social value of information in specific applications.
    In a typical model of production spillovers where complementarities emerge in investment
choices, coordination is ineﬃciently low. Moreover, welfare unambiguously increases with either
the accuracy or the transparency of information–a case for timely provision of relevant information
by the government or the media.
    The same result appears to hold in standard Keynesian monetary economies. In contrast,
coordination is ineﬃciently high and transparency can reduce welfare in economies resembling
Keynes’ beauty-contest parable for financial markets. Furthermore, in economies where equilibrium
fluctuations are largely ineﬃcient even under complete information, welfare may decrease with both
accuracy and transparency–from a social perspective, ignorance could be a bless.
    Finally, we consider an example of a competitive production economy where the equilibrium
is eﬃcient even under incomplete information. Since individual actions are strategic substitutes,
welfare increases with accuracy but decreases with transparency–perhaps a case for “constructive
ambiguity” in central bank communication.

    Related literature. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first to conduct a complete
welfare analysis for the class of economies considered here. The closest ascendants are Cooper and
John (1988), who examine economies with complementarities but complete information, and Vives
(1988), who shows eﬃciency of equilibria in a class of competitive economies that is a special case
of the more general class considered here (see Section 6.4).
    However, this paper is certainly not the first to examine the social value of information. Hirsh-
leifer (1971) highlights how distributional eﬀects can drive a wedge between the private and social
value of information. More recently, and more closely related to this paper, Morris and Shin (2002)
show that public information can reduce welfare in an economy that resembles a “beauty contest”
and that features strategic complementarity. Angeletos and Pavan (2004) and Hellwig (2005),
on the other hand, provide counterexamples where public information is socially valuable despite
complementarity–a real economy with investment complementarities in the first paper, a monetary
economy with pricing complementarities in the second. These works illustrate the non-triviality
of the welfare eﬀects of information within the context of specific applications, but do not explain
the general principles underlying the question of interest. We fill the gap here by showing how the
social value of information depends, not only on the form of strategic interaction, but also on other
external eﬀects that determine the discrepancy between equilibrium and eﬃcient allocations.
    The literature on rational expectations has emphasized how the aggregation of disperse private
information in markets can improve allocative eﬃciency (e.g., Grossman, 1981). Laﬀont (1985)
and Messner and Vives (2001), on the other hand, highlight how informational externalities can
generate ineﬃciency in the private collection and use of information. Although the information

                                                 3
structure here is exogenous, the paper provides an input into this line of research by studying how
the welfare eﬀects of private and public information depend on payoﬀ externalities.
        The paper also contributes to the debate about central-bank transparency. While earlier work
focused on incentive problems (e.g., Canzoneri, 1985; Atkeson and Kehoe, 2001; Stokey, 2002),
recent work emphasizes the coordinating role of public information. Morris and Shin (2002, 2005)
and Heinemann and Cornand (2004) argue that central-bank disclosures can lead to welfare losses
if markets behave like in Keynes’ “beauty contest”; Svensson (2005) and Woodford (2005) question
the practical relevance of this result; Hellwig (2005) and Roca (2005) show that public disclosures
can improve welfare by reducing price dispersion. In Section 6.3 we highlight that the welfare
eﬀects of such disclosures ought to depend on whether the business cycle is eﬃcient under complete
information, while in Section 6.4 we show that an argument for constructive ambiguity could be
made even in eﬃcient competitive economies.

        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We introduce the model in Section 2. We examine
equilibrium in Section 3, eﬃciency in Section 4, and the social value of information in Section 5.
We turn to applications in Section 6. The Appendix includes proofs omitted in the main text.


2        The model
Actions and payoﬀs. Consider an economy with a measure-one continuum of agents, each
choosing an action k ∈ R. Let Ψ denote the cumulative distribution function for k in the cross-
                              R
section of the population, K ≡ kdΨ(k) the mean action, and θ = (θ1 , ..., θ N ) ∈ RN a vector of
exogenous payoﬀ-relevant variables (the fundamentals), with N ≥ 1.3 Individual utility is given by

                                                   u = U (k, K, θ),                                                  (1)

where U : RN+2 → R is a strictly concave quadratic function.4,5 Finally, we let W (K, θ) ≡
U (K, K, θ) denote utility (also, aggregate welfare) when all agents choose the same action.
        Externality emerges whenever UK 6= 0, strategic complementarity whenever UkK 6= 0.6 We
restrict −UkK /Ukk within (−1, +1). As we will see in the next section, −UkK /Ukk is the slope of
best responses; restricting this slope within (−1, +1) is necessary and suﬃcient for the existence
of a unique stable equilibrium. We also impose concavity at both the individual and aggregate
level in the sense that Ukk < 0 and WKK ≡ Ukk + 2UkK + UKK < 0. If U were not concave, best
    3
        The analysis is simplest when N = 1, but N > 1 allow us capture the possibility that there are fundamentals
that are relevant for equilibrium but not for eﬃcient allocations, and vice versa.
   4
     That is, U (k, K, θ) = vUv 0 where U is a (n + 3) × (n + 3) negative-definite matrix and v = (1, k, K, θ).
   5
     Note that U depends on Ψ only through its first moment (mean activity); we extend the model to incorporate
an external eﬀect from the second moment (cross-sectional dispersion) at the end of Section 4.
   6
     In what follows, we often refer to UkK as the complementarity even if UkK < 0. That is, we identify substitutability
with negative complementarity.


                                                           4
responses would not be well-defined; similarly, if W were not concave, the first best would not be
well-defined.7
       Information. Before agents move, nature draws θn , for n ∈ {1, ..., N }, from independent
Normal distributions with mean μn and variance σ 2θn . The realization of θ = (θn ) is not observed
by the agents. Instead, for each n, agents observe private signals xin = θn + ξ in and public signals
yn = θn + εn , where ξ in and εn are, respectively, idiosyncratic and common noises, independent of
one another as well as of θ, with variances, respectively, σ 2xn and σ 2yn .
       The common posterior for θn given public information alone is Normal with mean zn ≡
                                                                                               −2 −1/2
E[θn |y] = λn yn + (1 − λn )μn and variance σ 2zn , where λn ≡ σ −2    −2               −2
                                                                 yn /σ zn and σ zn ≡ (σ yn + σ θn )    . In
what follows, we often identify public information with z rather than with y.8 Private posteriors,
on the other hand, are Normal with mean E[θn |xi , y] = (1 − δ n )xin + δ n zn and variance σ 2n , where
δ n ≡ σ −2    −2             −2     −2 −1/2 .
        xn /σ n and σ n ≡ (σ xn + σ zn )
       If we let ω in ≡ θn − E[θn |xi , y] denote agent i’s forecast error about θn , then
                                       ¡ ¢                              ¡          ¢
                            σ 2n = V ar ωin          and      δ n = Corr ωin , ω jn , i 6= j.

Hence, σ n measures the total noise in agents’ forecasts about the fundamentals and δ n the extent
to which noise is common across agents.9 We accordingly identify the accuracy of information with
σ −2
  n and its transparency (or publicity) with δ n .
       We prefer to parametrize the information structure by (δ n , σ n ) rather than (σ xn , σ yn ) for two
reasons. First, this is without any loss of generality since, given the prior, there is a one-to-one
mapping between (σ xn , σ yn ) and (δ n , σ n ) :
                                                                                      −2
                                          −2
                                                                             σ −2
                                                                               yn + σ θn
                    σ −2    −2     −2
                      n = σ xn + σ yn + σ θn > 0 and δ n =                                      ∈ (0, 1).                 (2)
                                                                         σ −2     −2     −2
                                                                           xn + σ yn + σ θn

Second, a change in σ xn or σ yn combines a change in the level of noise, σ n , with a change in its
composition, δ n . If there were no externalities and strategic interactions, welfare would depend
only on σ n , not δ n . With strategic interactions, instead, the extent to which information is public
plays an important role since it aﬀects the structure of higher order beliefs. From a theoretical
point of view, it thus seems most interesting to separate these two eﬀects.10
   7
       For tractability, we have restricted U, and hence W, to be quadratic. For non-quadratic concave environments,
our results represent approximations that are better the lower the noise in information. Convexities, on the other
hand, may introduce eﬀects about which our analysis is not appropriate. For example, aggregate convexities can
generate a social value for lotteries.
   8
     Throughout, we use the convenient vector notation x = (xn ), y = (yn ), and similarly for all other variables. We
also drop the superscript i whenever it does not create confusion.
   9
     Note that δ n is also an increasing transformation of the relative precision of public information.
  10
     In the context of specific applications, however, it is also interesting to translate the results in terms of comparative
statics with respect to (σx , σz ) . See Section 6 for some examples.


                                                              5
3          Equilibrium allocations
Each agent chooses k so as to maximize his expected utility, E[U (k, K, θ)|x, y]. The solution to this
optimization problem gives the best response for the individual. The fixed point is the equilibrium.

Definition 1 An equilibrium allocation is any function k : R2N → R such that, for all (x, y),

                                         k (x, y) = arg max
                                                         0
                                                            E[ U (k0 , K, θ) | x, y ],
                                                            k

where K(θ, ε) = E[ k (x, y) | θ, ε ], for all (θ, ε).11

         It is useful to consider first the complete-information benchmark. When θ is known, the
(unique) equilibrium is k = κ, where κ is the unique solution to Uk (κ, κ, θ) = 0. Since U is
quadratic, κ is linear: κ (θ) = κ0 + κ1 θ1 + ... + κN θN for some constants κn ∈ R, n ∈ {0, 1, ..., N }.12
The incomplete-information equilibrium is then characterized as follows.

Proposition 1 Let κ (θ) = κ0 + κ1 θ1 + ... + κN θN denote the complete-information equilibrium
allocation, N̄ ≡ {n ≥ 1 : κn 6= 0} 6= ∅,13 and
                                                                   UkK
                                                            α≡            .                                                  (3)
                                                                   |Ukk |

         (i) An allocation k : R2n → R is an equilibrium if and only

                                  k(x, y) = E[ (1 − α)κ + αK | x, y ]                for all (x, y)                          (4)

where K(θ, ε) = E[k(x, y)|θ, ε].
         (ii) The equilibrium exists, is unique, and is given by
                                                          X
                                       k(x, y) = κ0 +            κn [(1 − γ n )xn + γ n zn ] ,                               (5)
                                                          n∈N̄

                                                       αδ n (1 − δ n )
                                        γ n = δn +                            for all n ∈ N̄.                                (6)
                                                      1 − α(1 − δ n )

         Proof. Part (i). Take any strategy k : R2N → R and let K(θ, ε) = E[k(x, y)|θ, ε]. A best-
response is a strategy k 0 (x, y) that solves the first-order condition

                                                    E[Uk (k0 , K, θ)|x, y] = 0
    11
         A state of the world is given by the realizations of θ, ε, and {ξ i }i∈[0,1] . However, since ξ is i.i.d. across agents,
K and other aggregates are functions of (θ, ε) alone.
 12
    Since U is quadratic, κ0 = −Uk (0, 0, 0) /(Ukk + UkK ) and κn = −Ukθn /(Ukk + UkK ), n ∈ {1, ..., N }. It follows
that κn 6= 0 if and only if Ukθ 6= 0.
  13
     The assumption N̄ 6= ∅ avoids the trivial case that the fundamentals are irrelevant for equilibrium.


                                                                   6
for all (x, y). Using Uk (κ, κ, θ) = 0 for all θ, and the fact that U is quadratic, the best-response
function must satisfy E[Ukk (k0 − κ) + UkK (K − κ)|x, y] = 0, or equivalently,

                                     k0 (x, y) = E[ (1 − α)κ + αK | x, y ]

for all (x, y). In equilibrium, k 0 (x, y) = k(x, y), which gives (4).
       Part (ii). Since E[κ|x, y] is linear in (x, z), it is natural to look for a fixed point that is linear
in x and z. Thus suppose the equilibrium is

                                             k(x, y) = a + b · x + c · z                                 (7)

for some coeﬃcients a ∈ R, b ∈ RN and c ∈ RN .14 Then K (θ, ε) = a + b · θ + c · z and therefore (4)
reduces to
                        k(x, y) = (1 − α)κ0 + αa + ((1 − α)κ + αb) · E[θ|x, y] + αc · z

where κ = (κ1 , ..., κn ). Substituting E[θ|x, y] = (I − ∆)x + ∆z, where I is the N × N identity
matrix and ∆ is the N × N diagonal matrix with n-th element equal to δ n , we conclude that (7)
is an equilibrium if and only if a, b and c solve

         a = (1 − α)κ0 + αa,       b = (I − ∆) [(1 − α)κ + αb] ,     and c = ∆ [(1 − α)κ + αb] + αc.

Equivalently a = κ0 , bn = κn (1 − α)(1 − δ n )/[1 − α(1 − δ n )], and cn = κn δ n /[1 − α(1 − δ n )],
n ∈ {1, ..., N }. Note that bn + cn = κn always; bn = cn = 0 whenever κn = 0; and bn ∈ (0, κn ) and
cn ∈ (0, κn ) otherwise. Letting γ n ≡ cn /κn ∈ (0, 1) for any n ∈ N̄ gives (5)-(6). Clearly, this is the
unique linear equilibrium. Furthermore, since best responses are linear in E[θ|x, y] and E[K|x, y],
there do not exist equilibria other than this one. (This follows from the same argument as in Morris
and Shin (2002); our payoﬀs are more general but the structure of beliefs and best responses is
essentially the same.)

       Condition (4) has a simple interpretation: an agent’s best response is an aﬃne combination
of his expectation of some given “target” and his expectation of aggregate activity. The target is
simply the complete-information equilibrium. The slope of best responses with respect to aggregate
activity, α, is what we identify with the equilibrium degree of coordination.
       The sensitivity of the equilibrium allocation to private and public information depends on both
the degree of coordination and the transparency of information.When α = 0, the weights on signals
xn and zn are simply the Bayesian weights and hence γ n = δ n . The term [αδ n (1−δ n )]/[1−α(1−δ n )]
thus measures the excess sensitivity of equilibrium allocations to public information as compared
to the case where there are no complementarities. Note that this term is increasing in α. Stronger
complementarities thus lead to a higher relative sensitivity to public information. This is a direct
  14
       A dot between two vectors denotes inner product.


                                                          7
implication of the fact that, in equilibrium, public information is a relatively better predictor
of aggregate behavior than private information. In other words, public information has also a
coordinating role.
         If information were complete (σ n = 0 for all n, or at least for all n ∈ N̄ ), all agents would
choose k = K = κ. Incomplete information aﬀects equilibrium behavior in two ways. First, common
noise generates (non-fundamental) volatility, that is, variation in aggregate activity K around the
complete-information level κ. Second, idiosyncratic noise generates dispersion, that is, variation in
the cross-section of the population. The first is measured by V ar(K −κ), the second by V ar(k−K).
Their dependence on the degree of coordination and the information structure is characterized
below.15

Proposition 2 (i) Volatility, V ar(K − κ), necessarily increases with α and σ n , and increases with
                                          1−α
δ n if and only if α < 0 or δ n <          α .     Moreover, the impact of noise on volatility increases with α
           ∂ 2 V ar(K−κ)
(i.e.,          ∂σ n ∂α    > 0).
         (ii) Dispersion, V ar(k − K), necessarily decreases with α and δ n and increases with σ n . More-
                                                                            ∂ 2 V ar(k−K)
over, the impact of noise on dispersion decreases with α (i.e.,                  ∂σn ∂α     < 0).

         Higher complementarity thus mitigates the impact of noise on dispersion, and obtains a better
alignment of individual choices, but amplifies aggregate volatility. Higher transparency also reduces
dispersion possibly at the expense of higher volatility. Higher accuracy, on the other hand, reduces
both volatility and dispersion. We will examine in more detail the welfare eﬀects of information
later. In the next section, we turn to the characterization of the eﬃcient allocation and show how
this relates to the optimal degree of coordination.


4         Eﬃcient allocations
The property that complementarity generates high sensitivity to common noise, and thereby am-
plifies volatility, is interesting on its own. But this is only a positive property. To address the
normative question of whether these eﬀects are socially undesirable, one needs to understand what
is the eﬃcient use of information. We define eﬃcient allocations as those that maximize ex-ante
welfare (expected utility) among the ones that are measurable in the agents’ decentralized infor-
mation.

Definition 2 An eﬃcient allocation is a function k : R2N → R that maximizes ex-ante utility
                          Z     Z
                   Eu =           U (k(x, y), K(θ, ε), θ)dP (x|θ, ε)dP (θ, ε)
                                       (θ,ε)   x
    15
         In the following, whenever we say “volatility” we mean volatility of aggregate activity around its complete-
information counterpart.


                                                             8
subject to                                     Z
                                   K(θ, ε) =       k (x, y) dP (x|θ, ε), for all (θ, ε).
                                               x
where P (θ, ε) stands for the c.d.f. of the joint distribution of (θ, ε) and P (x|θ, ε) for the conditional
distribution of x given θ and ε.

       We believe that this notion of eﬃciency is appropriate for the purposes of this paper. The
allocation defined above is the solution to the “team problem” where agents choose a strategy
cooperatively and commit to it. It thus answers exactly the question of interest for this paper,
namely how allocations and welfare would change if agents were to internalize their payoﬀ interde-
pendences and appropriately adjust their use of available information.16 What is more, as we will
see in Section 5, it is precisely this notion of eﬃciency that helps understand the social value of
information in equilibrium.
       We start by deriving a necessary and suﬃcient condition for eﬃcient allocations.

Lemma 1 An allocation k : R2N → R is eﬃcient if and only if, for almost all (x, y) ,

                                  E[ Uk (k(x, y), K, θ) + UK (K, K, θ) | x, y ] = 0,                                (8)

where K(θ, ε) = E[k(x, y)|θ, ε].

       Proof. The Lagrangian of the problem in Definition 2 can be written as
           Z        Z
   Λ=                   U (k(x, y), K(θ, ε), θ)dP (x|θ, ε)dP (θ, ε)+
            (θ,ε)   x
                                                      Z            ∙        Z                    ¸
                                                   +        λ(θ, ε) K(θ, ε)− k (x, y) dP (x|θ, ε) dP (θ, ε).
                                                       (θ,ε)                       x

The first order conditions for K(θ, ε) and k(x, y) are therefore given by
              Z
                 UK (k(x, y), K(θ, ε), θ)dP (x|θ, ε) + λ(θ, ε) = 0      for almost all (θ, ε)                       (9)
           Z   x

                 [Uk (k(x, y), K(θ, ε), θ) − λ(θ, ε)]dP (θ, ε|x, y) = 0    for almost all (x, y)                  (10)
                (θ,ε)
                                                                               R
Noting that UK is linear in its arguments and that K(θ, ε) =                    x k (x, y) dP (x|θ, ε),   condition (9)
can be rewritten as −λ(θ, ε) = UK (K(θ, ε), K(θ, ε), θ). Replacing this into (10) gives (8). Since U
is strictly concave and the constraint is linear, (8) is both necessary and suﬃcient, which completes
the proof.
  16
       Our eﬃciency concept is the same as in Radner (1962) or Vives (1988) and shares with Hayek (1945) the idea
that information is disperse and can not be communicated to a “center”. Clearly, this is diﬀerent from eﬃciency
concepts that assume costless communication and focus on incentive constraints (e.g., Mirrlees, 1971; Holmstrom and
Myerson, 1983).


                                                               9
       This result has a simple interpretation. The first-best allocation, which corresponds to the
case where θ is commonly known and is henceforth denoted by κ∗ (θ), maximizes W (K, θ) ≡
U (K, K, θ). It thus solves the the first-order condition WK (K, θ) = 0, or equivalently Uk (K, K, θ) +
UK (K, K, θ) = 0.17 The incomplete-information counterpart of this condition is (8).
       We can then expand this condition to characterize the eﬃcient allocation under incomplete
information in a similar fashion as with equilibrium.

Proposition 3 Let κ∗ (θ) = κ∗0 + κ∗1 θ1 + ... + κ∗N θN denote the first-best allocation, N̄ ∗ ≡ {n ≥ 1 :
κ∗n 6= 0} 6= ∅, and
                                                 2UkK + UKK        UKK
                                        α∗ ≡                = 2α +        .                                     (11)
                                                    |Ukk |         |Ukk |
       (i) An allocation k : R2N → R is eﬃcient if and only if

                       k(x, y) = E[ (1 − α∗ )κ∗ + α∗ K | x, y ]                 for almost all (x, y),          (12)

where K(θ, ε) ≡ E[k(x, y)|θ, ε].
       (ii) The eﬃcient allocation exists, is essentially unique, and is given by
                                                   X
                                k(x, y) = κ∗0 +                  κ∗n [(1 − γ ∗n )xn + γ ∗n zn ] ,               (13)
                                                        n∈N̄ ∗

                                                  α∗ δ n (1 − δ n )
                                  γ ∗n = δ n +                            for all n ∈ N̄ ∗ .                    (14)
                                                 1 − α∗ (1 − δ n )

       In equilibrium, each agent’s action was an aﬃne combination of his expectation of κ, the
complete-information equilibrium action, and of his expectation of aggregate activity. The same is
true here for the eﬃcient allocation if we replace κ with κ∗ , the first-best action, and α with α∗ . In
this sense, condition (12) is the analogue for eﬃciency of the best response for equilibrium. This
idea is formalized by the following.

Proposition 4 Given an economy e = (U ; σ, δ, μ, σ θ ) ∈ E, let U (e) be the set of functions U 0 such
that, if agents perceived their payoﬀs to be U 0 rather than U, the equilibrium would coincide with
the eﬃcient allocation for e.
       (i) For every e, U (e) is non-empty.
       (ii) For every e, U 0 ∈ U (e) only if α0 ≡ −UkK
                                                    0 /U 0 equals α∗ .
                                                        kk


       Part (i) states that the eﬃcient allocation can be represented as the equilibrium of a fictitious
game where individual incentives are manipulated so as to coincide with social incentives.18 Part
  17
       Since U and hence W is quadratic, κ∗ (θ) = κ∗0 + κ∗1 θ1 + ... + κ∗N θN , where κ∗0 = −WK (0, 0) /WKK and κ∗n =
−WKθn /WKK , n ∈ {1, ..., N }. It follows that κ∗n 6= 0 if and only if WKθn ≡ Ukθn + UKθn 6= 0.
 18
    In some cases, this may also suggest a way to implement the eﬃcient allocation. For example, the government
may be able to use taxes and subsidies to fashion individual best-responses.


                                                             10
(ii), on the other hand, explains why we identify α∗ with the optimal degree of coordination: α∗
describes the level of complementarity that agents should perceive if the eﬃcient allocation were
to obtain as an equilibrium outcome, that is, if all externalities were to be internalized.
      The counterpart of optimal coordination is the eﬃcient use of information: the higher the opti-
mal degree of coordination, the higher the sensitivity of eﬃcient allocations to public information.

Corollary 1 The relative sensitivity of the eﬃcient allocation to public information is higher than
that of the equilibrium allocation if and only if the optimal degree of coordination is higher than the
equilibrium one, which is turn is true if and only if the complementarity is high enough relative to
second-order non-strategic eﬀects:

                    γ ∗n ≥ γ n ∀n ∈ N̄ ∩ N̄ ∗     ⇐⇒      α∗ ≥ α      ⇐⇒      UkK ≥ −UKK .        (15)

      Proposition 3 and Corollary 1 show how the eﬃcient allocation depends on the primitives of the
environment and how it compares to the equilibrium one. As with equilibrium, the optimal degree
of coordination is increasing in the complementarity, UkK ,. But unlike equilibrium, the optimal
degree of coordination depends also on UKK , a second-order external eﬀect that does not aﬀect
private incentives. In the absence of such an eﬀect, the optimal degree of coordination is higher (in
absolute value) than the equilibrium one (α∗ = 2α) reflecting the internalization of the externality
generated by the complementarity.
      To understand better the forces behind the determination of the optimal degree of coordination,
an alternative representation is useful. Welfare (ex-ante utility) at the eﬃcient allocation can be
expressed as Eu = EW (κ∗ , θ) − L∗ , where
                                      |WKK |                 |Ukk |
                               L∗ =          V ar(K − κ∗ ) +        V ar(k − K).                  (16)
                                        2                      2
Note that EW (κ∗ , θ) is ex-ante utility in the first-best allocation, while L∗ captures the welfare
losses associated with incomplete information, namely those due to aggregate volatility and cross-
sectional dispersion.19
      That volatility and dispersion generate welfare losses follows directly from concavity of prefer-
ences. Naturally, the weight on volatility is given by WKK , the curvature of welfare with respect
to aggregate activity, while the weight on dispersion is given by Ukk , the curvature of utility with
respect to individual activity. Note that WKK = Ukk + 2UkK + UKK . When there are no strategic
and second-order external eﬀects (in the sense that UkK = UKK = 0), aggregate welfare inher-
its the curvature of individual utility (WKK = Ukk ), so that volatility and dispersion contribute
equally to welfare losses. Complementarity (UkK > 0) helps oﬀset the diminishing returns faced at
the individual level, thus reducing concavity in the aggregate (WKK ) and therefore the weight on
volatility. The converse is true for substitutability (UkK < 0) or external concavity (UKK < 0).
 19
      Condition (16) follows from a Taylor expansion around k = K = κ∗ (θ); see the Appendix.


                                                        11
       Volatility is generated by common noise, dispersion by idiosyncratic noise. Increasing the rela-
tive sensitivity of allocations to public information–equivalently, raising the degree of coordination–
dampens dispersion at the expense of higher volatility. The eﬃcient use of information reflects the
resolution of this trade-oﬀ.


Corollary 2 The optimal degree of coordination equals one minus the weight that welfare assigns
to volatility relative to dispersion:
                                                              WKK
                                                α∗ = 1 −          .                                     (17)
                                                              Ukk

       Extension. In some applications of interest, cross-sectional dispersion has a direct external
eﬀect on individual utility. For example, price dispersion has a negative eﬀect on individual utility
in New-Keynesian monetary models (see Hellwig, 2005). In the beauty contest of Morris and Shin
(2002), on the other hand, dispersion has positive external eﬀect (see Section 6.2).
       We can easily accommodate such an eﬀect–and we do so for the rest of the paper–provided
that dispersion enters linearly in the utility function: U (k, K, θ, σ 2k ) with Uσ2 ∈ R being a constant
          R                                                                        k
and σ 2k ≡ (k − K)2 dΨ(k). Then all our results go through once we replace the welfare weight on
dispersion with Ukk + 2Uσ2 .20 In particular, welfare is now given by Eu = EW (κ∗ , θ) − L∗ , where
                               k



                                   |WKK |                 |Ukk + 2Uσ2 |
                            L∗ =          V ar(K − κ∗ ) +           k
                                                                        V ar(k − K).                    (18)
                                     2                          2

The optimal degree of coordination is

                                                           WKK
                                             α∗ = 1 −               .
                                                         Ukk + 2Uσ2
                                                                      k


Finally condition (15) becomes

                 γ ∗n ≥ γ n ∀n ∈ N̄ ∩ N̄ ∗    ⇐⇒        α∗ ≥ α   ⇐⇒       UkK ≥ −UKK + 2Uσ2 .
                                                                                             k



       Note that α∗ is increasing in UKK (or η) and decreasing in Uσ2 (or ω). This is intuitive.
                                                                                k
A higher UKK decreases the social cost of volatility, while a higher Uσ2 decreases the social cost
                                                                                    k
of dispersion. Both these eﬀects are external and non-strategic–they aﬀect the social value of
coordination without aﬀecting private incentives. The former contributes to a higher optimal
degree of coordination, the latter to a lower.

       Eﬃcient economies. We conclude this section with necessary and suﬃcient conditions for
the equilibrium to be eﬃcient under incomplete information.
  20
       In analogy to WKK < 0, we impose Ukk + 2Uσ2 < 0, which is necessary and suﬃcient for welfare to depend
                                                    k
negatively on dispersion.


                                                         12
Proposition 5 The equilibrium is eﬃcient if and only if

                                              κ(·) = κ∗ (·)    and   α = α∗ ,

or, equivalently, UkK +UKK −2Uσ2 = 0, UK (0, 0, 0) = Uk (0, 0, 0) UkK /Ukk , and UKθn = Ukθn UkK /Ukk
                                          k
for all n.

         The condition κ(·) = κ∗ (·) means that the equilibrium is eﬃcient under complete information.
But eﬃciency under complete information alone does not guarantee eﬃciency under incomplete
information. What is also needed is eﬃciency in the use of information which obtains when in
addition the equilibrium and the optimal degrees of coordination coincide.21


5         Social value of information
We now examine the impact of information on equilibrium welfare (allowing for Uσ2 6= 0), starting
                                                                                                   k
with economies where the equilibrium is eﬃcient. This provides a useful benchmark, not only
because eﬃciency is always an excellent starting point, but also because in our class of economies
eﬃciency implies a clear relation between the form of strategic interaction and the social value of
information.

Proposition 6 Suppose the equilibrium is eﬃcient. For any n ∈ N̄ , welfare necessarily decreases
with σ n , and increases [decreases] with δ n if and only if agents’ actions are strategic complements
[substitutes].

         As highlighted in the previous section, the impact of information on welfare at the eﬃcient
allocation is summarized in the impact of noise on volatility and dispersion (see condition (18)).
An increase in σ n for given δ n raises both volatility and dispersion and therefore necessarily reduces
welfare. An increase in δ n for given σ n , on the other hand, is equivalent to a reduction in dispersion,
possibly at the expenses of volatility. Such a substitution is welfare-improving if and only if the
social cost of dispersion is higher than that of volatility, that is, if and only if α∗ > 0.
         Note that, when the equilibrium allocation is eﬃcient, it maximizes ex-ante expected utility.
That accuracy is beneficial can then be obtained also an implication of Blackwell’s theorem. Indeed,
the same observation implies that, when the equilibrium is eﬃcient, welfare necessarily decreases
with either σ xn or σ yn , for any n ∈ N̄ .

Corollary 3 Suppose the equilibrium is eﬃcient. Welfare necessarily increases with the precision
of either private or public information.
    21
         Note that α and α∗ depend on U but not on (σ, δ) . This explains why eﬃciency can be checked on the basis of
the payoﬀ structure alone, as shown in Proposition 5 above.


                                                              13
       In economies where the equilibrium is ineﬃcient, the welfare eﬀects of information are more
complicated for two reasons. First, the equilibrium degree of coordination need not coincide with
the optimal one (α 6= α∗ ), thus introducing ineﬃciency in the way the trade-oﬀ between volatility
and dispersion is resolved. Second, the equilibrium level of activity may diﬀer from the socially
optimal one even under complete information (κ 6= κ∗ ), thus introducing first-order welfare losses
in addition to those associated with volatility and dispersion.
       Consider first the role of α 6= α∗ , maintaining for a moment κ = κ∗ . The welfare losses associated
with incomplete information continue to be the weighted sum of volatility and dispersion, as in
(18).22 For given α, a higher α∗ means a lower relative weight on volatility and hence a lower
cost associated with an increase in δ n .23 It follows that, relatively to the eﬃciency benchmark
(Proposition 6), ineﬃciently low coordination (α < α∗ ) increases the social value of transparency,
while ineﬃciently high coordination (α > α∗ ) reduces it. On the other hand, the possibility that
α 6= α∗ does not aﬀect the value of accuracy: a lower σ n reduces both volatility and dispersion and
therefore necessarily increases welfare.
       Consider next the role of κ 6= κ∗ , in which case the equilibrium is ineﬃcient even under complete
information. In equilibrium, welfare is given by Eu = EW (κ, θ) − L, where

                                              |WKK |                 |Ukk + 2Uσ2 |
                                                                               k
         L = −Cov (K − κ, WK (κ, θ)) +               · V ar(K − κ) +               · V ar(k − K)                    (19)
                                                2                          2

are the welfare losses due to incomplete information.24 The last two terms in L are the familiar
welfare losses associated with volatility and dispersion (second-order eﬀects). The covariance term,
on the other hand, captures a novel first-order eﬀect. When the complete-information equilibrium is
eﬃcient (κ = κ∗ and hence WK (κ, θ) = 0), the covariance term is zero; this is merely an implication
of the fact that small deviations around a maximum have zero first-order eﬀects. But when the
complete-information equilibrium is ineﬃcient due to externalities (WK (κ, θ) 6= 0), the covariance
term contributes to a welfare loss or gain; this is because a positive [negative] correlation between
K − κ, the “error” in aggregate activity due to incomplete information, and WK (κ, θ), the social
return to activity, mitigates [exacerbates] the first-order losses associated with externalities.
       As shown in the Appendix (Proof of Proposition 7), this covariance term can be expressed as

                                                                                               X
                Cov (K − κ, WK (κ, θ)) = |WKK |Cov (K − κ, κ∗ − κ) = |WKK |                           φn vn         (20)
                                                                                               n∈N̄

  22
       As obvious from the derivation of (16) in the Appendix, (16) and similarly (18) extend to α 6= α∗ as long as
κ = κ∗ . This can also be seen from (19) below noting that WK (κ, θ) = 0 when κ = κ∗ .
  23
     Recall from Proposition 2 that volatility increases with δ n if and only if α < 0 or δ < (1 − α) /α, which we assume
here in order to simplify the discussion. In the alternative case, welfare necessarily increases with δ n (when κ = κ∗ ).
  24
     Condition (19) follows from a Taylor expansion around K = κ(θ); see Appendix.


                                                           14
where, for all n ∈ N̄ ,
                              κ∗n − κn      Cov ( κ∗ − κ, κ | θ−n )
                       φn ≡             =                           ,
                                 κn              V ar ( κ | θ−n )
                                      1
                       vn   ≡ −             κ2 σ 2 = Cov ( K − κ, κ | θ−n ) ,
                                1 − α + αδ n n n
with θ−n standing for (θj )j6=n . The coeﬃcients vn capture the covariation between K − κ, the
aggregate “error” due to incomplete information, and κ, the complete-information equilibrium,
while the coeﬃcients φn capture the covariation between the latter and κ∗ − κ, the eﬃciency gap
under complete information.
     A lower σ n always implies a vn closer to zero, for less noise brings K closer to κ for any given
θ. But how this aﬀects welfare depends on whether getting K closer to κ also means getting K
closer to κ∗ , which in turn depends on the correlation between complete-information equilibrium
and first best. Intuitively, less noise brings K closer to κ∗ when φn > 0 but further away when
φn < 0. As a result, the welfare contribution of a lower σ n through the covariance term in (19) is
positive when φn > 0 but negative when φn < 0. Combining this with the eﬀect of σ n on volatility
and dispersion, we conclude that higher accuracy necessarily increases welfare when φn > 0 (i.e.,
when the correlation between equilibrium and first best is positive) but can reduce welfare when
φn is suﬃciently negative.
     The impact of δ n on vn , on the other hand, depends on the sign of the complementarity: higher
transparency increases the covariance between K and κ when α > 0 but decreases it when α < 0.
How this in turn aﬀects welfare depends again on the sign of φn . Hence, as evident from (20),
the sign of the eﬀect of δ n on first-order welfare losses depends on the sign of the product of α
and φn . Combining this with the eﬀects of δ n on volatility and dispersion, and noting that the
covariance term dominates for φn suﬃciently away from zero, we conclude that φn suﬃciently high
[low] suﬃces for the welfare eﬀect of δ to have the same [opposite] sign as α.
     These insights are verified in the following complete characterization of the welfare eﬀects of
information.
                                                       0
Proposition 7 There exist functions φ, φ0 , φ̄, φ̄ : (−1, 1) × (−∞, 1) → R, with φ ≤ φ̄ and φ0 ≤
 0
φ̄ < 0, such that the following are true for any n ∈ N̄ :

[Strategic Independece] When α = 0, welfare increases [decreases] with δ n for all (σ n , δ n ) if
      and only if α∗ > 0 [α∗ < 0].

[Strategic Complementarity] When α ∈ (0, 1), welfare increases [decreases] with δ n for all
      (σ n , δ n ) if and only if φn > φ̄(α, α∗ ) [φn < φ(α, α∗ )].

[Strategic Substitutability] When α ∈ (−1, 0), welfare increases [decreases] with δ n for all
      (σ n , δ n ) if and only if φn < φ(α, α∗ ) [φn > φ̄(α, α∗ )].

                                                       15
                                                                                                 0
[Accuracy] Welfare decreases [increases] with σ n for all (σ n , δ n ) if and only if φ > φ̄ (α, α∗ )
       [φ < φ0 (α, α∗ )]
                           0
The functions φ, φ0 , φ̄, φ̄ are invariant with E and satisfy the following properties: (i) φ = φ0 = φ̄ =
 0
φ̄ = − 12 whenever α = α∗ ; (ii) for α ∈ (0, 1), φ < 0 if and only if α > 1/2 or α∗ > −α2 /(1 − 2α),
while φ̄ < 0 if and only if α∗ > α2 ; and (iii) for α ∈ (−1, 0), φ < 0 if and only if α∗ < α2 , while
φ̄ < 0 if and only if α∗ < −α2 /(1 − 2α).

      By Proposition 5, the equilibrium is eﬃcient if and only if α = α∗ and κ = κ∗ , in which case
the welfare eﬀects of information are given by 6. If the only ineﬃciency is either that κ0 6= κ∗0 or
that κ∗n 6= 0(= κn ) for some n ∈
                                / N̄ , then this ineﬃciency does not aﬀect the comparative statics of
equilibrium welfare with respect to (δ n , σ n ) for n ∈ N̄ ; that is, Proposition 6 continues to hold for
all n ∈ N̄ as long as α = α∗ and φn = 0 for all n ∈ N̄ . Away from this benchmark, Proposition
5 implies that the social value of information can still be understood as a function of α, α∗ , and
(φn )n∈N̄ . We conclude that understanding the eﬃcient use of information–which is what we did
in the previous section–is also instrumental for understanding the social value of information.
      The following suﬃcient conditions are then immediate for the case where κ∗ − κ, the complete-
information eﬃciency gap, is either constant or positively correlated with κ.

Corollary 4 Suppose (φn )n∈N̄ ≥ 0, in which case Cov (κ∗ − κ, κ) ≥ 0. Then, welfare always in-
creases with the accuracy of information, whereas it increases with its transparency if α∗ ≥ α > 0,
and decreases with it if α∗ ≤ α < 0.

      The following case is also interesting, as it contrasts with the Blackwell-like result we encoun-
tered earlier for eﬃcient economies.

Corollary 5 Suppose φn < −1/2 and α = α∗ = 0. Welfare decreases with the precision of either
private or public information about θn .


6     Applications
In this section, we show how our results may help understand the relation between equilibrium
and eﬃcient allocations and the welfare eﬀects of information in specific contexts of interest. For
simplicity, in most cases we assume a single fundamental variable (N = 1) and drop the index n.

6.1     Investment complementarities

The canonical model of production externalities can be nested by interpreting k as investment and
defining individual payoﬀs as follows:

                                     U (k, K, θ) = A(K, θ)k − c(k),                                  (21)

                                                   16
where A(K, θ) = (1 − a)θ + aK represents the private return to investment, with a ∈ (0, 1/2) and
θ ∈ R, and c(k) = k 2 /2 the private cost of investment.25 Variants of this specification appear in
Bryant (1983), Romer (1986), Matsuyama (1992), Acemoglu (1993), and Benhabib and Farmer
(1994), as well as models of network externalities and spillovers in technology adoption. The
important ingredient is that the private return to investment increases with the aggregate level of
investment–the source of both complementarity and externality in this class of models.
          The equilibrium level of investment under complete information is κ = θ, whereas the first best
                1−a                         a
is   κ∗     =   1−2a θ,   and hence φ =   1−2a   > 0. That is, investment is ineﬃciently low for all θ > 0, and
the more so the higher θ. Furthermore, Ukk = −1, UkK = a > 0, and UKK = Uσ2 = 0. That is,
                                                                                                     k
there is a positive complementarity but no other second-order external eﬀect. It follows that the
equilibrium degree of coordination is positive and the optimal one is also positive and indeed higher
that the equilibrium one: α = a > 0 and α∗ = 2α > α > 0. Using this together with Corollary 4,
we have the following result.

Corollary 6 In the investment example described above, coordination is ineﬃciently low and wel-
fare unambiguously increases with both the accuracy and the transparency of information.

          In this example the agents’ private desire to coordinate is, not only socially warranted, but
actually not strong enough. It is then intuitive that higher transparency, or more precise public
information, necessarily increases welfare by facilitating better coordination.26
          Economies with frictions in financial markets–where complementarities emerge through col-
lateral constraints, missing assets, or other types of market incompleteness–are often related to
economies with investment complementarities like the one considered here. Although this is appro-
priate for many positive questions, it need not be so for normative purposes. As the examples we
study in the next two sections highlight, the result here depends on the absence of certain second-
order external eﬀects and on a suﬃciently strong correlation between equilibrium and first-best
activity. Whether these properties are shared by mainstream incomplete-market models is an open
question.


6.2          “Beauty contests” vs. other Keynesian frictions

Keynes contended that financial markets often behave like “beauty contests” in the sense that
traders try to forecast and outbid one another’s forecasts, but this motive is (presumably) not
     25
          This is the example we examined in Angeletos and Pavan (2004), although there we computed welfare conditional
on θ, thus omitting the eﬀect of Cov (κ, K − κ) on welfare losses.
  26
     Translating these results in terms of σx and σ y , it is easy to show that welfare unambiguously increases with a
reduction in either σx or σ y . Hence, both public and private information are beneficial in this example. However, a
higher α, by increasing the value of transparency, increases the welfare gain of public information and decreases that
of private information.


                                                             17
warranted from a social perspective because it is due to some (unspecified) market imperfection.
Capturing this idea with proper microfoundations is an open question, but one possible shortcut,
following Morris and Shin (2002), is to define a “beauty-contest economy” as an economy in which
α > 0 = α∗ and κ(·) = κ∗ (·). The first condition means that the private motive to coordinate is not
warranted from a social perspective; the second means that the ineﬃciency of equilibrium vanishes
as information becomes complete. By Proposition 7 we then have the following.

Corollary 7 In beauty-contest economies, welfare is increasing in accuracy but non-monotonic in
transparency.

       The specific payoﬀ structure assumed by Morris and Shin (2002) is given by

                                     ui = −(1 − r) · (ki − θ)2 − r · (Li − L̄)
                                                                         R
where θ ∈ R is the underlying fundamental, Li = L(ki ) ≡                     (k0 − ki )2 dΨ(k0 ) is the mean square-
                                                                        R
distance of agent i0 s action from other agents’ actions, L̄ =               L(k)dΨ(k) is the cross-sectional mean
of Li , and r ∈    (0, 1).27   This example is nested in our framework with28

                         U (k, K, θ, σ 2k ) = −(1 − r) · (k − θ)2 − r · (k − K)2 + r · σ 2k .

It follows that κ∗ = κ = θ, Ukk = −2, UkK = 2r, UKK = −2r, Uσ2 = r, and hence α = r > 0 = α∗ .
                                                                                 k
       Note how this example features two external eﬀects that tilt the trade-oﬀ between volatility and
dispersion in the opposite direction than the complementarity. In particular, UKK < 0 increases
the social cost of volatility, while Uσ2 > 0 decreases the social cost of dispersion. Both eﬀects
                                              k
are non-strategic, in the sense that they do not aﬀect private incentives, and both contribute to
reducing the social value of coordination. In the specific example considered by Morris and Shin
(2002), these eﬀects perfectly oﬀset the impact of the complementarity, so that the optimal level
of coordination is zero–which explains why transparency, and thereby public information, can be
welfare-reducing.
       Keyensian frictions such as monopolistic competition or incomplete markets are in the heart of
various macroeconomic complementarities (a.k.a. “multipliers” or “accelerators”). These frictions
share with beauty contests the idea that complementarity originates in some market imperfection.
However, the normative properties of beauty contests need not be shared by other Keynesian
frictions.
  27
       The first term in ui captures the value of taking an action close to a fundamental “target” θ. The Li term
introduces a private value for taking an action close to others’ actions, whereas the L̄ term ensures that there is
                                                                                   R
no social value in doing so. Indeed, aggregating across agents gives w = −(1 − r) (k − θ)2 dΨ(k), so that, from a
social perspective, it is as if utility were simply u = −(k − θ)2 , in which case there is of course no social value to
coordination.
                   R                     2
  28
     Note that Li = ((k0 − K) − (ki − K)) dΨ (k0 ) = (ki − K)2 + σ2k , L̄ = 2 · σ 2k , and Li − L̄ = (ki − K)2 − σ2k .


                                                           18
      Consider, for example, new-Keynesian monetary models where complementarity emerges in
pricing decisions (e.g., Woodford, 2003; Hellwig, 2005; Lorenzoni, 2005; Roca, 2005). In this
class of models, imperfect substitutability across goods results in a negative externality from cross-
sectional dispersion in prices (Uσ2 < 0), which in turn contributes to a higher optimal degree of
                                         k
coordination–the opposite of what happens in the beauty contest above. Hellwig (2005) provides
an excellent analysis of this class of models. He shows that the optimal sensitivity to public
information is higher than the equilibrium one. Moreover, the business cycle is eﬃcient under
complete information. Translating these properties in our framework gives α∗ > α > 0 and φ = 0,
in which case, by Corollary 4, welfare increases with both accuracy and transparency. This helps
understand why, unlike in Morris and Shin (2002), public information is welfare improving in
Hellwig (2005) and Roca (2005).


6.3      Ineﬃcient fluctuations

The focus in the previous section was on how the complementarity and second-order eﬀects tilt the
trade-oﬀ between volatility and dispersion. We now turn focus to first-order eﬀects. In particular,
we consider economies where the eﬃciency gap κ∗ −κ co-varies negatively with κ–that is, economies
where recessions are ineﬃciently deep.
      To isolate the impact of first-order eﬀects (φ 6= 0), we abstract from strategic and second-order
external eﬀects (UkK = UKK = Uσ2 = 0), so that α∗ = α = 0. From Proposition 7 then φ < −1/2 is
                                          k
necessary and suﬃcient for welfare to decrease with accuracy and be independent of transparency.

Corollary 8 Suppose that α∗ = α = 0 and that equilibrium fluctuations are suﬃciently ineﬃcient
                                          1
in the sense that Cov (κ, κ∗ ) <          2 V ar(κ).   Then welfare decreases with either private or public
information.

      As an example, consider an economy where θ = (θ1 , θ2 ) ∈ R2 and where agents engage in an
investment activity without complementarity but for which private and social returns diﬀer:

                                  U (k, K, θ, σ 2k ) = θ1 k − k 2 /2 + λ(θ2 − θ1 )K,

for some λ ∈
           / (0, 1). The private return to investment is θ1 , while the social return is θ2 6= θ1 . It
follows that κ = θ1 , while κ∗ = (1 − λ) θ1 + λθ2 , and hence φ1 = −λ. If λ < 1/2, meaning that
the discrepancy between private and social returns is small enough, then φ1 > −1/2 and welfare
increases with either private or public information about θ1 . But if λ < 1/2, meaning that the
correlation between private and social returns is close to zero, then φ = −1 < −1/2 and welfare
decreases with either private or public information about θ1 . A special case of this is when λ = 1
and σ θ2 = 0, so that κ∗ is constant and the entire fluctuation in investment is ineﬃcient.29
 29
      If we maintain that the correlation between κ and κ∗ is low enough but let α∗ = α > 0, then welfare continues to


                                                          19
      The recent debate on the merits of transparency in central bank communication has focused
on the role of complementarities in new-Keynesian models (e.g., Morris and Shin, 2002; Svensson,
2005; Woodford, 2005; Hellwig, 2005; Roca, 2005). The results of this and the previous section
suggest that this debate might be somewhat misfocused–a critical role is played by the ineﬃciency
of equilibrium fluctuations.
      For example, we conjecture that the result in Hellwig (2005) and Roca (2005) that public
information has a positive eﬀect on welfare relies on the property that the business cycle is eﬃcient
in these models. In standard new-Keynesian models (e.g., Woodford, 2003) the monopolistic mark-
up introduces an eﬃciency gap. As long fluctuations are driven by productivity, taste, or monetary
shocks–which is the case in Hellwig (2005) and Roca (2005)–this gap remains constant over the
business cycle. But if the business cycle is driven by shocks in mark-ups or the “labor wedge,” it
seems possible that providing markets with information that helps predict these shocks can reduce
welfare. This is an interesting question that we leave open for future research.


6.4     Eﬃcient competitive economies

The examples considered so far feature either positive complementarity or some form of ineﬃciency.
We now turn to competitive economies where agents’ choices are strategic substitutes and where
the equilibrium is eﬃcient under both complete and incomplete information.30
      There is a continuum of households, each consisting of a consumer and a producer, and two
commodities. Let q1i and q2i denote the respective quantities purchased by consumer i (the con-
sumer living in household i). His preferences are given by

                                               ui = v(q1i , θ) + q2i ,                                          (22)

where v(q, θ) = θq − bq 2 /2, θ ∈ R, and b > 0, while his budget is

                                               pq1i + q2i = e + π i ,                                           (23)

where p is the price of good 1 relative to good 2, e is an exogenous endowment of good 2, and π i
are the profits of producer i (the producer living in household i), which are also denominated in
terms of good 2. Profits in turn are given by

                                                 π i = pki − c (ki )                                            (24)

decrease with accuracy but now it also decreases with transparency–which strengthens particularly the case against
public information.
  30
     We constructed this class of quadratic competitive economies independently but then found out that Vives (1988)
had proved eﬃciency of equilibria for exactly this class long before us. Hence, with regard to this particular class,
only the welfare eﬀects of information are novel here.


                                                         20
where ki denotes the quantity of good 1 produced by household i and c(k) the cost in terms of
good 2, with c (k) = k2 /2.31
       The random variable θ represents a shock in the relative demand for the two goods. Exchange
and consumption take place once θ has become common knowledge. On the contrary, production
takes place at an earlier stage, when information is still incomplete.
       Consumer i chooses (q1i , q2i ) so as to maximize (22) subject to (23), which gives p = θ − bq1i .
Clearly, all households consume the same quantity of good 1, which together with market clearing
                                                      R
gives q1i = K for all i and p = θ − bK, where K = kdΨ(k). It follows that i’s utility can be
restated as ui = v(K, θ) − pK + e + π i = bK 2 /2 + e + π i , where π i = pki − c (ki ) = (θ − bK)ki − ki2 /2.
This example is thus nested in our model with

                              U (k, K, θ, σ 2k ) = (θ − bK)ki − ki2 /2 + bK 2 /2 + e,

in which case κ∗ = κ = θ/ (1 + b) , Ukk = −1, UkK = −b, UKK = b, Uσ2 = 0, and therefore φ = 0
                                                                                       k
and α∗ = α = −b < 0.
       That the complete-information equilibrium is eﬃcient (κ = κ∗ ) should not be a surprise. Un-
der complete information, the economy is merely an example of a complete-markets competitive
economy in which the first welfare theorem applies. What is interesting is that the equilibrium
remains (constrained) eﬃcient under incomplete information, despite the absence of ex-ante com-
plete markets. This is because the strategic substitutability perceived by the agents coincides with
the one that the planner would have liked them to perceive (α∗ = α) .32 The following is then a
direct implication of Proposition 6.

Corollary 9 In the competitive economy described above, the equilibrium is eﬃcient and welfare
unambiguously decreases with both δ and σ.

       This result may be relevant for the debate on transparency vs. constructive ambiguity in
monetary policy. If we interpret “transparent” central bank disclosures as information that admits
a single common interpretation and “ambiguous” disclosures as information that admits multiple
idiosyncratic interpretations, then the result above makes a case for constructive ambiguity. This
may be reminiscent of Morris and Shin (2002), but is diﬀerent. Whereas the result there was
driven by ineﬃciently high coordination (α∗ = 0 < α), here it is due to eﬃcient substitutability
(α∗ = α < 0). It is perhaps more surprising that a case for constructive ambiguity can be made
even for eﬃcient competitive economies.
  31
     Implicit behind this cost function is a quadratic production frontier. The resource constraints are therefore given
   R        R         R             R
by i q1i = i ki and i q2i = e − 12 i ki2 for good 1 and 2, respectively.
  32
     The equilibrium would be ineﬃcient if we had defined welfare as producer surplus alone, which may be relevant
for open economies that are net exporters of good 2. In this case, ui = π i and therefore α∗ = −2b < α = −b < 0; that
is, the cooperative solution between the producers would involve stronger substitutability (and hence less sensitivity
to public information) than equilibrium.


                                                          21
       Finally, this last result opens up the possibility that the informative role of prices may be
welfare damaging even in competitive economies where the use of information is eﬃcient. For
example, suppose that an exogenous increase in the informativeness of prices–caused for example
by a reduction in the impact of noisy traders in financial markets–leads agents to reduce their
costly collection of private information. Due to strategic substitutability, such a substitution of
private information for public information could reduce welfare even if agents’ overall uncertainty
reduces.33
       Clearly, the model in this paper does not allow for information aggregation through prices, but
extending the results in this direction seems a promising line for future research.




Appendix
Proof of Proposition 2. From condition (5),
                                                      X
                                    k(x, y) = κ0 +          κn [(1 − γ n )xn + γ n zn ] ,
                                                     n∈N̄
                                                      X
                                K(θ, ε) = κ0 +              κn [(1 − γ n )θn + γ n zn ] .
                                                     n∈N̄
                          P                                              P
Hence k − K =                κn [(1 − γ n )(xn − θn )] and K − κ =
                             n∈N̄                                            n∈N̄ κn γ n (zn − θ n ). Using
                                                    ¡         −2
                                                                 ¢−1
V ar(xn − θn ) = σ 2xn , V ar(zn − θn ) = σ 2zn = σ −2 yn + σ θn     and δ n = σ −2      −2
                                                                                  zn /σ n , together with
(6), we have
                                        X
                                        £                 ¤      X (1 − α)2 (1 − δ n )
                  V ar(k − K) =      κ2n (1 − γ n )2 σ 2xn =          κ2n                 σ2 ,
                                                                          (1 − α + αδ n )2 n
                                n∈N̄                             n∈N̄
                                X                    X        ∙                     ¸
                                       2 2 2                2           δn        2
                  V ar(K − κ) =      κn γ n σ zn =         κn                    σ ,
                                                                (1 − α + αδ n )2 n
                                        n∈N̄                n∈N̄

which gives the result.

       Proof of Proposition 3. Part (i). Since U is quadratic, (8) can be rewritten as

  E[ Uk (κ∗ , κ∗ , θ) + Ukk · (k(x, y) − κ∗ ) + UkK · (K − κ∗ )+
                                                 + UK (κ∗ , κ∗ , θ) + (UkK + UKK ) · (K − κ∗ ) | x, y ] = 0.
  33
       Of course, for this to be true it must be that there is some ineﬃciency in the collection   of information, or
otherwise Blackwell’s theorem would again imply that any exogenous information is beneficial.


                                                            22
Using WK (κ∗ , θ) = Uk (κ∗ , κ∗ , θ) + UK (κ∗ , κ∗ , θ) = 0, the above reduces to

                       E[ Ukk (k(x, y) − κ∗ ) + (2UkK + UKK )(K − κ∗ ) | x, y ] = 0,

which together with WKK = Ukk + 2UkK + UKK gives (12).
    Part (ii) follows from the same steps as in the proof of Proposition (1) replacing α with α∗ and
κ(·) with κ∗ (·).

    Proof of Proposition 4.               Consider first part (ii). When agents perceive payoﬀs to be U 0 ,
the equilibrium is the unique function k : R2N → R that solves

                                      k(x, y) = E[ (1 − α0 )κ0 + α0 K | x, y ],                          (25)

for all (x, y) ∈ R2N , where K(θ, ε) = E[k(x, y)|θ, ε], α0 ≡ −UkK
                                                               0 /U 0 and κ0 (θ) = κ0 + κ0 θ +
                                                                   kk               0    1 1
... + κ0N θN is the unique solution to Uk0 (κ0 , κ0 , θ) = 0. From the same arguments as in the proof of
Proposition 1, the unique solution to (25) is given by
                                                   X               £                       ¤
                              k(x, y) = κ00 +                   κ0n (1 − γ 0n )xn + γ 0n zn ,
                                                       n∈N̄ 0

where
                                       α0 δ n (1 − δ n )
                       γ 0n = δ n +                        ∀n ∈ N̄ 0 ≡ {n ≥ 1 : κ0n 6= 0} 6= ∅
                                      1 − α0 (1 − δ n )
For this to coincide with the eﬃcient allocation for all (x, y) ∈ R2N , it is necessary and suﬃcient
that κ0 (·) = κ∗ (·) and that α0 = α∗ , which proves part (ii).
    For part (i) it suﬃces to let U 0 (k, K, θ) = U (k, K, θ) + UK (K, K, θ)k, in which case it is imme-
diate that κ0 (·) = κ∗ (·), and α0 = α∗ .

    Proof of Condition (16).                Since U is quadratic, a second-order Taylor expansion around
k = K is exact:

                                                                                      Ukk
                    U (k, K, θ) = U (K, K, θ) + Uk (K, K, θ) · (k − K) +                  · (k − K)2 .
                                                                                       2

It follows that ex-ante utility is given by

                                                                     Ukk
                                       Eu = E[W (K, θ)] +                E[(k − K)2 ],
                                                                      2

where k = k(x, y) and K = K(θ, ε) are shortcuts for the eﬃcient allocation and W (K, θ) ≡
U (K, K, θ). A quadratic expansion of W (K, θ) around κ∗ , which is exact since U and thus W are
quadratic, gives

                                                                                  WKK
                    W (K, θ) = W (κ∗ , θ) + WK (κ∗ , θ) · (K − κ∗ ) +                 · (K − κ∗ )2 .
                                                                                   2

                                                                23
By definition of κ∗ , WK (κ∗ , θ) = 0. It follows that

                                    WKK                       Ukk
                     Eu = EW (κ∗ , θ) +   · E[(K − κ∗ )2 ] +       · E[(k − K)2 ].
                                     2                          2
                                     P
At the eﬃcient allocation, k − κ∗ =            ∗         ∗                  ∗
                                       n∈N̄ ∗ κn [(1 − γ n )(xn − θ n ) + γ n (zn − θ n )] implying that
Ek = EK = Eκ∗ and therefore E[(K − κ∗ )2 ] = V ar(K − κ∗ ) and E[(k − K)2 ] = V ar(k − K), which
gives the result.

    Proof of Proposition 5. The result follows directly from the proof of Proposition 4 together
with the definitions of κ(·), κ∗ (·), α and α∗ .

    Proof of Proposition 6.              Suppose κ(·) = κ∗ (·) and α = α∗ and consider the set K of
allocations that satisfy
                                     k(x, y) = E[(1 − α0 )κ + α0 K|x, y]
                                                         P
for some α0 < 1, or equivalently k(x, y) = κ0 +             n∈N̄    κn [(1 − γ 0n )xn + γ 0n zn ] , where

                                                α0 δ n (1 − δ n )
                                γ 0n = δ n +                          for all n ∈ N̄ .
                                               1 − α0 (1 − δ n )

Clearly, the equilibrium (and eﬃcient) allocation is nested with α0 = α(= α∗ ). Since for any any
allocation in K EK = Ek = Eκ, ex-ante welfare can be written as Eu = EW (κ, θ) − L, where

                     |WKK |                |Ukk + 2Uσ2 |               |Ukk + 2Uσ2 |
                                                     k                           k
             L =            V ar (K − κ) +               V ar(k − K) =               Ω,
                       2                         2                           2

with
                               Ω ≡ (1 − α∗ )V ar (K − κ) + V ar(k − K).

Using
                             X    0
                                             X             0 ¡          ¢
        V ar (K − κ) =      κ2n γ n2 σ 2zn =         κ2n γ n2 σ 2n /δ n ,
                       n∈N̄                     n∈N̄
                      X         £                ¤ X                  £           ¡              ¢¤
                              2            0 2 2
        V ar(k − K) =       κn (1 − γ n ) σ xn =                  κ2n (1 − γ 0n )2 σ 2n /(1 − δ n ) ,
                                 n∈N̄                                   n∈N̄

we have that                                     (                                  )
                                  X                            0
                                                     (1 − α∗ )γ n2 (1 − γ 0n )2
                             Ω=             κ2                    +                     σ 2n .
                                        n∈N̄ n           δn          1 − δn

    Note that Eu depends on α0 and (δ n , σ n ), for n ∈ N̄ , only through Ω. Since the eﬃcient
allocation is nested with α0 = α∗ , it must be that α0 = α∗ maximizes Eu, or equivalently that
γ 0n = γ ∗n solves ∂Ω/∂γ 0n = 0; that is,

                                                        γ ∗n   1 − γ ∗n
                                            (1 − α∗ )        =          .                                   (26)
                                                        δn     1 − δn

                                                          24
Next note that Ω increases, and hence Eu decreases, with any σ n . Finally, consider the eﬀect of
δ n . By the envelope theorem,
                                    ¯                ½                              ¾
                        dΩ     ∂Ω ¯¯               2   (1 − α∗ )γ ∗2
                                                                  n    (1 − γ ∗n )2
                             =                  = κn −               +                σ 2n
                        dδ n   ∂δ n ¯γ 0n =γ ∗n            δ 2n        (1 − δ n )2

Using (26), we thus have that dEu/dδ n > [<]0 if and only if γ ∗n /(1 − γ ∗n ) > [<] δ n /(1 − δ n ), which
is the case if and only if α∗ > [<]0. Using α = α∗ (by eﬃciency) then gives the result.
                                    ¡             ¢
    Proof of Condition (19). Since U k, K, θ, σ 2k is quadratic in k and linear in σ 2k ,
            ¡             ¢                                            Ukk
           U k, K, θ, σ 2k = U (K, K, θ, 0) + Uk (K, K, θ, 0)(k − K) +     (k − K)2 + Uσ2 σ 2k .
                                                                        2               k


Using the fact that σ 2k = E[(k − K)2 |θ, ε] and hence Eσ 2k = E[(k − K)2 ], we have that ex-ante utility
is given
                                                    Ukk + 2Uσ2
                              Eu = EW (K, θ) +                  k
                                                                    · E[(k − K)2 ].
                                               2
A Taylor expansion of W (K, θ) around K = κ then gives
                                                                         WKK
                       W (K, θ) = W (κ, θ) + WK (κ, θ)(K − κ) +              (K − κ)2
                                                                          2
and hence
                                                     WKK                  Ukk + 2Uσ2
    Eu = EW (κ, θ) + E[WK (κ, θ) · (K − κ)] +            · E[(K − κ)2 ] +          k
                                                                                     · E[(k − K)2 ].
                                                      2                        2
In equilibrium, Ek = EK = Eκ and therefore, E[WK (κ, θ) · (K − κ)] = Cov[WK (κ, θ), (K − κ)],
E[(K − κ)]2 = V ar(K − κ) and E[(k − K)2 ] = V ar(k − K), which gives the result.

    Proof of Proposition 7.           We prove the result in three steps. Step 1 computes the welfare
losses due to incomplete information. Step 2 derives the comparative statics. Step 3 characterizes
                         0
the bounds φ, φ̄, φ0 , φ̄ .
    Step 1. The property that W is quadratic, along with WK (κ∗ , θ) = 0 (by definition of the first
best), and WKK < 0, imply that

                     WK (κ, θ) = WK (κ∗ , θ) + WKK · (κ − κ∗ ) = |WKK | · (κ∗ − κ) .

It follows that
                    Cov(K − κ, WK (κ, θ)) = |WKK | · Cov (K − κ, κ∗ − κ) .                             (27)
              P                             £                               ¤
Since K − κ =   κn γ n (zn − θn ), zn − θn = λn (εn ) + (1 − λn )(μθn − θn ) , and (εn , εj , θn , θj ) are
mutually orthogonal whenever n 6= j, we have
                                            P                      P ∗
               Cov (K − κ, κ∗ − κ) = Cov (    κn γ n (zn − θn ) ,     (κn − κn ) θn ) =
                                     P ∗
                                   =    (κn − κn ) κn γ n Cov (θn , zn − θn ) =
                                          µ          ¶
                                      P κ∗n − κn
                                   =                   κ2n γ n [− (1 − λn ) V ar (θn )]
                                     n∈N̄     κn


                                                       25
Using φn ≡ (κ∗n − κn )/κn , γ n = δ n /(1 − α + αδ n ), and (1 − λn ) V ar (θn ) = (σ −2    −2 2         2
                                                                                      θn /σ zn )σ θn = σ zn =
σ 2n /δ n , we have that
                                                          X       ½                                 ¾
                                            ∗                                     1
                           Cov (K − κ, κ − κ) =                 φn −                     κ2 σ 2                 (28)
                                                                             1 − α + αδ n n n
                                                         n∈N̄

while
                                                                                              1
                Cov ( K − κ, κ | θ−n ) = κ2n γ n Cov (zn − θn , θn ) = −                             κ2 σ 2 .
                                                                                         1 − α + αδ n n n
Next, as in the proof of Proposition 2,
                                                         X            δn
                               V ar(K − κ) =                                    κ2 σ 2                          (29)
                                                                (1 − α + αδ n )2 n n
                                                         n∈N̄
                                                         X (1 − α)2 (1 − δ n )
                               V ar(k − K) =                                   κ2 σ 2 .                         (30)
                                                            (1 − α + αδ n )2 n n
                                                         n∈N̄

Substituting (27)-(30) into (19), using v = (1 − α∗ )|Ukk + 2Uσ2 |, and rearranging, we get
                                                                                    k


                                      |Ukk + 2Uσ2 | X
                               L=                   k
                                                                Λ (α, α∗ , φn , δ n ) κ2n σ 2n
                                                2
                                                         n∈N̄

where
                                         (1 − α∗ ) [2φ(1 − α + αδ) + δ] + (1 − α)2 (1 − δ)
                    Λ (α, α∗ , φ, δ) ≡                                                     .                    (31)
                                                           (1 − α + αδ)2
    Step 2. Note that EW (κ, θ) is independent of (δ n , σ n ) and hence the comparative statics of
welfare with respect to (δ n , σ n ) coincide with the opposite of those of L. Note that

                              ∂L            |Ukk + 2Uσ2 |
                                      =                     k
                                                                κ2n Λ (α, α∗ , φn , δ n )
                              ∂σ 2n               2
                               ∂L           |Ukk + 2Uσ2 |                  ∂Λ (α, α∗ , φn , δ n )
                                      =                     k
                                                                κ2n σ 2n
                               ∂δ n                 2                             ∂δ n
We thus need to understand the sign of Λ and ∂Λ/∂δ n .
    By (31),

           ∂Λ     α2 [(1 − δ n )(1 − α) − δ n ] − α∗ (1 − α − αδ n ) − 2αφ(1 − α∗ )(1 − α + αδ n )
                =
           ∂δ n                                    (1 − α + αδ n )3

When α = 0, this reduces to
                                                        ∂Λ
                                                             = −α∗
                                                        ∂δ n
and hence, for any n ∈ N̄ , ∂L/∂δ n > [<]0 if and only if α∗ < [>]0.
    When instead α 6= 0,

                                ∂Λ        2(1 − α∗ )
                                     =                  α[f (α, α∗ , δ n ) − φn ],
                                ∂δ n   [1 − α + αδ n ]2

                                                            26
where
                                              α2 [(1 − δ)(1 − α) − δ] − α∗ (1 − α − αδ)
                          f (α, α∗ , δ) ≡                                               .
                                                       2α(1 − α + αδ)(1 − α∗ )
Since α∗ < 1, sign[∂L/∂δ n ] = sign[α] · sign[f (α, α∗ , δ n ) − φn ]. Let

                     φ(α, α∗ ) ≡ min f (α, α∗ , δ) and φ̄(α, α∗ ) ≡ max f (α, α∗ , δ).
                                    δ∈[0,1]                                   δ∈[0,1]

If φn ∈ (φ, φ̄), then ∂L/∂δ n alternates sign as δ n varies between 0 and 1, no matter whether α > 0
or α < 0. Hence, φn < φ is necessary and suﬃcient for ∂L/∂δ n > 0 ∀δ n when α > 0 and for
∂L/∂δ n < 0 ∀δ n when α < 0, whereas φn > φ̄ is necessary and suﬃcient for ∂L/∂δ n < 0 ∀δ n when
α > 0 and for ∂L/∂δ n > 0 ∀δ n when α < 0.
     Finally, note that ∂L/∂σ 2n > [<] 0 if and only if φn > [<] g(α, α∗ , δ n ), where

                                                   (1 − α)2 (1 − δ) + δ(1 − α∗ )
                               g(α, α∗ , δ) = −                                  < 0.
                                                      2(1 − α∗ )(1 − α + αδ)
Letting
                                                                    0
                    φ0 (α, α∗ ) ≡ min g(α, α∗ , δ) and φ̄ (α, α∗ ) ≡ max g(α, α∗ , δ),
                                    δ∈[0,1]                                   δ∈[0,1]
                                                                        0
we get that ∂L/∂σ 2n > 0 [< 0] for all δ n ∈ [0, 1] if φn > φ̄ [< φ0 ], whereas ∂L/∂σ 2n alternates sign
                              0
as δ n varies if φn ∈ (φ0 , φ̄ ).
     Step 3. Note that both f and g are monotonic in δ, with
                                  ∂f      ∂g           (1 − α)
                                     = −2    =                       (α∗ − α)
                                  ∂δ      ∂δ   (1 − α )(1 − α + αδ)2
                                                     ∗


When α∗ = α, both f and g are independent of δ, and
                                                                   0            1
                          φ0 (α, α∗ ) = φ(α, α∗ ) = φ̄(α, α∗ ) = φ̄ (α, α∗ ) = − < 0.
                                                                                2
When instead α∗ > α, f is strictly increasing (and g strictly decreasing) in δ, so that

                             φ(α, α∗ ) = f (α, α∗ , 0) < φ̄(α, α∗ ) = f (α, α∗ , 1),
                                                                0
                             φ0 (α, α∗ ) = g(α, α∗ , 1) < φ̄ (α, α∗ ) = g(α, α∗ , 0),

and when α∗ < α, f is strictly decreasing in δ and

                             φ(α, α∗ ) = f (α, α∗ , 1) < φ̄(α, α∗ ) = f (α, α∗ , 0)
                                                                0
                             φ0 (α, α∗ ) = g(α, α∗ , 0) < φ̄ (α, α∗ ) = g(α, α∗ , 1).

     Consider first the case α ∈ (0, 1). If α∗ > α, then α2 + (1 − 2α)α∗ > 0 (using the fact that
α∗ < 1) and therefore

                                                                        α2 + (1 − 2α)α∗
                        φ(α, α∗ ) < φ̄(α, α∗ ) = f (α, α∗ , 1) = −                      < 0.
                                                                          2α(1 − α∗ )

                                                           27
If instead α∗ < α, then
                                       α2 + (1 − 2α)α∗                                     α∗ − α2
       φ(α, α∗ ) = f (α, α∗ , 1) = −                   < φ̄(α, α ∗
                                                                   ) = f (α, α ∗
                                                                                 , 0) = −
                                         2α(1 − α∗ )                                      2α(1 − α∗ )
and therefore φ < 0 if and only if α > 1/2 or α∗ > −α2 /(1 − 2α), while φ̄ < 0 if and only if α∗ > α2 .
Since −α2 /(1 − 2α) < 0 whenever α < 1/2, we conclude that, for α ∈ (0, 1), φ < 0 if and only if
α > 1/2 or α∗ > −α2 /(1 − 2α), and φ̄ < 0 if and only if α∗ > α2 .
    Next, consider the case α ∈ (−1, 0). If α∗ > α, then
                                        α∗ − α2                                      α2 + (1 − 2α)α∗
       φ(α, α∗ ) = f (α, α∗ , 0) =                  < φ̄(α, α ∗
                                                                ) = f (α, α ∗
                                                                              , 1) =
                                     (−2α)(1 − α∗ )                                   (−2α)(1 − α∗ )
and hence φ < 0 if and only if α∗ < α2 , while φ̄ < 0 if and only if α∗ < −α2 /(1 − 2α). If instead
α∗ < α, then α∗ < 0 < α2 and hence
                                                                    α∗ − α2
                      φ(α, α∗ ) < φ̄(α, α∗ ) = f (α, α∗ , 0) =                  < 0.
                                                                 (−2α)(1 − α∗ )
We conclude that, for α ∈ (0, 1), φ < 0 if and only if α∗ < α2 , and φ̄ < 0 if and only if α∗ <
−α2 /(1 − 2α).
    Finally, note that
                                        (1 − α)                            1
                    g(α, α∗ , 0) = −              < 0 and g (α, α∗ , 1) = − < 0.
                                       2(1 − α∗ )                          2
                                                                        0                         0
Together with the monotonicity of g, this implies that φ0 ≤ φ̄ < 0 for all (α, α∗ ), φ̄ < −1/2
whenever α < α∗ , and φ0 > −1/2 whenever α > α∗ .




References
 [1] Acemoglu, Daron (1993), “Learning About Others’ Actions and the Investment Accelerator,”
    Economic Journal 103, 318-328.

 [2] Angeletos, George-Marios, and Alessandro Pavan (2004), “Transparency of Information and
    Coordination in Economies with Investment Complementarities,” American Economic Review
    94 (P&P), 91-98.

 [3] Angeletos, George-Marios, and Ivàn Werning (2004), “Crises and Prices: Information Aggre-
    gation, Multiplicity and Volatility,” MIT mimeo.

 [4] Atkeson, Andrew, and Patrick Kehoe (2001), “The Advantage of Transparent Instruments of
    Monetary Policy,” NBER working paper.

                                                      28
 [5] Benhabib, Jess, and Roger Farmer (1994), “Indeterminacy and Increasing Returns,” Journal
    of Economic Theory 63, 19-41.

 [6] Bryant, John (1983), “A Simple Rational Expectations Keynes-Type Model,” Quarterly Jour-
    nal of Economics 98, 3, 525-28.

 [7] Canzoneri, Matthew (1985), “Monetary Policy Games and the Role of Private Information,”
    American Economic Review 75, 1056-70.

 [8] Cooper, Russell, and Andrew John (1988), “Coordinating Coordination Failures in Keynesian
    Models,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 103, 441—463.

 [9] Cukierman, Alex, and Allan Meltzer (1986), “A Theory of Ambiguity, Credibility, and Inflation
    under Discretion and Asymmetric Information,” Econometrica 54, 1099-128.

[10] Gereatts, Petra (2002), “Central Bank Transparency,” Economic Journal 112, F532-F565.

[11] Grossman, Sanford (1981) “An Introduction to the Theory of Rational Expectations under
    Asymmetric Information,” Review of Economic Studies 48, 541-559.

[12] Heinemann, Frank, and Camille Cornand (2004), “Optimal Degree of Public Information Dis-
    semination,” CESifo Working Paper 1353.

[13] Hellwig, Christian (2005), “Heterogeneous Information and the Benefits of Transparency,”
    UCLA mimeo.

[14] Hirshleifer, Jack (1971), “The Private and Social Value of Information and the Reward to
    Inventive Activity,” American Economic Review 61, 561-574.

[15] Holmstrom, Bengt, and Roger Myerson (1983), “Eﬃcient and Durable Decision Rules with
    Incomplete Information,” Econometrica 51, 1799-1819.

[16] Laﬀont, Jean-Jacques (1985), “On the Welfare Analysis of Rational Expectations Equilibria
    with Asymmetric Information, ” Econometrica 53, 1-30.

[17] Lorenzoni, Guido (2005), “Imperfect Information, Consumers’ Expectations and Business Cy-
    cles,” MIT mimeo.

[18] Matsuyama, Kiminori (1992), “A Simple Model of Sectoral Adjustment,” The Review of Eco-
    nomic Studies 59, 375-388.

[19] Messner, Simon, and Xavier Vives (2001), “Informational and Economic Eﬃciency in REE
    with Asymmetric Information,” CEPR working paper 2678.

                                               29
[20] Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin (2002), “The Social Value of Public Information”,
    American Economic Review 92, 1521-1534.

[21] Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin (2005), “Central Bank Transparency and the Signal
    Value of Prices,” forthcoming, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.

[22] Radner, Roy (1962), “Team Decision Problems,” Annals of Mathematical Statistics 33, 857-
    881.

[23] Raith, Michael (1996), “A General Model of Information Sharing in Oligopoly,” Journal of
    Economic Theory 71, 260-288.

[24] Roca, Mauro (2005), “Transparency and Monetary Policy with Imperfect Common Knowl-
    edge,” Columbia University mimeo.

[25] Stokey, Nancy (2002), “Rules versus Discretion After Twenty-Five Years,” NBER Macroeco-
    nomics Annual 17, 9-45.

[26] Svensson, Lars (2005), “The Social Value of Public Information: Morris and Shin (2002) is
    Actually Pro Transparency, Not Con,” forthcoming in American Economic Review.

[27] Vives, Xavier (1988), “Aggregation of Information in Large Cournot Markets, ” Econometrica
    56, 851-876.

[28] Woodford, Michael (2003), Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,
    Princeton University Press.

[29] Woodford, Michael (2005), “Central Bank Communication and Policy Eﬀectiveness,” paper
    given at the 2005 Symposium of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City at Jacksons Hole,
    The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future.




                                              30
