NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE COST OF CARING FOR YOUNG CHILDREN
Dan T. Rosenbaum
Christopher J. Ruhm
Working Paper 11837
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11837
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2005

The authors are collaborators on a study of inequality in early childhood education and care, funded by the
Russell Sage Foundation as part of its Social Inequality program. We would like to thank Eric Wanner and
the Foundation for their support. Ruhm gratefully acknowledges additional funding for this research from
the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. Address correspondence to Ruhm at:
Department of Economics, Bryan School of Business and Economics, UNCG, Greensboro, NC
27402-6165.The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Dan T. Rosenbaum and Christopher J. Ruhm. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Cost of Caring for Young Children
Dan T. Rosenbaum and Christopher J. Ruhm
NBER Working Paper No. 11837
December 2005
JEL No. J13, J18, J22
ABSTRACT
This study examines the "cost burden" of child care, defined as day care expenses divided by aftertax income. Data are from the wave 10 core and child care topical modules to the 1996 Survey of
Income and Program Participation. We estimate that the average child under six years of age lives
in a family that spends 4.9 percent of after-tax income on day care. However, this conceals wide
variation: 63 percent of such children reside in families with no child care expenses and 10 percent
are in families where the cost burden exceeds 16 percent. The burden is typically greater in singleparent than married-couple families but is not systematically related to a measure of socioeconomic
status that we construct. One reason for this is that disadvantaged families use lower cost modes and
pay less per hour for given types of care. The cost burden would be much less equal without low cost
(presumably subsidized) formal care focused on needy families, as well as government tax and
transfer policies that redistribute income towards them.
Dan T. Rosenbaum
Department of Economics
University of North Carolina at Greensboro
P.O. Box 26165
Greensboro, NC 27402-6165
rosenbaum@uncg.edu
Christopher J. Ruhm
Department of Economics
University of North Carolina at Greensboro
P.O. Box 26165
Greensboro, NC 27402-6165
and NBER
chrisruhm@uncg.edu

The Cost of Caring for Young Children
How much of their income do parents spend on day care for their young children? To
our knowledge, this study provides the first comprehensive study of this seemingly simple
question.1 There are two main reasons why we know so little about what we call the “cost
burden of child care”, defined as child care expenses divided by family incomes. First, it is
difficult to compile data that simultaneously provides accurate information on day care expenses
and family incomes. Second, conceptualizing the cost burden is surprisingly complex, since
parental employment and child care use are closely linked (Hofferth et al., 1991 and Smith,
2002), with the result that parents (particularly mothers) who work typically utilize more nonparental care than those who do not.2 One implication is that employment often raises both the
numerator (expenses) and the denominator (family incomes) in the child burden equation. The
positive relationship between child care spending and family income is even stronger for femaleheaded households, where labor supply is a greater determinant of total family income and child
care use. Other complicating issues include the measurement of income (e.g. gross versus
disposable income, family versus household), permanent versus transitory components of income
and expenses, and possible changes in family composition over time.
Our analysis addresses five specific questions. First, what is the average cost burden of
caring for children under six years of age? Second, how does this burden differ across types of
families? Third, do child care costs increase or lower measured income inequality? Fourth, how
would inequality in the cost burden change if the modes or costs of care became more similar
1

Some indication of child care expenses relative to income has previously been provided by Hofferth et al. (1991),
Anderson and Levine (2000), and Smith (2002). Giannarelli and Barsimantov’s (2002) research is most closely
related to this analysis but is limited to families where the primary caregiver is working.
2

Child care expenses also influence parental employment. Anderson and Levine (2000) and Meyers et al. (2004)
review the related research and conclude that most estimates of the elasticity of maternal employment with respect
to child care expenses cluster around -0.3 or -0.4.

Page 1

across groups than they currently are. Finally, do government tax and transfer policies and child
care subsidies exacerbate or mitigate differences in the cost burden of child care?
This analysis utilizes the 1996 panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation
(SIPP), which contains detailed data on both child care expenses and income. Our information
on child care comes from the wave 10 topical module covering the period March through June
1999; that on income is from the wave 10 core survey providing information on average incomes
in the preceding four months. We also use data from the March Current Population Survey
(CPS) to construct a measure of socioeconomic status (SES) that is based on predicted income
percentiles and use the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) TAXSIM program to
estimate taxes for our SIPP families.
We estimate that the average child under the age of six lives in a family that spends 4.9
percent of their after-tax income on child care. This conceals a wide variation: 63 percent of
such children reside in families with no (non-immediate family) day care expenses and 10
percent are in families where the cost burden exceeds 16 percent. A large portion of differences
in the cost burden are related to family characteristics. For example, children living with married
parents are in families where the average cost burden is 3.9 percent, compared to an average cost
burden of 7.4 percent for families with an absent spouse or never married parent.
Income inequality is somewhat greater when measured net of child care expenses than
when these costs are not taken into account (the Gini coefficient rises from 0.398 to 0.406).
However, the child care cost burden is not systematically related to SES, as proxied by predicted
incomes. The reason for this is that disadvantaged families use lower cost modes and pay less
per hour for given types of child care. Equalizing costs per hour (and presumably differences in
the quality of care received) would dramatically increase the cost burden of disadvantaged

Page 2

families. Finally, our evidence suggests that government policies operate to reduce inequality of
the child care cost burden. This primarily reflects the redistributed effects of tax policies and the
role of the Earned Income Tax Credit. Transfer payments have smaller effects.
1. Previous Evidence on the Cost Burden of Child Care
Previous research provides some information on the cost burden of child care. Using the
1990 National Child Care Survey, Hofferth et al. (1991) report that child care expenses, for
families with children under five and who pay for care, are 10 percent when the mother is
employed and 6 percent when she is not. They also provide evidence that cost burdens decline
with income. However, as shown below, there is an important role for care that is provided free
of charge, making it difficult to use these statistics to determine the cost burden for all families,
not just those paying for care.3
Anderson and Levine (2000) and Casper (1995) report cost burdens computed from the
1993 (and earlier) panels of the SIPP but are limited because these data refer only to families
with caregivers who are working or in school.4 Anderson and Levine estimate that child care
expenses are 7 percent of income, for families with children under six and employed mothers
paying for care; Casper (1995) obtains a corresponding cost burden of 7.6 percent for families
with children under five years of age. However, neither study accounts for free child care or
families with nonworking mothers. These exclusions are important – accounting for 68 percent
of all children in the sample we analyze.
Giannarelli and Barsimantov (2000) provide the most comprehensive previous study of
the cost burden of child care. Using the 1997 National Survey of American Families (NSAF),
they find that families with children under 13 pay 9.2 percent of their income for child care.
3
4

Meyers et al. (2004) attempt to do so by combining findings from a number of tables in Hofferth et al. (1991).
Hofferth (1996) and Blau (2001) provide additional analyses of the statistics reported by Casper.

Page 3

However, the analysis is again limited to paid care and to families with an employed caregiver.
Also, the NSAF does not break down child care costs by mode.
The “Who’s Minding the Kids?” reports by the U.S. Census Bureau (Smith, 2002) used
the 1996 SIPP panel to examine how the cost burden varies by group. Smith reports that child
care expenses are 6.6 percent of income, for families making payments, and is considerably
higher for low-income families that pay for care. But once again, describing the cost burden is
not the primary focus and it is extremely difficult to ascertain how the cost burden differs across
all families. To reiterate, free care is important and studies neglecting to consider it miss out on
one of the primary determinants of differences in the cost of care.
The analysis below improves on the previous literature in five ways. First, we calculate
the cost burden for all families with young children, not just those with employed parents.
Second, we carefully consider the role of both paid and free child care. Third, we examine
difference in modes and costs per mode of care. Fourth, we consider child care expenses as a
fraction of disposable rather than gross income (removing taxes and adding in transfer
payments). Fifth, we emphasize the distribution of the cost burden, not just the average value.
2. Data
The Survey of Income and Program Participation is is a multistage-stratified sample of
the U.S. civilian noninstitutionalized population, sponsored by the U.S. Census Bureau, that
provides extensive available information on both child care use and expenditures and income.
SIPP households are interviewed every four months (each interview is a wave) for periods of up
to four years. The survey is built around detailed monthly “core” questions on labor force
activity, program participation and sources of income. These are supplemented by wave-specific

Page 4

“topical modules”.5 We use a recent topical SIPP module on child care use, wave 10 of the 1996
panel, covering the period from March 1999 through June 1999.6 Our sample contains 4,524
families with 5,777 children under the age of six.7 A primary caregiver (typically the mother) is
designated for each family.8
The focus of this paper is calculating the “child care cost burden,” defined as
expenditures on child care (obtained from non-immediate family members) divided by after-tax
income. The SIPP topical module contains extremely detailed questions on child care costs.9
Variables for usual weekly child care costs are separately provided for each of the five youngest
children (under six) and for each of seven non-immediate family child care arrangements
(grandparent, other relative, family day care, day care center, pre-school/nursery school, Head
Start, and other non-relative).10 Data for both the working and non-working caregivers is
collected in the 1996 SIPP.
Income data come from the core questionnaire and are measured as a monthly average
over the four months prior to the survey.11 Total family income includes earnings, government

5

Further information on the SIPP can be obtained at: http://www.sipp.census.gov/sipp.

6

Similar child care data are collected in wave 4 of the 1996 SIPP panel. Earlier SIPP panels also collect child care
information that, as previously mentioned, is limited to caregivers who are working or in school. The SIPP also
collects data on children aged 6 to 14 which (because our focus is on young children) is not used in this analysis.
7
These are obtained from the full 1996 SIPP panel of 36,700 households (most of whom do not have children or
children in the designated age range).
8

This is the mother in married-couple families and the sole parent in single parent families. Grandparents and other
relatives can also be designated as the primary caregiver.
9

The extreme level of detail may have hindered the efforts of previous researcher to compute child care costs using
the 1996 panel of the SIPP. For example it is necessary to read in 105 variables in order to compute: the total cost of
child care (for children five years and younger), total child care hours per week, and total child care hours per week
when the primary caregiver is working.
10

Also included are hours of care, hours of care while the caregiver was working, and place of care, as well as
similar variables for care by immediate family members including the other parent and older siblings.
11

We use a four-month average in order to minimize the effects of transitory fluctuations.
Page 5

transfers (Temporary Assistance to Needy Families, Unemployment Compensation, and Social
Security), non-government transfers (e.g. alimony and child support payments), and unearned
income (dividends, property income, and pensions).12
We also estimate the taxes paid by each family, using TAXSIM which has been
developed by the National Bureau of Economic Research.13 In doing so, we break families into
tax-filing units (single, head of household, married filing jointly), compute income (federal and
state) and payroll (Social Security and Medicare) taxes for each tax-filing unit, and sum these to
get total taxes. TAXSIM is sophisticated in its treatment of different types of income (e.g.
earned versus Social Security income), and in allowing child care expenses to be included in
child care credit calculations.14
When calculating the child care cost burden, we assume a minimum after-tax family
income of $314 per month (corresponding to the 5th percentile in our sample) and cap the cost
burden at a maximum of 50 percent. We make these adjustments for several reasons. First,
since incomes are averaged over only a four month period, very low (and zero) measured
incomes will often represent transitory reductions (e.g. during periods of temporarily reduced
employment). Second, families with incomes below the 5th percentile may be able to afford

12

In SIPP, all household members are part of the primary family, except for married couples or single caregivers
and their nonadult children, where neither spouse (or the single caregiver) is the household head.
13

For more information on TAXSIM, see Feenberg and Coutts (1993) and TAXSIM (2003).

14

Data limitations require that we make several simplifying assumptions. Most importantly, lacking good
information on itemized deductions, we assume that all tax-filing units take the standard deduction. We also assume
that only child care expenses for family day care, day care centers, pre-school/nursery schools, and Head Start are
claimed for tax purposes. To compute annual income and child care expenses, we multiply our monthly averages
incomes by twelve and weekly child care expenses by 52. Maine and Vermont are combined into one state group, in
the SIPP, as are North Dakota, South Dakota, and Wyoming. To compute state income taxes for these states, we
constructed a population-weighted average for families residing in the specified group of (two or three) states.

Page 6

child care because they reside in households with income support provided by other adults.15
Although a full investigation of the distinction between family and household incomes is beyond
the scope of this analysis, we provide some information on this issue below. Third, the cost
burden is capped because it seems unlikely that many families would be able to spend more than
half of their income on child care expenses for extended periods of time.
We often compare results for families with different predicted incomes, using the latter as
a proxy for socio-economic status (SES). When doing so, predicted income is estimated using
data from the 1998 through 2002 March Current Population Survey (CPS) and controlling for
gender, age, education, race/ethnicity, and state of residence of the primary caregiver, as well as
all second-level interactions between these variables.16 Children in the SIPP are ranked by
predicted family incomes, based upon characteristics of their primary caregiver and the CPS
model estimates, and then grouped into six categories representing the: 0-10, 10-25, 25-50, 5075, 75-90, and 90-100 predicted income percentiles.17 Compared to grouping children by a
single characteristic (e.g. the education of their mother), this method but has the advantage of
simultaneously accounting for a large number of determinants of SES.
For ease of exposition, we use several conventions throughout the paper. First, we
sometimes refer to caregivers (who are occasionally grandparents or other guardians) as
“parents” but in all cases are talking about all caregivers. Second, we split the sample into three
15

The average family with monthly income less than $314 lives in a household with a monthly income of $1,670.

16

The age groups include <20, 20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44, 45-49 and 50+ individually and <28, 28-34, and
35+ for the interactions. The educational groups include high school dropout, high school graduate, some college
but no bachelor’s degree, bachelor’s degree, and master’s degree or higher. The last two educational groups are
combined for the interactions. The race/ethnicity groups are white non-Hispanic, black non-Hispanic, other nonHispanic, and Hispanic. Each state, except those grouped in the SIPP, are entered individually, but the states are
grouped into five regions for the interactions. The CPS income variable is equivalent to that used in the SIPP, prior
to deducting taxes.
17

Children with predicted incomes at the dividing point between categories are placed into the lower group (e.g.
children at the 10th percentile are placed in the 0-10th and not the 10-25th percentile).

Page 7

marital status groups – married with spouse present, spouse absent (married with spouse absent,
widowed, divorced, or separated), and never married – and refer to the latter two groups as
“single parents,” even though it is possible that these caregivers cohabit. Third, our results
provide nationally representative estimates for children aged 0 through 5.18 While we
occasionally we discuss findings for “caregivers” or “families,” these technically refer to
children under the age of six in those families. Fourth, except where noted, reported child care
hours and costs are for arrangements outside of the immediate family (the other parent and
siblings). Fifth, all child care costs and incomes are measured as monthly, while child care hours
generally are reported as weekly. To compute monthly child care costs, we multiply our weekly
child care costs by 52 weeks and divide by 12 months.
3. Use and Cost of Child Care
Care of young children by persons outside the immediate family is common but not
universal. As detailed in Table 1, children under six years of age reside in families where an
average of 25 hours of day care per week is supplied outside the immediate family (other than
parents and siblings) at a cost of $135 per month, with external care used by roughly three-fifths
of families. This care costs an average of $1.24 per hour, which is sharply divided between that
generally provided very cheaply by grandparents or other relatives (averaging $0.31 per hour)
and that that supplied at an average cost of around $2 per hour in day care centers, pre-schools,
or other less formal settings (with the exception of the virtually free care supplied by Head Start).
These differences explain why two-fifths of child care is provided free of charge, including
three-quarters of that by grandparents or other relatives, versus around one-fifth of hours by non-

18

These are obtained by multiplying SIPP person weights by the number of children for the given caregiver.

Page 8

relatives in informal settings and only one-tenth to one-eighth of care in family day care
facilities, centers, and preschools.19
Approximately 40 percent of the 25 hours of average weekly non-immediate family child
care is provided by grandparents or other relatives; 8 hours weekly occurs in day care centers or
pre-schools; 7 hours per week in family day care centers or by non-relatives in informal settings;
and less than 1 hour through the federal Head Start program (although this is probably an
undercount).20 In addition, an average of six hours per week of supervision is provided by the
parents other than the designated caregiver and less than one hour weekly by siblings.21 The
remainder of our analysis focuses exclusively on care by non-immediate family members and the
related discussion refers only to these sources of care.
The amount and costs of child care vary substantially across types of families. For
instance, single parent families use 50 percent more child care than those with married parents
(33 vs. 22 hours per week) but utilize much cheaper sources ($0.80 vs. $1.50 per hour) and, as a
result, spend 20 percent less per week ($114 vs. $143). Similarly, families where the caregiver is
a non-Hispanic white use slightly fewer hours of day care than minorities (24 vs. 27 hours per
week) but pay more both per hour ($1.49 vs. $0.87) and per month ($155 vs. $100) for these
19

These figures represent lower-bounds on the percentage of free child care because no free care is assigned in cases
where families receiving some hours at no charge and pay for other hours of care within a given mode (e.g. if a
grandparent provides some portion of care for free and is paid for the rest). We suspect that the resulting
understatement is small.
20

In Table 1 we are estimating that approximately 200,000 children are in Head Start in a given month. In the 1999
fiscal year, there were 826,016 children enrolled in Head Start at a cost of $4.7 billion (U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, 2000). Part of this undercount is due to our time period stretching into the summer months,
when Head Start programs are not in session. However, we suspect that a more important reason is because most
Head Start children may be counted in some of the other modes of care. For example, we estimate that there are
nearly 600,000 three and four year-old children in families with incomes less than the median income (about $2,500
per month) receiving free or less than a dollar per hour care in day care centers, pre-schools, or nursery schools.
Many of these children may be Head Start children.
21

For immediate family members (siblings and the other parent), only hours of care while the primary caregiver is
working or in school are counted in the SIPP.

Page 9

services. By contrast, more educated parents use both large amounts and expensive sources of
care, and so have relatively high expenditures.
The child care burden depends on the type and cost of care, as well as on the family
incomes. Thus, it represents a complicated interaction of a variety of factors that often move in
different directions. Groups using smaller amounts of care often utilize more expensive sources
and so have greater total expenditures. These same groups (e.g. married couple families) also
often have relatively high family incomes so that it is not obvious, a priori, which types of
families have the highest cost burdens. As mentioned, this issue is even more complicated
because employment and child care use are jointly determined and because there are likely to be
substantial within-group differences in all of these factors. We explore these issues below.
4. What is the Cost Burden of Child Care?
As shown on the first row of Table 2, the average 0-5 year old child is in a family paying
4.9 percent of their disposable income on day care.22 This average, however, conceals enormous
diversity in the child care burden. Fully 63 percent of children live in families with no expenses,
implying that the median cost burden is 0 percent. Conversely, the average child care burden for
families in the upper 10 percent of the distribution is nearly 30 percent of disposable income.23
As noted above, the absence of child care costs does not imply that no day care is used – 23
percent of children are in families that utilize only free sources of care. Note, also, that the
average burden rises to 13.0 percent if the sample is limited to the 32 percent of the sample with
working caregivers who pay for care, as is done in most previous analyses (Smith, 2002;
22

Calculation of the average cost burden is somewhat sensitive to the treatment of the small number of children in
families with very high burdens, usually occurring because of low average incomes over the four month period over
which these are calculated. Fewer than 2 percent of children are affected by the 50 percent maximum we use in
calculating the cost burden. If this maximum were raised to 75 percent (100 percent) the average burden would
increase to 5.2 (5.3) percent. There is no effect on the lower 98 percent of the cost burden distribution.
23

The 75th, 90th, and 95th percentiles of the cost burden distribution are 5.9, 16.3, and 25.3 percent.

Page 10

Anderson and Levine, 2000; and Giannarelli and Barsimantov, 2000).24 Limiting the sample to
this sub-group ignores much of the variation in the burden across families.
Perhaps the most noteworthy finding in Table 2 is the remarkable concentration of the
child care burden. Families in the upper 10 percent of the distribution pay an average $624 per
month for care, versus $80 per month for the other 90 percent of families. Yet, these high cost
burden families have disposable incomes of just $2,268 per month, lower than the $3,150 for the
other 90 percent. Part of the reason for this difference is that 40 percent (versus 15 percent) of
the high cost burden caregivers are working single parents.
The cost burden of child care, and its components, differs substantially and in mostly
predictable ways with the demographic characteristics of the primary caregiver. Table 3
stratifies the sample by race/ethnicity, marital status, education, geographic location, the number
of children, and age of the youngest child. As mentioned, the cost burden is lower in marriedcouple families (3.9 percent) than in those where the caregiver has never been married (7.0
percent) or where the spouse no longer lives with the child (7.9 percent). The average cost
burden is also relatively high for black families (6.0 percent), but not for other types of
minorities, and for those with multiple young children (5.9 percent). Interestingly, the cost
burden rises monotonically with education, from 3.9 percent for high school dropouts to 5.4
percent for college graduates. This reflects the somewhat higher child care hours and much
greater costs of the most educated group, and occurs despite their high family incomes. By
24

Smith (2002), using wave 4 of the 1996 SIPP, reports that among families with at least one child under five who
pay for care, the average child care payment over the average pre-tax income is 8.9 percent. In our sample, the
analogous statistic is 7.5 percent (but our figure excludes families with 6-14 year old year old but no younger
children). Anderson and Levine (2000), using SIPP panels from the early 1990s, report an average child care burden
of 7.7 percent of pre-tax income among working caregiver families with at least one child under six who pay for
care; However, this includes costs of only primary and secondary arrangements, with a cap of $140 per week for
each. Using 1997 NSAF data, Giannarelli and Barsimantov (2000) report an average child care burden of 9.2
percent of pre-tax income among working caregiver families who pay for care. Their measure is for families with
children under 13, a group likely to have lower expenses than for families that all include a child under six.

Page 11

contrast, the high cost burdens of single parent households reflect low incomes, with particularly
long hours being offset by the use of cheap sources of day care.
There is also substantial variation in the distribution of the child care cost burden within
groups (see Table 4). For instance, almost four-fifths of children with a high school dropout
parent are in families with no child care costs, compared to under half of those where the
caregiver is a college graduate; however, the cost burden at the 90th percentile is similar (15.0
percent versus 15.9 percent). Conversely, the relatively high average cost burdens for children
with black caregivers or in single parent families result from increased costs at the top of the
distribution (as indicated by the 75th and 90th percentiles), with little difference in the fraction of
such families experiencing positive child care costs.
Many of the differences in child care cost burdens, highlighted in Tables 3 and 4 reflect
the common influences of factors that vary in similar ways across sub-samples. For instance,
since black children have relatively high probabilities of being raised in single parent families,
some of the racial differences could result from disparities in marital status rather than other race
effects. With this in mind, Table 5 presents partial correlations between demographic factors and
the cost burden, remaining after controlling for other observable characteristics. The dependent
variable in the first column is the average cost burden and the equation is estimated by OLS.
The second and third columns present estimated marginal effects from binary probit models
(with other covariates evaluated at the sample means) for dichotomous dependent variables
indicating if the child’s family has any child care costs and if the cost burden exceeds the 90th
percentile (16.3 percent). Robust standard errors are also displayed, calculated assuming
independence for children across but not within families.

Page 12

The econometric estimates confirm many of the previously described patterns. Single
parent families have relatively high cost burdens, as do those with highly educated parents and
large numbers of young children. Interestingly, single parents appear to be particularly
concentrated among those with cost burdens above the 90th percentile, even accounting for other
demographic characteristics – a finding hinted at in many of the earlier tables. Characteristics
associated with high average cost burdens are usually positively related to the probability of
having positive expenses or being above the 90th percentile of the distribution. There are,
however, some exceptions (e.g. Hispanic children are especially likely to live in families with no
costs but also marginally more likely to live in those with cost burdens above the 90th percentile).
A noteworthy finding is that the previously observed substantial differences between white and
black children largely disappear with the inclusion of controls for other covariates.
5. Do Child Care Costs Increase Inequality?
The issue of income inequality has received a great deal of attention in recent years, in
part because of its sharp rise during the 1980s and early 1990s after several decades of decline.25
The growth of income inequality can be traced, in large part, to increasing wage inequality (Katz
and Autor, 1999) but also to growth in single motherhood, particularly among less-skilled
women (Ellwood and Jencks, 2004). The consequences of the changing wage structure have
been partially offset by increases in women’s labor force participation (U.S. Bureau of the
Census, 2001; and Mishel, Bernstein, and Schmidt, 2001), raising the question of whether child
care costs mitigate or exacerbate inequality.
We address this question by comparing inequality in family income with and without
accounting for child care costs. The results of this exercise, presented in Table 6, suggest that
25

Jones and Weinberg (2000) report that between 1975 and 1993, households in the 90th percentile saw their
incomes rise by 21.8 percent, while those in 10th percentile experienced decreases of 2.3 percent.

Page 13

income inequality modestly increases when child care expenses are subtracted from disposable
income. For example, the Gini coefficient rises from 0.398 to 0.406 and the ratio of incomes at
the 90th and 10th percentiles of the distribution (the 90/10 ratio) increases from 7.78 to 8.52.
Similarly, the 50/25 and 25/10 ratios grow from 1.67 and 2.08 to 1.71 and 2.23. The top panel of
the table reveals that the increase in inequality occurs primarily because of disproportionately
large reductions in net incomes at the bottom of the distribution (e.g. 13 percent at the 10th
percentile versus less than 5 percent at the 90th percentile), while median incomes are relatively
unaffected (falling just 4 percent) so that there is little change in the 90/50 or 75/50 ratio.
The results just discussed refer to a sample of families with young children. If these
families have relatively low incomes, as seems likely, the preceding calculations will understate
the rise in inequality resulting from netting out child care expenses.26 On the other hand, our
main income variable removes taxes and transfer payments, and therefore is not directly
comparable to that typically used in prior research. We investigate government tax and transfer
policies below.
6. How Does the Child Care Cost Burden Differ With Socioeconomic Status?
The remainder of our analysis examines how child care costs and the cost burden differ
with SES. We are interested in determining whether “disadvantaged” families face the double
problem of low incomes and high child care cost burdens, or if they have lower burdens because
of using less hours or cheaper sources of day care.
As previously discussed, we sort families into SES groups by: 1) estimating predicted
incomes from CPS data, with controls for age, education and race/ethnicity of the primary
caregiver, as well as many interactions between these variables; 2) ranking SIPP children by
26

For example, the families in our sample have median annual (pre-tax) incomes of $34,668. The corresponding
median income for all U.S. families, in 1999, was $48,950 (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2001, Table 668.)

Page 14

predicted family income, based upon characteristics of their primary parent; 3) grouping them
into into six categories representing the: 0-10, 10-25, 25-50, 50-75, 75-90, and 90-100 predicted
income percentiles. In addition to providing a single summary measure of SES, rather than
relying on multiple correlated indicators, this method has the advantage of removing the effects
of caregiver-specific variation in work hours (that is likely to be correlated with both family
incomes and child care use and costs). However, it should be noted that the effects of betweengroup variation in average employment or child care use will not be removed. For instance,
persons with high predicted incomes may have relatively high child care costs because this group
is dominated by educated parents who supply relatively large amounts of market labor.
Sample characteristics for the six predicted income categories, summarized in Appendix
Table A.1, largely accord with our expectations. Groups with low predicted incomes are
dominated by minorities, single-parent families, and less educated caregivers, whereas whites,
married-couple families, and educated caregivers are disproportionately represented among those
with high expected incomes. For example, the primary parent of 48 percent of children in the 010th percentile is nonwhite, 34 percent are Hispanic, 67 percent have no spouse present, and 69
percent are high school dropouts; the corresponding percentages for children in the 90-100th
percentile are 6 percent, 3 percent, 5 percent, and 0 percent.27 Parents of the latter group work
many more hours (68 versus 29 hours), largely due to the presence of the spouse in the family.
Conversely, there is much more likely to be a non-parent working adult in the household for the
0-10th than the 90-100th percentile (41 versus 3 percent), with the result that the family provides a

27

We also calculated predicted income percentiles using an equation that add controls for marital status and the
number of children (and selected interactions) to the set of explanatory variables. The patterns are generally similar
to those obtained without these additional variables, although (not surprisingly) with an even larger representation of
single-parent families in the lower SES groups and slightly less delineation by educational attainment. The results
discussed below are also fairly similar when using this alternative predicting equation.

Page 15

much lower share of total household income for the lower SES group (68 versus 99 percent).28
One implication is that calculating the cost burden as the ratio of child care costs to household
(rather than family) income might result in a considerably lower figure at the bottom of the
predicted income distribution but would have little effect for high SES individuals.29 This
represents an important subject for future research.
Table 7 details how the cost burden of child care and its components varies with both
actual income and with SES as proxied by predicted family income. The burden falls
monotonically with actual incomes because increases in the latter more than offset the rising
hours and cost of care. For instance, day care use care is almost twice as large for families in the
90-100th than for those in the 0-10th percentiles (30.5 vs. 16.4 hours per week) and their monthly
child care costs are more than six times higher ($313 vs. $47) but these differences are dwarfed
by an almost 30-fold difference in average incomes ($8,534 vs. $288). However, a significant
portion of these differences are due to the endogeneity between employment and child care use –
those working more have both higher incomes and greater child care expenses. This can be seen
in the lower panel of the table, where the link between predicted incomes and child care use and
costs is much less pronounced.
The most striking finding is the absence of any consistent pattern between predicted
income and the cost burden. The burden for the 0-10th, 25-50th, and 90-100th percentiles are

28

A complication with measuring the cost burden at the family-level is the treatment of multi-generation
households. Family definitions in the SIPP and CPS result in differences in the treatment of other adults in the
household (such as grandparents). In particular, when the family head is not the household head, other adults
generally will not count in family income calculations, whereas if the family and household head are the same they
will not.
29

However, it is also possible that other adults in the household have young children of their own, in which case the
cost burden for the entire household might not fall. Moreover, without a full understanding of intra-household
income transfers it is somewhat difficult to know how to interpret a cost burden measure that is based upon
household incomes.

Page 16

virtually identical (5.5 or 5.6 percent) and substantially lower for the 25-50th, 50-75th and 75-90th
percentiles (4.7, 4.1 and 4.2 percent). The lack of a monotonic relationship results from
offsetting increases in actual incomes and child care costs when moving up the predicted income
distribution. For instance, families in the 90-100th percentile spend 1.3 times as much on day
care as those in the 25-50th percentile and have incomes that are 1.4 times as high.
The other remarkable feature is the similarity in child care hours across predicted income
groups. Although the categories with the highest average cost burdens (the 0-10th, 25-50th, and
90-100th percentiles) also use the most child care, these differences are dwarfed by disparities in
the costs of care. For example, the 90-100th percentile obtain 20 percent more hours of child care
per week than the 50-75th percentile (27.9 vs. 23.2 hours) but pays over twice as much for it
($269 vs. $129 per month).
Table 8 provides information on differences in the use and cost of specific modes of child
care across SES categories. Notice that the similarity in total hours of care, just discussed, masks
substantial variation in the choice of modes. Families at the bottom of the predicted income
distribution obtain a large proportion of total care from relatives, whereas those at the top get
most care from centers, preschools, or family day care facilities. Specifically, the 0-10th
percentile obtains almost half of total care hours from grandparents or other relatives compared
to less than a fifth of hours for the 90-100th percentile. Conversely, the former group gets 31 (7)
percent of care from centers and preschools (family day care) compared to 43 (19) percent for
the latter.
The distribution of monthly child care spending is detailed in the bottom panel of Table
8. The bulk of child care expenditures are devoted to paying for formal care in centers,
preschools, and family day care facilities – these three modes account for 63 percent of the

Page 17

monthly child care spending for the 0-10th predicted income percentiles, 56 percent for the 1050th percentiles and 73 to 76 percent for the 50-100th percentiles.
Families with high predicted incomes not only use more expensive types of care but also
pay more for any given mode. As shown in the top panel of Table 9, the 90-100th percentile
spends 133 percent more per hour for center/pre-school care than the 0-10th percentile ($2.75 vs.
$1.18), 81 percent extra for family day care ($2.39 vs. $1.32), 66 percent more for informal nonrelative care ($2.42 vs. $1.46), and over twice as much for supervision by relatives ($0.63 vs.
$0.23).
It seems likely that the extra spending by families with high predicted incomes purchases
higher quality care. However, costs for the bottom of the distribution are probably being reduced
by day care subsidies offered by the government, employers, or others. The middle panel of the
table, which investigates the frequency with which child care is provided without cost to the
family, supplied evidence in support of this. In particular, the use of free care provided by nonrelatives is much more common at the bottom of the predicted income distribution than at the
top, as expected if subsidies are targeted to disadvantaged families,. Thus, 19 percent of the
center-based care is supplied to the 0-10th percentile without charge, compared to 7 percent for
the 90-100th percentile. Free care is also much more likely to be provided to low SES families
by non-relatives. Conversely, almost all hours in family day care settings are paid for, whereas
care by relatives is usually free.
Families at the bottom of the predicted income distribution are also much less likely to
pay more than $1 per hour for center-based care (see the bottom panel of Table 9), providing a
further indication that they receive a disproportionate share of subsidized care. For example, the
0-10th and 10-25th percentiles spend over $1 for 44 and 53 percent of center/pre-school hours,

Page 18

compared to over 85 percent for families in the top two predicted income categories.
Consequently, children in families in the 0-10th percentile spend about 20 percent of their 26
hours per week in free or low cost ($1 per hour or less) center-based care (including Head Start),
44 percent in free or low cost care with relatives, and only 31 percent in care costing more than a
dollar per hour. Children in the 10-25th percentile spend 11 (51) percent of their 25 hours per
week in free or low cost center-based care (relative care) and only about 28 percent in care
costing more than a dollar per hour. On the other hand, children in the 90-100th percentile spend
76 percent of their 28 hours per week in care costing more than a dollar per hour and just 15
percent in free or low cost care with relatives.
7. Household Accommodations and Government Policies
The section examines how government policies and household accommodations affect
the cost burden of child care. Table 10 focuses on how tax and transfer policies that cause net
and gross incomes to differ. As shown in the first three rows of the table, earnings are by far the
largest source of total incomes for all SES categories, with those of the caregiver being far more
important at the bottom than the top of the distribution. The caregiver provides 51 percent of
earnings for the 0-10th percentile and 41 percent for the 10th-25th percentile, compared to just 28
and 30 percent among the 75-90th and 90-100th percentiles. This largely reflects the high share of
single parent families among the low SES categories.
Government transfers result in a modest redistribution towards disadvantaged families:
such payments account for 18 percent of net incomes among the bottom 10 percent (60 percent
due to welfare) and less than one percent for the top decile. Although such transfers are large
enough to more than pay for the child care expenditures of the bottom half of the distribution, if

Page 19

they were targeted to families with high child care expenses, most of the payments are actually
received by those with no child care costs.30
Income and payroll taxes have much larger effects on disposable income. We estimate
that taxes reduce the net incomes of the top two SES groups by 25 and 28 percent, compared to
less than 8 and 4 percent for the bottom two. The modest reductions in incomes for
disadvantaged families occur even though payroll taxes (for Social Security and Medicare) are
approximately proportional to incomes. The most important reason is that federal income taxes
are particularly low for these families, in large part due to the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC),
which creates strong employment incentives and rapidly phases out at higher incomes (Meyer
and Rosenbaum, 2001).31 Finally, federal child tax credits and federal and state child care credits
have modest effects on net incomes for all groups. However, the EITC and Child Care Credit
are more targeted towards families with high day care expenses than are transfer payments.32
The first row of the Table 11 repeats the information from Table 7, showing that the cost
burden of child care remains relatively constant across predicted income categories. The
remainder of the table estimates of how the cost burden would change under several scenarios.
These counterfactuals assume that families use the same amount of family day care as in the base
case, and examine the effects of government tax/transfer policies (which affect net incomes) or
30
We calculate that families in the bottom half of the predicted income distribution could pay for just 14 percent of
their child care costs with their transfer payments; in the bottom decile this percentage rises to 22 percent.
31

Our calculations assume that all families take the standard income tax deduction. Since high income families are
more likely to itemize, we are overstating income taxes (by a larger amount) for high SES families and therefore
also overestimating the redistribution due to the tax system. Using data from the SIPP, we estimate that this
overstatement is sizable, but that it has very little effect on our cost burden measure. Allowing for itemized
deductions would likely result in 0.9, 1.2, 2.3, 3.9, 3.6 and 7.4 increases the after-tax income 0-10th, 10-25th, 25-50th,
50-75th and 90-100th percentiles of the predicted income distribution. Overall, this would lower the cost burden by
about 0.11 percentage points (4.86 to 4.75 percent) with families in the 90-100th percentile experiencing about a 0.23
percentage point decrease, and the rest of the distribution experiencing between a 0.06 and 0.16 percentage point
decrease in the cost burden.
32

We calculate that families in the bottom half of the predicted income distribution could pay for 29 percent of their
child care costs with the Earned Income Tax and Child Care Credits; in the bottom decile this rises to 36 percent.
Page 20

changes in the type or cost per hour of the care utilized (which affect expenditures). The
simulations do not account for the substitution towards cheaper types or fewer hours of care that
might occur when costs per hour increase. Nor do they account for the changes in modes that
would accompany different government tax/transfer policies.
As mentioned, transfer policies have little effect on the child care cost burden. The
second row shows that removing this source of income would increase the child care burden for
the bottom decile of the predicted income distribution from 5.6 to 6.1 percent, while having
smaller effects on the 10th-75th percentiles and none at all for the top quartile. By contrast,
eliminating taxes would have no effect on the bottom 25 percent but (by increasing disposable
incomes) would sharply reduce the cost burden of the top half of the distribution. For instance,
the burden of the 75-90th and 90-100th percentiles would fall from 4.2 to 3.4 percent and 5.5 to
4.3 percent (see the third row of the table).33
The SIPP does not provide complete information on subsidized sources of care. To
estimate the effects of eliminating such subsidies (whether they come from government or
private sources) we assume that any day care provided in centers, pre-schools or family day care
facilities at a cost of less than $1 per hour is subsidized. We then calculate the expenses of nonsubsidized care by replacing the actual hourly costs of subsidized care with the sample average
hourly cost for unsubsidized hours of care from these sources.34 The results of this exercise,
shown in the fourth row of the table, indicate that the removal of subsidies would dramatically
increase the cost burden of low SES families (e.g. from 5.6 and 4.7 percent to 8.9 and 6.6 percent
33

These are all partial equilibrium effects because we assume that income and payroll taxes would be eliminated
without replacing them by any offsetting source of government revenue.
34

The average cost of care costing more than $1 per hour in centers, preschools, and family day care facilities is
$2.47 per hour. Our calculations will understate the effects of removing subsidies if some care costing more than $1
per hour is subsidized.

Page 21

for the 0-10th and 10-25th percentiles) and result in a substantial rise through the 75th percentile of
the predicted income distribution, while having smaller effects for the top quartile. These results
further emphasize the importance of free and low cost sources of care in holding down the child
care cost burden.
Since low SES families use cheaper types of child care and also pay less within modes,
making patterns of day care use more similar along either of these dimensions would
dramatically increase inequality in the cost burden of child care. As illustrated in the fifth row,
equalization of the cost per hour within (but not across) modes of care, combined with existing
patterns of use, would cause the average cost burden to rise from 5.6 to 9.6 percent for the 0-10th
percentile and from 4.7 to 6.9 percent for the 10-25th percentile, whereas the burden would fall
from 4.2 to 3.7 percent for the 75-90th percentile and from 5.5 to 4.2 percent for the 90-100th
percentile. If the cost per hour of child care was equalized for all families (across as well as
within modes), the average cost burden would be 12.6, 9.8, 3.5, and 3.3 percent for the 0-10, 1025, 75-90, and 90-100th percentiles (see row six).
The last row of Table 11 demonstrates the average cost burden if hours of day care were
unchanged, taxes and transfer payments were eliminated, and all families paid the sample
average amount for each hour of care. In this case, the burden of child care would be over twice
as high as that actually observed for the 0-10th percentiles (14.2 vs. 5.6 percent) and 10-25th
percentiles (11.3 vs. 4.7 percent), while declining by almost one-third for the 75-90th percentile
(from 4.2 to 2.9 percent) and by more than half for the highest decile (from 5.5 to 2.6 percent).
Moreover, the families in the 0-10th (10-25th) percentiles would expect to spend over five (four)
times as much of their income on child care as the top decile.
8. Discussion

Page 22

Children under the age of six (in 1999) live in families spending an average of $135
month on day care and with disposable incomes averaging $3,060 per month. Dividing the first
number by the second suggests that 4.4 percent of income is devoted to child care. This simple
calculation provides a misleading indication of the child care burden for two reasons. First, it
overweights higher income families. We calculate that the child care burden for the average
family is a somewhat higher 4.9 percent.35
More importantly, any calculation of the average cost burden conceals tremendous
variation in child care spending. Perhaps most striking is that 63 percent of young children live
in families that have no child care expenses. In roughly two-thirds of cases this is because no
non-immediate family day care is used. However, the remainding families do use child care but
pay nothing for it. The majority of free (or very low cost) care is provided by relatives (such as
grandparents), although subsidized care in more formal settings is received by a substantial
fraction of families.
Another noteworthy result is that average hours and cost burdens of child care are
relatively constant across SES groups, as measured by predicted family income. For instance,
the 0-10th percentile average 26.3 hours of day care weekly and pay 5.6 percent of their income
for it; the 90-100th percentile use 27.9 hours per week and spend 5.5 percent of income on it.
The similarity of cost burdens, despite much higher incomes at the top of the distribution, occurs
because disadvantaged families make far more extensive use of cheaper types of care and pay
less for any given mode. One likely implication is that at least some of the efforts made by
35

Consider a sample of three families with child care costs of $79, $98, and $313 and incomes of $1,152, $1,990,
and $8,534 (corresponding to the sample averages for families in the 10-25th, 25-50th, and 90-100th percentiles of the
actual income distribution). Total spending on child care is $490 and total incomes are $11,676 implying that 4.2
percent of income is spent on day care. Conversely, the three families devote 6.9 percent, 4.9 percent, and 3.7
percent of their incomes to day care, imply that the average across families is 5.2 percent. The first procedure
provides a smaller number because it weights the expenditures of high income families (who have smaller cost
burdens) more heavily, whereas the second gives each family an equal weight in calculating the average.
Page 23

disadvantaged families to minimize the burden of child care come at the cost of accepting lower
quality services.36 Our evidence also suggests that accounting for child care expenses would
raise the extent of measured income inequality, providing further evidence of the difficult
situation of the least advantaged families.
These results notwithstanding, the cost burden of child care (and the quality of services
received) would probably be much more unequal were it not for the efforts of low SES families
to minimize expenses, of government tax and transfer policies that redistribute resources towards
needy families, and of low cost (presumably subsidized) formal care that is focused on them.
For instance, if all families paid the same amount for each hour of day care but did not change
the amount used, the cost burden for the 0-10th and 10-25th percentiles would rise from 5.6 and
4.7 percent to 12.6 and 9.8 percent, while those of the 75-90th and 90-100th percentiles would
decline from 4.2 and 5.5 percent to 3.5 and 3.3 percent. Eliminating taxes and transfer payments
would further raise cost burdens of the bottom two groups, to 14.2 and 11.3 percent, while
lowering those of the top two to 2.9 and 2.6 percent. These comparisons ignore the behavioral
responses that would accompany such changes (e.g. shifting to cheaper modes or reducing total
child care hours by low SES families), but nevertheless suggest that the current policy
environment provides at least some assistance to disadvantaged families.
Our results should be viewed with caution for several reasons. As mentioned, we have
looked at the cost of care and make some inferences about quality but do not have direct
information on the latter. Similarly, we use the presence of extremely low-cost formal care as
36

There is also direct evidence that higher income families use higher quality care within modes (e.g. Galinsky, et
al., 1994) and that more formal modes tend to offer higher quality of care (see Meyers et al., 2004 for a detailed
discussion). Evidence that reductions in the cost of care cause parents to substitute market forms for less formal
arrangements is provided by Michalopoulos and Robins 2002; Micholopoulos, Robins and Garfinkel 1992;
Cleveland et al 1996; and Powell 1997. In his comprehensive study of child care choices, Blau (2001) concludes
that “parents feel most ‘priced out’ of center and family day care and would prefer these types over other
nonparental care and parental care if they were equally as cheap” (p. 74).

Page 24

evidence of subsidies, in the absence of direct data on these. Child care and family income will
also sometimes be reported with error, particularly given the short period of time to which the
data refer. This could be important since estimates of the average cost burden (but not most
other distributional measures) are somewhat sensitive to the treatment of outliers. Another
potential issue is the use of family rather than household incomes. Although the distinction is
generally not important, since the family and household are usually one and the same,
disadvantaged families relatively often reside in households containing other adults which,
depending on the nature of within-household income transfers, has the potential for reducing
child care cost burdens when measured as a percentage of family incomes.37
Much exciting research remains to be done.

37

Using household rather than family incomes reduces the average cost burden from 4.9 to 4.4 percent and from 5.6
to 4.6 percent for the 0-10th percentile, 4.7 to 3.9 percent for the 10-25th percentile, 5.6 to 4.9 percent for the 25-50th
percentile, 4.1 to 3.8 percent for the 50-75th percentile, 4.2 to 4.2 percent for the 75-90th percentile, and 5.5 to 5.4
percent for the 90-100th percentile of the predicted income distribution.

Page 25

References
Anderson, Patricia, and Philip Levine (2000). “Child Care and Mother'
s Employment
Decisions.” In Findings Jobs: Work and Welfare Reform, edited by David Card and
Rebecca Blank. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, pp. 420-462.
Blau, David M. (2001). The Child Care Problem. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2001.
Casper, Lynne M. (1995). “What Does It Cost to Mind Our Preschoolers?” Washington, DC:
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Current Population Reports, P70-52, September 1995,
http://www.census.gov/prod/1/pop/p70-52.pdf.
Cleveland, Gordon, Morley Gunderson, and Douglas Hyatt (1996). “Child Care Costs and
the Employment Decision of Women: Canadian Evidence.” Canadian Journal of
Economics 29(1), pp. 132-51.
Ellwood, David, and Christopher Jencks (2004). “The Uneven Spread of Single-Parent
Families: What Do We Know? Where Do We Look For Answers?” In Social Inequality,
edited by Kathryn M. Neckerman. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, pp. 3-77.
Feenberg, Daniel Richard, and Elizabeth Coutts (1993). “An Introduction to the TAXSIM
Model.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 12(1), Winter 1993, pp 189-194.
Galinsky, Ellen, Carollee Howes, Susan Kontos, and Marybeth Shinn (1994). The Study of
Children in Family Child Care and Relative Care: Highlights of Findings. New York:
Families and Work Institute.
Giannarelli, Linda and James Basimantov (2000). “Child Care Expenses of American
Families: Assessing the New Federalism.” Occasional Paper Number 40. Washington,
DC: Urban Institute, December 2000.
Hofferth, Sandra L. (1996). “Child Care in the United States Today.” The Future of Children:
Financing Child Care, 6(2), Summer/Fall 1996, pp. 41-61.
Hofferth, Sandra L., April Brayfield, Sharon Deich, and Pamela Holcomb (1991). National
Child Care Survey, 1990. Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute Press.
Jones, Arthur F., Jr. and Daniel Weinberg (2000). “The Changing Shape of the Nation’s
Income Distribution (1947-1998).” Washington, DC: U.S. Bureau of the Census, Current
Population Reports, P60-204, June 2000, http://www.census.gov/prod/2000pubs/P60204.pdf.
Katz, Lawrence F. and David H. Autor (1999). “Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings
Inequality.” In Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3A, edited by Orley Ashenfelter
and David Card. New York and Oxford: Elsevier Science, North-Holland, pp. 1463-1555.

Page 26

Meyer, Bruce D. and Dan T. Rosenbaum (2001). “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit,
and the Labor Supply of Single Mothers.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3), pp.
1063-1114.
Meyers, Marcia, Dan T. Rosenbaum, Christopher Ruhm, and Jane Waldfogel (2004).
“Inequality in Early Childhood Education and Care: What Do We Know?” In Social
Inequality, edited by Kathryn M. Neckerman. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, pp.
223-269.
Michalopoulos, Charles, Philip K. Robins, and Irwin Garfinkel (1992). “A Structural Model
of Labor Supply and Child Care Demand.” Journal of Human Resources 27(1), pp. 166203.
Michalopoulos, Charles and Robins, Philip K. (2000). “Employment and Child Care Choices
in Canada and the United States.” Canadian Journal of Economics 33(2), pp. 435-470.
Mishel, Lawrence., and Jared Bernstein, and John Schmidt (2001). The State of Working
America: 2000-2001. Ithaca, NY: ILR Press/Cornell University Press, 2001.
Powell, Lisa (1997). “Supply and Childcare Choice Decisions of Married Mothers.” Journal of
Human Resources 37(1), pp. 106-128.
Smith, Kristin (2002). “Who’s Minding the Kids? Child Care Arrangements: Spring 1997.”
Washington, DC: U.S. Bureau of the Census, Current Population Reports, P70-86, July
2002, http://www.census.gov/prod/2002pubs/p70-86.pdf.
TAXSIM Version 5.0 (2003). Boston, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, 2003,
http://www.nber.org/~taxsim/taxsim-calc5/index.html.
U.S. Bureau of the Census (2001). Statistical Abstract of the United States. Washington, DC:
U.S. Government Printing Office, 2001.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Resources (2000). “2000 Head Start Fact Sheet.”
Washington, DC: Head Start Bureau, 2000,
http://www2.acf.dhhs.gov/programs/hsb/research/factsheets/00_hsfs.htm.

Page 27

Table 1:
Decomposing Child Care Hours and Costs
Type of Child Care/
Caregiver Characteristic

Hours
Per Week

Percent
Using

Dollars
Per Hour

Dollars
Per
Month

Percent
Receiving
Free Care

Mode of Child Care: All Children
Non-Immediate Family

25.0

60.2%

$1.24

$135

39.0%

Relative/Grandparent

10.0

29.8%

$0.31

$13

76.3%

Non-Relative

3.4

11.4%

$1.77

$26

18.0%

Family Day Care

3.4

8.4%

$1.77

$26

10.1%

Center/Pre-School

7.9

22.7%

$2.01

$69

12.4%

Head Start

0.3

1.2%

$0.13

$0

82.3%

6.5

22.1%

Other Parent

5.9

19.0%

Siblings

0.6

4.0%

Immediate Family

Use and Cost of Non-Immediate Family Child Care By Caregiver Characteristics
Non-Hispanic White

24.1

61.1%

$1.49

$155

34.3%

Non-White/Hispanic

26.6

58.9%

$0.87

$100

46.3%

Spouse Present

21.9

56.0%

$1.50

$143

32.7%

Spouse Absent/Never Married

32.9

71.3%

$0.80

$114

50.1%

High School Dropout

20.2

46.0%

$0.72

$63

52.5%

High School Graduate

24.2

58.9%

$0.95

$99

44.1%

Beyond High School

27.0

65.5%

$1.51

$177

33.3%

Source: Data are from wave 10 of the 1996 panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation
(SIPP), covering the period from March through June 1999.
Standard errors: Standard errors range between 0.0-0.5 hours/week for use of care, 0.2%-0.7% for
probability of using the specified type of care, $0.03-$0.07 for cost/hour, $0-$4 for cost/month, and
0.9%-1.7% for the probability of free care (except for Head Start where it is 5.8%) for all children.
Corresponding standard errors for all non-immediate family child care among the specified population
sub-samples range from 0.5-1.1 hours/week, 0.9%-1.8%, $0.04-$0.06/hour, $5-$6/week, and 1.0%2.5%.
Note: Sample includes 4,524 caregivers of children aged 0 through 5. Observations are weighted using
SIPP person weights multiplied by the number of children aged 0 through 5, to provide nationally
representative estimates for children of these ages. The use of specified modes sums to over 100
percent because some families use multiple types of day care. Child care hours for the immediate
family are only for when the caregiver is working or in school. See the text for additional details.
Page 28

Table 2:
Sample Distributions of Child Care Burden and Its Components
Sample
Mean

0-63

4.9%
(0.1%)

0%
(0%)

3.1%
(0.1%)

10.1%
(0.1%)

29.7%
(0.5%)

Monthly Child Care Costs

$135
($4)

$0
($0)

$145
($6)

$365
($7)

$624
($20)

Weekly Child Care Hours

25.0
(0.5)

12.5
(0.5)

29.1
(1.1)

47.5
(1.0)

65.1
(1.8)

$3,060
($39)

$2,708
($47)

$4,757
($156)

$3,706
($65)

$2,268
($84)

Cost Burden Component
Child Care Cost Burden

Monthly Family Income

Cost Burden Percentile
63-75
75-90

90-100

Source: Data are from wave 10 of the 1996 panel of the SIPP.
Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. In this table and later tables child care costs and hours refer to
child care from non-immediate family members. Monthly family income is the average income from all
sources (earned and unearned income) for the entire family over the previous four months, less
estimated monthly income (state and federal) and payroll taxes. The child care cost burden is calculated
as total child care costs divided by total family income. The cost burden is capped at a maximum of
50%. See Table 1 and the text for additional details.

Page 29

Table 3:
Sample Average Characteristics By Child Care Cost Burden and Its Components
Child
Care Cost
Burden

Monthly
Child
Care
Costs

Weekly
Child
Care
Hours

Monthly
Family
Income

Sample
Size

Full Sample

4.9%

$135

25.0

$3,060

4,524

White

4.8%

$141

23.7

$3,265

3,652

Black

6.0%

$115

33.0

$2,023

655

Other Nonwhite

2.5%

$85

20.1

$3,109

217

Hispanic

4.7%

$90

22.1

$2,231

775

Spouse Present

3.9%

$143

21.9

$3,712

3,150

Spouse Absent

7.9%

$134

35.8

$1,599

569

Never Married

7.0%

$101

30.9

$1,219

805

High School Dropout

3.9%

$63

20.2

$1,599

780

High School Graduate

4.6%

$99

24.2

$2,408

1,386

Some College

5.2%

$132

26.3

$3,112

1,349

College Graduate

5.4%

$234

27.8

$4,957

1,009

1 Child (Aged 0-5)

4.1%

$105

19.3

$2,937

3,404

>1 Child (Aged 0-5)

5.9%

$176

33.0

$3,233

1,120

Youngest Child Aged 0-2

5.3%

$145

27.0

$2,972

2,413

Youngest Child Aged 3-5

4.3%

$120

22.0

$3,189

2,111

Lives in Northeast

4.7%

$139

22.2

$3,360

785

Lives in Midwest

5.0%

$135

24.7

$3,098

1,065

Lives in South Atlantic

6.0%

$155

27.5

$3,117

723

Lives in South Central

4.6%

$121

28.2

$2,712

856

Lives in West

4.3%

$128

23.2

$3,031

1,095

Caregiver Characteristic

Source: Data are from wave 10 of the 1996 panel of the SIPP.
Note: See note on Table 1. The “Spouse Absent” category includes currently married persons whose
spouse is absent as well as those who are divorced, separated, or widowed. See Tables 1 and 2 and the
text for additional details.

Page 30

Table 4:
Distribution of the Child Care Cost Burden Within Groups
Average
Cost Burden

% With No
Child Care
Costs

50th

75th

90th

Full Sample

4.9%

62.9%

0%

5.9%

16.3%

White

4.8%

62.1%

0%

5.9%

15.8%

Black

6.0%

63.6%

0%

7.1%

24.6%

Other Nonwhite

2.5%

75.7%

0%

0%

8.9%

Hispanic

4.7%

73.3%

0%

2.5%

17.7%

Spouse Present

3.9%

62.4%

0%

5.5%

12.9%

Spouse Absent

7.9%

61.5%

0%

10.9%

29.1%

Never Married

7.0%

65.9%

0%

6.1%

28.9%

High School Dropout

3.9%

78.9%

0%

0%

15.0%

High School Graduate

4.6%

68.0%

0%

4.8%

16.5%

Some College

5.2%

60.1%

0%

7.1%

16.8%

College Graduate

5.4%

48.5%

6.8%

7.9%

15.9%

Caregiver Characteristic

Source: Data are from wave 10 of the 1996 panel of the SIPP.
Note: See Tables 1 and 2 and the text for additional details.

Page 31

Cost Burden Percentile

Table 5:
Econometric Estimates of the Correlates of the Child Care Cost Burden
Cost
Burden

No Child
Care Costs

Cost Burden >
90th Percentile

-.0009** (.0003)

.0033* (.0014)

-.0032** (.0008)

.0127 (.0121)

-.0006 (.0500)

.0245 (.0233)

Black
Other Nonwhite
Hispanic

-.0039 (.0061)
-.0194** (.0053)
.0076 (.0060)

.0225 (.0270)
.1387** (.0331)
.0500* (.0246)

-.0104 (.0132)
-.0432 (.0184)
.0270 (.0160)

Spouse Absent
Never Married

.0502** (.0088)
.0377** (.0069)

-.0632* (.0287)
-.0433 (.0275)

.1565** (.0260)
.1162** (.0222)

High School Dropout
Some College

-.0147** (.0062)
.0125** (.0047)

.1124** (.0256)
-.0896** (.0219)

-.0241 (.0137)
.0193 (.0135)

College Graduate

.0235** (.0047)

-.2266** (.0248)

.0412* (.0178)

# Children Aged 0-5

.0147** (.0046)

-.0247 (.0170)

.0401** (.0087)

Age Youngest Child

-.0013 (.0011)

-.0247** (.0055)

-.0087** (.0033)

Lives in Midwest
Lives in South Atlantic

.0027 (.0054)
.0135* (.0067)

-.0516* (.0264)
-.0857** (.0299)

-.0040 (.0147)
.0126 (.0178)

Lives in South Central
Lives in West

-.0018 (.0058)
-.0001 (.0055)

-.0121 (.0282)
-.0317 (.0270)

-.0142 (.0152)
-.0108 (.0148)

Regressor
Age
Female

* for P < 0.05, ** for P <0.01.
Source: Data are from wave 10 of the 1996 panel of the SIPP.
Note: Estimation is by OLS in the first column and binary probit in the next two. Observations are
weighted using SIPP child weights (described in Table 1). The coefficient estimates give the predicted
effect of a marginal change in the explanatory variable (with other regressors evaluated at their variable
means for the probit models). Robust standard errors, estimated assuming that observations are
independent across but not within families, are shown in parentheses. See Tables 1 and 2 and the text
for additional details.

Page 32

Table 6:
Income and Inequality With and Without Deduction for Child Care Costs
Income Percentile
25th
50th
75th

Average
Income
$3,060

$723

$1,503

$2,509

$3,996

$5,625

$2,925

$631

$1,408

$2,405

$3,837

$5,375

Gini
Coefficient

90/10

90/50

Income Ratio
75/10
75/25

50/10

Monthly Family Income

0.398

7.78

2.24

5.53

2.68

3.47

Family Income Net of
Child Care Costs

0.406

8.52

2.23

6.08

2.72

3.82

Income Measure
Monthly Family Income
Family Income Net of
Child Care Costs
Income Measure

10th

90th

Source: Data are from wave 10 of the 1996 panel of the SIPP.
Note: The top panel of the table shows incomes at different points of the distribution, with observations
weighted using SIPP child weights (described in Table 1). The bottom panel displays the Gini
coefficient and the ratios of incomes at specified percentiles of the income distribution. See Tables 1
and 2 and the text for additional details.

Page 33

Table 7:
Cost Burden and Its Components By Actual and Predicted Family Income
Cost Component

0-10

Actual Family Income Percentile
10-25
25-50
50-75
75-90

Child Care Cost Burden

6.2%

6.3%

4.9%

4.1%

4.6%

4.4%

Monthly Child Care Costs

$47

$79

$98

$133

$196

$313

Weekly Child Care Hours

16.4

27.7

23.4

24.1

28.5

30.5

Monthly Family Income

$288

$1,152

$1,990

$3,205

$4,716

$8,534

Sample Size

488

706

1,105

1,150

647

428

Predicted Family Income Percentile
10-25
25-50
50-75
75-90

90-100

90-100

Cost Component

0-10

Child Care Cost Burden

5.6%

4.7%

5.6%

4.1%

4.2%

5.5%

Monthly Child Care Costs

$83

$75

$115

$129

$180

$269

Weekly Child Care Hours

26.3

24.9

25.9

23.2

23.8

27.9

$1,268

$1,637

$2,294

$3,437

$4,665

$5,570

428

689

1,140

1,161

659

447

Monthly Family Income
Sample Size

Source: Data are from wave 10 of the 1996 panel of the SIPP.
Standard errors: Standard errors range between 0.2%-0.7% for child care cost burden, $6-$23 for
monthly child care costs, 0.9-1.9 hours/week for weekly child care hours, and $8-$201 for monthly
family income.
Note: The top panel shows results for sub-samples stratified by actual family income. The bottom panel
divides the sample by the predicted family income percentile, which is obtained by regressions of total
family income on interactions of gender, race, age, education, and region, using data from the 1998
through 2002 March Current Population Survey (CPS). In both cases, SIPP caregivers are divided into
the specified percentiles based upon the specified family income variable and sample means are
calculated weighting observations by SIPP child weights (described in Table 1). See Tables 1 and 2 and
the text for additional details.

Page 34

Table 8:
Decomposing Child Care Hours and Costs By Predicted Family Income
Type of Child Care

0-10

Predicted Family Income Percentile
10-25
25-50
50-75
75-90

90-100

Weekly Child Care Hours
All Non-Immediate Family

26.3

24.9

25.9

23.2

23.8

27.9

Relative/Grandparent

12.8

14.2

10.7

9.0

7.4

5.1

Non-Relative

2.9

3.1

3.8

2.7

3.3

5.4

Family Day Care

1.8

2.0

3.5

3.7

4.3

5.3

Center/Pre-School

8.2

5.3

7.6

7.6

8.8

12.1

Head Start

0.6

0.3

0.3

0.3

0.0

0.0

Monthly Child Care Costs
All Non-Immediate Family

$83

$75

$115

$129

$180

$269

Relative/Grandparent

$13

$20

$15

$11

$8

$13

Non-Relative

$18

$13

$23

$20

$40

$57

Family Day Care

$10

$15

$22

$26

$37

$55

Center/Pre-School

$42

$27

$56

$72

$95

$144

Head Start

$0

$0

$0

$0

$0

$0

Source: Data are from wave 10 of the 1996 panel of the SIPP.
Standard errors: For weekly child care hours, standard errors range between 0.9-1.7 hours for all nonimmediate family, 0.6-1.1 hours for relative/grandparent, 0.3-1.0 hours for non-relative, 0.4-0.8 hours
for family day care, 0.6-1.1 hours for center/pre-school, and 0.0-0.2 hours for Head Start. For monthly
child care costs, standard errors range between $42-$164 for all non-immediate family, $2-$5 for
relative/grandparent, $2-$10 for non-relative, $3-$8 for family day care, $4-13 for center/pre-school,
and less than $0.30 for Head Start.
Note: See Table 7 for details.

Page 35

Table 9:
Decomposing Child Care Costs Per Hour By Predicted Family Income
Type of Child Care

0-10

Predicted Family Income Percentile
10-25
25-50
50-75
75-90

90-100

Costs Per Hour for Child Care
All Non-Immediate Family

$0.73

$0.70

$1.03

$1.29

$1.75

$2.23

Relative/Grandparent

$0.23

$0.32

$0.32

$0.28

$0.25

$0.60

Non-Relative

$1.46

$1.00

$1.39

$1.68

$2.80

$2.42

Family Day Care

$1.32

$1.74

$1.42

$1.66

$2.01

$2.39

Center/Pre-School

$1.18

$1.17

$1.70

$2.20

$2.50

$2.75

Head Start

$0.00

$0.09

$0.06

$0.33

--

--

Percentage of Hours of Free Child Care
All Non-Immediate Family

51.9%

47.8%

40.8%

40.0%

30.5%

20.1%

Relative/Grandparent

81.5%

66.6%

74.7%

80.8%

82.1%

80.0%

Non-Relative

29.0%

24.9%

19.5%

20.1%

11.6%

6.7%

Family Day Care

11.6%

11.1%

13.9%

12.1%

3.3%

7.4%

Center/Pre-School

18.6%

24.3%

14.0%

10.3%

7.2%

6.5%

Head Start

100.0%

41.9%

95.3%

82.9%

--

--

Percentage of Hours Costing More Than $1 Per Hour
All Non-Immediate Family

30.5%

27.7%

44.4%

51.5%

61.9%

75.5%

Relative/Grandparent

8.6%

10.6%

11.6%

11.8%

10.6%

18.5%

Non-Relative

67.0%

32.5%

68.8%

70.0%

80.9%

91.5%

Family Day Care

78.4%

80.1%

63.6%

77.3%

86.1%

90.6%

Center/Pre-School

43.8%

53.3%

70.9%

81.1%

86.6%

85.6%

Head Start

0.0%

0.0%

4.7%

14.4%

--

--

Source: Data are from wave 10 of the 1996 panel of the SIPP.
Standard errors: For costs per hour, standard errors range between $0.04-$0.10 for all non-immediate
family, $0.04-$0.13 for relative/grandparent, $0.12-$0.24 for non-relative, $0.10-$0.23 for family day
care, $0.10-$0.15 for center/pre-school, and $0.00-$0.18 for Head Start. For percentage of hours
variables (second and third panels), standard errors range between 1.7-2.9% for all non-immediate
family, 1.6-3.9% for relative/grandparent, 3.1%-8.6% for non-relative, 2.1%-8.4% for family day care,
1.8%-5.8% for center/pre-school, and 0.0%-22.1% for Head Start.
Note: See Table 7 for details.
Page 36

Table 10:
Decomposing Monthly Family Income by Predicted Income Percentile
Income Category

0-10

Predicted Family Income Percentile
10-25
25-50
50-75
75-90

90-100

Net Income

$1,269

$1,637

$2,298

$3,439

$4,665

$5,570

Total Earnings

$1,054

$1,562

$2,453

$4,060

$5,988

$7,456

$534

$641

$875

$1,216

$1,690

$2,274

$223

$171

$151

$102

$54

$50

$133
$91

$107
$64

$76
$75

$30
$72

$11
$43

$5
$45

$48

$135

$372

$841

$1,546

$2,188

-$49

-$4

$138

$450

$961

$1,412

$97
$10
$7

$86
$16
$6

$72
$23
$11

$39
$37
$12

$19
$40
$13

$6
$34
$19

State Income Taxes

$12

$17

$49

$106

$191

$305

Payroll Taxes

$86

$122

$184

$285

$393

$472

Caregiver Earnings
Transfers
Welfare
Non-Welfare
Income and Payroll Taxes
Federal Income Taxes
Earned Income Tax Credit
Child Tax Credit
Child Care Credit

Source: Data are from wave 10 of the 1996 panel of the SIPP.
Standard errors: Standard errors range between $42-$164 for net income, $55-$279 for total earnings,
$31-$167 for caregiver earnings, $10-$22 for transfers, $2-$14 for welfare, $7-$17 for non-welfare,
$14-$130 for income and payroll taxes, $9-$102 for federal income taxes, $2-$5 for earned income tax
credit, $1-$2 for child tax credit, $1-$1 for child care credit, $2-$21 for state income taxes, and $4-$11
for payroll taxes.
Note: See Table 7 for details on how predicted family income was calculated. Dollar amounts are
monthly and are for the entire family, except for caregiver earnings. Net income is total earnings plus
transfers plus income/payroll taxes plus other non-tax/non-transfer income. Welfare income includes
Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF), General Assistance (GA), and Food Stamps. Nonwelfare transfer income includes Social Security, Unemployment Compensation, Workers’
Compensation, Supplemental Security Income (SSI), Veteran’s Benefits, and other small government
programs. Payroll taxes include the employee half of Social Security and Medicare payroll taxes. See
Table 1 and the text for additional details.

Page 37

Table 11:
Decomposing the Child Care Cost Burden
Predicted Family Income Percentile
10-25
25-50
50-75
75-90 90-100

Child Care Cost Burden Measure

0-10

Actual Cost Burden

5.6%

4.7%

5.6%

4.1%

4.2%

5.5%

Burden Without Transfer Income

6.1%

4.9%

5.8%

4.3%

4.2%

5.5%

Burden Without Transfer Income or
Taxes

6.0%

4.8%

5.5%

3.7%

3.4%

4.3%

Burden Without Subsidized Formal
Care

8.9%

6.6%

7.2%

5.2%

4.6%

6.0%

Burden With Equal Hourly Costs by
Mode

9.6%

6.9%

7.3%

4.5%

3.7%

4.2%

Burden With Equal Hourly Child Care
Costs

12.6%

9.8%

8.2%

4.7%

3.5%

3.3%

Burden Without Taxes/Transfers and
With Equal Hourly Child Care Costs

14.2%

11.3%

8.8%

4.8%

2.9%

2.6%

Minimum Standard Error
Maximum Standard Error

0.6%
0.9%

0.4%
0.6%

0.3%
0.4%

0.2%
0.3%

0.2%
0.3%

0.2%
0.4%

Source: Data are from wave 10 of the 1996 panel of the SIPP.
Note: Minimum and maximum standard errors for all of the burden measures for the given percentile
group are given the bottom panel. See Table 7 for details on how predicted family income was
calculated. Transfer income includes TANF, GA, Food Stamps, Social Security, Unemployment
Compensation, Workers’ Compensation, SSI, Veteran’s Benefits, and other small government
programs. Taxes included federal and state income taxes and the employee half of Social Security and
Medicare payroll taxes. “Burden Without Subsidized Formal Care” assumes that all free or less than a
dollar per hour care in centers, preschools/nursery schools, family day care, and Head Start cost $2.47
per hour, the mean cost for unsubsidized formal care. “Burden With Equal Hourly Costs by Mode”
assumes that hourly costs by mode are the same for all families in the sample, but hours and mode
choices differ across families. “Burden With Equal Hourly Child Care Costs” assumes that hourly costs
are the same for all families, but hours differ across families. See Tables 1 and 2 and the text for
additional details.

Page 38

Table A.1:
Sample Characteristics By Predicted Family Income
Caregiver Characteristic

0-10

Predicted Family Income Percentile
10-25
25-50
50-75
75-90

Age (years)

23.1

26.7

29.2

33.5

34.4

37.4

Female

96.6%

92.7%

95.6%

97.4%

98.8%

98.8%

White

51.2%

71.6%

76.8%

87.1%

89.5%

93.6%

Black

44.3%

26.5%

19.1%

7.0%

5.6%

2.1%

Other Nonwhite

3.9%

1.9%

4.1%

5.9%

4.9%

4.3%

Hispanic

33.7%

38.1%

20.5%

11.9%

4.3%

2.7%

Spouse Present

33.4%

50.8%

66.3%

84.2%

94.0%

94.9%

Spouse Absent

13.4%

15.1%

16.1%

10.8%

3.7%

3.9%

Never Married

53.2%

34.1%

17.6%

5.1%

2.3%

1.2%

High School Dropout

68.9%

43.7%

13.2%

0.2%

0.0%

0.0%

High School Graduate

28.5%

42.2%

46.6%

35.3%

1.2%

0.0%

Some College

2.6%

14.1%

39.1%

54.4%

28.3%

0.0%

College Graduate

0.0%

0.0%

1.2%

10.1%

70.5%

100.0%

# Children Aged 0-5

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.5

Age Youngest Child (Years)

1.8

2.2

2.3

2.4

2.1

2.4

# Persons in Family

3.3

3.7

3.9

4.2

4.2

4.1

Caregiver Work Hours/Week

16.9

18.6

22.5

23.8

22.9

23.5

All Parents’ Work Hours/Week

28.9

38.9

49.7

60.6

66.4

67.6

Non-parent Adult in Household

52.3%

35.1%

23.7%

12.1%

6.1%

5.6%

Non-parent Working Adult in HH

41.0%

28.0%

17.6%

7.9%

3.5%

3.3%

Family Income/HH Income

68.4%

83.0%

89.5%

96.2%

98.5%

98.8%

Source: Data are from wave 10 of the 1996 panel of the SIPP.
Note: See Table 7 for details.

Page 39

90-100

