NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHERE DID THE PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH GO?
INFLATION DYNAMICS AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF INCOME
Ian Dew-Becker
Robert J. Gordon
Working Paper 11842
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11842
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2005

We are above all grateful to Dan Feenberg of the NBER for making it possible for us to access and analyze
the IRS micro data files. We are grateful for helpful data, ideas and insights to Michael Harper and Phyllis
Otto of the BLS, Robert Brown of the BEA, Carol Corrado of the Board of Governors, Mary Daly, Brad
DeLong, Julie P. Gordon, Larry Katz, and Mark Watson. Dan Feenberg and Emmanuel Saez were
particularly helpful in providing insights and programs that made possible our analysis of the IRS micro data
files. Chris Taylor was our exemplary research assistant. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Ian Dew-Becker and Robert J. Gordon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Inflation Dynamics and the Distribution of Income
Ian Dew-Becker and Robert J. Gordon
NBER Working Paper No. 11842
December 2005
JEL No. D31, D33, D63, E31, I30, J30
ABSTRACT
A basic tenet of economic science is that productivity growth is the source of growth in real income
per capita. But our results raise doubts by creating a direct link between macro productivity growth
and the micro evolution of the income distribution. We show that over the entire period 1966-2001,
as well as over 1997-2001, only the top 10 percent of the income distribution enjoyed a growth rate
of real wage and salary income equal to or above the average rate of economy-wide productivity
growth. Growth in median real wage and salary income barely grew at all while average wage and
salary income kept pace with productivity growth, because half of the income gains went to the top
10 percent of the income distribution, leaving little left over for the bottom 90 percent. Half of this
inequality effect is attributable to gains of the 90th percentile over the 10th percentile; the other half
is due to increased skewness within the top 10 percent.
In addition to its micro analysis, this paper also asks whether faster productivity growth reduces
inflation, raises nominal wage growth, or raises profits. We find that an acceleration or deceleration
of the productivity growth trend alters the inflation rate by at least one-for-one in the opposite
direction. This paper revives research on wage adjustment and produces a dynamic interactive model
of price and wage adjustment that explains movements of labor's share of income.
What caused rising income inequality? Economists have placed too much emphasis on "skill-biased
technical change" and too little attention to the sources of increased skewness at the very top, within
the top 1 percent of the income distribution. We distinguish two complementary explanations, the
"economics of superstars," i.e., the pure rents earned by sports and entertainment stars, and the
escalating compensation premia of CEOs and other top corporate officers. These sources of
divergence at the top, combined with the role of deunionization, immigration, and free trade in
pushing down incomes at the bottom, have led to the wide divergence between the growth rates of
productivity, average compensation, and median compensation.
Ian Dew-Becker
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208-2600
i-dew@northwestern.edu

Robert J. Gordon
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208-2600
and NBER
rjg@northwestern.edu

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 1

“It’s no secret that the gap between the rich and the poor has been growing, but the extent to which the
richest are leaving everybody else behind is not widely known . . . . It’s like chasing a speedboat with a
rowboat.”
– Bob Herbert (2005)
“There is no question that a huge gap has opened up between productivity and living standards . . . . Not
since World War II have productivity and income diverged so sharply.”
– Louis Uchitelle (2005)

I. Introduction
The first half of this decade has witnessed a sharp contrast between strong output
growth on one hand, and slow employment and median income growth on the other. Taken
together, strong growth in output combined with weak growth in hours has resulted in the
2001-04 “explosion” in U. S. labor productivity growth, implying an underlying trend in
productivity growth faster than any previous sub-period of the postwar era.
Yet who received the benefits of this productivity growth explosion? Median household
income fell by 3.8 percent from 1999 to 2004 and grew cumulatively from 1995 to 2004 at an
annual rate of only 0.9 percent per year, much slower than the growth rate of nonfarm private
business (NFPB) output per hour over the same period of 2.9 percent.1 Similarly, the median
real wage for all workers grew over 1995-2003 at 1.4 percent per year, less than half the rate of
productivity growth.2
The failure of the productivity growth revival to boost the real incomes and wages of the

1. Mishel et. al. (2005), Table 1.1, p. 42. Median household income updated from 2003 to 2004 from
Leonhardt (2005).
2. Mishel et. al. (2005), Table 2.6, p. 122. Measures of real income and real wages from this source deflate

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 2

median family and median worker calls into question the standard economic paradigm that
productivity growth translates automatically into rising living standards, as in this quote from
Paul Krugman (1990, p. 9):
Productivity isn’t everything, but in the long run it is almost everything. A country’s
ability to improve its standard of living over time depends almost entirely on its ability
to raise its output per worker . . . the essential arithmetic says that long-term growth in
living standards . . . depends almost entirely on productivity growth.

Macro and Micro
This paper should be read in the spirit of a detective novel, “The Case of the Missing
Productivity – Where Did It Go?” Our detective story is divided into two parts, macro and
micro. The macro part begins with the standard identity stating that productivity growth
equals real wage growth if labor’s income share is constant. We begin in Part II by examining
aggregate data that compares productivity growth with growth in alternative real wage
measures. Then in Parts III and IV we ask how the post-1995 productivity growth acceleration
enters into the econometrics of price and wage dynamics. In past incarnations of dynamic
Phillips curves, productivity growth has been a minor side show if mentioned at all. The paper
provides a new look at price and wage dynamics in order to assess the causes of low inflation in
the decade after 1995. In light of high demand in the late 1990s, why was inflation so low?
What role was played by the revival of trend productivity growth as contrasted to other
beneficial supply shocks? Did the productivity growth slowdown of 1965-79 play a parallel
role in creating high inflation in the 1970s? Can dynamic wage and price equations reproduce

nominal values by the CPI-U-RS back to 1978.

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 3

the behavior of changes in labor’s income share that have been observed in the data?
The investigation begins with the “mainstream” inflation model that explains price
changes by inertia, demand shocks, and supply shocks but does not include wages. A unique
contribution of this paper is to bring wages back into the study of wage dynamics and to
develop a model including both price and wage equations that include mutual feedback and
can capture the effect of changes in trend productivity growth on inflation, nominal wage
changes, and changes in labor’s income share. In dynamic simulations of the wage-price
model, we find that changes in the productivity growth trend had major effects in boosting
inflation during 1965-1979 and in slowing down inflation between 1995 and 2005.
The micro section of the paper in Parts V and VI examines the behavior of labor and
non-labor income as recorded in the IRS micro data files of the Statistics of Income covering the
years 1966-2001. The IRS micro files can be used to determine how much of the real income
gain over various periods, e.g., 1966-2001 or 1997-2001, accrue to the median taxpayer and to
those at different percentiles from the 10th to the 99.99th. The IRS data have the great advantage
over the more frequently used CPS data, in that they allow a microscopic view of what is going
on inside the upper tenth of the income distribution. We find that increasing inequality inside
the upper tenth is as important a source of growing inequality as a higher ratio of incomes at
the 90th compared to the 10th percentile.
Our review of the sources of increased income inequality finds that economists have
placed too much emphasis on skill-biased technical change and too little on independent factors

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 4

that have pushed down relative incomes at the bottom and raised them at the top. At the
bottom it is useful to take a broader perspective that extends back to the 1920s, and we can
explain the U-shaped time pattern of inequality by three U-shaped factors – the rise and fall of
labor unions, the fall and rise of immigration, and the fall and rise of international trade. At the
top we focus on the enormous increase in the income share of the top one percent and even the
top 0.01 percent. Part of our analysis applies the “economics of super stars”, extending Rosen’s
original (1981) argument that new technology such as CDs, the internet, and cable TV boosts the
earnings premia of superstars. The other part applies to the large part of added income in the
upper tail of the income distribution attributable to CEOs and other top corporate officers,
where the facts are clear but the interpretations are controversial.
Taken together, the macro and micro parts of our detective story allow us to allocate the
cumulative increase in real GDP attributable to the post-1995 acceleration in productivity
growth. The macro section allows us to determine how much of the cumulative increase was
broadly allocated to all income groups through lower inflation, how much went to nominal
labor income, and how much went to nominal non-labor income. The micro section allows us
to look within the increased amount of real labor income to determine how much went to the
top, middle, and bottom of the income distribution. In the end, we find that only the top 10
percent of taxpayers had gains in real labor income per hour that kept pace with productivity
growth over either the 1966-2001 or 1997-2001 periods. The micro section reconciles the
paradox that median income lagged so far behind productivity growth while labor’s income

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 5

share remained roughly constant, simply because the distributional change caused median
income growth to behave so differently than mean growth.

II. Issues Raised by Macro Data on Productivity and Labor’s Share
We begin by examining data on the interplay between productivity growth and labor’s
share, using the definition that a constant income share of labor compensation implies that labor
productivity grows at the same percentage rate as real labor compensation per hour. How large
was the post-1995 acceleration in productivity growth? Did real wages accelerate fully in
response, leaving labor’s income share intact, or did labor’s share decline? How large was the
difference among alternative measures of real wage growth?

Decomposing the Difference between Productivity Growth and Median Real Wage
Growth
We begin with a close look at the last four years ending in 2005:Q1. Labor productivity
in the nonfarm private business (NFPB) sector over these four years, according to the official
data as of July, 2005, registered an annual growth rate of 3.89 percent per year. In contrast,
average real hourly earnings in the total private economy increased at an annual rate of only
0.49 percent. We will show that most of this large difference involves data issues, and that the
remaining decline in labor’s share did not offset an increase in that share during 1995-2001;
labor’s share was actually higher in 2005:Q1 than eight years earlier. Over a longer period
going back to 1954, labor’s income share has been virtually constant.

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 6

Data issues largely explain the difference in the four years ending in 2005:Q1 between
the 3.89 percent growth in labor productivity in the July data and 0.49 percent growth in real
hourly wages. These issues involve: (a) data revisions, (b) the contrast between actual and
trend productivity growth, (c) the NFPB sector vs. the total economy, (d) the difference between
productivity and real compensation growth, (e) the difference between hourly compensation
and average hourly earnings, and (f) the impact of alternative price deflators used to convert
nominal wages to real wages.
Data Revisions. The annual revisions of the National Income and Product Accounts
(NIPA) in late July, 2005, reduced the growth rate of real GDP over the last few years and raised
the rate of inflation. The complementary revisions of the BLS productivity data reduced the
annual growth rate of NFPB productivity over the recent four year interval from 3.89 percent
per annum to 3.44 percent per annum.
Actual vs. Trend. The distinction between actual and trend productivity growth is
illustrated for 1950-2005 in the top frame of Figure 1. The grey-shaded line plots the eightquarter rate of change of NFPB output per hour, and the solid line is a Hodrick-Prescott (HP)
trend.3 Prior to the recent data revisions, the HP trend reached 3.5 percent per year during the
2003-04 period, but now it barely scrapes 3.0 percent, considerably less than actual productivity
growth during 2001-05.

7. The smoothing parameter used for the Hodrick-Prescott filter is 6400 and was chosen in Gordon (2003,
pp. 220-1) to avoid too much “bending” of the trend in response to the deep recession of 1981-82.

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 7

Total Economy vs. NFPB. The bottom frame of Figure 1 displays as a solid line the HP
trend for the NFPB sector, copied from the top frame. In contrast the grey line shows the trend
for the entire economy. This tracks the NFPB trend quite closely until the late 1980s and then
grows more slowly. The total economy trend rises above 2.0 percent in 1999, two years after the
NFPB trend, and it only slightly exceeds 2.5 percent during 2002-05. The bottom frame also
displays the difference between the two trends, which is very close to zero on average during
1950-85 but then begins to rise, reaching a maximum of 0.60 in mid-2002.

Understanding this

difference is important both in relation to the behavior of labor’s share in the total economy, and
also because future potential output growth depends on productivity growth in the total
economy, not just that for the NFPB sector.

Productivity, Real Compensation, and Labor’s Income Share
In the top frame of Figure 2 the lower line displays the ratio of NIPA employee
compensation in the total economy to NIPA national income, i.e., GDP minus capital
consumption and indirect business taxes.

Contrary to the widespread impression that labor’s

share has been squeezed, there was no change in labor’s share from 1997:Q3 to 2005:Q1, with a
substantial increase in the boom of the late 1990s followed by a reversal in the early years of the
current decade. Over a longer period, labor’s share has fluctuated over a wider range. There
were two big step increases in 1952-54 and especially in 1966-70. There were substantial
fluctuations in labor’s income share prior to 1984 but little movement since then.
The top line in Figure 2 adds to NIPA employee compensation the labor component of

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 8

proprietors’ income, as estimated by the Economic Policy Institute.4 Because the share of
proprietors’ income in total domestic income has declined over the years, and because the labor
share of that income has also declined, the overall behavior of labor’s income share looks more
stable in the upper line in Figure 2. Over the entire interval plotted, labor’s share as plotted by
the lower line rises from 65.l percent in 1950:Q1 to 69.5 percent in 2005:Q1. In contrast, labor’s
share as plotted by the upper line barely rises at all over the same time interval, from 71.8
percent in 1950:Q1 to 72.5 percent in 2005:Q1. Overall there seems little air of crisis in the data
on labor’s share. Especially when the labor component of proprietors’ income is included, the
share of labor in domestic income has floated up and down over the decades with no clear
trend.

Components of Non-Labor Compensation
The bottom frame of Figure 2 displays the components of the non-labor capital share of
domestic income, which by definition is unity minus the same labor’s share concept plotted as
the lower line in the top frame.5 From bottom to top, the five components are “Government
enterprises and transfer payments,” then income from rent, above it proprietors’ income, then
interest, and finally at the top corporate profits. The arrangement is to place the more stable
components at the bottom and the more volatile components at the top.

4. See Mishel et. al (2005)., Table 1.24, p. 95. The fraction of total proprietors’ income that we use from the
Mishel table is linearly interpolated between the selected years that they display.
5 In the bottom frame of Figure 2 all of Proprietors’ income is included in non-labor income. In the top
frame the lower line treats all of proprietor’s income as non-labor income, and the upper line treats a
fraction (ranging from 0.41 to 0.29) of proprietors’ income as part of labor income.

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 9

The share of the sum of rent and proprietors’ income declined from 20.1 percent in
1950:Q1 to a low point of 8.0 percent in 1983:Q3, and then gradually increased to a terminal
value of 11.1 percent in 2005:Q1. If this major component of non-labor income declined so
much in the postwar era, what emerged to take its place? This was the huge increase in the
share of interest income, which evolved slowly during 1960-1980 and then jumped suddenly
from 1980 to 1985. The share of interest was a mere 1.4 percent in 1950:Q1, then a slow increase
to 6.5 percent in 1979:Q1, then a sharp increase to 10.9 percent in 1986:Q2, and finally a slow
slide to 7.2 percent in 2005:Q1. Presumably the increase in the interest income share from 1950
to 1986 combines the gradual increase in the use of debt in the economy, multiplied by a sharp
increase in interest rates in the late 1960s, and especially between 1978 and 1981-82 associated
with high inflation, the Volcker monetary policy, and the Reagan fiscal deficits.
Much of the current discussion of the failure of productivity gains to spill over to labor
income focuses on the buoyant behavior of corporate profits in the past several years.
However, the bottom frame of Figure 2 shows that the share of before-tax corporate profits has
declined over time. If we examine the ups and downs of the profit share over successive
business cycles, the cyclical low point fell from 13.1 percent in 1950:Q1 to 6.9 percent in 2001:Q3,
and the cyclical high point fell from 15.4 percent in 1950:Q4 to 11.4 percent in 2005:Q1.6 After
declining over the earlier part of the postwar era, the profit share has stabilized over the past
two decades and was not unusually high in 2001-05.

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 10

The top section of Table 1 displays growth rates of output per hour for the total
economy, for the NFPB and private business sectors, and for the four sectors outside of the
NFPB sector, namely farms, government, households, and institutions. Growth rates are
displayed between “benchmark quarters.”7 The first six columns of Table 1 show annual
growth rates between benchmark quarters, the next column shows the average growth rate over
the entire 1954-2005 interval, and the final two columns break the 1997-2005 period at 2001:Q1,
in order to focus on differences between the 1997-2001 period when the economy was enjoying
its extraordinary expansion and 2001-05 when the economy was in recession or recovering from
recession.
In the top section of Table 1, we can see that after 1987 residual productivity growth
slowed down while NFPB productivity growth increased, accounting for the growing gap
between the total economy and the NFPB sector displayed in the bottom frame of Figure 1.
Most of this gap can be accounted for by a slowdown in farm productivity growth after 1987,
with a small additional contribution from the institutions sector.
Labor’s share may evolve differently in each separate sector of the economy. The
middle section of Table 1 displays the growth rate of real compensation per hour, deflated by
the GDP deflator. Any differences between real wage growth (in the middle section) and

6. The cyclical peak of the profit share in 1997:Q3 (11.6 percent) was almost identical to that in 2005:Q1
(11.4 percent).
7. Benchmark quarters are those when the actual unemployment rate is roughly equal to the NAIRU and
is declining through the NAIRU. Benchmark quarters in Table 1 for the period up through 1987 are the
same or within one quarter as those used in Gordon (2003). Reflecting lower estimates of the NAIRU

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 11

productivity growth (in the top section) imply changes in labor’s income share, as displayed in
the bottom section. Over the entire period 1954-2005, differences between real wage growth
and productivity growth in the total economy were minimal, with an average growth of real
compensation of 2.03 percent per year compared with 1.92 percent for productivity, implying a
slight increase in labor’s share of 0.11 points per year over the 51 years. Somewhat surprisingly,
in light of comments about labor “losing out” from the productivity growth upsurge, labor’s
share in the total economy actually increased at an annual rate of 0.25 percent over the period
1997-2005.
In the private business sector labor’s share exhibited a gradual decline relative to the
total economy, with an average annual growth rate over 1954-2005 of -0.26 percent.

A notable

aspect of Table 1 is that compensation in the “residual” sector increased much faster than
productivity, implying a marked increase in labor’s income share at an annual rate of 1.28
percent over the full 1954-2005 period. “Baumol’s Law” states that labor mobility causes wages
to increase uniformly across sectors, so that those sectors with below-average productivity
growth (the proverbial “haircuts” and “string quartets”) will have real wage growth faster than
productivity growth, and hence a positive growth rate of labor’s share.

Alternative Wage Indexes and the Role of Price Deflators
Table 1 compares productivity growth only with growth in a single real wage index,
compensation per hour deflated by the GDP deflator. Table 2 displays a wider variety of real

displayed in Figure 5 below, the mid-1990s benchmark has been shifted from 1994:Q4 to 1997:Q4. The

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 12

wage indexes. Compared first are three real wage indexes using the GDP deflator, of which the
first is real Compensation per Hour (CPH) in the private business economy, the same index as
displayed in the middle section of Table 1. Next is the Employment Cost Index (ECI ), which is
a CPI-like index of a market basket of wages which controls for shifts in mix across industries
and occupations, both of which plague the CPH.8 Third is the BLS index of average hourly
earnings (AHE) for production and nonsupervisory workers.

Because the real AHE growth

rate is often deflated by the CPI in official government publications, we include the bottom
rows of Table 2 that allow us to translate different systems of deflation for the alternative wage
indexes.9
Three themes emerge from Table 2. First, the growth rate of the real CPH is modestly
below the growth rate of private sector business productivity over the entire 1954-2005 period
and also over the shorter 1997-2005 period. As we have already learned in Table 1, this
apparent decline in the private sector labor share in contrast to the stability of the NIPA labor
share in Figure 1 is explained by the distinction between the total economy and the private
business sector. Labor’s share increased steadily in the residual sector but decreased slightly in
the private business sector, averaging out for the total economy with a labor share that was
almost flat over the past 50 years.

final benchmark quarter is 2005:Q1, the end of the data examined in Table 1.
8. Because the ECI is only available back to 1978, several blank cells appear in Table 2, but we are able to
track the growth rate of the ECI measure of the real wage over our sub-intervals starting in 1979.
9. The AHE is deflated by the CPI in the Economic Report of the President 2005, Table B-47.

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 13

The shortfall of CPH growth relative to productivity growth in the private business
sector is minor compared to the shortfall of the other wage indexes displayed in Table 2. For
the 1954-2005 interval, the annual growth rate of the shortfall of the real CPH is only -0.25
percent per year, but the shortfall for the AHE is -1.49 percent per year (i.e., 0.80 minus 2.29).
When deflated by the CPI-U, the shortfall of the real AHE is -1.84 percent per year (i.e., 0.45
minus 2.29).
If we shift the time interval to 1979-2005, we can bring the ECI into the comparison, as
shown in the far right column. For this interval the private sector CPH falls short of private
sector productivity growth by 0.73 percent per year, while the shortfalls are greater for the ECI
(-1.03 percent), the AHE deflated by the GDP deflator (-1.71 percent), and the AHE deflated by
the CPI-U (-2.28 percent). What accounts for these discrepancies? Abraham et al. (1999) dealt
with the discrepancy between AHE and a series very similar to CPH, and found that much of
the difference was explained by the fact that AHE only covers production and non-supervisory
workers. Apparently workers not covered by AHE must be seeing much faster wage growth
than those covered. The difference between growth in the CPH and AHE is one aspect of the
distinction between median and mean income growth that is a theme of this paper.

III. The Effect of Changes in the Productivity Trend in a Model of
Inflation Dynamics
We saw in Part II that labor’s income share has remained roughly stable over most of the
postwar period, and in particular was not significantly lower in early 2005 than in the early

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 14

stages of the productivity revival in mid-1997. This stability in labor’s share implies that the
post-1995 increase in trend productivity growth exhibited in Figure 1 must have created some
combination of slower inflation and faster nominal wage growth. This section of the paper
provides a new analysis of the effects of productivity growth on the inflation rate, using and
extending the longstanding “mainstream” model of inflation dynamics that was developed in
the late 1970s and was last reported upon at BPEA seven years ago (Gordon, 1998). Did the
increase in trend productivity growth in 1995-2005 reduce inflation, thus easing the job of the
Fed in managing the economy? Did the decrease in trend productivity growth in 1965-1979
raise the inflation rate and thus complicate the job of the Fed in managing the economy of that
era that was already buffeted by oil and import price shocks, and by the destabilizing effects of
the Nixon price controls? This section begins by presenting the background and specification of
the dynamic inflation model, including the role of changes in the productivity growth trend,
and then discusses several closely related issues in the literature on inflation dynamics that have
arisen recently, including more parsimonious specifications and shifts in parameters, including
the slope of the Phillips Curve itself.10

The “Mainstream” Model of Inflation and the Role of Demand and Supply Shocks
The inflation equation used in this paper is similar in most details to the specification
developed 25 years ago (Gordon, 1982; Gordon-King, 1982). It builds on earlier work (Gordon,

10. See Gali and Gertler (1999), Gali et al. (2001) and Stock and Watson (2002, 2003) for simplified new
Keynesian Phillips curves. For discussion of changing parameters see Atkeson and Ohanian (2001) and
Tetlow and Ironside (2005).

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 15

1975, 1977) that combined the Friedman-Phelps natural rate hypothesis with the role of supply
shocks as a source of direct shifts in the inflation rate. These supply shocks can create
macroeconomic externalities in a world of nominal wage rigidity. Since the mid-1990s, this
research has built on the work of Staiger, Stock, and Watson (1997, 2001) by incorporating time
variation in the natural rate of unemployment or “TV-NAIRU.” The term ʺmainstreamʺ model
refers to a Phillips Curve that has three distinguishing characteristics — (1) the role of inertia is
broadly interpreted to go beyond any specific formulation of expectations formation to include
other sources of inertia, e.g., wage and price contracts; (2) the driving force from the demand
side is an unemployment or output gap; and (3) supply shock variables appear explicitly in the
inflation equation.11 The specification can be written in this general form:
pt = a(L)pt-1 + b(L)Dt + c(L)zt + et .

(1)

Lower-case letters designate first differences of logarithms, upper-case letters designate
logarithms of levels, and L is a polynomial in the lag operator.
The dependent variable pt is the inflation rate. Inertia is conveyed by a series of lags on
the inflation rate (pt-1). Dt is an index of excess demand (normalized so that Dt=0 indicates the
absence of excess demand), zt is a vector of supply shock variables (normalized so that zt=0
indicates an absence of supply shocks), and et is a serially uncorrelated error term.
Distinguishing features in the implementation of this model include unusually long lags on the

11. The work of Staiger, Stock, and Watson (1997, 2001) is included within the label ʺmainstream
approach.ʺ While Gordon’s work (1997, 1998) adopted their modeling of the TV-NAIRU, their work
adopted Gordon’s specification of the inflation equation itself, including the specification of demand and

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 16

dependent variable, and a set of supply shock variables that are uniformly defined so that a
zero value indicates no upward or downward pressure on inflation.
If the sum of the coefficients on the lagged inflation values equals unity, then there is a
ʺnatural rateʺ of the demand variable (DNt ) consistent with a constant rate of inflation.12 The
estimation of the time-varying NAIRU combines the above inflation equation, with the
unemployment gap serving as the proxy for excess demand, with a second equation that
explicitly allows the NAIRU to vary with time:
pt = a(L)pt-1 + b(L)(Ut-UNt ) + c(L)zt + et ,

(2)

UNt = UNt-1 + νt , E(νt) = 0, var(νt )=σ2

(3)

In this formulation, the disturbance term νt in the second equation is serially uncorrelated and is
uncorrelated with et . When this standard deviation σ = 0, then the natural rate is constant, and
when σ is positive, the model allows the NAIRU to vary by a limited amount each quarter. If
no limit were placed on the ability of the NAIRU to vary each time period, then the timevarying NAIRU would jump up and down and soak up all the residual variation in the inflation
equation (2).
The reduced-form inflation equation (2) includes the gap between the actual
unemployment rate and the NAIRU, as well as the lagged dependent (inflation) variable. In
addition, five variables are included that are interpreted as supply shocks (the zt variables in (1)

supply shocks and lags thereof.
12. While the estimated sum of the coefficients on lagged inflation is usually roughly equal to unity, that
sum must be constrained to be exactly unity for a meaningful ʺnatural rateʺ of the demand variable to be

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 17

and (2) above), namely the change in the relative price of non-food non-oil imports, the change
in the relative price of food and energy, changes in the relative price of medical care, the change
in the trend rate of productivity growth, and dummy variables for the effect of the 1971-74
Nixon-era price controls.13 Lag lengths were originally specified in Gordon (1982) and have not
been changed since then to allow an assessment on the robustness of this approach to 25 years
of new data.
Besides the addition of the medical care variable, the other major change in the current
inflation equation from the (Gordon, 1998) Goldilocks specification involves productivity
growth, the point of departure for the current paper. Here we use the Hodrick-Prescott (H-P)
filter as in Figure 1 to define the productivity trend and then define the acceleration or
deceleration in the productivity trend as the two-year (eight-quarter) change in the growth rate
of the trend, as plotted in Figure 3. Its deceleration into negative territory from 1965 to 1980
might be as important a cause of accelerating inflation in that period as its post-1995
acceleration was a cause of low inflation in the late 1990s.

calculated.
13. The relative import price variable is defined as the rate of change of the non-food non-oil import
deflator minus the rate of change of the dependent variable. The relative food-energy variable is defined
as the difference between the rates of change of the overall PCE deflator and the ʺcoreʺ PCE deflator. The
Nixon control variables remain the same as originally specified in Gordon (1982). Lag lengths remain as
in 1982 and are shown explicitly in Table 3. The medical care variable is defined as the difference
between the inflation rate of the PCE deflator and the inflation rate for that deflator when medical care
spending is deducted from total PCE. The productivity variable is the two year change in the HodrickPrescott filtered trend of productivity using 6400 as the smoothness parameter, as displayed in Figure 3
below.

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 18

Coefficients in Alternative Inflation Equations
Table 3 displays coefficients or sums of coefficients, significance levels, and simulation
results for our basic inflation equation and several other variants estimated over 1962:Q1 to
2005:Q2. What we call the “naive” Phillips curve is displayed in column (1). This contains
only the current level of the unemployment rate and four lags on the dependent variable. This
equation fits the data poorly; the sum of squared residuals (SSR) is 177.
Column (2) provides the 1998 “Goldilocks” (Gordon, 1998) version of the full
mainstream specification in equation (2) above. Included are 24 lags on the dependent variable,
the unemployment gap relative to the TV-NAIRU that is estimated simultaneously, and the
listed supply shock variables. Comparing the first two columns, the full version in column (2)
cuts the SSR by a factor of three, from 177 to 63.
Column (3) shows our preferred specification, incorporating both the productivity
acceleration and medical care effect. This version has better summary statistics, all of the
coefficients are significant, and the simulation errors show that the equation has little drift over
time and has very small mean squared error. The productivity acceleration enters with its first
and fifth lags, and these coefficients sum to minus 1.34, indicating that an acceleration in the
productivity trend reduces inflation by more than one-for-one. As opposed to the Goldilocks
specification using the deviation of actual productivity growth from trend, this variable is
highly significant, and shows that changes in the productivity trend have a major impact on

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 19

inflation. 14
Figure 3 gives an idea of the scale of this impact. The acceleration in the trend hit its
peak of 0.46 in 1999, and the effect of the variable near the peak of the last business cycle,
between 1998 and 2000, would have been to lower inflation by about a half percentage point.
Symmetrically, the deceleration in the trend hit its minimum of -0.40 in 1978, and this added to
the acceleration of inflation in the 1970s by about half a percentage point. As we shall see below
in Table 6, these static results greatly underestimate the full impact of the 1995-2005
productivity growth acceleration and the 1965-78 deceleration, because they ignore dynamic
feedback through the lagged dependent variable.

The Inflation Equation: Simulation Performance
While most papers presenting time-series regression results display coefficients,
significance levels, and summary statistics, few go beyond that and display results of dynamic
simulations. Yet the performance of the inflation equation is driven in large part by the role of
the lagged dependent variable, making dynamic simulations the preferable method for testing.
To run such simulations, the sample period is truncated ten years before the end of the data
interval, and the estimated coefficients through 1995:Q2 are used to simulate the performance of
the equation for 1995:Q3 to 2005:Q2, generating the lagged dependent variables endogenously.
Since the simulation has no information on the actual value of the inflation rate and no

14. As in column (2), the sum of the coefficients on the two productivity acceleration terms is highly
significant, with a T-ratio of -4.07. The two individual coefficients are not significant, indicating that they

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 20

error correction mechanism, there is nothing to keep the simulated inflation rate from drifting
far away from the actual rate.15 The bottom rows of Table 3 summarize the simulation results in
two statistics, the mean error (ME) over the 40-quarter simulation period and the root meansquared error (RMSE). The ME reflects the drift of the simulated value away from the actual
value, so that in column (1) the naive Phillips curve on average over 1995-2005 has a predicted
value of inflation that on average is fully 4.0 percentage points higher than the actual outcome.
The 1998 Goldilocks specification in column (2) has a ME of much less, -0.64 points, but still a
substantial overprediction of inflation.16 In contrast, our preferred specification in column (3)
has a miniscule ME of -0.11 for our preferred simulation. The RMSE of the preferred
specification is actually substantially lower than the within-sample standard error of estimate
(SEE), 0.56 versus 0.65.
Figure 4 provides a vivid display of the differences among these simulation results for
the three specifications summarized in Table 3. The solid black line plots the four-quarter
change in the actual PCE inflation rate. To the left of the vertical bar are within-sample
predicted values, and the post-sample simulations are displayed to the right of the vertical bar.
The naive specification has no clue as to why inflation was so low in the late 1990s, and its

convey the same information. Nevertheless, we include both rather than one or the other, for
expositional convenience in Part IV below.
15
A qualification is that the TV-NAIRU used to calculate the unemployment gap after 1995 is based on
data for the full period 1962-2005. This makes little difference, since the TV-NAIRU is almost constant
during the 1995-2005 interval.
16. The simulation errors shown in column (2) are calculated with the 1998 specification run on today’s
data through 2005. The simulation ME reported in the 1998 paper (Table 3, p. 315) was -0.46, but that was

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 21

simulated inflation rate soars up close to 9 percent by 2005. The Goldilocks specification drifts
above the actual outcome but by 2005 is still only half a percentage point too high. The
preferred specification hugs the actual values with amazing tightness.
The excellent simulation performance has two important implications. First, the
equation is more than simply a random walk. The supply shock variables and unemployment
gap add a substantial amount of information beyond that from the lagged dependent variable.
Second, the absence of drift in the simulations shows that the equation is stable after 1995.
The price equation is not only stable after 1995, but it is also stable across the full sample.
A Chow test for a break at 1983:Q4 cannot reject the null of no break.17 Furthermore, when
interaction terms are added allowing any of the coefficients to change, none of the sums of
interaction terms is significantly different from zero, except for the food-energy effect in the
PCE equation.
Atkeson and Ohanian (2001) claimed that the relationship between inflation and
unemployment no longer holds.18 Their conclusion, however, is entirely dependent on using a
random walk to predict inflation. The significance of our coefficients, the performance of our
simulations, and the stability of our model over time is at odds with their claim of the instability
and structural shift in the Phillips curve.

for a simulation period of only 22 quarters contrasted to the more demanding 40-quarter simulation
period in this paper.
17. The value of the F(27,114) ratio based on estimating separate equations for 1962:Q1-1983:Q4 and
1984:Q1-2005:Q2 is 1.25, compared to a 5 percent critical F value of 1.55.
18. See also Tetlow and Ironside (2005) for an analysis of changes in the slope used in the Federal
Reserve’s FRB/US model.

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 22

Estimating the TV-NAIRU
The time-varying NAIRU or “TVN” is estimated in equation (3) simultaneously with the
inflation equation (2) above. In the process of estimating the NAIRU, the coefficients are forced
to sum to unity. For each set of variables, there is a different TVN. For instance, when supplyshock variables are omitted, the TVN soars to 8 percent in the mid-1970s, since this is the only
way the inflation equation can “explain” why inflation was so high in that decade. However,
when the full set of supply shocks is included in the inflation equation, the TVN is quite stable.
As explained above, the NAIRU can either be so smooth as to be a constant, or so jumpy
as to explain all the residual variation in the inflation equation. Rather than estimate the gain
ratio for the Kalman smoother, either through a maximum likelihood estimate or by using the
Stock-Watson median unbiased estimator, we impose a gain ratio of 0.0125. 19 This was chosen
as a compromise level that would allow the NAIRU to vary over time, yet also removed all
negative serial correlation.20 The TVN series associated with our basic inflation equation for
the PCE deflator is displayed in figure 5. It remains within a narrow band between 1962 and
1988 but then drifts downwards until it reaches 5 percent in 1995.
Thus we concur with the general consensus that the TVN is currently roughly in the vicinity of

19. See Stock and Watson (1996). Specifically, we used a Quandt likelihood ratio statistic and drew our
estimate of the gain ratio from their table 3.
20. We reject negative serial correlation in the TVN, because the basic idea of the NAIRU is to reflect the
gradual evolution of frictions in labor and product markets. For a further discussion of the “smoothness
issue,” see Gordon (1998, pp. 311-12).

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 23

5.0 percent.21 For historical continuity, Figure 5 also displays the TVN that was estimated for
the PCE deflator in Gordon (1998, Figure 1, p. 312). Our current specification yields a TVN that
is about half a percentage point below the 1998 “Goldilocks” specification for most of the
sample period, but the 1998 version of the TVN declines more rapidly in the mid-1990s and is
virtually the same as our current version in 1997-98.

IV. Adding the Wage Equation and Closing the Model
It has long been recognized that any factors that affect prices could also affect wages.
This can be supported from a wage aspiration framework, from the basic supply shock
perspective set out above, or from a purely statistical argument.22 Our baseline wage equation
is therefore estimated with identical explanatory variables as the equation for prices. We will
then add a feedback term that allows wages and prices dynamically to interact with each other.
The explanatory variable in the wage equations, rather than being simply compensation
per hour, is the change in trend unit labor cost, which is defined as the growth in compensation
per hour minus trend productivity:
(w- θ*)t = d(L) (w-θ*)t-1 + f(L)(Ut-UNt ) + g(L)zt + et

(4)

This is identical to the inflation equation (2) above, except that we have replaced the inflation
rate (p) with the change in trend unit labor cost, that is, the change in nominal compensation per
hour (w) minus the change in trend productivity growth (θ*).

21. The standard error for the estimate of the NAIRU is 0.92.

One of the reasons for using the

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 24

change in trend unit labor cost, rather than actual unit labor cost, is that it removes the added
variance associated with highly volatile changes in measured productivity growth. Throughout
this paper, we focus on trend productivity growth; it is used as the explanatory variable in
Tables 3 and 4 and is subtracted from wage change to form the dependent variable of the wage
equations.

Closing the Model
How was the post-1995 revival of productivity growth divided between slower inflation
and faster growth in nominal compensation per hour?

We start with the definition of the

change in trend labor’s share (tls) as the change in the nominal wage rate (w) minus the trend in
productivity growth (θ*) minus the inflation rate ( p).
tlst = (w - θ*)t – pt,

(5)

How does the change in trend labor’s share enter into the price and wage change
equations? A remarkable feature of the inflation equation (2 above) is that wages do not matter
for the determination of inflation. An equally remarkable feature of the wage equation (4
above) is that prices do not matter for the determination of wage changes. Loosening these
restrictions allows us to develop symmetric price and wage change equations with mutual
feedback between prices and wages, and this feedback is transmitted by the change in trend
labor’s share.
We begin by modifying the wage equation (4) to allow changes in trend unit labor cost

22. Sims (1987) argued that equations with wages and prices as alternative dependent variables are

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 25

(TULC) to depend both on lagged TULC changes and lagged inflation.
(w-θ*)t = d(L) (w-θ*)t + h(L)pt-1 + f(L)(Ut-UNt ) + g(L)zt + et

(6)

(w-θ*)t = [d(L)+h(L)] (w-θ*)t - h(L)( w-θ*-pt-) + f(L)(Ut-UNt ) + g(L)zt + et

(7)

Equation (6) is completely general in allowing any mix of lagged TULC change and lagged
inflation to drive the evolution of TULC changes. Equation (7) is a simple algebraic
rearrangement of equation (7) that adds and subtracts the “h” coefficients multiplied by the
change in TULC (w-θ*)t . By constraining the sum of the d and h coefficients, the natural rate
hypothesis can be retained. Notice that the transformation brings the change in trend labor’s
share into the equation, as the second term multiplied by h(L) is the same as tlst as defined
above in equation (5). An identical transformation can be applied to the price equation that
adds the lagged effect of trend unit labor costs as a supply shock term and, after the same
transformation, introduces the change in trend labor’s share into the inflation equation.23
pt = a(L)pt-1 + j(L) (w-θ*)t-1 + b(L)(Ut-UNt ) + c(L)zt + et ,
pt = [a(L)+j(L)]pt-1 + j(L)( w-θ*-p) t-1 + f(L)(Ut-UNt ) + g(L)zt + et

(8)
(9)

Notice that our final TULC change and inflation equations (7 and 9) are completely symmetric,
explaining the dependent variable with a set of lagged dependent variables, the change in trend
labor’s share, the output gap, and supply shocks. The only difference is that the change in trend

simply alternative “rotations” of each other.
23. Equation (7) is identical to equation (8) in Gordon (1998, p. 306). That paper worked out the role of
changes in trend labor’s share in transmitting wage impulses and price impulses back and forth between
the inflation and wage change equations, but it did not develop an adequate empirical implementation of
the model.

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 26

labor’s share enters with opposite signs, negative in the TULC equation (7) and positive in the
inflation equation (9).

Estimated Coefficients and Simulation Performance
Table 4 displays results from the preferred specification (9) of the inflation equation
applied in columns (1) and (4) to two different inflation measures, the PCE deflator and the
NFPB deflator. Then columns (2) and (5) estimate equation (7) for the change in trend unit
labor cost.

The biggest differences between the wage equation and the inflation equation are

in the summary statistics, with a much better fit for the inflation equations. Coefficients are
somewhat different in the wage equation from those in the price equations. The reaction of
trend unit labor costs to the unemployment gap is somewhat smaller that that of prices, and the
reactions to the medical care effect and the relative price of imports are negative rather than
positive, albeit insignificant.
In Table 4 all the inflation and TULC equations include the change in trend labor’s share,
as required by equations (7) and (9) above, and this extra term has been entered with the first
through eight lags. In all of the these equations, the sum of coefficients on lagged tls is
significant and of the correct sign, positive in the inflation equations and negative in the TULC
equations. The simulation errors for inflation are similar to those in the model without wage
feedback, but those for trend unit labor costs are noticeably better than when the lagged tls
terms are excluded.
The coefficients are subtracted in columns (3) and (6) in order to derive an equation for

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 27

the change in trend labor’s share. An interesting result in row 2 of columns (3) and (6) is that as
aggregate demand improves, as represented by a decline in the unemployment gap, tls is
predicted to be negative as the extra demand boosts prices more than wages. This is nothing
more than the famous result of the countercyclical real wage (or negatively sloped labor
demand curve) debated in the late 1930s by Keynes and his critics.
Another important implication of Table 4 is that the sum of coefficients on the lagged tls
terms in line 7, column (6), subtract to a value of -0.87, implying that all other things being
equal, the growth rate of tls will tend towards zero through an error-correction mechanism,
eventually finding an equilibrium. Second, the early (lag 1) effect of a productivity acceleration
(line 8) implies a fall in labor’s share, and the late (lag 5) corrects some of this. The long run
effect of changes in productivity is extinguished by the negative coefficient on lagged tls, but in
the short run the growth rate of trend labor’s share is negative, and so a positive shock to trend
productivity growth implies a reduction in the level of labor’s share.

Counterfactual Simulations
While the coefficients on the productivity acceleration variable in Table 4 indicate that
such an acceleration should cause a shift in the level of labor’s share, a better way of illustrating
exactly how productivity has influenced labor’s share is to calculate a dynamic simulation of the
price and wage equations. We will assume first that the productivity growth slowdown of the
late 1960s and 1970s never occurred. Then we will assume that the post-1995 productivity
acceleration never occurred. These counterfactual simulations are calculated by using the

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 28

coefficients from the regressions over the full sample to simulate price and wage changes, first
with all the variables taking on their actual values, and then alternatively with the productivity
acceleration terms set to zero. The simulation that “turns off” the productivity slowdown runs
from 1965:Q1 to 1980:Q1. The simulation that “turns off” the productivity revival runs from
1995:Q3 to 2005:Q2. Recall that the 1995-2005 simulation results differ from those summarized
at the bottom of Tables 3 and 4, because those simulations terminated the sample period at
1995:Q2, whereas these simulations use coefficients based on the entire 1962-2005 sample period
and thus would be expected to have lower mean errors.
Table 5 summarizes the results of the two simulations. The top section shows five lines
of results for the NFPB deflator, the actual change, the simulated change assuming the actual
behavior of the productivity growth trend acceleration variable, the counterfactual simulation
that suppresses to zero the same productivity variable, the simulation error (line 1 minus 2),
and the counterfactual effect of the change in trend productivity growth (line 2 minus 3). The
middle section shows the same for the change in trend unit labor cost, and the bottom section
shows the same for the change in trend labor share.
Looking horizontally, Table 6 is divided into four columns, two for each of the two
simulations. The left two columns summarize results for the productivity slowdown simulation
of 1965-80, and the right two columns summarize results for the productivity revival after 1995.
For each simulation, there are two columns. The first displays the mean annual percentage rate
of change over the the full simulation period, whereas the second identifies drift in the

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 29

simulations by displaying the four-quarter change in the final year of each simulation.
Lines A4, B4, and C4 summarize our findings for the simulation errors in each time
period. As in previous simulation results displayed earlier in the paper, the simulation results
for the inflation rate are very small, with no drift at all in the final four quarters of the
simulation period. For the change in TULC (the middle section), the mean errors are modest
but the final year errors are higher, indicating an overprediction of TULC changes at the end of
the 1965-80 simulation and a substantial underprediction at the end of the 1995-2005 simulation.
The TLS change errors match those for the change in TULC, since the inflation errors are so low.
Lines A5, B5, and C5 provide the main results of this section. The mean effect over the
simulation period of the 1965-80 productivity growth slowdown was to add 1.28 percentage
points to the inflation rate, 1.46 to TULC growth, and 0.18 to the change in TLS. Symmetrically,
the mean effect over the simulation period of the 1995-2005 productivity growth revival was to
subtract 1.19 percentage points from the inflation rate, 1.38 points from TULC growth, and 0.19
points from the change in TLS. It appears that a sustained productivity growth acceleration
shifts labor’s share down and a sustained productivity growth slowdown shifts labor’s share
up, explaining part of the sharp jump in labor’s share observed in the NIPA data for 1966-71.
The second and fourth columns show that these productivity effects continue to grow, so that
after 15 years the post-1965 productivity growth slowdown had caused the inflation rate to be
2.68 higher than otherwise, and after 10 years the post-1995 productivity growth revival had
held down the annual inflation rate by 1.7 percentage points, with even greater effects on the

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 30

change in TULC.
Overall, these results go considerably beyond the Phillips curve literature of the past
decade by developing wage equations in parallel with price equations and allowing mutual
feedback between them, using the change in trend labor’s share as the variable of transmission
of mutual feedback. We expose the wage-price model to the demanding task of staying on
track in dynamic simulations, and these yield strong responses of both wage and price change
to decelerations or accelerations in productivity growth. The trend decline in productivity
growth between 1965 and 1978 was a much more important contributor to high inflation in the
late 1960s and the entire decade of the 1970s than is generally recognized. And the trend
increase in productivity growth after 1995 was the most important single element in keeping
inflation low and allowing the Federal Reserve to set short-term interest rates much lower than
would otherwise have been possible.

V. Changes in the Distribution of Income
By definition, macro models deal with sums and averages and have nothing to say about
the reasons why the average growth rate of hourly compensation is different than the median
growth rate of hourly compensation. Further, the median annual earnings can grow at a
different rate than median hourly earnings if annual hours behave differently for low-paid and
high-paid workers, as when a recession like that of 1981-82 causes a sharp drop in annual hours
for low-paid workers.

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 31

To address differences in average and median growth rates of compensation that occur
when there is a shift in the distribution of income, we need to switch from macro to micro data.
This part of the paper provides new results on changes in the distribution of income from
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) micro data files and compares these changes with those in the
Current Population Survey (CPS), the source used by most of the literature in labor economics
on issues related to income inequality. While the IRS data have numerous disadvantages that
we discuss here, they have the unique advantage of allowing a microscopic look at incomes
within the top 10 percent of the income distribution. While the CPS data are “top-coded”, so
that an income of $1 million in a particular year may be classified only as “greater than
$100,000,” the IRS data provide precise data from tax returns for all taxpayers, no matter
whether their income is $100,000, $1 million, or $10 million.
When we compare our IRS data with CPS data for the main part of the income
distribution by using the conventional ratios of income in the 90th to the 10th percentile, we
obtain similar results in the magnitude and timing of the increase in income inequality since the
late 1960s. But when we go above the 90th percentile, we find significant further increases of
inequality that are missed in the CPS data. While most of our analysis focuses on wage and
salary income, in order to focus on the comparison of the mean and median growth rate of labor
compensation with the growth rate of productivity, our data also allow an analysis of changes
in the distribution of non-labor income (rent, interest, dividends, and business income), and of
total labor plus non-labor income.

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 32

Data Issues
For every year between 1966 and 2001 that IRS has released data on income tax returns
from over 100,000 filers. These returns oversample those at the very top of the distribution so
that one can study the distribution at the level of the top 0.1 percent (one-tenth of one percent)
or even the top 0.01 percent.24 Our examination of these tax returns over the 35 year data period
is thus based on roughly 5 million observations.
Because there are minimum income requirements for filing, the data are flawed by
omitting income at the bottom of the distribution earned by non-filers. We follow the method
of Piketty and Saez (2003) of counting the total number of tax units in the economy by adding
the total number of married couples and non-married men and women over the age of
eighteen.25 Total tax units and total returns filed are reported in Table 6, where we find that tax
returns have consistently accounted for over 92 percent of tax units. Given that those who do
not file necessarily have very little income, and only account for five to 10 percent of the
population, the data provided by the IRS micro files allow us to obtain a very complete record
of incomes actually earned. Table 6 also shows how many tax units reported wage income each
year, and how many hours were worked per tax unit on average. We use the hours history to

24. The oversampling is extreme at the very top, where in every year between 1966 and 2001 between
3000 and 3500 returns are sampled for the top 1/100 percent, representing about 40 percent of those
returns for 1966 and about 23 percent for 2001.
25. Piketty and Saez (2003) claim that the number of married couples who file individually is
insignificant.

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 33

illustrate general trends in hours worked, and subsequently to compare IRS real compensation
growth per hour to growth in output per hour.26
Income is not always faithfully reported to the IRS. Every year, the BEA publishes data
comparing its estimates of the amount of income that should be reported to the IRS, and what is
actually reported on tax returns. The gap between the IRS and BEA measures of adjusted gross
income (AGI) ranges between 9 and 13.5 percent. For wages, because nearly all wage earners
file tax returns, and because their wages are reported by their employers, this gap is smaller,
and is never greater than 6 percent.27 We make no adjustments to wages for misreporting, and
simply assume that misreporting is equally distributed across income levels.28 Despite the
problem of misreporting, our IRS data have the advantage that most income is solidly linked to
W-2, 1098, and 1099 forms, and these data are not subject to the recall bias that plagues such
sample surveys as the CPS.

Changes in the Distribution of Wage Income in the IRS compared to the CPS
Our research on the income distribution can be viewed as complementary to that of
Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2005), hereafter A-K-K, who provide an extensive critical survey of
the large labor economics literature on the sources of increased inequality, as well as their own
new results from the CPS. The top frame of Figure 6 displays the log ratio of the 90th to the 10th

26. Juhn, Murphy, and Topel (2002) find that many former income earners have dropped out of the labor
force and thus appear neither in wage data nor in our IRS tax data.
27. Park (2002), Table 3.

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 34

percentile (P90/P10) in three data sets. From A-K-K we display the log P90/P10 ratio for
average hourly earnings in the March CPS and alternative May “Outgoing Rotation Group”
(MORG) samples, along with the log P90/P10 ratio from our IRS data.29 The two CPS measures
both compare wages only for people actually working, whereas our set looks at total income for
the year. Therefore people who only work part of the year may report very low wages for the
full year even if their wages when they were working were much higher, and these people will
have very low wages in the IRS data but relatively higher wages in the CPS data. The average
IRS annual income in P10 was only about $4,000 in 2001, while a full-time minimum wage
worker would have earned roughly $10,000.
The bottom frame of figure 6 shows the P90/P10 ratio over time, expressed as an index
number with the LN equal to zero in 1973. The three measures show surprisingly similar
changes, although there are subtle differences. The IRS series exhibits all of its increase between
1980 and 1989, whereas the March CPS increase is smoother, with an increase from zero to 0.15
during 1980-89 and a further increase to 0.27 during 1989-2001. The pattern in the MORG data
is almost identical, with an increase from 0.01 in 1980 to 0.16 in 1989 to 0.27 in 2001. The fact
that the two CPS measures continued to increase in the 1990s becomes important in
distinguishing among different explanations of increased inequality, as we shall explore in Part
VI below.

28. One is tempted to assume that misreporting is more prevalent among the rich, who have the means
with which to do it legally, and the incentive to do it illegally. If this is so, then our estimates of top
income shares can be viewed as a lower bound.

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 35

A-K-K (2005) emphasize the contrast between the behavior at the bottom and top of the
income distribution, as represented by changes in the P50/P10 and P90/P10 ratios. Their results
for the CPS data are the same as ours for the IRS data, which are displayed in the top frame of
Figure 7. There was no change in the P50/P10 ratio over the full data interval. If all of the
increase in inequality was occurring above the P50 level, and not in the P50/P10 ratio, then the
sharp decline in the real minimum wage in the 1980s, emphasized as a major cause by CardDiNardo 2002, could not have been important. In contrast to the stability of the P50/P10 ratio is
the increase in the P90/P10 IRS ratio.
The IRS can show us what is going on inside the top 10 percent, a great advantage over
the CPS. As shown in the lower frame, while the log of the P90/P10 ratio increased by 0.292
over the 1966-2001 period, the log of the P99/P10 ratio increased by 0.628 and and the log of the
P99.9/P10 ratio increased by 1.047. Taking antilogs to convert these into index numbers, we
have 2001 index numbers on a 1966 base equal to 134, 187, and 285, respectively. Thus we find
that the limited focus on the P90/P10 ratio in the literature based on the CPS data misses the
dramatic increase in inequality within the top 10 percent.

The Distribution of Labor Income in the IRS Data
We now turn to a more detailed examination of the IRS data, starting with the top
section of Table 7 that summarizes the changes in the shares of the quantiles. Over time, the
shares of those in the bottom 90 percent have fallen by a total of 11 percentage points, while

39. We appreciate the help of Lawrence Katz in providing these data on the 90-10 CPS ratios.

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 36

those of the top 10 percent have risen by a total of 11 percentage points. Shown separately is
the top 1/100 of a percent, the share of which increased by a factor of nine from 0.2 to 1.8 percent
of total wage and salary income.
While income shares are useful for comparing relative incomes, knowing the total
amount of income accruing to each quantile is more helpful for analyzing changes in welfare,
and particularly our central topic in this paper, the response of individual real incomes to the
post-1995 revival in productivity growth. The bottom section of Table 7 displays the total real
amount of wage income (in billions of 2000 dollars) going to each of our selected quantiles, and
its change between 1966 and 2001.30 Of the total increase in real labor income of over 2.8 trillion
dollars, less than 12 percent went to the bottom half of the income distribution.31 More of the
income change accrued to the top one percent than the entire lower 50 percent, and more
accrued to the top 1/100 percent than to the entire lower 20 percent. The small share going to
the bottom half reflects not just growing inequality of real hourly wages, but a smaller number
of hours worked at the bottom.32
Figure 8 shows how much of the increase in real compensation between 1997 and 2001
went to each quantile. There is a lot of symmetry here. The 90-95 and 20-50 slices are

30. Every inflation-adjusted number in this section of the paper is calculated by using the PCE deflator,
not any version of the CPI.
31. The $2805 billion estimate for the total increase in real wage income matches nicely with the BEA
reported change of $3080 billion given the decline in the percentage of BEA wages reported to the IRS
32. Gottschalk-Danziger (2005, Figures 8 and 9) show that hours worked per year for those in P10 are
cyclically volatile compared to those in P90. Thus much of the upsurge of earnings inequality in the deep
recession of 1981-82 is an artifact due to the fact that annual earnings dropped so much relative to hourly
wages in P10 but not in P90.

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 37

approximately the same size. The slices representing the bottom 80 percent and the top 5
percent are approximately the same size (36.1 percent and 38.2 percent, respectively). The
shares of wage growth in recent years are distributed approximately the same way over the past
35 years.33
The top section of Table 8 shows the actual levels of wages and salaries at each
percentile, their changes between 1966 and 2001, and the skewness of the wage distribution.
Since skewness is unaffected by the magnitude of the values in the distribution, it can be used
as a consistent measure of changes in inequality over time.

The most notable result here is that

the median real wage has risen by only 11 percent in 35 years, for an average annual growth
rate of 0.3 percent. Compare this to average productivity growth of 1.57 percent over the same
1966-2001 period for the entire economy, somewhat slower than the 1.74 percent growth rate for
the NFPB sector. In stark contrast real income in the 99.9th percentile grew at over 3.4 percent
per year and in the 99.99th percentile grew at over 5.6 percent per year. Skewness tells the same
story, rising from 11 in 1966 to 319 in 2001.34
Since 1966, NIPA wages and salaries have comprised a steadily smaller portion of NIPA
total compensation, due to a rising share of fringe benefits. In order to correct for this, we apply

33. A careful reader might note here that tax units are not the same as households, and since there are an
average of 1.3 tax units per household, it is possible that the average household might have one tax unit
that is earning very little, say an eighteen year old high school senior, and one tax unit, his or her parents,
that is in the upper half of the distribution and has reaped greater gains. While this is possible, it cannot
apply to most households, since the average number of units per household is only 1.3, and the minimum
is obviously one.

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 38

the decline in the NIPA wage share of compensation equally to all percentiles. The middle
section of Table 8 displays percentiles after having been adjusted for the change in the share of
wages in total compensation, and shows that share in the last column. This raises the average
annual growth rate by the same amount, 0.24 percent, in each percentile group.
Finally, the bottom section of Table 8 shows growth rates of total compensation adjusted
for hours growth. In order to compare total compensation to productivity growth, we need to
know how many hours each tax unit worked. We make no assumptions about the distribution
of the change in hours over time, we simply show what compensation growth would have been
had there been no general decline in hours per tax unit. With these adjusted growth rates, we
can compare the changes in each percentile to the 1.57 percent annual change in economywide
productivity between 1966 and 2001. In the bottom of Table 8, which percentiles grew at the
average rate of productivity growth of 1.57 percent or at a higher rate? Our answer is that
nobody below the 90th percentile received the average rate of productivity growth. Even the 80th
percentile, after adjusting their wages upwards for fringe benefits and hours, experienced
slower real hourly compensation growth.
Even if we look at the growth in the income of individual tax units, examining a separate
set of IRS panel data from 1979 to 1990, the median growth rate, after accounting for changes in
hours per tax unit and wages as a share of compensation, only rises by 0.34 percent per year.

34. Measured skewness is fairly volatile since it is heavily influenced by the top few observations which
are many orders of magnitude above the mean, but it has unambiguously risen an enormous amount
over our sample.

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 39

This is compared to a change in median income of -0.38 percent per year, and economywide
productivity growth of 1.41 percent for the 1979-90 interval. The panel data cover only a small
sample of tax returns and years, but they show that even this taking this alternative source of
income growth that tracks individual taxpayers over time (e.g., students who transition into
adult jobs), the median does not keep up with productivity.

Capital Income
It is well known that capital (i.e., non-labor) income is less equally distributed than labor
income, but did that degree of inequality increase in the 1966-2001 period? The IRS data are
ideally suited to answer this question, and allow us to include five general types of non-labor
income: interest, dividends, rent, business, and pension income. We exclude capital gains
income, because capital gains are excluded from NIPA personal income. Unlike wages and
salaries, these income sources cannot be directly mapped to NIPA personal income tables in any
productive way, for two main reasons.35 One is that some income covered by the IRS, such as
small business income, is not included in the NIPA. The second is that there is a larger
discrepancy between IRS reported income and its NIPA equivalent for non-labor income than
for wages and salaries (as discussed above).
The data on non-labor income includes many tax filers who declare losses. Since
nobody would stay in business if they were losing money every year, we assume that losses are

35. The BEA does provide comparisons of BEA and IRS equivalent measures of income, but the detailed
breakdowns are not available for every year, and much of the reconciliation, especially for non-labor

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 40

not economically significant, but rather are a result of give-aways in the tax code. Further,
average declared farm income is less than zero, so we completely ignore farm income. By
ignoring losses, we make the assumption that year-after-year losses are not economically
meaningful but rather reflect opportunities provided by the tax system for middle-income and
upper-income people to shelter income from taxes. These losses are not what we mean by
“poverty” and are economically different from the situation of those who earn only wage
income and are in the bottom 20 percent of the distribution.
Table 9 provides data on real income for quantiles ranked by total income, including
both labor and non-labor income, as contrasted to the ranking based only on labor income in
Table 7. As we would expect, the ranking based on total income is much more concentrated
than labor income alone. Nearly as much of the 1966-2001 real non-labor income change went
to the top 0.1 percent as went to the bottom 50 percent. The next two panels decompose income
into labor and non-labor income. Comparing shares of changes, the data for all three measures
of income are roughly similar for the bottom 80 percent, but then diverge sharply for the top 20
percent. The top 1 and 0.1 percent have a far higher share of new non-labor income than wage
income. Every other quantile takes a smaller share of non-labor income than total income.
Looking at the bottom section of Table 9, we can see that common sense holds, and as
one moves up the income distribution, a larger share of total income tends to be accounted for
by non-labor income. Interestingly though, over time, non-wage income has worked its way

income, is simply defined as “income not included in personal income,” which is not helpful for the

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 41

down the income distribution. The top quantiles have taken most of new non-labor income, but
the lower quantiles, especially 50-80 and 80-90, have seen a much larger percentage of their
incomes accounted for by non-labor income, while for the top 5 percent, this proportion has
declined. In 1966, 72 percent of the income of the top 0.1 percent came from non-labor sources.
By 2001 it was only 60 percent. For the 50-80 quantile, the share rose from 10 percent to 18
percent, nearly doubling. So there are two conflicting trends. One, the majority of new nonlabor income goes to the top 10 percent of the distribution, but on the other hand, non-labor
income is taking a smaller share of income at the top, and a larger share in lower quantiles.
Figure 9 shows how the distribution of gains looks for the top 10 percent in the top
frame and the top 1 percent in the bottom frame. The top decile tends to take about the same
share of added labor and non-labor income, but the top centile takes a much larger share of
non-wage gains. It is notable how different the bars for 1979 to 1997 and 1997 to 2001 look from
those for 1966 to 1979. The share of the top 10 percent in total (labor and non-labor) real
income gains ranged from 33.6 percent for 1966-79, to a much higher 59.0 percent for 1979-97, to
a somewhat lower 48.6 percent for 1997-2001, averaging out at 49.4 percent for 1966-2001.
Lessons from the IRS Data Analysis
At the level of comparing P90/P10 and P50/P10 ratios, the IRS data confirm the basic
conclusion of other authors based on CPS data that the increase of inequality since the late 1960s
has been a phenomenon of the top half of the distribution, not the bottom half. But the top-

present analysis.

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 42

coding of the CPS data prevents a quantification of the total number of real dollars of income
that are earned within the top 10 percent of the distribution, or of measurement of increased
skewness within the top 10 percent, which the IRS data allow.36
A convenient way to dramatize the role of increasing skewness at the top is to
decompose the two different factors that caused fully 46 percent of real income growth from
1966 to 2001 to be earned by the top 10 percent, in contrast to its much lower 25.7 percent
income share in 1966. How much of this difference between 46 and 26 percent was caused by
an upward movement of P90 income relative to the lower percentiles, and how much was
caused by increased skewness within the top 10 percent? To answer this question, we make a
calculation of the income level of each group within the top 10 percent on the counterfactual
assumption that each group ratio to P90, i.e., P95/P90, P99/P90, etc., was fixed at the 1966 ratio.
It is obvious from the bottom frame of Figure 7 that the income level of each group above P90
would have been lower under the counterfactual, and indeed our calculation indicates that
under this condition the top 10 percent would have captured 36 percent of the real income gain
over 1966-2001 instead of the actual 46 percent. Thus we conclude that almost half (10.6 points)
of the extra income gain of the top 10 percent above its original 1966 income share of 25.7
percent was due to increased P90 income relative to the lower percentiles, and the other half (9.7

36. Gottschalk-Danziger (2005, Figure 16, p. 252) show enormous sensitivity to CPS measures of
inequality to the method of top-coding. Their P90/P10 ratio in 2002 on a base of 1979=100 is roughly 140
with “unadjusted topcoding” and 118 with “Burkhauser topcoding.”

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 43

points) was due to increased skewness within the top 10 percent. This second factor represents a
finding with the IRS data that the CPS data are incapable of addressing.
Another less widely known fact is that, while the top of the income distribution takes
most of the non-labor income, the share of top earners’ income in P95-P100 that comes from
non-wage sources has declined over the years, while the share for all other groups from P0 to
P95 has increased.

37

Overall, our results resolve the puzzle raised at the beginning of the paper, why has
growth in median real wages and real incomes lagged so far behind productivity growth when
labor’s share of total income has been relatively stationary? Our answer is the labor’s share
includes the wage and salary income of the top 10 percent who have garnered almost half the
gains over 1966-2001. The stability of labor’s share disguises a large gain in the part of that
labor’s share that is going to the top 10 percent and a decline in the part of that labor’s share
that is going to everyone else, including the median earner.

VI. Causes of the Increase of Income Inequality
Our findings naturally raise questions about the interpretation of these dramatic shifts in
the distribution of income that have caused median real income gains to lag so far behind

37. Our results are complementary to those of Kopczuk and Saez (2004), who in their Figure 9 show that
the increase in the share of total income for the top 0.01 percent over the period 1976-2000 consists almost
entirely of salary and professional income rather than income from capital and capital gains. Comparing
2000 with 1929, the share of the top 0.01 percent was similar at 3.5 percent, but a much larger share in
1929 took the form of capital income and a much smaller share the form of salaries and professional
income.

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 44

productivity growth. We start with the question of whether there is sufficient income mobility
to mitigate the effects of rising inequality. If everyone’s relative income were in constant
motion, allowing each person to visit each percentile of the distribution, we would not be
concerned about the constantly changing cast of characters in the top 10 percent or top 0.1
percent. Subsequently we will turn to controversies in the recent literature on the causes of
increased inequality and suggest a different mix of causes than in recent papers.
Income Mobility
Doubts can be raised about the significance of any findings regarding income inequality
that are based on a cross-section of individuals who occupy different places in the income
distribution from year to year. First, there is an obvious dependence of income on age, with low
incomes for youth, higher incomes in the prime earning ages, followed by zero labor income
following retirement. A typical MBA student might report wage and salary income from a
summer internship of $5,000 in one tax year but report income of $120,000 two years later and
$500,000 ten years later. Further, wage and salary incomes of taxpaying units fluctuate from
year to year for many other reasons besides age and life cycle reasons, including
unemployment, movement in and out of the labor force in response to childbirth or illness, and
fluctuations in sales commissions and bonuses in response to changes in national, local, or
individual economic circumstances. Fluctuations are even more likely in non-labor income.
How much do such factors cause our previous analysis to overstate the increase in
inequality? Mishel et. al. (2005, p. 73) cite a useful analogy from Joseph Schumpeter of a hotel

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 45

where the quality of rooms improves the higher the floor. How many people over their
lifetimes occupy both basement and penthouse rooms, as contrasted to a totally immobile
society in which some remain stuck in the basement all their lives while others luxuriate
permanently in the penthouse?
Evidence provided by Bradbury and Katz (2002) shows clearly that there was substantial
income mobility across income quintiles over decade-long periods in the 1970s, 1980s, and
1990s. It would be surprising if this were not true, given the simple life-cycle factors evident in
the example of the MBA student and the complementary retirement of his or her business
executive father. Examples like the MBA student account for those who started in the basement
(the bottom 20 percent) in one year and wound up in the penthouse (the top 20 percent) ten
years later, but this basement-to-penthouse decadal transition occurred for only 3.3 percent of
basement-dwellers in 1969, 3.2 percent in 1979, and 4.3 percent in 1989. Stories like Daddy’s
retirement, or his Enron-like or Worldcom-like transition from the penthouse to jail, account for
5.0, 4.2, and 3.0 penthouse dwellers in 1969, 1979, and 1989, respectively. Overall, the BradburyKatz evidence shows no increase in income mobility alongside the increase in income
inequality, and indeed there were small increases in the penthouse dwellers who remained in
the penthouse a decade later – 49.1 percent in 1969, 50.9 percent in 1979, and 53.2 percent in
1989.
In short, income mobility due to life-cycle and other reasons is a constant feature of any
economy. No one person is the median taxpayer or wage-earner forever. The important fact

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 46

about income mobility is that it takes place independently of the quite new phenomenon of
increased skewness of the distribution of labor in the 1980s and 1990s. Not only are half of the
penthouse dwellers still there a decade later, but the differential of opulence in the penthouse
keeps increasing relative to the basement.

Causes of Increased Income Inequality
An enormous outpouring of literature has examined the increase in wage inequality
since the 1960s. Here we cite several key contributions and raise questions. We divide our
discussion into three parts. The first covers the recent literature on general explanations, most
often “skill-biased technical change”, hereafter SBTC, that attempt to explain the increase in
such ratios as P90/P10 or P90/P50. The second concerns special factors operating mainly at the
bottom of the income distribution. The third concerns the top of the distribution. In our view,
the evolution of the income distribution reflects multiple causes, some of them independent,
and we reject the tendency of some analysts to argue for a particular single cause.
The SBTC hypothesis emerges from a simple model in which two skill classes of labor
are imperfect substitutes, see for instance Katz-Murphy (1992). The skilled-unskilled (S-U)
wage differential depends on the evolution of relative supplies of the two groups of labor and
changes in the demand for skills. Often the relative wage of college and high-school graduates
is used as a proxy for the S-U differential. Because the relative quantity of college graduates has
increased, particularly in the 1970s, the SBTC proponents argue that the rising S-U differential
must reflect a shift in demand toward more skilled workers.

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 47

A prominent survey by Card and DiNardo (2003) criticizes the SBTC approach on
several grounds. Assuming that the dominant technical change over the past few decades has
involved computers, Card-DiNardo argue that the timing is wrong. In their data, all of the
increase in inequality occurs during 1980-86 while the development of computer technology
either occurred steadily or was particularly concentrated in the “new economy” period of the
late 1990s. They also point out that the timing is wrong in relation to aggregate productivity
growth, which as we have seen in Part II was slow in the 1979-97 period when inequality
increased most and revived in the mid-1990s after most of the increase of inequality had already
happened. Card-DiNardo much prefer an alternative explanation, showing that there is an
almost perfect negative correlation between the increase in the P90/P10 income ratio and the
decline in the real minimum wage, both of these movements being concentrated in the 1980-86
period.
Beaudry-Green (2002) also question the SBTC hypothesis, treating it as an idea whose
time has come and gone. In particular, they estimate for 1971-87 a SBTC equation explaining
the skilled wage differential by a relative supply term and a time trend to represent
technological change and then compute the predicted value for 1988-2000. The predicted value
wildly overpredicts the actual differential by about 0.35 in logs.
A-K-K (2005) provide a more complex, multi-causal interpretation. First, they support a
limited role for SBTC, taking the view that the evolution of the college-high school wage
differential is well explained by a steady demand-driven growth in the relative demand for

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 48

college graduates overlaid with fluctuations in the relative supply of college graduates.
Second, in their CPS data as in Figure 6 above, the increase in P90/P10 wage inequality is
relatively steady over the 1980s and 1990s and not concentrated only in the early 1980s when
the drop in the real minimum wage occurred.
However, like Beaudry-Green, A-K-K also criticize a purely SBTC explanation on the
ground that the increase in inequality began to plateau around 1992, whereas the new economy
revival of aggregate productivity growth began around 1995. Thus they echo the skepticism
based on timing of Card-DiNardo as summarized above. Second, they emphasize the
difference in the magnitude of P50/P10 inequality changes (which were negligible as in Figure 7
above), and in the P90/P50 changes which were substantial and continuous. They argue for a
broader conception of SBTC in which they distinguish between five types of job tasks, ranging
from “routine manual” at the bottom to “non-routine analytic” and “non-routine interactive” at
the top. They assign different shares of these job tasks to each decile of the wage distribution
using occupational data and conclude that there has been a sharp twist in demand growth to
those tasks most common in the upper three income deciles, and they view this as evidence in
favor of a “polarization hypothesis.” However, their broad definitions of these job tasks cover
substantial shares of the population and do not explain increased skewness within the top 10
percent.
If SBTC had been a major source of the rise in inequality, then we should have observed
an increase in the relative wages of those most directly skilled in the development and use of

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 49

computers. Yet in the 1989-97 period total real compensation of CEOs increased by 100 percent,
while those in occupations related to math and computer science increased only 4.8 percent and
engineers decreased by 1.4 percent.38 Europe provides perspective, because the increase in the
ratio of CEO pay to average worker pay so evident in the United States has not occurred in
Europe. We return below to the puzzle of rising CEO pay premia.

Inequality at the Bottom: The “Great Compression” and the U-Shaped History
A significant limitation of most of the literature on SBTC is that it limits its attention to
the period since about 1970 and ignores the 50 years before that. The basic facts to be explained
about income equality are not one but two, that is, not only why inequality rose after the mid1970s but why it declined from 1929 to the mid-1970s.39 Goldin and Margo (1992) have called
the flattening of the income distribution during 1930-70 the “Great Compression” and attribute
it to at least three events that fit neatly into this U-shaped pattern, all of which influence the
effective labor supply curve and the bargaining power of labor: (1) the rise and fall of
unionization, (2) the decline and recovery of immigration, and (3) the decline and recovery in
the importance of international trade and the share of imports. Unions rose and declined in
part because of the encouragement by government legislation in the 1930s and increasing
discouragement in the postwar years. In addition, the invention of air conditioning facilitated

38. These numbers come from Mishel et. al. (1999, Table 3.50, p. 210).
39. The most vivid representation of the U-shaped historical pattern of income inequality is KopczukSaez (2004, Figure 9), which shows the income share of the top 0.01 percent and its composition across
labor and capital income. This share fell from 3.7 percent in 1929 to 0.6 percent in 1976 and then rose to
3.6 percent in 2000.

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 50

the dispersion of employment into the Old Confederacy with their “right to work” laws, and
unions were further weakened by the steady decline in the share of employment in
manufacturing and mining in light of the failure of unions to organize employees in the service
sector.
Partly as a result of restrictive legislation in the 1920s, and also as a result of the Great
Depression and World War II, the share of immigration per year in the total population
declined from 1.3 percent in 1914 to 0.02 percent in 1933, remained very low until a gradual
recovery began in the late 1960s, reaching 0.48 percent (legal and illegal) in 2002.40 Competition
for unskilled labor not only arrives in the form of immigration but also in the form of imports,
and the decline of the import share from the 1920s to the 1950s and its subsequent recovery is a
basic fact of the national accounts.
While Card-DiNardo and A-K-K raise important questions about the SBTC hypothesis,
we are surprised that they miss two obvious issues. First, inequality decreased as much from
the 1920s to the 1970s as it increased from the 1970s to now. Are we to believe that technical
change over 1920-70 was “unskilled biased”? It is possible that the heyday of unionized,
assembly-line manufacturing provided repetitive jobs for high-school drop-outs, but the fact
that these jobs paid relatively well surely depended more on the strength of unions, and the
absence of immigration and imports. Second, the SBTC hypothesis fails to explain the absence

40. Annual immigration as a share of the U. S. population is displayed in Gordon (2003, Figure 5, p. 268).

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 51

of an increase of income in equality in Europe despite the free flow of technology across
borders.41
Skewness at the Top: Superstars
Our analysis of the IRS data in Part V suggests that most of the shift in the income
distribution has been from the bottom 90 percent to the top 5 percent, and especially to the top 1
percent. This is much too narrow a group to be consistent with a widespread benefit from
SBTC. We argue in this section that two possibly independent phenomena are taking place at
the top of the income distribution. The first is the increasing income premia being paid to
“superstars,” the subject of a brilliant analysis by the late Sherwin Rosen in his 1981 article “The
Economics of Superstars.” Rosen explains why a limited number of stars in particular fields
earn most of the income, and we extend his ideas to explain why the superstar premium has
been increasing. We also take an explicit look at the incomes of two classes of superstars,
“power celebrities” and major league athletes. A second group that earns a larger share of
income at the top are CEOs and other top corporate officers. Recent economic research
provides the beginning of an analysis of CEO premia while leaving important questions
unanswered.
Rosen (1981) explains extreme skewness in occupational categories dominated by
superstars by particular characteristics of demand and supply. On the demand side, both

41. For the latest data on the change in inequality in the U. S. vs. European countries, see Mishel et. al.
(2005, Chapter 7). For an attempt to develop theories of how European institutions distort the evolution
of technical change, see Acemoglu (2002).

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 52

market size and price per unit (the “ticket price”) multiply together to form of revenue function
of which the convexity implies that “small differences in talent become magnified in large
earnings differences, with great magnification if the earnings-talent gradient increases sharply
near the top of the scale” (Rosen, 1981, p. 846). Competition does not work to drive down these
differentials – “hearing a succession of mediocre singers does not add up to a single
outstanding performance” (p. 846). On the supply side, the performer exerts the same effort
whether 10 or 10,000 witness the performance.
Superstars benefit from skewness, but why has the degree of skewness increased? As
Rosen recognizes, successive innovations going back to the invention of the phonograph, radio,
and motion pictures have increased the size of audiences who can hear a given performance,
thus increasing incomes of superstars by many multiples. Thus superstars represent a
particular type of SBTC that is concentrated at the very top of the income distribution, where
the technological change is the development of CDs, downloaded internet music, cable
television, and other forms of “audience magnification.” As Rosen shows, superstars represent
an equilibrium phenomenon in economics, there is no suggestions that markets do not work,
and technological change feeds directly into increased premia.
A typical reaction to our use of the superstar model to explain increased skewness at the
top is to react that “there aren’t enough superstars.” What is the size of the superstar
community relative to the 13,000 IRS tax returns in the 99.99th percentile, which in 2001
accounted for $83 billion of income with an entry threshold of $3.2 million? Here we report on

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 53

incomes of a small set of entertainment superstars and a larger group of professional athletes.
But this is only the tip of the iceberg of the superstar phenomenon. Rosen himself uses
examples of professional comedians, classical music artists, economics textbook authors, other
authors, and lawyers, and he quotes approvingly from Marshall’s Principles which uses the
examples of barristers, jockeys, painters, and musicians.
An annual Forbes feature on the “The Celebrity 100” (2005) provides estimated 2004
incomes for 100 top celebrities, including superstars in the worlds of movies, music, TV,
multimedia, sports, and fiction writers. The reported incomes range from $290 million for
George Lucas to a mere $1.5 million for Amanda Bynes, a “child star.” The total income
accounted for is $3.1 billion, for an average annual income of $31 million and a median income
of $25 million. All but three of the top 100 have incomes that qualify them for the IRS 99.99th
percentile. Yet this is an underestimate of the top 100 superstar incomes, because the celebrity
list is chosen based not just on income but also on indicators of fame, including numbers of
magazine covers, media citations, and internet hits.
While the top-100 celebrity list leaves unknown the total incomes of other superstars in
the entertainment world, we can perform a complete census of major league baseball, football,
and basketball players using data maintained by USA Today.42 The 2005 total payroll for 2820
athletes was $7.0 billion, for an average of $2.48 million per player, a bit short of the entry level
to the IRS 99.99th percentile. Here our main interest is the contribution of these athletic salaries

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 54

to the overall increase in skewness, and for historical issues only the baseball data source
provides information going back more than five years. For the 26 continuing baseball teams
which existed in 1988, the total payroll has increased from $295 million to $1,991 million, and
the average salary has increased from $354,000 to $2,075,287. The inflation-adjusted increase
was 8.9 percent per year compared to the 6.0 rate of real increase for the IRS top 99.99 percentile
between 1987 and 2001.
Taking the 100 celebrity superstars and the athletes together, their incomes account for
$10 billion in 2004-05 compared to the $83 billion in the IRS 99.99th percentile in 2001. And this
excludes other sports including golf and tennis which Rosen specifically mentions as
beneficiaries of media expansion, and it excludes high-earning entertainment figures below the
level of the 100 celebrities. Finally, this tally excludes the celebrity lawyers (Johnnie Cochran,
David Boies) and top-earning figures in professions like management consulting and
investment banking, e.g., Jack Meyer who earned $25 million annually to manage the Harvard
endowment.
CEOs
Clearly a large share of the income at the very top of the income distribution is earned
by CEOs and other top corporate officers. But we treat the increasing pay premia of CEOs as
different than the superstar phenomena, in light of the puzzles that arise in its economic
analysis. In this section we cite other sources that document the increase in relative CEO pay

42. For baseball see http://asp.usatoday.com/sports/baseball/salaries/default.aspx and similar sites for

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 55

compared to average pay, quantify the total size of CEO compensation in a large sample of U. S.
firms, and discuss alternative explanations of the increased CEO premia that doubtless
contribute to increased skewness at the top of the U. S. income distribution.
The ratio of CEO pay to average worker pay increased from 27 in 1973 to 300 in the year
2000, then fell to 237 in 2001 as a result of the stock market crash.43 Including both cash and
equity compensation, the 1989-2000 increase in CEO compensation grew 342 percent as
compared to 5.8 percent for the median hourly wage. A basic difficulty for any equilibrium
theory to explain this jump in CEO premia is that it is primarily a phenomenon of the United
States and has not happened elsewhere. The ratio of CEO pay to the compensation of
manufacturing production workers in 2003 was 44.0 in the United States, more than double the
ratio of 19.9 in 13 other rich countries.44
Bebchuk-Grinstein (2005), hereafter B-G, provide valuable data and analysis of the CEO
pay phenomenon. First, they present average pay levels for the top 5 executives in 1500 firms,
the S&P 500, the Mid Cap 400, and the Small Cap 600. The average pay in 2001 was $14.3
million for the CEO and $31.9 million for the top five executives, or $6.4 million each. This is
7500 people making $6.4 million each, compared to the IRS 99.99th percentile that includes
13,000 people making $6.4 million each in 2001. Our first inference is that most of these

football and basketball.
43. Mishel et. Al. (2005), Figure 2Y, p. 214. Other facts in this and the next paragraph come from the same
source, pp. 212-16.
44. The discrepancy between the ratio of 44 for the cross-country comparisons and the ratio of 237 in the
previous paragraph for the U. S. is explained in Mishel et. Al. (2005, p. 216) as due to inconsistent data
sources.

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 56

executives are in the IRS 99.99th percentile and that their total income of $48 billion accounts for
more than half of that quantile.
Does rising CEO pay reflect a reward for increasing firm size, rate of return, or growth
of rate of return? B-G regressions based on 14,154 firms show that compensation of the top five
executives increased during 1993-2003 by 76 percent more than can be explained by their
regressions of compensation on these explanatory factors. They calculate that the ratio of topfive compensation to total earnings for a large sample of about 20,000 firms rose from 5.0
percent in 1993-95 to 12.8 percent in 2000-02.
An explanation that B-G call the “Arm’s Length Bargaining Perspective” explains
increased CEO pay by demand and supply, where demand depends on the value to
corporations of executive services, and supply depends on alternatives for CEOs in other
occupations, and the nonpecuniary aspects of the job (stress, legal risk, etc.) B-G emerge
unconvinced by this model, arguing that the stock market boom of the 1990s should have
increased CEO premia only temporarily, not permanently, and that income levels in alternative
occupations have increased much slower than for CEOs. They also reject the view that
corporate compensation committees were ignorant of the fact that stock options imposed costs
on shareholders.
Their “managerial power” perspective veers further from equilibrium economics.
Directors do not seek to get the best deal for shareholders. In their view the only constraint on
CEOs paying themselves unlimited amounts is the “outrage constraint” which weakened in the

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 57

1990s as rising stock markets pacified shareholders and removed this constraint. This approach
comes close to being observationally equivalent to saying that CEO pay depends on stock
market valuation, although the B-G regressions suggest that CEO pay has far outpaced such
valuations.
While their paper is inconclusive about the merits of an “arms-length bargaining model”
versus a “managerial power model,” we would propose a variant of the latter called the
“scratch my back model” based on an exclusive class of CEOs who determine each other’s pay
with relatively few market constraints. This image is conveyed by the following:
The compensation committee talks to an outside consultant who has surveys that you
could drive a truck through and pay anything you want to pay . . . The outside
consultant talks to the HR vice president, who talks to the CEO. The CEO says what
he’d like to receive. It gets to the HR person who tells the outside consultant. And it
pretty well works out that the CEO gets what he’s implied he thinks he deserves, so he
will be respected by his or her peers. (Morgenstern, 2005, p. 1).
The Economist christens this phenomenon the “Lake Wobegon effect,” because at Garrison
Keillor’s Lake Wobegon “all the children are above average.” No corporate compensation
committee wants to pay the average, they all want to pay above average and “so bosses’ pay
spirals upwards” (Economist, 2003).
The basic data reviewed here and the controls applied in the B-G regressions suggest
that top executive compensation has spiraled up at about the same rate as the compensation of
baseball players. Both the well-understood phenomenon of superstars and the puzzling case of
CEOs clearly explain most of the large increase of compensation in the 99.99th percentile relative
to the 90th. A broader interpretation of technology that includes new media inventions seems

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 58

crucial in explaining the rising skewness of superstar income, while some role for stock market
valuations may help to explain the CEO puzzle, including the difference between the U. S. and
Europe.

VII. Conclusion and Further Research Agenda
This paper started as a detective story titled “Where Did the Productivity Growth Go?”
The macro part of our investigation conducted a detailed search, worthy of Sherlock Holmes or
Columbo, to locate the effects of the post-1995 productivity revival, with a parallel search for
the effects of the post-1965 productivity growth slowdown. The micro part of our research used
IRS data to shed light inside the top 99.9th and 99.99th percentiles and linked increased skewness
at the top both to the economics of superstars and the less well-understood phenomenon of
escalating CEO pay premia.

The Stunning Micro Conclusion
A basic tenet of economic science is that productivity is the seed that creates the flower
of a nation’s standard of living. But our results raise doubts. Our most surprising result from
the large IRS micro data set is that over the entire period 1966-2001, only the top 10 percent of the
income distribution enjoyed a growth rate of total real income (excluding capital gains) equal to or above
the average rate of economywide productivity growth.

The bottom 90 percent of the income

distribution fell behind or even were left out of the productivity gains entirely.
Another way to state our main results is that the top 1 percent of the income distribution

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 59

accounted for 21.6 percent of real total income gains during 1966-2001 and 21.3 percent during
the productivity revival period 1997-2001. Still another way to describe our results is that the
top one-tenth of one percent of the income distribution earned as much of the real 1997-2001
gain in wage and salary income as the bottom 50 percent.
Our results show that the dominant share of real income gains accruing to the top 10
percent and top 1 percent is almost as large for labor income as for total income. This
contradicts those economists who believe that growing inequality is entirely a matter of the
dominant share of wealth and capital income at the top, as for instance Philip Swagel who
recently stated “It looks like the gains from the recovery haven’t really filtered down . . . The
gains have gone to owners of capital and not to workers” (quoted in Leonhardt, 2005, p. A14).
It is not that all the gains went to capital and none to labor; rather, our finding is that most of
the gains in labor income went to the very top percentiles.
Many previous papers have documented an increase in American income inequality
over the past three decades, but most have used CPS data that – because of top-coding – has
nothing to say about shifts in the income distribution within the top 10 percent of income
earners. We document that the top 10 percent of wage and salary earners gained 46 percent of
real income gains during 1966-2001, whereas their income share was a lower 26 percent in 1966.
Of that difference between 46 and 26 percent, half is due to an increase of incomes in the 90th
percentile relative to those below the 90th, whereas the other half is due to increased inequality
within the top 10 percent and especially the gains of the top 0.1 percent compared to the next 9.9

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 60

percent.
The post-1995 productivity growth revival did not automatically signal good news for
the majority of American workers and households. Indeed, to the extent that the productivity
growth “explosion” of 2001-2004 was achieved by cost-cutting, layoffs, and abnormally slow
employment growth (as suggested in Gordon, 2003), then the historical link between
productivity growth and higher living standards falls apart. Not only have the bottom 90
percent of American workers failed to keep up with productivity growth, many have been
harmed by it.
Our new data on the micro income distribution is accompanied by a review and
extension of a large literature in labor economics on inequality. We conclude that there has
been virtually no increase of inequality at the bottom as measured by changes in the P50/P10
ratio. The standard explanation of SBTC has some role in explaining increased inequality in the
group with incomes between P50 and P90, although the literature has raised legitimate
questions about the timing of the increase in skill premia and their relation, if any, with the
spread of computer technology and the timing of macro productivity growth.
Because our IRS data allow a close look inside the top 10 percent right up to the 99.99th
percentile, we emphasize causes of increased inequality at the very top. We combine two
separate analyses, the first of the economics of superstars where technology has broadened
audiences and increased the rewards for the very best as compared to the next best. The second
is of CEO compensation, where current compensation relative to average wages has increased

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 61

by many multiples since the 1970s as had superstar income, but perhaps for different reasons.
For both analyses, we collect new data and cite other papers in concluding that superstars and
CEOs account for most of the income earned in the very top quantiles of the income
distribution.

The New Macro Analysis
The macro analysis provides an important advance along several dimensions in the
longstanding literature on inflation and wage dynamics. The most important result directly
related to our topic, “where did the productivity growth go?” is that an acceleration or
deceleration of the productivity growth trend alters the inflation rate by at least one-for-one in
the opposite direction. This is an impact of the change in the rate of trend productivity growth
and dies out if trend productivity growth stabilizes at a new level, as in 1995-2005.
Symmetrically, the post-1965 acceleration of inflation was in part caused by the infamous
“productivity slowdown.” Counterfactual simulations of our econometric model suggest that
the 1965-80 slowdown in productivity growth boosted inflation on average by 1.3 percentage
points during the 1965-80 simulation period, while the 1995-2005 revival of productivity growth
held down inflation on average by 1.2 percentage points over the 1995-2005 period.
Linking the macro and micro analysis, a deceleration of inflation caused by a
productivity growth revival is good news for everyone. But it does not overturn or in any way
conflict with the story of this paper’s micro analysis. For a bottom-group wage earner with a
real income growth rate after 1995 of 0.5 percent, that real income growth rate would have been

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 62

-0.5 percent without the productivity growth revival. For a top-group wage earner with real
income growth of 4.0 percent, the absence of the productivity growth revival would have
reduced that to 3.0 percent. There were no distributional consequences of the inflation impact
of the productivity growth revival (and 1965-80 slowdown), yet that inflation impact made a
strong contribution to macroeconomic stability and the conduct of monetary policy.

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 63

REFERENCES

Abraham, Katherine G., Speltzer, James R., and Stewart, Jay C (1999). “Why Do Different Wage
Series Tell Different Stories?” The American Economic Review, Vol. 89, No. 2, 34-39.
Acemoglu, Daron (2002). “Cross-Country Inequality Trends,” NBER Working Paper 8832,
March.
Atkeson, Andrew and Lee Ohanian (2001). “Are Phillips Curves Useful for Forecasting
Inflation?” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Vol. 25, No. 1, 2-11.
Autor, David H., Katz, Lawrence F., and Kearney, Melissa S. (2005). “Trends in U. S. Wage
Inequality: Re-assessing the Revisionists,” NBER Working Paper 11627, September.
Ball, Laurence and Moffitt, Robert (2001). ʺProductivity Growth and the Phillips Curve,ʺ in Alan
B. Krueger and Robert M Solow, eds., The Roaring Nineties: Can Full Employment Be
Sustained? New York: The Russell Sage Foundation and the Century Foundation Press.
Beaudry, Paul, and Green, David A. (2002). “Changes in U. S. Wages 1976-2000: Ongoing Skill
Bias or Major Technological Change?” NBER Working Paper 8787, February.
Bebchuk, Lucian and Grinstein, Yaniv (2005). “The Growth of Executive Pay,” NBER Working
Paper 11443, June.
Bradbury, Katherine, and Katz, Jane (2002). “Are Lifetime Incomes Growing More Unequal?
Looking at New Evidence on Family Income Mobility.” Regional Review: Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston, vol. 12, no. 4.
Card, David, and DiNardo, John E. (2002). “Skill-Biased Technological Change and Rising
Wage Inequality: Some Problems and Puzzles,” Journal of Labor Economics (20, 4), 733-83.
Economist (2003). “Where’s the Stick?” October 11, p. 13.
Forbes (2005). “The Celebrity 100,” July 4, pp. 102-11.
Gali, Jordi, and Gertler, Mark (1999). “Inflation Dynamics: A Structural Econometric Analysis,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 44: 195-222.

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 64

__________ and Lopez-Salido, David (2001). “European Inflation Dynamics,” European
Economic Review, 45(7) June: 1237-70.
Goldin, Claudia, and Margo, Robert A. (1992). “The Great Compression: The Wage Structure
in the United States at Mid-Century,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107 (February): 134.
Gordon, Robert J. (1975). ʺAlternative Responses of Policy to External Supply Shocks,ʺ BPEA
1:1975, 183-206.
_________ (1977) ʺCan the Inflation of the 1970s Be Explained?ʺ BPEA 1:1977, 253-77.
_________ (1982) ʺInflation, Flexible Exchange Rates, and the Natural Rate of Unemployment.ʺ
In Workers, Jobs, and Inflation, edited by Martin N. Baily. Washington: Brookings, 88-152.
__________ (1998). ʺFoundations of the Goldilocks Economy: Supply Shocks and the TimeVarying NAIRU,ʺ BPEA 2:1998, 297-333.
_________ (2003). “Exploding Productivity Growth: Context, Causes, and Implications,” BPEA
2:2003, 207-79.
_________ and King, Stephen R. (1982). “The Output Cost of Disinflation in Traditional and
Vector Autregressive Models,” BPEA 1:1982, 205-42.
Gottschalk, Peter, and Danziger, Sheldon (2005). “Inequality of Wage Rates, Earnings, and
Family Income in the United States, 1975-2002,” Review of Income and Wealth, 51 (2, June):
231-55.
Herbert, Bob (2005). “The Mobility Myth,” New York Times, June 6, p. A23.
Hubbard, R. Glenn (2005). “Pay without Performance: A Market Equilibrium Critique,” Journal
of Corporation Law, forthcoming.
Juhn, C., Murphy, Kevin, and Topel, Robert H. (2002). “Current Unemployment, Historically
Contemplated,” BPEA 2001:1, 79-136.
Katz, Lawrence F., and Murphy, Kevin M. (1992). “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987:
Supply and Demand Factors,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107 (February): 35-78.
Kopczuk, Wojciech, and Saez, Emmanuel (2004). “Top Wealth Shares in the United States, 1916-

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 65

2000: Evidence from Estate Tax Returns,” NBER Working Paper 10399, March.
Ledbetter, Mark (2004). “Comparison of BEA Estimates of Personal Income and IRS Estimates
of Adjusted Gross Income,” Survey of Current Business, November, 9-14.
Leonhardt, David (2005). “U. S. Poverty Rate Was Up Last Year,” New York Times, August 31, p.
A1.
Mishel, Lawrence, Bernstein, Jared, and Allegretto, Sylvia (2005). The State of Working America
2004/2005. Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press.
Morgenstern, Gretchen (2005). “How to Slow Runaway Executive Pay,” New York Times,
business section, October 23, p. 1.
Park, Thae S. (2002). “Comparison of BEA Estimates of Personal Income and IRS Estimates of
Adjusted Gross Income: New Estimates for 2000 and Revised Estimates for 1999,”
Survey of Current Business, 82 (11, November), 13-20.
Piketty, Thomas and Saez, Emmanuel (2003). “Income Inequality in the United States, 19131998,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118: 1-39.
Rosen, Sherwin (1981). “The Economics of Superstars.” American Economic Review 71:5, 845-58.
Samuelson, Paul A., and Solow, Robert M. (1960). “Analytical Aspects of Anti-Inflation Policy,”
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 50:2 (May), 177-94.
Sims, Christopher A. (1997). “Comment,” BPEA, 1:1987, 117-20.
Staiger, Douglas, Stock, James H., and Watson, Mark W. (1997). ʺThe NAIRU, Unemployment,
and Monetary Policy,ʺ Journal of Economic Perspectives 11 (Winter): 33-49.
__________ (2001). ʺPrices, Wages, and the U. S. NAIRU in the 1990s,ʺ in Alan B. Krueger and
Robert M Solow, eds., The Roaring Nineties: Can Full Employment Be Sustained? New
York: The Russell Sage Foundation and the Century Foundation Press. pp. 3-60.
Stock, James H., and Watson, Mark W. (1996). “Asymptotically Median Unbiased Estimation of
Coefficient Variance in a Time Varying Parameter Model,” NBER Technical Working
Paper No. 201.
Tetlow, Robert J, and Ironside, Brian (2005). “Real-time Model Uncertainty in the United States:

Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Page 66

the Fed from 1996-2003.” http://ssrn.com/abstract=701423.
Uchitelle, Louis (2005). “Were the Good Old Days That Good?” New York Times, July 3, p. C1.

Figure 1. Actual and Trend Changes in Output per Hour,
NFPB Sector and Total Economy, 1950-2005
6
5
4

Actual

Percent

3
2

Trend
1
0
-1
-2
1950

1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

4
3.5
3

NFPB

2.5

Percent

2

Total Economy

1.5
1
0.5
0
1950
-0.5
-1

Difference
1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Figure 2a. NIPA Labor Income Share With and Without Proprietor's Income, 19502005
80
Compensation with Labor Component of Proprietors Income

Percent/100

75

70
Compensation
65

60
1950

1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

FIgure 2b. NIPA Nonlabor Income Share by Component, 1950-2005
40
35

Percent/100

30
25

Corporate Profits

20
Interest

15
10

Proprietor's Income
Government Enterprises and Transfer Payments

5
Rent
0
1950

1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Figure 3. Productivity Acceleration
0.6

0.4

0.2

0

-0.2

-0.4

-0.6

-0.8
1950

1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Figure 4. Four-quarter Changes in Actual and Simulated Values of PCE Deflator, 1984-2005

10

9

Simulated

8

7
Predicted

Column 1

6

5

4

Column 2

3

2

1
Actual

0
1984:01

1989:01

1994:01

1999:01

Column 3

2004:01

Figure 5. Time-Varying NAIRU, 1998 and Current Version, 1962-2005

12
Actual Unemployment Rate

10

Goldilocks 1998 Specification

8

6

Preferred Current Specification

4

2

0
1962:01

1967:01

1972:01

1977:01

1982:01

1987:01

1992:01

1997:01

2002:01

Figure 6: Log Ratios of 90th to 10th Percentiale in 3 alternative Data Sets, and Index
Numbers of Ratios, 1966-2001
3.4

2.9

Natural Log

IRS Data
2.4

1.9

March CPS Data

1.4
Morg Data
0.9
1966

1971

1976

1981

1986

1991

1996

2001

0.35
0.3

Index, LN=0 in 1973

0.25
0.2

Morg Data

0.15
0.1

March CPS Data

0.05
0
-0.05
IRS Data

-0.1
-0.15
1966

1971

1976

1981

1986

1991

1996

2001

Figure 7. Alternative Percentile Ratios of IRS data,
and Index Numbers of Ratios, 1966-2001

3.5
3
90/10

Natural Log

2.5
2
50/10

1.5
1

99/90

0.5
0
1966

1971

1976

1981

1986

1991

1996

2001

1996

2001

1.4
1.2

Index, LN=0 in 1966

1
0.8
99.9/10
0.6
99/10

0.4
0.2
90/10
0
-0.2
1966

1971

1976

1981

1986

1991

Figure 8. Share of Growth in Real Wages and Salaries, 1997-2001
0-20
1.9%

99.9-100
7.7%

20-50
10.8%

99-99.9
16.2%

50-80
23.4%
95-99
14.3%

90-95
11.0%

80-90
14.8%

Figure 9.
Share of Top 10 Percent in Increase of Real Income, $2000
Selected Intervals, 1966-2001
70
60

Percent

50
40

Labor Income
Nonlabor Income
Total Income

30
20
10
0
1966-79

1979-97

1997-2001

1966-2001

Share of Top 1 Percent in Increase of Real Income, $2000
Selected Intervals, 1966-2001
50
45
40

Percent

35
30

Labor Income
Nonlabor Income
Total Income

25
20
15
10
5
0
1966-79

1979-97

1997-2001

1966-2001

Table 1
Annual Growth Rates of Output per Hour, Compensation per Hour and Labor's Share of Income
by Sector, Selected Intervals, 1954:Q4 - 2005:Q1
Entire
Period
1954:Q4- 1963:Q2- 1972:Q1- 1979:Q1- 1987:Q4- 1997:Q4- 1954:Q41963:Q2 1972:Q1 1979:Q1 1987:Q4 1997:Q4 2005:Q1 2005:Q1

Addendum
1997:Q4- 2001:Q1
2001:Q1 2005:Q1

Output per Hour
Total Economy
Private Business
Non-Farm
Farm
Residual ("GHI")
Government
Households
Institutions

2.56
2.83
2.48
4.80
1.39
0.66
5.57
0.29

2.12
2.54
2.53
5.14
0.84
-0.10
5.31
1.61

1.57
1.88
1.76
4.04
0.87
-0.23
3.95
0.80

1.36
1.61
1.38
6.81
0.64
0.47
3.53
0.34

1.32
1.65
1.64
3.36
0.24
-0.21
4.57
0.01

2.48
3.12
3.07
4.03
0.38
0.62
3.07
0.14

1.92
2.29
2.12
4.71
0.73
0.19
4.49
0.56

2.10
2.54
2.46
4.95
0.59
0.22
8.92
0.18

2.78
3.58
3.57
3.28
0.21
0.93
-1.68
0.11

Real Compensation per Hour
Total Economy
Private Business
Residual ("GHI")
Government
Households
Institutions

2.87
2.80
3.07
3.02
1.92
2.57

2.63
2.45
3.14
3.01
0.57
4.07

1.51
1.74
0.81
0.48
-1.09
1.10

1.24
1.06
1.80
1.75
-2.28
2.32

1.07
1.12
0.88
0.75
4.65
0.88

2.72
2.98
1.95
2.03
0.71
2.18

2.03
2.03
2.01
1.91
0.92
2.27

3.60
4.18
1.68
1.41
4.57
2.48

2.02
2.00
2.17
2.53
-2.43
1.94

Labor's Share of Income
Total Economy
Private Business
Residual ("GHI")
Government
Households
Institutions

0.31
-0.03
1.68
2.37
-3.65
2.28

0.51
-0.08
2.30
3.11
-4.74
2.46

-0.06
-0.13
-0.06
0.71
-5.03
0.30

-0.12
-0.55
1.16
1.27
-5.81
1.98

-0.25
-0.53
0.64
0.96
0.07
0.87

0.25
-0.14
1.57
1.41
-2.36
2.04

0.11
-0.26
1.28
1.72
-3.58
1.72

1.49
1.64
1.09
1.18
-4.35
2.30

-0.77
-1.58
1.97
1.59
-0.74
1.83

Source : NIPA Table 1.3.6 and unpublished hours data provided by Phyllis Otto of the BLS

Table 2
Annual Growth Rates of Private Business Output per Hour and of Alternative Real
Wage Series, Selected Intervals, 1954:Q4 - 2005:Q1
Entire
Period
1954:Q4- 1963:Q2- 1972:Q1- 1979:Q1- 1987:Q4- 1997:Q4- 1954:Q41963:Q2 1972:Q1 1979:Q1 1987:Q4 1997:Q4 2005:Q1 2005:Q1

Addendum
1997:Q4- 2001:Q1- 1979:Q12001:Q1 2005:Q1 2005:Q1

Output per Hour

2.83

2.54

1.88

1.61

1.65

3.12

2.29

2.54

3.58

Deflated by GDP Deflator
Compensation per Hour
Employment Cost Index
Average Hourly Earnings

2.80
-1.52

2.45
-1.67

1.74
-0.07

1.06
1.02
-0.34

1.12
1.12
0.57

2.98
1.73
1.11

2.03
-0.80

4.18
1.99
2.00

2.00
1.51
0.39

1.32
1.02
0.34

Deflated by PCE Deflator
Compensation per Hour
Employment Cost Index
Average Hourly Earnings

3.02
-1.74

2.85
-2.07

1.77
-0.09

0.87
0.83
-0.53

0.76
0.75
0.21

3.05
1.80
1.19

2.05
-0.83

4.07
1.88
1.90

2.23
1.74
0.62

1.17
0.87
0.19

Difference in Growth Rates
Among Price Indexes
PCE Deflator minus GDP Deflator
CPI-U minus PCE Deflator

-0.22
-0.14

-0.40
0.28

-0.02
0.60

0.19
0.68

0.36
0.42

-0.08
0.45

-0.02
0.38

0.11
0.73

-0.23
0.22

0.15
0.42

Source : NIPA Tables

TABLE 3
Estimated Equations for Quarterly Changes in
the PCE Deflator, 1962:Q1 to 2005:Q2

Variable
1. Constant
2. Lagged Dependent Variable
3. Lagged Dependent Variablea
4. Unemployment Rate
5. Unemployment Gap
6. Relative Price of Imports
7. Food-Energy Effect
8. Medical Care Effect
9. Deviation of Productivity Growth from Trend
10. Productivity Acceleration
11. Productivity Acceleration
12. Nixon Controls "on"
13. Nixon Controls "off"
R2
S.E.E
S.S.R.
Dynamic Simulationb
1995:Q3-2005:Q2
Mean Error
Root Mean-Squared Error

Lags
0
1-4
1-24
0
0-4
1-4
0-4
0-4
0-1
1
5
0
0

Naïve Equation:
Only Lagged
Inflation and
Actual Unemployment
(1)
1.45 **
0.95 **
------0.20 *
---------------------------------------------0.791
1.176
176.9

-4.00
4.57

"Goldilocks"
Version
Productivity
with
Acceleration and
Productivity
Medical Care
Deviation
Effect
(2)
(5)
--------------------1.00 **
1.00 **
-----------0.66 **
-0.66 **
0.08 **
0.07 **
1.02 **
1.10 **
-----1.57 **
-0.04
-----------0.41
------0.93
-1.70 **
-1.52 **
1.78 **
1.97 **
0.932
0.934
0.659
0.648
63.4
59.2

-0.64
0.83

-0.11
0.56

Notes: (*) indicates that coefficient or sum of coefficients is significant at 5 percent level; (**) at 1 percent level.
a) Lagged dependent variable is entered as the four-quarter moving average for lags 1, 5, 9, 13, 17, and 21, respectively.
b) Dynamic simulations are based on regressions for the sample period 1962:Q1-1995:Q2 in which the coefficients on th
lagged dependent variable are constrained to sum to unity.

Table 4
Estimated Equations for Quarterly Changes in the PCE and NFPB Deflators, and for Trend Unit Labor Cost,
with Wage-Price Feedback, 1962:Q1 to 2005:Q2

Variable
1. Lagged Dependent Variable a
2. Unemployment Gap
3. Relative Price of Imports
4. Food-Energy Effect
5. Medical Care Effect
6. PCE Trend Labor Share
7. NFPB Trend Labor Share
8. Productivity Acceleration
9. Productivity Acceleration
10. Nixon Controls "on"
11. Nixon Controls "off"
R2
S.E.E
S.S.R.
Dynamic Simulationb
1995:Q3-2005:Q2
Mean Error
Root Mean-Squared Error
Notes:

Lags
1-24
0-4
1-4
0-4
0-4
1-8
1-8
1
5
0
0

PCE Price Equation
Trend Unit
Inflation
Labor Costs
(1)
(2)
0.99 **
1.02 **
-0.56 **
-0.32
0.07 *
-0.09
1.14 **
0.76
1.95 **
-2.60
0.20 **
-0.73 *
-0.45
-0.90
-1.50
1.95

**
**
**
**

-0.25
-1.17
-0.30
0.54

Difference
(2) - (1)
(3)
0.24
-0.16
-0.38
-4.55
-0.93
0.20
-0.27
1.20
-1.41

NFPB Price Equation
Trend Unit
Difference
Inflation
Labor Costs
(5) - (4)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.99 **
1.05 **
-0.43 **
-0.30
0.13
0.11 *
-0.07
-0.18
0.92 **
0.82 *
-0.10
1.80 *
-1.63
-3.43
0.24 *
-0.19
-0.94
-1.20
2.29 **

-0.63 *
-0.17
-1.00
-0.17
0.60

0.936
0.636
53.8

0.587
2.020
544.7

0.850
1.070
152.4

0.580
2.030
549.6

0.35
0.86

1.77
3.43

0.46
1.26

2.1
3.67

(*) indicates that coefficient or sum of coefficients is significant at 5 percent level; (**) at 1 percent level.
a) Lagged dependent variable is entered as the four-quarter moving average for lags 1, 5, 9, 13, 17, and 21, respectively.
b) Dynamic simulations are based on regressions for the sample period 1962:Q1-1995:Q2 in which the coefficients on the
lagged dependent variable are constrained to sum to unity.

-0.87
0.02
-0.06
1.03
-1.69

Table 5
Effects of Counterfactual Simulations that Impose Zero Values on Trend Productivity Change,
Simulation Mean values and Four-Quarter Terminal Values, 1965:Q1-1980:Q1 and 1995:Q3-2005:Q2

Variable and Concept

Simulation 1965:Q1 - 1980:Q1
Mean Change
Final Quarter
in Percent
4-Quarter Change

Simulation 1995:Q3 - 2005:Q2
Mean Change
Final Quarter
in Percent
4-Quarter Change

A. NFPB Deflator
1. Actual
2. Factual Simulation
3. Counterfactual Simulation
4. Factual Simulation Error (1-2)
5. Effect of Productivity Change (2-3)

5.34
5.52
4.24
-0.18
1.28

9.39
9.41
6.73
-0.02
2.68

1.55
1.57
2.76
-0.02
-1.19

2.31
2.32
4.03
-0.01
-1.71

B. Trend Unit Labor Cost
1. Actual
2. Factual Simulation
3. Counterfactual Simulation
4. Factual Simulation Error (1-2)
5. Effect of Productivity Change (2-3)

5.47
5.49
4.03
-0.02
1.46

8.65
9.07
6.06
-0.42
3.01

1.82
1.61
2.99
0.21
-1.38

3.57
2.66
4.57
0.91
-1.91

C. Change in Trend Labor Share
1. Actual
2. Factual Simulation
3. Counterfactual Simulation
4. Factual Simulation Error (1-2)
5. Effect of Productivity Change (2-3)

0.13
-0.03
-0.21
0.16
0.18

-0.74
-0.34
-0.67
-0.40
0.33

0.27
0.04
0.23
0.23
-0.19

1.26
0.34
0.54
0.92
-0.20

Table 6
Number of Tax Units, Tax Returns, Percentage of Tax Units Filing in IRS
Micro Data File, and Hours per Tax Unit, Selected Years, 1966 to 2001

Year
1966
1972
1979
1987
1997
2001

Number of Tax Units
(thousands)
75831
83670
97457
112640
129532
137088

Number of Tax Returns
(thousands)
70160
77573
92694
106996
122422
130255

Percentage of
Tax Units Filing
92.5
92.7
95.1
95.0
94.5
95.0

Percentage of Returns
With Wages
88.5
90.2
89.8
85.0
85.3
85.4

Annual Hours
(Billions)
154
161
185
207
244
254

Hours Per
Wage Return
2472.43
2301.43
2229.09
2276.11
2339.35
2287.30

Notes: This table is taken directly from Piketty and Saez (2003) except for hours data
Population and tax units estimates based on census and current population surveys (Historical
Statistics of the United States, and Statistical Abstract of the United States)
Tax units estimated as sum of married men, divorced and widowed men and women, and singles men and women aged 20 and over.
Hours data from Phyllis Otto, BLS

Table 7
Shares and Real Amount Earned, Wage and Salary Income by Quantile,
Selected Years, 1966-2001
Percent Shares of Total Wage and Salary Income by Quantile

0-20
20-50
50-80
80-90
90-95
95-99
99-99.9
99.9-100
99.99-100

1966
2.6
16.9
36.0
17.3
10.6
11.1
4.4
1.2
0.2

1972
2.5
16.5
35.4
17.6
10.9
11.4
4.5
1.2
0.3

1979
2.6
15.2
34.5
17.9
11.2
11.9
5.1
1.6
0.4

1987
2.2
13.8
32.7
17.9
11.6
12.9
6.2
2.6
0.7

1997
2.1
13.1
30.9
17.7
12.0
14.3
5.8
4.1
1.5

Percentage Point
Change
-0.5
-4.2
-6.3
-0.1
1.2
3.2
3.2
3.5
1.6

2001
2.1
12.7
29.7
17.2
11.8
14.3
7.6
4.7
1.6

Real Amount Earned by Each Quantile (Billions of 2000 Dollars)

0-20
20-50
50-80
80-90
90-95
95-99
99-99.9
99.9-100
99.99-100
Total

1966
43.2
283.0
603.3
290.5
178.1
186.0
73.3
19.5
3.8
1676.9

1972
54.2
360.1
770.3
382.9
237.2
248.0
98.4
27.0
5.5
2178.1

1979
68.1
398.3
900.1
468.2
293.3
311.2
132.3
41.1
9.4
2612.6

1987
67.5
422.3
996.2
546.7
353.7
394.0
188.8
80.3
22.3
3049.5

1997
78.0
488.6
1156.4
661.5
448.6
533.5
218.6
152.5
54.2
3737.7

2001
91.9
569.1
1330.2
771.3
530.0
640.0
339.4
210.1
82.9
4482.0

Percent
Change
Share of Change
48.7
1.7
286.1
10.2
726.9
25.9
480.8
17.1
351.9
12.5
454.0
16.2
266.1
9.5
190.6
6.8
79.1
2.80
2805.1

Table 8
Real and Adjusted Wage and Salary Percentiles in Year 2000 Dollars, Selected Years, 1966 - 2001
Year
1966
1972
1979
1987
1997
2001
Percent Change
Average Annual Growth Rate

20
7,242
8,331
8,244
7,621
7,805
8,581

50
23,667
26,353
24,412
24,232
24,285
26,251

80
42,127
48,657
49,668
52,058
53,785
58,566

90
52,683
62,153
64,291
69,749
75,589
83,162

95
63,367
75,084
78,400
88,117
99,222
110,883

99
99,872
117,710
127,524
155,061
197,540
220,590

99.9
220,653
263,271
316,234
472,230
636,564
741,013

99.99
442,626
531,522
714,431
1,359,600
2,373,844
3,172,691

18.5
0.48

10.9
0.30

39.0
0.94

57.9
1.30

75.0
1.60

120.9
2.26

235.8
3.46

616.8
5.63

Skewnessa
11.33
20.75
44.25
113.95
368.32
318.67

Percent
Wage Share
of Compensation

Adjusted Percentiles
Year

20

50

80

90

95

99

99.9

1966
1972
1979
1987
1997
2001

7,242
8,554
8,916
8,353
8,496
9,335

23,667
27,059
26,402
26,562
26,436
28,559

42,127
49,960
53,717
57,064
58,549
63,715

52,683
63,817
69,531
76,457
82,285
90,473

63,367
77,094
84,790
96,591
108,012
120,630

99,872
120,862
137,918
169,973
215,039
239,982

220,653
270,320
342,009
517,644
692,955
806,157

Average Annual Growth Rate

0.73

0.54

1.18

1.55

1.84

2.50

3.70

20
3.97
1.05
-1.08
-0.10
2.92

50
3.43
0.11
-0.19
-0.32
2.49

Hours Adjusted Growth Rates
80
90
95
4.04
4.39
4.46
1.49
1.68
1.82
0.49
0.93
1.37
-0.02
0.46
0.84
2.68
2.93
3.32

99
4.37
2.34
2.35
2.08
3.31

99.9
4.58
3.82
4.92
2.64
4.35

0.95

0.76

2.72

3.92

1966-1972
1972-1979
1979-1987
1987-1997
1997-2001
Average Annual Growth Rate
Source: Authors' calculations

1.40

1.77

2.06

90.5
88.1
83.7
82.6
83.1
83.2

Hours
Growth
-1.19
-0.46
0.26
0.27
-0.56
-0.22

Productivity
Growth
2.17
1.28
1.43
1.31
2.17
1.57

Table 9
Real Amount Earned, Sum of Labor and Positive Non-Labor Income,
Selected Years, 1966-2001
Total income

0-20
20-50
50-80
80-90
90-95
95-99
99-99.9
99.9-100
Total

1966
54.3
329.2
699.5
344.7
218.0
253.3
124.9
44.1

1972
69.1
418.3
881.8
445.7
282.6
320.8
150.4
50.8

1979
86.7
472.3
1044.0
549.0
350.5
396.6
188.3
71.2

1987
83.2
513.3
1197.9
667.6
439.8
515.8
281.4
171.1

1997
101.6
602.6
1404.5
816.9
566.9
737.3
467.8
345.6

2001
118.2
696.5
1620.1
957.7
672.4
879.6
571.9
434.6

2068.0

2619.6

3158.6

3870.0

5043.1

5951.2

Percent
Change
Share of Change
63.9
1.6
367.3
9.5
920.7
23.7
613.0
15.8
454.4
11.7
626.3
16.1
447.1
11.5
390.5
10.1
3883.3

100.0

Wage Income
wage
0-20
20-50
50-80
80-90
90-95
95-99
99-99.9
99.9-100
Total

1966
44.1
265.7
627.5
309.4
187.6
177.0
53.4
12.4

1972
57.5
344.7
791.7
401.5
247.2
238.8
77.8
18.2

1979
74.6
385.3
914.6
488.4
304.1
298.6
114.6
32.3

1987
67.1
384.7
995.6
579.2
376.9
400.6
176.5
68.9

1997
81.4
456.6
1155.4
692.0
474.8
543.9
270.5
126.4

2001
93.4
531.7
1326.3
812.3
562.1
653.9
327.0
175.2

1677.0

2177.4

2612.5

3049.6

3800.9

4481.9

Percent
Change
Share of Change
49.3
1.8
266.0
9.5
698.7
24.9
503.0
17.9
374.5
13.4
477.0
17.0
273.6
9.8
162.9
5.8
2805.0

100.0

Non-wage income
non-wage
0-20
20-50
50-80
80-90
90-95
95-99
99-99.9
99.9-100
Total

non-wage
0-20
20-50
0-50
50-80
80-90
90-95
95-99
99-99.9
99.9-100

1966
10.2
63.5
71.9
35.3
30.0
76.3
71.5
31.8

1972
11.6
74.0
90.1
44.2
35.1
82.0
72.9
32.3

1979
11.9
87.1
129.6
60.6
46.3
98.0
73.8
38.7

1987
15.9
128.6
202.4
88.4
62.9
115.3
104.9
102.1

1997
20.2
145.9
249.5
124.9
92.3
193.3
197.3
219.2

2001
24.8
164.9
294.3
145.4
110.5
225.6
245.0
259.4

390.6

442.1

546.0

820.4

1242.6

1469.7

1966
18.70
19.30
19.22
10.28
10.24
13.77
30.14
57.24
72.00

1972
16.75
17.69
17.55
10.22
9.91
12.41
25.57
48.48
63.45

Percent
Change
Share of Change
14.6
1.4
101.3
9.4
222.3
20.6
110.1
10.2
80.5
7.5
149.2
13.8
173.5
16.1
227.6
21.1
1079.1

Non-wage Income as a Percent Share of Total Income
1979
1987
1997
2001
Change
13.73
19.15
19.88
20.96
2.26
18.45
25.05
24.21
23.67
4.36
17.72
24.23
23.59
23.27
4.06
12.42
16.90
17.76
18.16
7.88
11.03
13.24
15.29
15.18
4.94
13.22
14.29
16.28
16.43
2.67
24.71
22.36
26.22
25.65
-4.49
39.16
37.27
42.18
42.83
-14.41
54.33
59.64
63.43
59.68
-12.32

100.0

