                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           OPTIMAL BOND TRADING WITH PERSONAL TAXES:
           IMPLICATIONS FOR BOND PRICES AND ESTIMATED
                 TAX BRACKETS AND YIELD CURVES




                    George M. Constantinides

                   Jonathan E. Ingersoll, Jr.




                     Working Paper No. ii81




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                           August 1983




Earlier versions of the paper were presented at the annual AFA
meeting in Washington, D.C. and at workshops at the University of
Chicago, Michigan, M.I.T., Rochester, and Yale University. We
would like to thank Mark Wolfson, Steve Schaefer (the referee) and
the participants at the above meeting and workshops for helpful
comments. This research was conducted during the academic year
1981—82 when the second author was a Batterymarch Fellow.
Additional support was provided by the Sloan Foundation. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Financial Markets and Monetary Economics, and programs in Taxation
and Government Budget. Any opinions expressed Economic    of the
                                                are those Research.
authors and not those of the National Bureau of
                                                   NBER Working Paper #1184
                                                   August 1983



                 Optimal Bond Trading With Personal Taxes:
                     Implications For Bond Prices and
                  Estimated Tax Brackets and Yeild Curves


                                 ABSTRACT


     The assumption that bondholders follow either a buy-and—hold or a

continuous   realization trading policy, rather than the optimal trading policy,
is at variance with reality and, as we demonstrate, may seriously bias the
estimation of the yield curve and the implied tax bracket of the marginal
investor. Tax considerations which govern a bondholder's optimal trading
policy   include the following: realization of capital losses, short term if

possible; deferment of the realization of capital gains, especially if they

are short term; changing the holding period status from long term to short

term by sale of the bond and repurchase, so that future capital losses may be

realized short term; and raising the basis through sale of the bond and

repurchase in order to deduct from ordinary income the amortized premium.

Because of the interaction of these factors, no simple characterization of the

optimal trading policy is possible. We can say, however, that it differs

substantially from the buy-and-hold policy irrespective of whether the

bondholder is a bank, a bond dealer, or an individual. We obtain these strong

results even when we allow for transactions costs and explicitly consider

numerous IRS regulations designed to curtail tax avoidance.




George M. Constantinides                              Johnathan E. Ingersoll, Jr.
Graduate School of Business                           School of Organization and
University of Chicago                                 Management
1101 East 58th Street                                 Yale University
Chicago, IL 60637                                     56 Hilihouse Ave.
(312) 962—7278                                         New Haven, CT 06520
1. Introduction

    The yield curve implied by the prices of Treasury notes and bonds and
corporate bonds is of interest to economists and practitioners alike: it

reflects the investors' beliefs about the future course of the short term

interest rate. In calculating the yield curve, the tax bracket of the

marginal bondholder is either taken to be some given number or is estimated

simultaneously with the yield curve. The implied tax bracket of the marginal

investor is of independent interest. It provides a direct (but incomplete)

test of Miller's (1977) theory on the optimal capital structure of firms. It

may also be useful for determining fair prices for other assets.

     There are two major problems in estimating pure discount rates (the yield

curve of zero coupon bonds) and the implied marginal tax rate. The first

problem is that of differing clienteles, studied in detail by Schaefer (1981,

1982a). For a given investor some bonds of particular maturities and coupon

rates may   be   dominated by combinations of other bonds. In this case tax

clienteles naturally arise.     If there is no one clientele for which every bond

remains undominated, then the concept of the "marginal taxable investor" who

"sets" all prices may well be meaningless.

     The second problem is that of the assumed investment horizon. This is

the focus of the present paper. By necessity we ignore the problems of tax

clienteles. Extant estimation procedures assume either that the bond is held

to maturity, without intermediate realization of capital gains and losses (the

buy—and—hold policy), or that capital gains and losses are realized every

period as they occur (the continuous realization policy). Both the buy-and-

hold policy and the continuous realization policy lead to relatively simple

bond pricing formulae. This facilitates the estimation of the yield curve and

the implied tax bracket of the marginal investor.
                                       2




      The assumption that bondholders follow either a buy—and-hold or a

 continuous realization trading policy, rather than the optimal trading policy,

 is at variance with reality and, as we demonstrate, may seriously bias the

 estimation of the yield curve and the implied tax bracket of the marginal

 investor. Perusal of the Wall Street Journal provides convincing evidence

that investment advisors——and presumably their clients are aware of the

optimal trading policies which frequently differ sharply from a buy-and—hold

or continuous realization policy. By definition, the marginal bondholder is

an economic agent (or group of agents) of sufficient stature to set bond

prices at the margin. It is illogical then to assert that the marginal

investor follows a suboptimal trading policy through ignorance.

     The present paper unifies two recent strands of research, the pricing of

bonds with stochastically varying interest rates and investment opportunity

set and the pricing of stocks in the presence of personal taxes. Cox,

Ingersoll and Ross (1981, 1983) presented an equilibrium theory of bond

pricing and the term structure of interest rates, in particular explaining the

valuation of. a deterministic stream of cash flows but with a stochastically

varying interest rate and investment opportunity set. Constantinides (1982,

1983) and Constantinides and Scholes (1980) discussed the optimal trading of

stocks and options in the presence of personal taxes and presented an

equilibrium theory of stock pricing, in particular explaining the effect of

optimal realization of capital gains and losses on the pricing of stocks.

     Tax considerations which govern a bondholder's optimal trading policy

include the following: realization of capital losses, short term if possible;

deferment of the realization of capital gains, especially if they are short

term; changing the holding period status from long term to short term by sale

of the bond and repurchase, so that future capital losses may be realized
                                        3




short term; and raising the basis through sale of the bond and repurchase in

order to deduct from ordinary income the amortized premium. Because of the

interaction of these factors, no simple characterization of the optimal

trading policy is possible. We can say, however, that it differs

substantially from the buy-and-hold policy irrespective of whether the

bondholder is a bank, a bond dealer, or an individual. We obtain these strong

results even when we allow for transactions costs and explicitly consider

numerous IRS regulations designed to curtail tax avoidance.

     The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we outline the tax

provisions in four representative tax scenarios which may apply to the elusive

marginal bondholder. The formal model is presented in Section 3. Closed—form

solutions for the prices of consol bonds and the value of the timing option

are presented in Section 4 for a special case. In Section 5 we derive the

optimal trading policies under more general conditions and in Section 6 we

illustrate the effect of taxes on the prices of bonds and on the value of the

timing option. The estimation of the yield curve and the tax bracket of the

marginal investor is grossly biased if the value of the timing option is

ignored. This point is illustrated in Section 7. In Section 8 we discuss

municipal bonds. Concluding remarks are offered in Section 9.


2. The Tax Environment

     To avoid   a profusion of details in our discussion we abstract from many

of the nuances of the regulations governing the taxation of income, as defined

by the tax code and its interpretation by the Internal Revenue Service and the

courts. We do emphasize, however, certain important aspects of the code,

which, though largely ignored in finance, may materially affect bond prices

and the estimation of the yield curve and the marginal tax rate. We also

provide some historical perspective to familiarize the reader with major
                                        4




 changes in the tax code which may be reflected in a time series of bond

 yields.

      At least four broad classes of potential marginal investors warrant

 examination: individuals, banks and bond dealers, corporations, and tax—

 exempt institutions. Consider first the tax rules applicable to individual

 investors.

      Coupon income (net of interest expense) is taxed at the individual's

 marginal tax rate on ordinary income, the maximum rate being currently 50%.

 Between 1970 and 1980, coupon income was classified as "unearned income" and

 was taxed at a maximum rate of 72%. Prior to the seventies, the top marginal

 tax rate varied from a low of 7% in 1913 to a high of 95% in 1945. In our

 calculations we assume that the marginal tax rate on coupon income for an
                        if
 individual is t =
                 c
     The taxation of capital gains is complex. Unrealized gains and losses

remain untaxed. Gains and losses are taxed in the year that they are

realized. A realized gain or loss is the difference between the sales price

 (less cost of sale) and the basis. For most assets the basis is just the

purchase price (plus cost of purchase), but for some bonds the purchase price

is subject to adjustment.

     We consider only original issue par bonds, defined as such by the IRS if

the original issue discount does not exceed 1/4 of 1 percent multiplied by the

number of full years to maturity. For these bonds, if the purchase price •in

the secondary market is below par, no adjustment is made and the basis is just

the purchase price. If the purchase price is above par, this difference is


     1/
       Miller (1977) shows that, under simple tax rules, the marginal
bondholder is in the corporate tax bracket, and provides partial justification
for our choice of the tax rate. In any case, our qualitative results are
insensitive to the assumed rate.
                                      5



                                         2/
amortized linearly to the maturity date.'   The amount amortized in a tax year

is allowed as a deduction against ordinary income and the bond's basis is

correspondingly reduced. There is no specific limitation on this deduction.

In our calculations the amortized amount is (negatively) taxed at the rate

T = .5.
 C
     Realized capital gains and losses are either short term or long term.

The required holding period for long term treatment is currently one year.

This has varied many times since capital gains were first differentiated from

ordinary income in 1922. In the years 1942—1977 the holding period was six

months. Prior to that time there were three or more categories of long term

capital gains with required holding periods as long as ten years.

     Net short term capital gains are taxed as ordinary income. Net long term

capital gains are currently taxed at 40% of the investor's marginal tax rate

on ordinary income. This treatment has also been changed. The tax rate on

long term gains has varied from 20% to 80% of the tax rate on ordinary

income. In addition there have been periods in which alternate treatment

could be elected (or, was required for large capital gains).

     Net short term capital losses and 50% of net long term capital losses are

deducted from ordinary income and may jointly reduce the taxable ordinary

income by a maximum of $3,000 (until 1976, $1,000). Unused losses are carried

forward indefinitely. Short term losses and long term gains, incurred in the

same year, offset each other dollar for dollar, instead of being taxed at

their respective rates.



     —2/amortizationis optional for Treasury and corporate bonds. Since for
practically all individuals the marginal tax rate on ordinary income is no
less than the capital gains tax rate, amortization of the basis dominates
foregoing this option. The amortization method need not be straight line, but
may be that customarily used by the individual, if it is deemed to be
reasonable. If the bond is callable, the basis is amortized to the call price
at the call date or to par at maturity, whichever yields the smaller
amortization. If there are alternate call dates the rule is complex.
                                          6



      We define r       to be the marginal tax rate on short term capital gains

 arid losses. This rate is not necessarily equal to the marginal tax rate on

 ordinary income: if the investor has net short term losses and the deduction

 limit is binding, r = 0;      if the investor has net short term losses but

 larger long term gains, t      is 40% of the marginal tax rate on ordinary

 income. Likewise, we define     TL to be the marginal tax rate on long term

 capital gains and losses.

      If an asset is sold at a loss within thirty days before or after the

 acquisition of "substantially identical" property, the IRS can disallow the

 loss deduction under the "wash sale" rule. An investor has a high probability

of circumventing this rule by purchasing instead another bond with a slightly

different coupon or maturity. In any case, this rule is not applicable to

dealers or individual taxpayers who are in the business of trading bonds.

Consequently we ignore the wash sale rule throughout this paper.

     We consider three representative tax scenarios for an individual

bondholder and one scenario for banks or bond dealers, as defined by the

marginal rates t, t, and


     I. The marginal investor is an individual. Coupon income is taxed at

         the rate T = .5.       Realized short term and long term gains and
                    C
         losses are taxed at the rate t =
                                      s   L
                                                 = .25.   The deduction limit is

         not binding.


     This scenario is plausible if the individual is periodically forced to

sell some of his portfolio assets by factors beyond his control (or, of more

importance than the tax consequences) and, on average, realizes large long

term gains. Then the deduction limit is not binding. Since short term losses

must be used to offset the long term gains, the marginal tax rate is the long
                                              7




                   3/
term gains rate.        We take the long term gains rate to be half of the

investor's marginal tax rate on ordinary income, as it was between 1942 and

1979. We also assume that the investor can always defer the realization of

short term gains until the holding period exceeds one year and then realize

the gains long term.


     II. The marginal investor Is an individual. Coupon incom is taxed at

          the rate t = .5.         Realized short term gains and losses are taxed

          at the rate         = .5.      Realized long term gains and losses are taxed

          at the rate         =   .25.    The deduction limit is not binding.


     Scenario II is the least plausible one because it ignores both the

deduction limit and the (unfavorable for the taxpayer) offsetting of long term
                                  4/
gains with short term losses.            Since investors have a tax incentive to

realize losses and defer gains (at least, short term gains), the assumption

that the deduction limit is not binding may be tenuous and is relaxed in the

next scenario.




     —3/Similarlythe right to deduct half of long term losses from income,
even under the current 40% rule for long term capital gains, could not be
used. Losses could only be deducted from other capital gains. Thus, the
effective tax rate on both long term gains and losses is the same.
     —4/Theindividual may mitigate this offset provision of the tax law by
realizing long term gains and short and long term losses in alternate tax
years; however, we do not explicitly model this. See Constantirtides (1982).
This procedure may also help to avoid the unfavorable long term gain and loss
offset.
                                            8



        III. The marginal investor is an individual. Coupon income is taxed at

              the rate t    = .5.   Short and long term gains and losses remain

                       —
              untaxed, i.e., t =
                              s      L
                                         = 0.
       One justification for this scenario is to assume that the individual

realizes losses and defers gains. At the margin losses can only be carried

forward   as the deduction limit is   binding. The only tax "game" permitted

under this scenario is to realize a gain on a bond in order     to raise its basis

above   par and start deducting the premium amortization against ordinary
income. As we shall see, this policy is profitable.
       Although   corporations are taxed differently from individuals, the tax
regulations   on nonbank   corporations that hold bonds for reasons not directly
related   to their business purposes are sufficiently similar to those applying

to individuals that the previous scenarios remain at least qualitatively

correct. The primary distinction is that a net capital loss (short and long

combined) cannot be deducted in any amount from ordinary income, but may      be
carried back for three years and forward for five years as a short term loss

to offset gains. Banks and (corporate or individual) bond dealers are taxed

differently, however.

       For banks and dealers, bond coupons and all realized capital gains and

losses are treated as ordinary income or loss without explicit limitation.

Net operating losses of banks are carried back for ten years and forward for

five years. In the following scenario we effectively assume that the bank has

positive net earnings in every ten year period so that loss benefits are

earned immediately. Corporate earnings and losses are taxed at the corporate

rate of 50%. (The current corporate tax rate is 46% on earnings in excess of

$100,000. In the past it has been as high as 54%.) The same scenario applies

to   a bond dealer with marginal personal or corporate tax rate on ordinary
income equal to 50%.
                                           9




     IV. The marginal holder is a bank or bond dealer. Coupon income and all

            capital gains and losses are taxed at the rate 'r =
                                                              C
                                                                    ts =     L
                                                                                 = .5.
            There is no deduction limit.


     In each of the scenarios, I-IV, the tax rates r c,   t
                                                          S
                                                                  and   t
                                                                         L
                                                                             are

assumed to remain constant over time because we wish to focus on the long run

effect of taxes on bond prices. Certain trading policies not examined here

would become optimal at the timethat tax provisions were about to change.

For example, when the effective maximum rate on long term capital gains was

changed from 28% to 20% by the 1978 Tax Revenue Act, individuals paying the

28% rate should have deferred realizing their capital gains, ceteris

paribus. Similarly if an investor's income were to change sufficiently to

place him in a different tax bracket, the optimaltrading policy might be

affected.

     We also examine bond prices in each of the four tax scenarios under           the
assumption that the bondholder is (artificially) constrained to follow a buy—

and—hold policy and compare the bond prices, tax timing option, and yields to

the case when the investor follows optimal policies. The buy—and-hold economy

is taken as our primary benchmark in which there are no price effects induced

by tax trading.

     We do not explicitly examine a scenario in which the marginal bondholder

is exempt from all taxes. This might be considered a serious omission because

tax-exempt intermediaries currently hold more than one-third of all the

outstanding government and corporate bonds and account for an even greater

proportion of the trading volume. Furthermore, liberalized tax-deferred

retirement plans provide growing opportunities for taxable individuals to

defer the tax on coupons, dividends and capital gains until retirement. If

the marginal investor is tax—exempt, then there are obviously no tax—induced
                                           10




 tbiaSeSt   in bond prices. 5/   However, since the no—trading policy dominates any

 other for a tax—exempt investor (in a perfect market), we may assume the buy—

and-hold    policy. Consequently bond prices should equal the benchmark values,
and   standard estimation techniques, such as McCulloch's (1975), should verify

that the marginal tax bracket is zero.


3. The )de1

       Our goal is to find the price of a default—free bond with par value one,

continuous coupon rate c, and maturity date T. The bond is perfectly
                                                                     6/
divisible and may be bought or sold with zero transactions costs.         The bond

price is a function of the state vector Y (defined below) and time t,

i.e., P = P(Y, t; c, T).

      we price the coupon bond relative to short term (instantaneous) lending

via a riskiess, "single period" bond with maturity dt and before—tax yield

r(Y, t). The single period bond is perfectlj divisible and may be bought or

sold with zero transactions costs. Effectively there is unlimited riskiess

lending over the time interval dt at the before—tax interest rate r.           If an

investor's tax rate on ordinary income is r, his after—tax interest rate

i. (1

      We assume that, throughout the term to this coupon bond's maturity, some

investor with tax rates tc T5, and r (on           coupon income, short term


      5/Even
      —      in this case, however, when taxes do not affect bond prices, taxed
investors will still benefit from following trading policies different from
the buy-and-hold. The value of trading optimally will of course depend upon
what taxes they must pay. Thus, the timing option will have the same quali-
tative properties it does in one of the examined scenarios.
      6/ Transactions
      —             costs on bonds are small and are of the order of magnitude
of the bid—asked spread. In Section 6 (Table 6) we introduce transactions
costs and show that the pricing implications and the value of the tinting
option remain largely unaffected.
                                         11




capital gains and losses, and long terra capital gains and losses,

respectively) is indifferent between buying the coupon bond or investing in

the single—period bond. That there exists some tax bracket (t c, T s ,      L

with the property that an investor in this tax bracket is indifferent between

the two investments over a time interval dt,      is a weak assumption. The

strong part of our assumption is that investors in the same tax brackt are

the margin throughout the bond's term tomaturity.      In a richer model (beyond

our present scope) one might allow for the possibility that the bond is passed

from one tax clientele to another as it approaches maturity or as it becomes a

premium or discount bond due to shifts in interest rates. Since we wish to

focus on the already complex problem of the optimal realization of capital

gains and losses, we abstract from issues related to changing tax
              7/                                                assumption that all
clienteles.        We make the (perhaps unnecessarily strong)

marginal investors are in the same tax bracket.

     We present first a discussion of the issues relating to the determination

of the equilibrium bond prices and the value to a marginal, investor of holding

                                          cost basis. In the next section we use
a particular bond with an established
                                                      from the point of view of
a specific model to discuss the valuation problem

 investors not at the margin.




      7/
        Tax clienteles for bonds is an important issue which has been
 extensively discussed by Schaefer (1981, 1982a, 1982b) under the assumption
                                                      below, under tax laws
 that bonds are held to maturity. As we demonstrate
 similar to those in the U.S., a buy-and-hold policy is inferior to trading
 schemes which involve (among other things) early realization of capital
 losses. Under British regulations1 which imposed no long term capital gains
 tax on "gilt" securities prior to 1962 or after 1969, such trading schemes
 have no direct benefits, so a buy—and-hold policy is not necessarily
 inferior. Neither need it be correct, however. Even in Schaefer's world,
 future changes in interest rates or the introduction of new bonds may cause an
 existing bond to become dominated for its current clientele. The anticipation
 of such events should be reflected in the bond's price, and this may mask some
                                                       selling at a discount that
 clientele effects. For example, any bond currently
                                                                     which time
 appears to have a high tax clientele was originally a par bond at
  it probably appeared to have a lower tax clientele.
                                         .12




      The price of a coupon bond, P, is defined to be such that an investor

 in the given tax bracket (t ,
                            c    S
                                     , t L) is   indifferent between purchasing the

 coupon bond now or investing p dollars in the single period bond over the

 time interval dt. This equilibrium condition is formalized below as the

 after-tax version of the local expectations hypothesis. After purchasing the

 coupon bond, the investor follows the derived optimal trading policy as

 opposed to a continuous realization or a buy—and—hold policy.

      If an investor's cost basis differs from the prevailing bond price, he

 may be unwilling (or more than willing) to sell it at that price and thereby

 realize a capital gain or loss. His reluctance (or eagerness) to sell has

 nothing to do with the bond price being "unfair." If his cost basis were

 equal to the price, the same investor would be indifferent to selling at that

price because, by definition, the bond price is such that he is indifferent

between purchasing the bond (and establishing a basis equal to the price) or

investing in the short-term dicount bond.

     There may be instances when all investors have cost bases such that

nobody is willing to sell the bond at the "prevailing price." To avoid this

purely technical difficulty, we assume that the government supplies any

existing bond at the above—defined price with infinite elasticity. This

assumption assures that the market price is well defined and trades may always

take place at the reservation price of a marginal purchaser as previously
        8/
stated.




     8/
       Alternatively, we could assume that bonds are fixed in supply and some
investors are occasionally forced to trade for reasons unrelated to optimal
tax trading. "Liquidity purchasers" will never pay above their reservation
price because the discount bond is available. "Liquidity sellers," however,
may not be able to hold out for their reservation price.
                                               13



                                                                      A       A
        The value of the bond to an investor, V(Y, t; C, T; P, t), is defined

as the present value of the stream of cash flows associated with the bond,

assuming that the optimal policy in realizing capital gains and losses is

followed. The symbols p and t denote the current cost basis and the time

at which the bond was purchased.

        At those "stopping times" at which the investor either by choice or by

force sells the bond and realizes a capital gain or loss, the value to the

investor is simply the after—tax proceeds from its immediate sale. The bond's

maturity date is an obvious stopping time for all investors. At maturity, the

capital gain or loss is unavoidably realized, hence


               V(Y, T; C, T; P, t) = (1 — ¶S ) +           ¶SP, if T —    t41
                                                                          A           (1)
                                         =
                                             (1_tL)+TLP?if T-t>1
        A similar result is true at any stopping time prior to maturity when the

investor sells his bonds. For the sequence of (possibly random) stopping

times, t =     t1,   t2, ...,    at   which the investor realizes a capital gain or

loss,


               V(Y, t; c, T; P, t) = (1 —         T)P     +     if t —  t4 1
                                         = (1 —           + L' if t   — t >1          (2)


                                         at t =     t1,   t2




        Stopping times may      differ   across investors. At the stopping times chosen

by the investor the "smooth—pasting" (or "high contact") condition also must

hol9/

        —9/These   conditions are formally derived in Grigelionis and Shiryaev
continued
                                               14




                      n
                          = (1 —   t) — , if                  t —   t   '.   1
                                           n

                          = (1 —
                                   IL)          ,        if   t —   t>1                               (3)


                    for n = 1, 2, ..., N,
                                                             at t, t

The smooth-pasting condition is not imposed at those stopping times which

signify forced realizations. Forced realizations are assumed to be caused by

events exogenous to the model, e.g., an unanticipated and unavoidable need for

consumption or portfolio revision. Forced realizations are formally modelled

as Poisson arrivals with a constant force A. The Poisson process is

independent of the process which generates the movements of the state

variables.

     For a marginal investor the time of purchase is also an optimal stopping

time since, by definition, he is indifferent to the purchase. Thus,


                          V(Y, t;c, T; P, t) = P                                                  (4a)




                            n
                                   (1 —
                                          r5)   —   aP
                                                         n
                                                                        n        1, ..., N   .    (4b)

This condition of indifference provides the link between the value of the bond

and its market price. It may also be interpreted as an alternative descrip-

tion of the marginal investor. As we see below, (4a) need not hold for non—

marginal investors who either receive a surplus by purchasing the bond at the

prevailing price or find buying the bond to be dominated by lending at the

short—term rate.

     At all other times, the investor's value of the bond exceeds the after-

tax proceeds from immediate sale, and the investor optimally defers the

realization of a capital gain or loss. The set of states and times {,                            t}
                                                 15




at which this occurs is referred to as the continuation region, i.e., in the

continuation region


             V(Y, t; C; T; P, t) > (1 —          t S )P + St P, if     t —   t     1
                                                                                             (5)
                                      >(1—t)P+T?,
                                           L   L
                                                  if t—t>1.

      In the continuation region, the investor's after-tax rate of return on

his bond is

                 dv ÷ (1 -   t)Cdt    + max[O,        (P -   1)tdt/(T   -
                                                                             t)]             (6)
                                            v

The term (p —     1)Tdt/(T   -   t)   is the tax benefit of the linearly amortized

premium when the basis is above par.
                                                                                             10/
      We assume the after—tax version of the local expectations hypothesis:

The after—tax expected rate of return on the coupon bond (measured via the value

function) equals the after-tax single period rate of interest over the period

{t, t +    dt}, i.e.,
          dV + (1 - r )cdt       max[0,          1)T dt/(T —    t)]
                      c
                             +
                                     V
                                          (P —
                                                                      ] =   (1 —   tC )rdt   (7)



for   all Y, t, I', and t.
      We assume that the state of the economy at time t is summarized by a

vector {Y (t)}          This vector also summarizes the history of the economy,

Y(T), t < t, to the extent that the history is of current economic relevance.

The state variables are jointly Markov with movements determined by the system of

stochastic differential equations




      —10/
          See Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross (1981) for a discussion of the different
forms of the expectations hypothesis. In another paper (1983) they show how
this assumption may be weakened by incorporating a risk premium into the drift
terms for the state variables.
                                                           16




                dY (t)     p (Y, t)dt + cy'(Y, t)dw(t)                   (n =   1, 2, ..., N)           .         (8)
                  n        n                     n

 p
     n   is a scalar, c is a K—dimensional vector, K
                                n                                               N, and dw(t)                is   the

 increment of the Wiener process w(t) in RK. The variance—covariance matrix

 {   a'a}      is positive semidefinite and of rank K (positive definite, if

K =      N).
             If {y, t} lies in the continuation region, the expected value of dV due

to the movement of the state varlables Y, t, is given by Ito's Lemma, as the

first three terms of equation (9) below. The expected value of dV due to a
                                                                   A        A
stochastic        forced realization is (P —                T(t,   t)(P - P) -      V]Adt where
t(t, t) is the short term or long term rate, depending on the bond's status.

The term in the brackets is the loss incurred when the investor is forced to

deviate from his optimal policy. The term Xdt is the probability of a forced

realization over R,                 t ÷ at]. Also, the expected value of dv due to the
amortization of the premium is -                          tnax[O, (P —   1)dt/(T     -   t)].      Then equation
(7) becomes



         2                          cxm + E                 +      + [P -   r(t,    t)(P -      P)-V]A
             n=1 1 n in                   n1         ii

                                                                                                                 (9)

                  + (1 — T )c +
                            c            c
                                             —         max[O, (P — 1)/CT —         t)]   —   rV   = 0


The      solution     to this differential equation, subject to the boundary conditions

(1) through (5), provides the bond price, P, the value of a bond to the
                                         17




investor, V, and the optimal policy for the realization of capital gains and
       11/
losses.
     For general functions        (Y, t) and in (Y, t), a closed—form solution does
                              n
not typically exist. In Section 4 we illustrate the solution procedure in a

simplified version of this problem and discuss the economic implications. In

Section 5 we provide numerical solutions to the general problem.


4. An Example

     In this section we begin to examine the value of the timing option regarding

the realization of capital gains and losses on bonds and to analyze the effect of

the capital gains tax on their pricing. To discuss these issues in the simplest

possible setting and through closed—form solutions, we make a number of

simplifying assumptions.

     We assume that there is only one state variable, the short term rate of

interest, r, with movements determined by the stochastic differential equation


                           dr =   ctr2dt + sr3'12dw(t)                          (10)


                                                                    12/
where dw(t) is the increment of the scalar Wiener process w(t).           The

price, P(r; c), of an infinite maturity coupon bond is then a function of the



    —11/
        The now-familiar American put pricing problem provides a useful
analogy. Let G(S, K, T) denote the value of a put with striking price K
and time to maturity T on a stock with price S. Equation (2) is analogous
to the condition at exercise, G(S*, K, T) = K -          S.
                                                      The "smooth pasting"
condition analogous to (3) is Gs(S*, K, T) =  —1.  Together these relations
are sufficient to derive both the pricing function G and the optimal
exercise policy S*(T). Similarly here we derive both the value function and
the optimal realization policy Y conditional on the bond price function.
Equation (4) then provides the closure finally giving all three.
     12/
        We may alternatively consider (10) as the risk—adjusted interest rate
dynamics with a = i + ii where      measures the expected change in the short
rate and     captures the risk premium due on interest—rate—sensitive
             it

securities. Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross (1980) discuss this interpretation for
the stochastic process in (10).
                                                  18




 short term interest rate, r, but is independent of the current time, t,

 because the process generating interest rate movements is stationary.

      We also assume that the. tax rates on all capital gains and losses are equal,

 i.e., t =        r.    Thus the length of time over which the bond has been held is

 irrelevant, and the consol's value to an investor, V(r; C; p), is also

 independent of the current time, t. Finally, we assume away forced

 realizations, i.e., A = 0.

      It is easy to prove that any investor's optimal policy is to realize capital
                                                          13/
 losses immediately and defer capital gains indefinitely.     Given the basis,

  P, the continuation region is defined by the range of interest rates such that

  P(r; c) > P. In the continuation region the differential equation (9) becomes


   1/2 s2r3 --- + ar2 fL — (1 —            T)iV   + (1 —     t)c = 0   ,       P(r;       c) > P .   (11)

The boundary condition (4a) becomes

                                       A      A
                         V(r;   c; F) = F,             at P(r; c) = P      ,                         (12)

and the "smooth-pasting" conditions (3) and (4a) become

             av(r;c; p =           -        3P(r,   c)
                                                             at
                                                         ,        P(r; C) = P         .              (13)

     The bond price P(r; c) is a function of the interest rate,                              r, and of the
parameters c, ci, $ ,   t,   and             Inspection, of equation (10) indicates that

the parameters a and S are dimensionless as are the parameters t and
                                                                                                       rc.

The units of the coupon yield c are dollars per unit of time and the unit of



     13/
        This statement is formally proved in Constantinides (1983). If the
tax rates r and         are unequal the optimal policy is a great deal more
complex. UJer these circumstances, the optimal policy for trading stocks is
discussed in Constantinides (1982) and the optimal policy for trading bonds is
discussed in Section 5 of this paper.
                                            19




the interest rate is the inverse of the time unit. The bond price must be

proportional to the coupon rate, and since it is invariant to changes in the unit

of time, it must also be inversely proportional to r.                       Hence


                                     P(r; c) =      Hc/r                                  (14)



where H is a function of only the parameters a, S, t and t.

     Since we have determined the functional form of P, we can simplify (11)

with the aid of equation (14) to eliminate r and its derivatives, obtaining

     2                                               (1 —   tC)P =                        (15)
         p2vpp + 2 — c&)PV - (1 —                +          H          0,     P > P .

                                                                       14/
The general solution to equation (15) is given below:


                -
                    (1—t)P                                                        P > P   (16)
          V =                          + A P11 Pfl + A1PltPh1,
                                 2
                (1— tC +a—s )H
where A, A' are arbitrary constants to be determined, and ii, 1', (Ti < 0 < n')

are the roots of the quadratic equation
                      2
                             —
                                           2
                                     1) + (s —       a)    * (1       t) =   0   .        (17)

                                               —'               y•t
                                                   be proportional to the
By homogeneity, the coefficients of P' and p' must

parameters          and p, respectively. Thus, A and A' depend only
on the parameters a, s, T, and t.




     —
     14/
        For a meaningful solution the parameters of the interest rate process
must satisfy s2 -   < 1 —      From (22) and (23) the expected rate of price
appreciation and the limit (as r goes to zero) of the expected rate of
 appreciation of the value function are both (s2 — ct)r. Thus, if the stated
 condition is violated the expected rates of return including coupons must
 exceed the after—tax rate of interest (1 —                 T)r
                                                   and the expectations
 hypothesis cannot obtain as was assumed. Furthermore, given that the dynamics
 may be interpreted in a risk—adjusted sense, as discussed in footnote 12, no
 other equilibrium is possible either.
                                                               20




        The following argument determines A'. Since the optimal trading policy

 involves no sales at any price above the basis, p must have a negligible

 effect on the value function whenever p >> p Formally

                                                      av
                                                 lint —=                0   .                                       (18)
                                                p/p+co 9p
This condition is satisfied only if A' = 0.                                       The remaining two constants can

be determined using (12) and (13). Substituting (16) into (12) and setting

A' =    0, we obtain

                                               (1— r)P
                                                    c                               .


                                                                            +AP=P.                                  (19)
                                   (1 —        tC+ a —             2)H

Similarly, substituting (16) into (13) and setting                                        A' =     0,   we obtain

                                                 1    —tC
                                                                   2 +Ai=1.-t.                                      (20)
                                   (1—tC +a—g)H
We    solve for H and A and obtain

                                                                       (l—t)c
                                                                           c
                         P(r;c)=                                                                                    (21)
                                           (1 —       t + a—                2
                                                                        s ){1 —         t/(1   —

and

                         a                                 *       -
                                                                                    a
            V(r;    C;   P)       (1       t)P       + t P     ,                P . P

                                                                                                                    (22)

                              =   (i   —
                                           1
                                                           +            t )T1 ;i                        >

where

            n      — [s2/2 — a +           {(2,2       —   a)2 + 2               2 —

is   the negative root of (17).

       Equation (21) shows that the price of a consol bond is increasing in the

capital gains tax rate of the marginal investor. A high capital gains rate

does not hurt the investor because he is never forced to realize gains and hi
optimal policy is to defer indefinitely the realization of capital gains. In

fact a high capital gains rate is a benefit because it enables him to obtain

larger tax rebates by realizing a capital loss whenever such a loss occurs.

Provided that forced realizations are not too frequent, the same conclusion

also applies to a finite maturity par bond, as indeed is demonstrated in the

numerical solutions of Section 6. If the bond currently sells at par, the

investor can be neutral to the capital gains tax by following the naive policy

of deferring both gains and losses. The intelligent policy of deferring gains

and realizing losses can only turn the taxation to his advantage, and he

therefore benefits by a high capital gains tax rate.

     We find the expected rate of price appreciation to be


                            dP           2 —                 —
                      E[-         J] = (s    cL)rdt         (=   y   rdt)              (23)



by using Ito's Lemma and equations (10) and (21). Since s2 —                0,   the

expected capital gains rate can be either positive or negative. We write the

bond price in terms of y and obtain


                P(r; c) =
                                               dr                                  (21)'
                             {i   — y/(1   —   rc)}{1   —    t/(1     —

We observe that the bond price is increasing (decreasing) in the ordinary

income tax rate, if capital gains (losses) are expected. This indeterminancy

is due to the light taxation of capital gains relative to interest and coupon

income in this model. If capital gains are expected, the consol's current

coupon yield is less than the interest rate, and an increase in tc

represents a greater loss for potential holdings in the instantaneous bond

than in the consol.

     We use two benchmarks to measure the value of the tax timing option. The

first is the price of the consol, H' in an economy where the marginal
                                                         22




investor follows a buy-and-hold policy. This benchmark is also the consol's
                                                                              15/
price in an economy with zero capital gains tax.                                       Hence, we write

                                                      (1 —     t   )c
                                             =                      y)r •                                    (24)
                                                 (1

     The second benchmark is the consol price, '                                       in   an economy where the

marginal bondholder realizes all gains and losses continuously. Proceeding as

before, we find that this consol price satisfies the equation


          (1 —
                 t){j. r3P       +
                                     ar2P}
                                                      — (1 —       t)xP + (1            —   t)c = 0          (25)


with solution

                                                      (1 —     r   )c
                                     =                                                                      (26)
                                         {i      —           — y(1 —      t)}r     •




Note that PC H' as y                 0: A continuous realization policy dominates the

buy—and—hold policy whenever capital losses are expected.

     The tax effect on the consól's price is expressed relative to the two

benchmarks as follows:


                      H =
                  P          1
                                                                                                            (27a)

                 P-PC            t       r'1+                y(1   — Ti   —
                                                                              r)
                         =                               —                                                   27b
                  P          1 —         L           1             — y(1 — T)
                                                              C

When the buy—and—hold benchmark is used, the timing option's value derives

from the right to realize capital losses early. When the continuous-




     15/
        The buy—and—hold price is unaffected by the capital gains tax rate of
the marginal investor for the simple reason that no capital gains tax is ever
paid. This result differs from that reported in Constarttinides (1983) for
stocks. Although the tax liability is also postponed indefinitely for
equities, the expected rate of growth in price, adjusted for risk, equals the
discount rate so the present value of the tax liability is not negligible. In
our problem, the expected rate of growth in price ,yr, must be smaller than
the discount rate (1 —       T)r.
                               See footnote (14).
                                              23




realization benchmark is used, the timing option measures the value of

deferring capital gains.

     A similar analysis can be performed for a non—marginal investor in the

tax bracket (r .,
                   ci
                        t 1). The    valuation equation (15) and general solution (16)

retain   the same form with the same constant H but with different constants

A, A' and with different tax rates sabstituted. The optimal policy again

consists of realizing all losses immediately and holding all gains; therefore,

(13) is still a valid boundary condition. Equation (12), however, no longer
           16/
obtains.         Non—marginal investors need not value a potential purchase at the

price they pay for it. The valuation can be either more or less. Of course,

if they do buy, they must value the bond in excess of its price.

     Since the bond's price is set by the marginal investor, only two

coefficients need to be determined for the non-marginal investor's problem.

These are determined by (13) and (18) giving


                                               (1 —    — O(l   —
     V.(r; C; P) =           —
                                 1
                                          +                        1   —   n
                                                                               ))P1 ;1_n




     — For a non-maginal investor the difference between V(r; c; P) and
     16/

P, when P(r; c) = p, is the present value of all future benefits created by
optimal trading. Thus, whefl the investor sells, he values not only the after
tax proceeds of the sale (p under the optimal strategy) but also the future
benefit in using this money to buy another bond. As in most problems with
heterogeneous taxes the non—marginal investor must be restricted in some
fashion to keep his tax liabiity above zero (or minus infinity if rebates are
given). The assumption here is that short term borrowing to finance the
purchase of consols is not permited, nevertheless the expectations hypothesis
holds.
                                        24



where                                                                       (28)
                            1 — y/(1 — T)             17/
                     1      1—11(1 —T Cl
                                       ,)
     Any investor who finds V(r; c; P) > P enjoys a tax-induced surplus in
                             1
buying the bond. This is true for those tax brackets characterized by


                    1 —     —t    < O(l —   11
                                                 —    t)    .               (29)

     There are two distinct tax effects. First, the larger the investor's

capital gains tax rate the greater is the surplus since losses provide larger

benefits. Second, when capital gains (losses) are expected, y > 0 (y < 0),

the larger (smaller) his ordinary tax rate, the greater the surplus. This

effect is the standard one of high tax investors' preference for capital

gains, observed even in buy—and—hold economies. Since the two tax rates are

positively related in a cross section of investors, the effects are enhancing

when capital gains are expected and opposing when capital losses are expected.

     If the marginal holder of bonds is tax exempt, then there are no tax

effects on the consol's price. Nevertheless, even in this case equations (28)

and (29) reveal that many taxed investors may have a valuable timing option.

     To measure the magnitude of the timing option we require estimates of the

parameters a and s and the marginal tax bracket. The current annual

riskless rate is approximately 11%. In using the Ibbotson and Sinquefield

(1982) study the reported annualized standard deviation of changes in the

short rate over the period 1926—1981 is 2.2%. Using equation (10) we. set s =

(0.022)(0.11)3/2 = 0.604.    In the same study the reported standard deviation

of annualized returns on long term U.S. Treasury bonds is 5.7%. If we take


     17/
        If there are instantaneous tax exempt instruments with an interest
rate of (1 -t)r, then this is the appropriate after-tax opportunity cost to
investors in higher tax brackets Tci >       In this case 8
(1 —
     t0)/(1  —       and only investors in higher than marginal capital gains
tax brackets can enjoy a surplus. Those with a lower capital gains tax rate
buy short term taxable (tax exempt) bonds        if
                                              tci is less (greater) than t,.
                                        25




this number as an estimate of the standard deviation of returns on a consol,

then using (23) we can approximate s         (0.O57)//.11 = .172.

        Ibbotson and Sinquefield do not report the average change in the interest

rate so we somewhat arbitrarily examine the two cases a =      0    and a =

which correspond to no expected change in the interest rate and in the consol
price, respectively. If we choose to interpret a as a risk premium measure,

then under the assumption of no drift in the interest rate, the expected rate

of return on a consol is r(1 + ci).    Ibbotson and Sinquefield estimate that

investors expected on average a premium of 131 basis points on twenty-year

bonds. This gives an estimate for a of 0.44 based on the average interest

rate.

        Table 1 displays the value of the timing option as a percentage of price

for these parameter values (equations (29a, b)). It also presents the surplus

to non—marginal investors as a proportion of price. The values presented are

for the marginal tax rates tC       .5 and t = .25.

        For the higher variance process the timing option contributes a signi-
ficant portion of the bond's value as measured against either benchmark. For

the lower variance process the timing option remains important except in the

case when large capital losses are expected and the continuous realization



        — The
        18/ Ibbotson and Sinquefield estimate based on a portfolio of long—
term bonds may be a downwardly biased estimate of the standard deviation of a
consol's rate of return for two reasons:
     (a) They considered a portfolio of bonds with an average maturity of 20
years (not infinite).
     (b) The variability of a portfolio of bonds generally underestimates the
return variability of each bond. For example, a shock in the economy which
raises the price of ten—year bonds and lowers the price of thirty—year bonds
may leave the portfolio's price essentially unchanged and contribute little to
the variability of the portfolio's return. The same shock, however, may have
a significant impact on the consol's return.
     Both of our estimates of s, particularly the first, may also be
negatively biased because the interest rate was substantially less than 11%
for most of this period.
                                          26



benchmark is employed. We conclude that the potential effect of tax        trading
on bond prices cannot safely be ignored in practice.

       Examination of the levels of investor surplus indicates that clienteles

can be either sharp or weak, depending on the parameter values of the

stochastic interest rate process. The first column illustrates a very precise

marginal clientele when large capital gains are expected and the two tax

effects are strongly enhancing. The final column shows a somewhat weaker

clientele structure with a reversed ordering when the two tax effects are

opposing. The impact of the ordinary tax is greater in this case because the

required coupon yield is over forty percent in     excess   of the interest rate.

The   remaining columns are examples of broad marginal clienteles. Columns two
and five show the effect of differences in the capital gains tax rate alone.

5.    (,tira1 Bond Trading--the General Case
       We examine a discrete-time version of the model outlined in Section 3,
focusing   on the distinction between   short and long term gains and losses, the

effect of the amortization deduction and transactions costs. Since our

primary concern is on how optimal trading affects the bond prices, we confine

our   attention to the marginal bondholder.
                                                        19/
      We assume that the trading interval is one year. If an asset is sold

one year after purchase, we assume that the holding period is short term or

long term at the investors discretion. Since the cutoff point is one year

after purchase, the investor can make the holding period long or short term,


     19/
        The choice of one year is primarily a matter of convenience,
coinciding with both the maximum holding period for short term losses and the
tax year.  If the holding period were shorter, as it was until recently, and
the offset provision is assumed to be binding, then an additional complication
results. The value of short—term losses in the first part of the year cannot
be determined until it is known  if
                                  there are later offsetting long term
capital gains. This problem affects only tax scenario II, below.
                                      27




by delaying or advancing the bond sale by only one day. By a simple dominance

argument, all capital gains are realized long term. Similarly whenever the

investor realizes a capital loss one year after purchasing the bond, he does

so short term.

    We maintain our assumption that there are no forced realizations. On

each trading date the investor either holds his bond, deferring the

realization of a capital gain or loss, or sells his bond and immediately

repurchases it, thereby realizing a capital gain or loss and re-establishing a

short term status. The following set of factors determines whether the

investor holds his bond or executes a wash sale:

     (a) If the bond price is below the basis, the investor would like to

sell the bond and receive the tax deduction immediately. The reason becomes

more compelling if the bond was purchased one year earlier, so that this is

the only chance to realize the capital loss short term.

     (b) If the bond price is above the basis, the investor would like to

defer the realization of the capital gain and thereby defer the tax

liability. As stated previously, he never realizes a short term gain because

he can wait one more day. Nevertheless, he may wish to realize a long term

gain as explained in (c) and (d).

     (c) A short term holding status is beneficial to the investor. This

status helps when he realizes a capital loss, because he realizes it short

term, and it never hurts, even when the investor realizes a capital gain,

because he can always wait one more day and convert to the long term status.

The short term status turns out to be a very important factor governing the

optimal liquidation policy. Under certain realistic conditions, an investor

may realize a capital gain solely to convert to the beneficial short term

status.
                                              28



      (d) The peculiar amortization rules on bonds introduce another twist to

this already complex problem. If the bond's basis is above par, this

difference is linearly amortized over its remaining term to maturity with the

"loss" applied against the investor's ordinary income. The present value of

this tax deduction is high for short maturity bonds, but decreases with longer

maturity, because of the linearity of the amortization rule. For short

maturity bonds the benefit in establishing a basis above par may be

sufficiently large to make it optimal to realize a capital gain.

     We assume that the short term rate of interest, r, is the only state

variable and that it follows a driftless binomial random walk with two

reflecting barriers. We consider two specifications for the interest rate

process. In the low—variance process, the interest rate takes one of the

twenty—one values ,   .04,.05,.06,     ...,   • 24.   If the interest rate equals any

of the interior values then at the next date it has the value r            .01, each

with probability one half. If the interest rate is equal to one of the end-

point values .04 or .24 then at the next date it remains unchanged or takes on

the value .05 or .23, respectively with probability one half. The reader may

verify that the unconditional distribution of r is uniform over the twenty-

one points. The standard deviation of changes in the interest rate is

                            = .01
     std(r(t +   1)Ir(t))           per year, independent of the state (except in

the end-point states).. In the high-variance process, the interest rate takes

one of the eleven values,.04,.06,...,. 24. The probabilities are as in the

low—variance process and the reflecting barriers are at the levels .04 and

.24. The standard deviation of the changes in the interest rate in the high—

variance process is a = .02 per year. From the Ibbotson and Sinquefield

(1982) study, the annualized standard deviation of the short term rate is

.022. The low—variance process then underestimates the interest rate
                                                  29




variability, while the high-variance process reflects the average variability

in the period 1926—1981.

     As we shall see, the low—variance process implies, on average, that the

standard deviation of the annual rate of return of 20—year Treasury Bonds is

5.66%, if priced under           the   buy—and-hold policy, and 5,82% if priced under   the
optimal policy with t = .25                (scenario I). For the high—variance process,

the corresponding numbers are 9.47% and 8.73%, From the Ibbotson and

Sinquefield (1982) study this standard deviation is 5.7% for long term

Treasury bonds over the 1926-1981 period. Therefore the low—variance process
                                                          20/
ref lects the actual initial variability over that period.                The high—

variance process may        be   more representative of recent history.

     In discrete time, the differential equation (9) becomes a difference

equation which we may       solve      numerically subject to the boundary conditions.

Equivalently and more directly we obtain the bond price and the value of a

bond to the marginal investor by dynastic prograxsm!ng, at dates

T, T — 1, T —   2,   ...,   etc.
     Equations (30) and (31) establish the bond price and value of a bond to

the investor at maturity, i.e., at t =             T.   At maturity the ex-coupon bond is

priced at par which we take to be unity.


                                        P(r, T; c, T) =   1   .                       (30)

The value of the bond to an investor is the after—tax sale proceeds. By the

maturity date, the bond basis cannot exceed one, because the excess will have




    — See,
     20/
             however, the caveat in footnote (18). In addition, when the low—
variance process is used, the simulated volatility of a 20—year bond over its
life will be lower than the historic average because in the last part of its
life its price is more strongly affected by the short term rate so the
volatility is underestimated.
                                                30




been completely amortized by then. Thus only a gain can be realized at

maturity, and the appropriate capital gains tax rate is the long term rate.

Thus,



                             V(r, T; c, T; P, t) =           —                                     (31)
                                                         1
                                                                      + TLP   •




        With the terminal values established, the bond's price and its value to a

given investor at points in time prior to maturity can now be obtained through

dynamic programming. We distinguish between the cases in which amortization

is and is not utilized.

        The bond price is what a marginal investor is willing to pay for it. His

alternative is investing in the short term asset over the next year in which

case his investment increases at the prevailing after-tax interest rate. He

is indifferent to buying the bond, therefore, only if the after-tax coupon and

amortization benefit plus the expectation of the value function next period is

greater than the current bond price by exactly the after tax foregone interest.

If the bond is selling today for less than par, then its price is the appropriate

basis in the value function. If the bond is priced above par, then (P -                            1)/(T    -

t)   will be amortized in the next year, and the basis in the value function next

year is less than the prevailing price by this amount. Thus at time t


 P       (1 + (1 —     )r]   {(1 —    t)c +
                     + 1), t + 1; c, T; P, t]}, if P 1 +                                            (32a)
         E(V(r(t
 P = (1 + (1    —    t )r]   l{(1 —   T)c   + (p —   l)r/(T      —    t)

         E[V(r(t + 1), t + 1; c, TI P — (P           —   1)/(T    —    t),   t]}, if P >   1   .    (32b)
                                                  31



                                                                 21/
The bond price, P, is the solution to (32a, b).

      The value of a long position in the bond is the greater of the after-tax

proceeds from immediate sale and the discounted value of the benefits if the

bond is retained. The after—tax proceeds from immediate sale are


                   (1—r)P+TP,
                      5   S
                              if PP and tt=1
                                                                                                     (33)

                   (1 — TL)P + TLP       ,     otherwise.
As in (32) the discounted benefits, if the bond is retained, are

       [1 + (1 —    )r]   C(1 —    t)c +
                                                                                                    (3 4a)

            E[V(r(t +       1),   t + 1; C, T; P, t)]}, if P( 1

and

       [1 ÷ (1 -    )r]   l{(1 -   T)c       + (P -    1)t/(T   -   t)   +

                                                                                                    (34b)

         E[V(r(t +    1),   t + 1; c, T; P — (P —           1)/(T    —   t), t]},     if    >



In comparing equations (32) and (34) we note that P =                        V(r,   t; c, T; P, t) so

the relation in (4a) is satisfied.

      We illustrate the optimal trading policies for a bond with a 14 percent

stated coupon payable annually, in the four tax scenarios.


      I. Treasury bond held by a high-tax—bracket individual, with                              =

             = T:t = .25.




     21/
        The right-hand side of (32a) is positive at P = 0 since the first
term is, and the right—hand side of (32b) is less than P for large values
(since the maximum benefit of future tax losses is t (P — 1)). These
expressions are continuous at P = 1. Therefore a soution to (32a, b)
exists. For the dynamics assumed, the solution is also unique.
                                           32




      Table 2 reports the bond prices and values, V, for the high variance

 interest rate process, for a range of interest rates and bases, and for
                                 22/
 maturities 1, 5 and 20 years.         Asterisks and daggers mark the states in

which a wash sale is optimal. Asterisks indicate the realization of a capital

 gain establishing a new or higher amortizable basis. Daggers denote the

realization of a capital loss. If both the basis and the bond price are less

than one, the amortization feature is not in effect and the simple trading

rule is to realize a loss and defer a gain as indicated by daggers. If the

basis or the bond price exceeds one, the amortization feature becomes relevant

and complicates the rule.

     For one—year bonds, if the bond sells at a premium, P > 1,       and the

basis is below the bond price, p < p, the investor realizes a capital gain

in order to establish a higher basis and benefit from the amortization of the

basis. For five—year bonds, the amortization benefit Is reduced and large

capital gains may be deferred. For example, if P = 1.10        and p = .8      or

.9, the investor realizes a capital gain; but if P = .7        the investor defers

the capital gain. The amortization benefit becomes negligible for twenty-year

bonds. For example, if P = 1.25        and p ( 1.2,   the investor optimally

defers the realization of a capital gain and thereby foregoes the amortization

benefit of increasing the basis to 1.25. In fact, if P         .88 and
p = 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 the investor foregoes the amortization benefit and

realizes the capital loss.




    —22/
        Some of the entries in this table as well as those in Table 3 give the
value fmction for states which could never arise along the optimal path. For
example, since losses are always realized when the basis is below par, the
basis can never be substantially in excess of the current price in this
situation. These entries, therefore, give the value of changing to the
optimal policy from a suboptimal position.
                                                   33



      II.   Treasury bond held by a high-tax-bracket individual with 10 =

            .5,   t       = .5,      t   .= .25.
                      S              L

      Table 3 reports the bond price and values, V, for the high variance

interest rate process, for a range of interest rates and bases, and for

maturities 1, 5, and 20 years. Asterisks, daggers and double daggers mark the

states where the optimal policy is to perform a wash sale. Panel A reports

results when the bond has been held for longer than one year, t —      t > 1,
while panel B reports results when the bond has been held for just one year,

t -   t = 1.      Note that the value function in the two panels can differ only

when a wash sale is executed and a capital loss is realized. When      a   gain is

realized,      it is presumed to be long term so the taxes paid are the same. When
no wash sale occurs, the ensuing status must be long term regardless of the

current status.

       These tables indicate that the investor performs a wash sale of long term

bonds practically every year in order to revert to the short term status.

This is emphasized by the double daggers which mark states in which a wash

sale is executed to this end alone. The desirability of the short term status

seems to dominate all other considerations.


      III. Treasury bond held by a high-tax-bracket individual with 1 =

               Is=        L
                              = 0.

       The optimal trading policy is quite simple and need not be illustrated in

a table. Whenever the bond price is above par and the basis, the investor

makes a wash sale to establish a higher basis and deduct from future ordinary

income the premium amortization. The investor has no tax incentives to

perform any other trades.
                                        34



    IV.      Treasury bond held by a bank or bond dealer with t =       =       = .5.
                                                               c    s       L

     Again the optimal policy can be described without a table. The Investor

optimally realizes all capital losses and defers the realization of capital

gains. He never realizes a capital gain in order to establish a higher basis

with the benefit of the amortization deduction. The tax rate on ordinary income

is the same as that on capital gains so amortization "losses" at best exactly

offset the capital gain and occur later. Neither does he defer the realization

of a capital loss in order to maintain the benefit of the amortization

deduction.


6. Bond Prices and the Tax Timing (tion

     Table 4   displays simulated Treasury bond prices that would be established

by the marginal investor, following the optimal trading policy under each of

the four tax scenarios. We assume that the current value of the short term

interest rate is 14%. For comparison, the 14% coupon bond would be priced just

above par if the marginal investor followed a buy-and-hold policy. The exact

buy—and—hold prices range from 1.002 to 1.071 for the high—variance process and
                                                    23/
from 1.001 to 1.030 for the low—variance process.

     The prices which prevail under tax scenario II are uniformly higher than

those under scenario I since investors are not subject to the restrictive offset

provision of the tax code but can exploit in full their short term losses.

Furthermore, except for the bonds of five-year maturity, tax scenario II



    — Buy-and—hold
     23/
                     prices are computed with the formula (35) below. Even
though the interest rate is not expected to increase or decrease from 14%, the
yield curve is slightly downward sloping due to Jensen's inequality, and
prices are above par. For these and other premium bonds the buy—and—hold
policy assumes that the excess above par is amortized and deducted year by
year. Thus no capital losses (or gains) are earned on premium bonds under the
buy—and—hold policy. Therefore this benchmark price is the same for all
scenarios.
                                            35




typically results in the highest price. We would expect the second scenario to

yield high prices because short     term   losses provide valuable rebates and a short

term holding period is relatively cheap to establish. This advantage is least

valuable for short maturity bonds     because    they are the least volatile.

Consequently   all of the five-year bonds and      a few of the other short maturity

bonds are   priced highest under tax   scenario    III. There are two distinct
reasons.
       First, for discount bonds the buy-and-hold price is highest under tax
scenario III since the guaranteed capitalgain escapes all taxation.         Second,

with zero capital gains tax rate, it is costless to establish above—par
amortizable basis. For sufficiently short maturities these two effects

dominate.

       A comparison of the pricing under scenarios I, III, and IV is also of
interest.    While their interpretation is radically different, they actually

differ in only one respect. The capital gain tax rates, both long and short

term, are .25, 0, and .5 respectively. All other taxes are the same. Scenario

III with the lowest tax   rate   has prices which are uniformly highest;

nevertheless, the high tax rate in scenario IV does not always induce the lowest

price. Again there is a tradeoff between the value of capital losses and the

cost of capital gains. The former is more important for the volatile longer

maturity bonds. The latter is more important for the shorter maturity bonds,

particularly those selling below par.

       It is frequently asserted that discount bond prices are higher than what is

justified by the term structure of interest rates, reflecting the fact that a

portion of the return is realized as a lightly taxed capital gain. Our

discussion of Table 4 demonstrates that the above is just one of several tax

effects   on bond prices. The direction and magnitude of      the tax effect depends
                                          36



critically on the tax scenario applicable to the marginal investor and on

whether the marginal investor follows a passive or optimal trading policy.

     We now turn our attention to the tax timing option, defined as    the
difference between the bond prices under the optimal and buy-and-hold
            24/
policies.         Table 5 reports the value of the timing option as a percentage of

the bond price under the optimal policy. In each case the buy-and-hold price is

calculated using the corresponding long term capital gains tax rate (.25, .25,

0, .5). If this price is above par,. the amortization is deducted every year.

Thus no capital losses (or gains) are earned under the buy—and-hold policy for

premium bonds, and the benchmark price is the same for all scenarios. For

discount bonds the buy—and—hold prices vary across the scenarios and are

inversely related to the long term capital gains tax rate. The timing option

varies widely for different coupon rates, maturities, and tax scenarios, but in

most cases it represents a substantial fraction of the bond price just as the

example in section 4 illustrates.

     The one exception is deep discount bonds.under tax scenario III. Here the

timing option is worth little since there is only a small probability of ever

amortizing a premium and no other tax trading benefit is possible. For bonds

selling near or above par, however, the timing option is more important under

tax scenario III than under scenarios I or IV. The binding deduction limit

under scenario III is a mixed blessing. On the one hand the individual may not

obtain tax rebates from the government by realizing capital losses. On the




    — An
     24/
           alternative definition of the timing option is the difference
between the bond prices under the optimal and continuous realization
policies. The two definitions are compared in the example of Section 4.
Since the interest rate dynamics employed here are without drift, the results
are most similar to the case a = 0 in the continuous time model. The buy—
and—hold benchmark resulted in smaller timing options in that case so our
choice is conservative.
                                       37




other hand he can costlessly realize capital gains in order to raise the basis

and take advantage of the amortization deduction.

     The reported values show that the tax timing option is typically increasing

in maturity. This is due to both the increased value of standard options when

their maturities are lengthened and the greater volatility of the longer

maturity bonds underlying these options. This feature explains why the 25- and

30—year 10% coupon bonds are mor.e expensive than those with 10— to 20—year

maturities even though the interest rate is above the coupon rate at 14% and the

yield curve is essentially flat.

     Although longer maturity bonds generally have more valuable timing options,

it does not follow that a larger tax subsidy flow is available on long bonds.

For example, holding two 15—year bonds in succession may provide greater total

tax benefit than a single 30—year bond provides. One way to compare the

benefits of different maturity bonds is to express the timing option on an

annualized basis. The maturity of bonds with the largest annualized benefits

would then represent the natural "habitat" of investors particularly concerned

with tax benefits. The annualized tax subsidy on a T-year bond is

approximately r(1 -   t)/[1   — exp(—r(1 —   t)T)]   per dollar value of the tIming

option. Using this approximation we establish that the lowest annual subsidy is

on short maturity bonds. On bonds with ten or more years to maturity the

benefits are fairly constant, regardless of the tax scenario.

     Annualizing the timing option also permits us to normalize the tax benefits

relative to the rate of return earned on the bond. For example, under the four

scenarios tax benefits provide on average 7, 32, 18 and 10 percent,

respectively, of the total return expected on the 25—year, 14% coupon bond.

     We have so far ignored transactions costs. A bid—ask spread or other costs

of trading will reduce the value of the timing option since the optimal policies
                                            38


involve    substantially more trading than the buy-and-hold policy. Constantinides

has examined the optimal tax trading policy on stocks in the presence of
                                     25/
proportional transactions costs.           In a simple continuous—time lognormal model

he found that investors should not realize losses immediately, but should wait

until the price falls to a specific fraction of the basis. A similar rule

applies to our    model in section 4. The modifications to the optimal trading

policies of the models here are more complicated, but the basic idea remains the

game: Trades are deferred until capital gains and losses are larger than in the

absence of transactions costs.

        Table 6 displays the value of the timing option when trading is costly.

The round—trip transaction cost is represented by a bid—ask spread of 0.2, 0.5
                         26/
or 1.0 percent of par.          The timing option retains a large fraction of its

value even with sizeable transactions costs. Bonds of ten or more years to

maturity retain at least half of the original timing option even with one

percent transactions costs. The reduction may       not   be as large as we might have

expected because transactions costs are not entirely a dead weight loss. The

cost of purchase is added to the basis while the cost of sale is deducted from

the sales proceeds. Effectively, the taxing authority subsidizes the costs of

trading.

        Transactions costs   decrease the value of the timing option on short

maturity bonds   more than they do on long maturity bonds. With one point bid-ask
spread, the five—year bond loses 71, 64, 46 or 75      percent of its timing option

under   the four tax scenarios   while bonds of at least fifteen years to maturity



    —
    25/
        In an earlier   version of Constantinides (1 983).
    —
    26/
        U.S. Treasury bonds are typically quoted with spreads of one-quarter
to one—half of a point in the Wall Street Journal. A few have spreads of one—
eighth of one point. Treasury note spreads are usually one—eighth to one—
quarter of a point.
                                                39




never give up more than 40 percent. At thirty-year maturities the examined

bonds always retain at least two-thirds of the value of their timing options.


7.   The Tax—Adjusted Yield Curve       and Implied Tax Bates

      We demonstrated that bond prices set by the marginal investors following

the optimal trading policy are markedly different from those set under a buy—

and—hold or continuous—realization policy. In this section we explore the

inlications of these differences when interest rate and tax bracket estimates

are inferred from market prices.

      Previous authors typically have assumed that a particular marginal investor
                           27/
holds the bond to maturity.            Under this assumption the price of a bond with

maturity T, coupon rate c, and par value one is the solution to

                              T
           P = (1 —   t C)c   Z
                                   t
                                  'r   + (1 —   c
                                                     L
                                                         ÷ r p(ir
                                                             L T        ,     P < 1       (35a)

                                                         T
           P =   [(1 — Tc)c + rc (P     —   1)/TI        E i
                                                             t
                                                                 + 11
                                                                        T ,
                                                                               P >    1   (35b)



where       is the price at time zero of one dollar after tax at time t.

Given a set of bond prices, the resulting set of equations (35) can be

inverted to solve for the discount factors and the tax rates.




     27/
        See, for example, Caks (1977), McCulloch (1975), Robichek and Niebuhr
(1970), and Schaefer (1981). McCulloch explicitly and Caks implicitly use
equations identical to (35a). Robichek and Niebuhr impose the additional
assumption that all of the      are related through a single interest rate.
Only McCulloch recognizes the premium amortization feature embodied in (35b).
                                                 40



       Robichek and Niebuhr (1970) do this by imposing the additional

assumptions         =           and a flat term structure,            = (1 +   y)t    They
then solve for the remaining unknowns,                'r   and y, using just two bonds.

Their estimates of the marginal tax bracket for the year 1968 range from 37.5%

to 50%, depending on the pair of bonds used (and disregarding the cheapest

flower bond).

       McCulloch (1975) also assumes t
                                             L
                                                 = . rc;       however, he does not require
a flat term structure. Instead, he estimates the tax bracket and a cubic

spline   for the discount function to minimize a weighted sum of the squared
deviations between actual and modeled prices. Using data from 1963-1966 he
concludes     that "the effective tax rate that best explains the prices of U.S.

Treasury securities lies somewhere in the range .22 to .33." For new data

from 1973 the best estimate of the tax rate is only .19.

       Pye (1969) estimates the tax bracket of the marginal bondholder using

various combinations of discount and         par, taxable and exempt bonds. The
analysis closest to ours compares par and moderately discounted taxable

bonds. Pye      concludes    that the effective tax rate at the margin varies between

10% and 36% over the period 1967—1968.

       Our   analysis   provides a possible explanation of this finding. If bond

prices are set by investors who follow an optimal trading policy, estimates of

the yield curve and the margi nal tax bracket obtained under the assumption of

a naive buy—and-hold policy may       be   biased. To test for bias, we generate a

sanple of simulated bond prices under the assumptiOn of optimal trading

policies with known tax rates and yield curves. We then estimate the yield

curve and tax rate front thi.s sample by a procedure            which i.s in the   spirit   of
the   methods   discussed,
                                                                        41




        Since our "data" is simulated and, therefore, not subject to measurement

error, there is no statistical advantage in using many                                                      prices.      Thus, like

Robichek      and Niebuhr we use an exact "estimation" requiring only a few
bonds. We eliminate                     the need of assuming a flat term structure, however, by

using    four rather than two bonds. In fact with four bonds no smoothness
requirement for the                yield curve even of the weak type assumed by McCulloch is

required.

       For each estimation we use two different coupon bonds from each of two

adjacent maturities. Under an assumed buy—and—hold policy, the two longer

bonds with maturity T + 1                        are priced according to

                          T
 P' =    (1 —   tC   )c    Z
                                    t
                                   it    + {i   — r + t P' + (1 —
                                                   L   L
                                                                                          t     )c}n
                                                                                                          T+1
                                                                                                                ,      P < 1               (36a)
                                                                                           •c
                                                    T
 P' =[(1 —      tc )c     + r (Pt — 1)/T]                  E it     + [(1 — T )c + t (P' —                           1)/T   + 1]ir
                               c
                                                      =i                     c      c                                                T+1

                                                                                                                     P' > 1                (36b)



while the shorter maturity bonds are priced by (35).

       Substituting the four bond prices i.nto (35) and (36) gives four equations

in the five unknowns, E it ,
                          t
                                                 it
                                                   T
                                                       ,
                                                            it
                                                              T+1
                                                                    ,
                                                                             c
                                                                                 ,   and        tL    .    If   we assume

                the system of equations is now fully specified. We eliminate
TL =    T/2f
 T'    T+1'
                     and                 to obtain a quadratic equation i.n                                     the variable E

Solving for this unknown and then the others yields two solution sets. Only

one of these satisfies the constraints 0                                             it          IT         1       and t < 100%, and
                                                                                      T+1             T                  C
                                         28/
this   is the one chosen.
       Tables    7 and 8 report the errors in the estimated forward rates and the

estimated tax brackets on coupon income (correct tax bracket t = 50%                                                                   in




       — In
       28/
                some cases this                 forces           negative estimates for the tax rates.
                                            42




each case) for different maturities, tax scenarios, coupon rates and interest
                    29/
rate variances.           The errors are usually opposite in sign   since   an increase

in    the   tax rate decreases the effective discount rate and errors of opposite

signs   have    partially offsetting effects. In most cases the interest rate is

overestimated while the tax bracket is underestimated. In the extreme, the

tax rate is estimated to be negative.

       The errors are usually smaller for the low—variance process, as wewould

expect, since the timing option then has less value and buy-and-hold prices

are more accurate. For the same reason, errors are smaller when the deep

discount bonds are used in the estimation.

       The estimates are generally most accurate under tax scenario I. Again

this corresponds to the case when the timing option has the least value. Tax

scenario II yields very poor results as does scenario III when near par bonds

are   used. Tax scenari.o IV i.s interesting because the Implied tax bracket Is
about the same for all maturities. It ranges between 20% to 30%, disturbingly
reminiscent     of the tax rate estimated by NcCulloch. (By construction, the

actual tax rates in this case are all 50%.)

       While the errors in the forward rates are often large, the computed

numbers           are almost invariably within one standard deviation of both the
true forward rate and the single—period rate expected to prevail at the
forecast time. Consequently, verifying the induced tax trading bias i.n the
forward rates would require a large sample of data. Furthermore, even with
large amounts of data available, the errors probably could not be
distinguished     from liquidity or other term premia. It   is   interesting to note

       29/The
            error in the estimated forward rate is the deviation between the
estimate and the true forward rate calculated from the binomial model. The
true forward rate is not equal to the future expected spot rate, 14% in thi.s
case, due to Jensen's inequality.
                                               43



that   the positive errors are at least qualitatively consistent with the

usually claimed upward bias in the yield curve.

       We also tried estimation under the buy—and-hold assumption with

t    = 0   and T       = T .   These rates are correct for tax scenarios III and IV
L                L        c

respectively, but the estimates are not noticeably improved, probably because

the buy-and—hold policy is "too        far"   front optimal.


8.   Municipal Bonds
       The   tax treatment of municipal bonds differs from the tax treatment of
Treasury     and corporate bonds i.n two important respects. First, coupon income

on municipal bonds is exempt from Federal tax. Second, if            the   purchase price

in the secondary market is above par this excess must be amortized but the

amortized amount is not allowed as a deduction, even though the bond's tax

basi.s is correspondingly reduced. In effect the taxation of bond coupons and

of premium amortization are symmetric: for Treasury bonds, the coupons and

premium amortization are taxed at the individual's marginal tax rate on

ordinary     income; for municipal bonds the coupons and premium       amortization

remain untaxed.
       Coupon income on municipal bonds        may be   subject to state tax, but in   our

calculations     we ignore state taxes. We consider this a good first approxi-

mation for two reasons. Many states exempt from state tax the coupons on

bonds issued by municipalities within the state so the marginal holders of

such bonds may well be exempt front taxes. Also, while state tax rates vary

widely across states, they are generally very low relative to the Federal tax
                                                               30/
rates of investors who would consider holding municipal bonds.




—
30/
   As of 1980 seven states had no individual income tax on interest. More
than half the states had maximum marginal tax rates at or below 7%. In only
three states was the maximum tax rate above 11%. The highest rate was
Minnesota's     16%.
                                      44



      The main difference between the optimal trading policies for municipal
and taxable bonds is that no trades are ever made at a price above par since
there is no advantage in establishing an amortizeable basis. Since this is
the only trading advantage of taxable bonds under tax scenario III, the value
of the timing option on municipal bonds l.s zero i.n this scenario. At the
opposite extreme is tax scenario IV. In this case it is never optimal to
establish an above par basis ona taxable bond, so the right to amortize such
a basis contributes nothing to the value of the timing option. Thus under

scenario IV, the value of the timing option on a municipal bond is equal to

that on a taxable bond with the same after—tax coupons (i.e., before-tax

coupons 1/(1 —   r)   times as large). Under tax scenarios I and II the timing

option on municipal bonds is less valuable than the option on coupon-

equivalent taxable bonds.

     Table 9 presents the value of the timing option on municipal bonds. When

municipals are deep discount, the timing   option under scenarios   I and II is

nearly as valuable as on coupon—equivalent taxable bonds. The same i.s true on

short maturity municipals even if the di scount is small. These, of course,

are the cases when the right to amortize the basis In the future has

negligible value. On premium municipal bonds the timing option is substan-

tially smaller than on coupon equivalent taxables, especially if the

comparison is made between short maturity bonds. For example, under tax

scenario II the timing option on short-maturity municipals is one—third as

large as the timing option on short—term taxables; the timing option on long-

term municipals is one—half as large as the timing option on long—term

taxab].es.
                                           45




9.   concluding   Remarks

     This paper extended the work of Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross (1981, 1983) on

valuing bonds   and   combined it with the work of Constantinides (1982, 1983) and

Constantinides and Scholes (1980) on optimal trading policies. We determined

that of the tax timing option is an important fraction of the bond price.

     We also discussed how the price distortion affects standard estimation

techniques for extracti.ng interest rates and marginal tax brackets from

observed bond prices. We found the implied errors to be substantial.

     Although we focused on the value of the timing     option   to the marginal

bondholder, we did    illustrate   in one case that the optimal trading policy

differs from the buy—and—hold or continuous realization policy for all taxed

investors. Thus, even if the marginal investor is tax exempt, the timing

option has positive value to other bondholders.

     Our paper only examined the case when the tax bracket of the marginal

bondholder remains unchanged. That Is,          investo may buy and sell the bond

in the course of the optimal trading policy, but the bond remains In the hands

of investors in the same tax bracket throughout its term to maturity. The

next step should be to recognize the existence of tax clienteles as in

Schaefer (1981); but unlike Schaefer, to explore the implications of the

bondholders' following optimal trading policies and of the bond being passed

from one tax bracket investor to another as its maturity shortens or as it

changes from a discount to a premium bond.
                                                  46




                                                TABLE   1


                     The Value of the Timing Option and the Non—Marginal
                             Investor's    Surplus as a Percentage
                                       of the Consol Pricea


                                        s = 0.604                        s =   0.172
                               a=0 a=52 a= .44                    ct=0   _____         a— .44
Timing      option:
buy and hold
     benchmark                  7.7%      11.2          11.9       3.4     3.9          11.7


continuous real! zation
     benchmark                 44.9      11.2               9.0    4.9     3.9           0.5


Investor Surplus:
 t
     ci       t J.

      0.5     0.5              11.2      20.3           22.7       3.9     4.7          22.1

      0.6     0.25            277.1       0.0           —5.3       1.8     0.0         —16.8

     0.4      0.2             —43.7      —4.1           —0.8      —1.9    —0.9           9.1

     0.3      0.15           —62.7       —8.1           —2.6      —3.6    —1.9          15.7

     0.0      0.0            —88.0      —20.3          —11.1      —7.4    —4.7          26.3


     aCouted for infinitely lived investors. Interest rate follows the
risk-adjusted stochastic process dr = ar2 dt + sr312 dw. Marginal bond-
holder's tax rates are    = .5 on coupon income and t = .25 on all capital
gains. Non—marginal holders' tax rates are as given.
                                         47




                                       TABLE 2

           Treasury Bond Prices and Values of a Long Position Under Tax
                      Scenario I,     = .5, s = L = .25 a
                                    c


Interest      Bond                                 Basis
 Rate         Price      .7      .8       .9         1.0      1.1    1.2      1.3




                                Maturity =     1   year
  0.06       1.0755    *0.98   *1.01    *1.03       *1.06     1.09    1.14    1.18

  0.10       1.0364    *0.95   *0.98    *1.00       *1.03     1.07    1.11    1.16

  0.14       1.0000     0.93    0.95     0.98       *1.00     1.05    1.09    1.14

  0.18       0.9762     0.91    0.94     0.96       P0.98     1.03    1.07    1.12

  0.22       0.9535     0.90    0.92     0.94       tO.97     1.01    1.05    1.10



                               Maturity = 5 years
  0.06       1.3363    *1.18   *1.20    *1.23       *1.25    *1.28   *1.30   *1.33

  0.10       1.771     *1.06   *1.08    *1.11       *1.13    *1.16    1.18    1.22

  0.14       1.0197     0.95    0.97     0.99       *1.01     1.05    1.08    1.12

  0.18       0.9110     0.88    0.89     0.91       tO.93     0.96    1.00    1.04

  0.22       0.8354     0.81    0.83    tO.85       tO.88    P0.90    0.93    0.97



                               Maturity = 20 years

  0.06       1.7358     1.48   *1.50    *1.53       *1.55    *1.58   *1.60   *1.63

  0.10       1.4187     1.26    1.27      1.29       1.31     1.34    1.36   *j39
  0.14       1.1044     1.03    1.04      1.06       1.08     1.10   tl.13   tl.15

  0.18       0.8793     0.85    0.86     tO.88      tO.91    tO.93   tO.96   tO.98

  0.22       0.7429     0.74   P0.76     tO.78       P0.81   tO.83   tO.86   tO.88




             rate on bond is 0.14 paid annually. Interest rate follows high—
variance process with standard deviation of .02 per year. Asterisks and dag-
gers mark the states in which the optimal policy is to perform a wash sale.
Asterisks indicate the realization of a long term capital gain establishing a
new or higher amortizable basis. Daggers denote the realization of a long
term capital loss.
                                             48
                                         TABLE 3

           Treasury Bond Prices and Values of a Long Position Under Tax
                   Scenario II 'r = .5,      = .5,     = .25 a
                                 c         s         L
Interest     Bond                                   Basis
  Rate       Price       .7        .8         .9      1.0      1.1      1.2      1.3


                            Panel A: Long Terni Status
                                Maturity = 1 year
  0.06      1.0755    *0.98    *1.01   *1.03   *1.06          1.09      1.14    1.18
  0.10      1.0364    *0.95      *0.98      *1.00   *1.03    '1.07      1.11    1.16
  0.14      1.0000     0.93       0.95       0.98   *1.00     1.05     1.09     1.14
  0.18      0.9762     0.91       0.94       0.96   'P0.98    1.03     1.07     1.12
  0.22      0.9535     0.90       0.92       0.94   tO.97     1.01     1.05     1.10

                                  Maturity = 5 years
  0.06      1.3476    *119 *1.21         *1.24   *1.26       *1.29    *1.31    *1.34
  0.10      1.1919    *1.07      *1.09   *1.12   *1.14       *1.17    'P1.19    1.22
  0.14      1.0368     0.95 *098 *100 *103                   'P1.05    1.08     1.12
  0.18      0.9177     0.88       0.89    *0.91     'P0.98   'P1.00    1.04     1.04
  0.22      0.8357     0.81       0.83    'P0.85    tO.88    tO.90     0.93     0.97

                                 Maturity = 20 years
  0.06      1.9200    *1.62      *1.64   *1.67   *1.69       *1.72    *1.74    *1.77
  0.10      1.6138    *139 *141 *144 *1.46                   *1.49    *1.51    *1.54
  0.14      1.2672    *113       *1.15 *118 *1.20            *123     *1.25    'P1.28
  0.18      0.9791    *0.91      *0.93    tO.96     'P0.98   'P1.01   'P1.03   P1.06
  0.22      0.7856    *0.76      P0.79    'P0.81    'P0.84   'P0.86   'P0.89   tO.91
                              Panel B: iort Term Status
                             Maturity = 1 year
  0.06      1.0755    *098 *101 *103 *1.06                   'P1.09   'P1.14   'P1.19
  0.10      1.0364    *0.95 *0.98 *1.00 *103                 tl.07    tl.12    'P1.17
  0.14      1.0000     0.93       0.95      0.98    *1.00    'P1.05   'P1.10   'P1.15
  0.18      0.9762     0.91       0.94      0.96    'P0.99   'P1.04   'P1.09   'P1.14
  0.22      0.9535     0.90       0.92      0.94    P0.98    tl.03    'P1.08   P1.13

                                 Maturity = 5
  0.06      1.3476    *119 *121 *124 years
                                      *126 *129 *1.31                          *134
  0.10      1.1919    *1.07      *1.09    *1.12     *1.14 *117        P1.20    'P1.25
  0.14      1.0368     0.95      *0.98    *1.00     *103     'P1.07   'P1.12   'P1.17
  0.18      0.9177     0.88       0.89    *0.91     'P0.96   'P1.01   'P1.06   'P1.11
  0.22      0.8715     0.84       0.86    'P0.87    'P0.92   'P0.97   'P1.02   'P1.07

                                 Maturity   = 20 years
  0.06      1.9200    'P1.62    'P1.64    'P1.67    *1.69    *1.72    *1.74    *1.77
  0.10      1.6138    *1.39     *1.41    *1.44      *1.46    *1.49    *1.51    *1.54
  0.14      1.2672    *1.13     *115 *118 *1.20              *1.23    *1.23    'P1.28
  0.18      0.9791    *0.91     *0.93    *0.96      tO.99    'P1.04   'P1.09   'P1.14
  0.22      0.7856    *0.76     'P0.79   'P0.84     'P0.89   tO.94    1'0.99   P1.04
      aCoupon rate on bond is c = 0.14, paid annually. Interest rate follows
the high—variance process with standard deviation of 0.02 per year. Asterisks,
daggers, and double daggers mark the states in which the optimal policy is to
perform a wash sale. In each case, one of the benefits is reestablishing a
short term holding status. Asterisks and double daggers indicate the realization
of .a long term capital gain. The former also denote the establishing of a new or
higher amortizable basis. Daggers Indicate the realization of a long or short
term capital loss in panels A and B respectively.
                                                  49

                                                 TABLE   4

                     Treasury Bond Prices Established by Optimal Trading
                              Policies Under Each Tax Scenarioa

                     High-variance Process                             Low—variance Process
Maturity               a=      .02   per year                             r
                                                                           = .01 per year


scenario:b       I        II          III         Iv               I           II      III         Iv
                                        Coupon rate c            .06
    5          0.802     0.803       0.837   0.748               0.801        0.801   0.836       0.746
   10          0.690     0.708       0.728   0.642               0.681        0.683   0.721       0.628
   15          0.624     0.664       0.655   0.592               0.607        0.613   0.641       0.568
   20          0.584     0.644       0.605   0.566               0.561        0.578   0.586       0.535
   25          0.558     0.633       0.570   0.551               0.531        0.560   0.548       0.516
   30          0.540     0.627       0.545   0.542               0.512        0.553   0.523       0.505

                                        Coupon rate c = .10
    5          0.904     0.912       0.923   0.878               0.901        0.901   0.918       0.874
   10          0.861     0.903       0.889   0.840               0.844        0.855   0.864       0.821
   15          0.841     0.923       0.874   0.833               0.812        0.842   0.831       0.800
   20          0.832     0.947       0.865   0.836               0.796        0.846   0.812       0.792
   25          0.828     0.969       0.859   0.841               0.787        0.857   0.801       0.791
   30          0.825     0.986       0.853   0.847               0.783        0.869   0.796       0.792

                                        coupon rate c            .14
    5          1.020     1.037       1.039      1.010            1.009        1.017   1.018       1.004
   10          1.054     1.118       1.103   1.043               1.023        1.054   1.048       1.019
   15          1.082     1.199       1.153      1.080            1.035        1.096   1.075       1.037
   20          1.104     1.267       1.188   1.113               1.047        1.137   1.097       1.055
   25          1.120     1.320       1.209   1.139               1.057        1.172   1.114       1.071
   30          1.132     1.359       1.221   1.159               1.067        1.201   1.127       1.085

                                        Coupon rate c        =   .18
    5          1.161     1.176       1.184   1.147               1.150        1.157   1.163       1.142
   10          1.276     1.344       1.342   1.255               1.244        1.275   1.282       1.231
   15          1.350     1.484       1.453   1.339               1.301        1.367   1.365       1.292
   20          1.401     1.593       1.527   1.402               1.337        1.440   1.422       1.337
   25          1.436     1.667       1.572   1.450               1.363        1.496   1.460       1.370
   30          1.460     1.707       1.595   1.485               1.382        1.536   1.484       1.396

        acomputed at the rnJdpoint of the interest rate range, r =                     .14.
        axscenarios are described by their capital gains tax rates. If the
investor is an individual, these depend on whether the short—term loss/long—term
gain offset rule and the $3,000 deduction limit are binding. For banks and
dealers these rules are not applicable. In each case the ordinary tax rate is
= .5.
        Scenario I: Offset rule binding, deduction limit not binding, T5 = tL


               IV:
                    =    .25
               II: Neither rule binding, r =
              III: Deduction limit binding, offset
                       Bank or dealer at margin, t =
                                                                    t     = .25
                                                                       rule irrelevant
                                                                         = .5
                                                                                              =         =0
                                          50

                                         TABLE 5

                     Value of the Timing Option on Treasury Bonds
                       as Reflected by the Percentage Difference
                         Between the Prices under the Optimal
                              and Buy-and—Hold Polici.esa

                     High—variance Process             Low—vriance Process
Maturity               a = .02 per year                    = .01 per year
                                                         r

Tax scenario:b       I      II     III    IV           I     II   III      IV

                                   Coupon rate c = .06
       5            0.0%    0.1    0.0   0.1      0.0       0.0   0.0     0.0
      10            0.5     2.9    0.2   1.6       0.1      0.3   0.0     0.4
      15            1.3     7.2    0.4   3.4       0.4      1.4   0.0     1.3
      20            2.0    11.1    0.5   5.1       0.9      3.7   0.1     2.4
      25            2.6    14.2    0.4   6.3       1.3      6.5   0.2     3.4
      30            3.0    16.4    0.4   7.1       1.8      8.9   0.3     4.2
                                   Coupon rate c = .10
       5            0.2     1.1    0.4   0.4       0,0      0.1   0.0     0.1
      10            1.5     6.1    2.5   2.2       0.3      1.6   0.2     0.9
      15            2.6    11.2    4.3   4.2       0.8      4.4   0.9     2.0
      20            3.4    15.1    5.5   5.8       1.4      7.4   1.6     3.1
      25            3.9    17.9    6.9   6.1       2.0     10.0   2.4     4.0
      30            4.1    19.7    6.2   7.7       2.4     12.1   3.0     4.7

                                   Coupon ratec = .14
       5            1.7     3.3    3.5 0.8       0.8        1.6   1.7     0.4
      10            3.9    9.4     8.1   2.8       1.9      4.8   4.2     1.5
      15            5.0    14.2   10.8   4.7       2.6      8.0   6.1     2.7
      20   •
                    5.4    17.6   12.0   6.1       3.0     10.7   7.4     3.7
      25            5.5    19.8   12.4   7.0       3.3     12.7   8.2     4.5
      30            5.4    21.2   12.2   7.6       3.4     14.3   8.6     5.0

                                  Coupon rate c = .18
       5            1.7    2.9   3.6    0.5       0.9       1.5   2.0     0.2
      10            3.5     8.4  8.3    2.0       1.9      4.3    4.8     0.8
      15            4.2    12.8 11.0    3.4      2.3        7.0   6.9     1.6
      20            4.4    15.9 12.3    4.5      2.3       9.3    8.2     2.3
      25           4.4     17.6 12.7    5.3      2.4       11.1   8.9     2.9
      30           4.3     18.2 12.4    5.9      2.5       12.2   9.2     3.4


     aCouted at the midpoint of the interest rate range, r =            .14.
           scenarios are described by their capital gains tax rates. If the
investor is an individual, these depend on whether the short—term loss/long-term
gain offset rule and the $3000 deduction limit are binding. For banks and




                                                   '
dealers these rules are not applicable. In each case the ordinary tax rate i.s
= .5.
      Scenario I: Offset rule binding, deduction limit not binding, r5 =
                   = .25
            II:    Neither rule binding, T5       tL = .25
           III:    Deduction limit binding, offset rule irrelevant, t5 =        0
               IV: Bank or dealer at margin, 5 = tL =
                                                         51

                                                    TABLE 6

                        Effects of Transactions Costs on the Timing ot0a

               Tax Scenario   I: ta =      L
                                               =                  Tax   Scenario   II:    t S = .5,         L
                                                                                                                =

Maturity           Value of Timing Option                                Value of Timing Option
              k = 0.0     0.2     0.5     1.0                       k = 0.0     0.2     0.5     1.0

   5              1.7%      1.4     1.0            0.5                   3.3%      2.8       2.0            1.2

   10             3.9       3.3     2.7            2.0                   9.4       8.4       7.0            5.0

   15             5.0       4.4     3.8            3.0                  14.2       13.1     11.4            8.7

   20             5.4       4.8     4.2            3.5                  17.6       16.3     14.4        11.4

   25             5.5       4.9     4.3            3.7                  19.8       18.4     16.5        13.2

                  5.4       4.8     4.2            3.6                  21.1       19.9     17.8        14.4
   30

               Tax   Scenario III: ta = L = 0
                                             b                            .
                                                                  Tax Scenario IV: at = L = .5b
Maturiy            Value of Timing Option                                Value of Timing Option
              k = 0.0     0.2     0.5     1.0                      k = 0.0     0.2     0.5      1.0

    5                3.5%   3.2     2.7            1.9                   0.8%       0.6      0.4            0.2

   10                8.1    7.6     6.9            5.9                   2.8        2.6      2.3            1.9

   15            10.8       10.1    9.3            8.2                   4.7        4.5       4.2           3.7

   20            12.0       11.3    10.4           9.2                   6.1        5.8       5.5           5.0

   25            12.4       11.6    10.7           9.4                   7.0        6.7       6.4           5.9

   30             12.2      11.4    10.5           9.2                   7.6        7.4       7.0           6.6

                                                                         .14. Interest rate follows
        acomputed at   midpoint of interest rate range, r
high—variance   process with standard deviation of .02 per year. Coupon rate on bond
c = .14. k measures the transactions costs (bid—ask spread) as a percent of par.
Tax scenarios are as outlined in Table 4.

          scenarios are described by their capital gains tax rates. If the investor
is an Individual, these depend on whether the short-term loss/long term gain offset
rule and the $3,000 deduction limit are binding. For banks and dealers these rules
are not applicable. In each case the ordinary tax rate i.s TC = .5.
        Scenario I: Offset rule binding, t =
                II: Neither rule binding,                 =   ,
                                                              = .25

               III: Deduction limit binding, offset rule irrelevant
                                                                   = .25
                                                                                          t =
                                                                                                tL
                                                                                                      = 0
                                                       = .5
                IV: Bank or dealer at margin, T =                  tL
                                                           52

                                                       TABLE 7

             Errors (Basis Points) l.n Estimated Forward Ratesaunder the
                          Buy—and—Hold Assumption with TL =                •
Forecast                         High—variance Process                           Low—variance Process
 Period                                     = .02                                        = .01   per year
                                        r           per year
                                                                                    r

               Std.                         Tax ScenarioC                std.            Tax ScenarioC
               Dev.b                I         II     III        IV       Dev.b       i      ii     iii       iv
                (Coupon rates on bonds used for estimation .08, .10)
    5            400             39          203    —136 466             200        5       27    —201      470
   10               549          85          266      22  357             300       17 201        —134      350
   15            595             98          255     126 287             403        33 243         —64 284
   20            620            105          283     243  238            426        42 271           10     246
   25            625             98          296     391    198          468        50 292          87      212
   30            631             82          338     657    179          497        57 318          175     192



                (Coupon rates on bonds used for estimation .04, .06)
    5            400                5        30     —200    467          200        0        0    —201      420
   10            549                7        129    —146    328          300        13      45    —167      338
   15            595                6        112    —125    260          403        6       65    —138      262
   20            620                4        97     —105    211          426        7      141    —114      222
   25            625                0        67.     —97    151          468        7     149      —94      188
   30            631            —23          47      —83        94       497        0      127     —79      138


        aCO,uted at midpoint of interest rate range r = .14.                             Errors reported
i.n basis points.

        bStandard   deviation of single period interest rate being forecasted.
     CT scenarios are described by their capital gains tax           If the              rates.
investor is an individual, these depend on whether the short-term loss/long-
term gain offset rule and the $3,000 deduction limit are binding. For banks
and dealers these rules are not applicable. In each case the ordinary tax
rate is tc =

        Scenario I: Offset rule binding, deduction limit not binding,
                                =           = .25
                          •ts

               II: Neither rule binding, 5                           = ' = .25
              III: Deduction limit binding, offset rule irrelevant, r = TL = 0
               IV: Bank or dealer at margin, 5 = TL                             •
                                                         53

                                                       TABLE 8

                        Estimated Tax Brackets under the Bu-and-Ho1d
                                Assumption with TL =

                                High—variance Process                           Low—variance Process
Maturity                         a = .02 per year                                a = .01 per year
                                    r                                             r

                                                                Tax scenariob
                                I        II     III       IV                    I    II    III    IV

                     (Coupon rates on bonds used in estimation .08, .10)

    5                       44%          17      52       20                   49    45     63    18
   10                       36           17      28       23                    47    11    53    27
   15                       35            0       14      25                    44     7    42    31
   20                       35          —17       —6       26                   42    —2    30    31
   25                       38          —26      —36       29                  40    —15     16   31
   30                       44          —48     —108       27                   38   —33    —4    30

                     (Coupon rates on bonds used in estimation .04, .06)

    5                       49           44       63       18                   50    50    63    26
   10                       48           20       55       27                   47    39    59    28
   15                       47           20       56       29                   48    30     56   32
   20                       47           18       54       30                   47     8     54   32
   25                       48           24       56       39                   47     5     52    33
   30                       55           27       55       50                   49    11     51   43


     aComputed at the midpoint of interest rate range, r = .14.                            True tax
bracket in each case is t = 50%.

     bTax scenarios are described by their capital gains tax rates. If the
investor is an individual, these depend on whether the short-term loss/long-
term gain offset rule and the $3,000 deduction limit are binding. For banks
and dealers these rules are not applicable. In each case the ordinary tax
rate is T        =    .5.
             C

        Scenario      I: Offset rule binding, deduction limit not binding,
                          t =
                           s    L
                                    t
                                  = .25

                     II: Neither rule binding,     =     t:t = .25
                 III: Deduction limit binding, offset rule irrelevant,
                            T
                                s
                                        TL =0
                     IV: Bank or dealer at margin, t =                     =
                                                 5.4.
                                                TABLE 9

            Value    of the Timing Option on Municipal Bonds as Reflected
                    by the Percentage Difference between the Prices
                     under the Optimal and Buy-and-Hold Policiesa

                        High-variance Process                              Low—variance Process
Maturity                            .02 per year                                       = .01        per year

                                                         Tax scenariob
                          I               II       IV                             I            II             IV

                                                   Coupon    rate        c = .03
    5                    0.0%             0.1      0.1                           0.0           0.0            0.0
   10                    0.5              2.6      1.6                           0.1           0.3            0.4
   15                    1.2              6.6      3.4                           0.4           1.0            1.3
   20                    1.9             10.5      5.1                           0.7           1.9            2.4
   25                    2.5             13.6      6.3                           1.0           3.0            3.4
   30                    3.0             15.9      7.1                           1.2           4.1            4.2

                                                   Coupon   rate         c = .05
    5                    0.1              0.8      0.4                           0.0           0.1            0.1
   10                    0.7              3.8      2.2                           0.2           1.2            0.9
   15                    1.5              7.2      4.2                           0.6           2.9            2.0
   20                    2.2             10.0      5.8                           1.0           4.5            3.1
   25                    2.8             12.2      6.1                           1.3           5.8            4.0
   30                    3.2             13.8      7.7                           1.5           6.8            4.7

                                                   Coupon   rate c =            .07
    5                    0.2              1.0      0.8                           0.1           0.5            0.4
   10                    0.9              3.3      2.8                           0.5           1.7            1.5
   15                    1.8              5.7      4.7                           0.9           2.9            2.7
   20                    2.4             7.9       6.1                      •    1.2           3.9            3.7
   25                    3.0             9.6       7.0                           1.5           4.8            4.5
   30                    3.4             11.1      7.6                           1.7           5.4            5.0

                                                   Coupon   Rate c =            .09
    5                    0.6              1.2      0.5                           0.3           0.6            0.2
   10                    1.4              3.1      2.0                           0.7           1.5            0.8
   15                    2.1             4.9       3.4                           1.0           2.2            1.6
   20                    2.6             6.6       4.5                           1.3           2.7            2.3
   25                    2.9             8.1       5.3                           1.4           3.2            2.9
   30                    3.2             9.4       5.9                           1.5           3.7            3.4

        aCOUSd   at the midpotrit of the interest rate range r =                          .14.bTax
scenarios are described by thel.r capital gains tax rates. If the investor is
an individual, these depend on whether the short—term loss/long-term gain
offset rule and the $3,000 deduction limit are binding. For banks and dealers
these rules are not applicable. In each case the ordinary tax rate i.s
    = .05.
        Scenario I: Offset        rule   binding, deduction limit not binding, t                         = t = .25
               II: Neither rule bJ.nding, t               = .5,            .25
              III: Deduction limi.t binding, offset rule irrelevant, t
                                                                                                     S
                                                                                                         =   tL   = 0
               IV:    Bank   or    dealer at margin, t
                                                            S
                                                                =   tL   = .5
Timing   option i.s always zero under tax scenario III.
                                         5

                                  REFERENCES

Caks, J.1977, "The Coupon Effect on Yield-to—Maturity," Journal of Finance,
    32, 103—115.

Constantinides, G. M., 1982, "Optimal Stock Trading with Personal Taxes:
    Implications for Prices and the Abnormal January Returns," Working paper
    no. 75 (Center for Research in Security Prices, July, Graduate School of
    Business, University of Chicago).

Constantini.des, G. M., 1983, "Capital   Market Equilibrium with Personal Tax,"
    Econometrica 51, 611—636.
Constantinides, G. M. and M. S. Scholes, 1980, "Optimal Liquidation of Assets
    in the Presence of Personal Taxes: Implications for Asset Pricing,"
    Journal of Finance 35, 439-449.

Cox, J. C., J. E. Ingersoll, Jr. and S. A. Ross, 1980, "An Analysis of
    Variable Rate Loan Contracts," Journal of Finance 35, 389—403.

Cox, J. C., J. E. Ingersoll, Jr. and S. A. Ross, 1981, "A Re-examination of
    Traditional Hypotheses about the Term Structure of Interest Rates,"
    Journal of Finance 36, 769—799.

Cox, J. C., J. E. Ingersoll, Jr. and S. A. Ross, 1983, "A Theory   of   the Term
    Structure of Interest Rates," Econometrica (forthcoming).

Gri.gelioni.s, B. I., and A. N. Shiryaev, 1966, "On Stefan's Problem and Optimal
    Stopping Rules for Markov Processes," Theory of Probability and Its
    Applications 11, 541—558.

Ibbotsan, R. G., and R. A. Sinquefield,1982, Stocks, Bonds, Bills and
    Inflation: The Past and the Future. Financial Analysts Research
    Foundation.

McCulloch, J. H., 1975, "The Tax-Adjusted Yield Curve," Journal of Finance 30,
    811—830.

Merton, R. C., 1973, "Theory of Rational Option Pricing," Bell Journal of
    Economics and Management Science 4, 141—183.

Miller, M. H., 1977, "Debt and Taxes," Journal of Finance 32, 261-275.

Miller, M. H., and M. S. Scholes, 1978, "Dividends and Taxes," Journal of
    Financial Economics 6, 333—364.

Robichek, A. and W. D. Niebuhr, 1970, "Tax Induced Biases in Reported Treasury
    Yields," Journal of Finance 25, 1081—1090.

Schaefer, S. H., 1981, "Measuring a Tax—Specific Structure of Interest Rates
    in the Market for British Government Securities," Economic Journal 41,
   4 15—438.
                                    56




Schaefer, S. M., 1982a, "Tax Induced Clientele Effects in the Market for
    British Government Securities: Placing Bounds on Security Values in    an
    Incomplete Market," Journal of Financial Economics 10, 121-159.

Schaefer, S. M., 1982b, "Taxes and Security Market Ecjui.llbrium," in: W. F.
    Sharpe and C. M. Cootner, eds., Financial Economics: Essays in Honor of
    Paul H. Cootner (Prentice—Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ).

Skelton, 3. L., 1980, "The Relative Pricing of Tax Exempt and Taxable Debt,"
    Graduate School of Business Administration, University of California—-
    Berkeley (mimeographed).

Torous, W. N., 1980, "Differential Tax Effects in a Continuous—Time Partial
    Eguilibrium Characterization of Coupon Bond Markets." University of
    Michigan (mimeographed).

Varian, H. R., 1981, "Optimal Wash Sales," University of Michigan, September
    (mimeographed).

Williams, 3., 1981, "Trading Depreciable Assets," Graduate School of Business,
    New York University, October (mimeographed).
