NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PLATFORM OWNER ENTRY AND INNOVATION
IN COMPLEMENTARY MARKETS:
EVIDENCE FROM INTEL
Annabelle Gawer
Rebecca Henderson
Working Paper 11852
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11852
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2005

The authors would like to thank Barry Nalebuff, Michael Cusumano, Scott Stern, David Gann, the
participants at the Stanford Strategy Conference and two reviewers who provided valuable suggestions.
Thanks also go to the many Intel managers who agreed to be interviewed. The usual disclaimers apply.The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Annabelle Gawer and Rebecca Henderson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Platform Owner Entry and Innovation in Complementary Markets: Evidence from Intel
Annabelle Gawer and Rebecca Henderson
NBER Working Paper No. 11852
December 2005
JEL No. L0
ABSTRACT
This paper draws on a detailed history of Intel's strategy with respect to the complementary markets
for microprocessors to explore the usefulness of the current theoretical literature for explaining
behavior. We find that as the literature predicts, Intel invests heavily in these markets, both through
direct entry and through subsidy. We also find, again consistent with the literature, that the firm's
entry decisions are shaped by the belief that it does not have either the capabilities or the resources
to enter all possible markets, and thus that it believes it is critical to encourage widespread entry. As
several authors have pointed out, this imperative places the firm in a difficult strategic position, since
it needs to attempt to commit to potential entrants that it will not engage in an ex-post "squeeze",
despite the fact that ex post it has very strong incentives to do so. We find that the fact that the
complementary markets in which Intel competes are complex, dynamic and multilayered
considerably sharpens this dilemma. We explore the ways in which Intel attempts to solve it,
highlighting in particular the organizational structure and processes through which they attempt to
commit to making money in the markets which they choose to enter while also committing not to
making too much. Our results have implications for both our understanding of the dynamics of
competition in complements and of the role of organizational structures and processes in shaping
competition.
Annabelle Gawer
Imperial College London
Tanaka Business School
London, SW7 2 AZ, UK
a.gawer@imperial.ac.uk
Rebecca Henderson
Sloan School of Management
MIT, E52-543
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
rhenderson@mit.edu

1. INTRODUCTION
Many high -technology industries offer products or services which can be described
as systems of interdependent components, built around or on top of “platforms”. In these
industrial “ecosystems”, very large players may have considerable influence over the
livelihood of developers of complementary products, and the behavior of platform owners
towards the other firms in the ecosystem has been subject to much scrutiny. In particular,
the recent landmark Microsoft antitrust trial has sparked considerable interest in the
behavior of platform owners with respect to complementary markets, and in the
consequences of platform owner entry for innovation.
Despite its importance, this is a surprisingly unexplored question . Existing theoretical
models tend to focus quite narrowly on the individual factors that shape entry decisions.
Few models have anything to say about how incentives may change in the case of a
platform – and its corresponding complementary markets -- that are likely to evolve in
ways that cannot be predicted. Moreover while some models suggest that entry in
complementary markets is always optimal for a platform owner , others suggest that in
some circumstances a platform owner’s ability to commit not to enter complementary
markets may be important to preserve complementors’ incentives to innovate.1 There is
also very scant empirical work in the area. To our knowledge there is no research that
explores platform owner incentives systematically across a range of complementary
markets, or that focuses on how some of the key drivers from the theoretical literature can
be identified, on whether they are important, or on how they may trade-off against each
other.
For example, while the literature hints at the idea that in those cases in which
platform owners do not have the necessary organizational capabilities, they might wish to
subsidize entry into complementary markets but to refrain credibly from entry themselves,

We use the term “complementor” in the sense defined by Brandenburger and Nalebuff (1997), as a shorthand for “the developer of a complementary product” where two products are complements if greater
sales of one increase demand for the other. Formally, A and B are complements if the valuation by
consumers of A and B together is greater than the sum of the valuation of A alone and of B alone. V a+b = (1
+ d) (V a + V b), d > 0 (Nalebuff, 2004).
1

3

they give very little insight as to how this might be done. Moreover they offer no insight as
to how platform owners should behave when the platform itself is dynamically evolving.
Should they enter complementary markets to maintain control of the platform? Should
they refrain? If they do enter, how can they maintain incentives for entrant innovation?
This paper explores these issues through the medium of a detailed study of Intel's
experiences with complementary markets in the personal computer industry. Intel offers a
particularly favorable setting for an in -depth case study of this question, because entry and
innovation in complementary markets were a central and recurring problem for the firm:
as the provider of an essential element of the personal computer, Intel’s decision to enter
complementary markets – or not -- strongly affected its relationship with external
providers of complementary products, and was thus strategically important. Our data
cover 14 years of entry decisions in a range of complementary markets, under different
market conditions and under changing strategic context s. We use them to analyze Intel’s
actions and avowed motivations, exploring the degree to which Intel’s history confirms the
usefulness of current theory and raises new questions for future work.
We find, as predicted, that Intel's behavior with respect to complementary markets is
greatly shaped by whether the firm can match the competencies of potential entrants. But
we also find that Intel's behavior is heavily influenced by whether the interface between
markets is "static" (when the platform boundary is reasonably stable) or "dynamic" (when
the scope of the platform and the ways in which it interacts with complementary products
are changing). In those cases where the interface between markets is evolving, Intel is
much more likely to enter the “connector” markets – markets for those products that
embody new platform interfaces. Since this then puts Intel in a particularly strong position
to squeeze potential entrants in both the connector markets themselves and in
complementary markets that are adjacent to, or “on top” of these markets, Intel
experiences the dilemma outlined in the literature in a particularly acute form, and their
desire to encourage innovation amongst entrants shapes the firm’s behavior in some
intriguing ways.
Intel appears to rely on three primary mechanisms to signal that it will not engage in
any ex-post "squeezing" of entrants. First, it uses an internal organizational structure

4

(separate divisions with their own Profit & Loss operation s) and a widely publicized
rhetorical device (the distinction between "Job 1" and "Job 2"2) to signal that it expects both
Intel and its competitors to make money in complementary markets – that it will not "suck
all the air" out of them. Second, it attempts to subsidize entry into complementary markets
not through direct subsidy but by lowering the cost of entry for all potential entrants –
largely, but not only, by the development and widespread dissemination of Intellectual
Property. Third, it attempts to commit to the stability and security of these subsidies – and,
given its frequent entry into markets for interface technologies -- to the promise not to
change "the rules of the game" in these markets through the creation of a separate
organizational unit (The Intel Architecture Lab) which is explicitly structured as a cost
center and rewarded for its success in “promoting the health of the ecosystem” as a whole,
or for stimulating demand for microprocessors.
This combination of activities creates considerable tension inside the firm, since on the
one hand managers within Intel are encouraged to profit maximize within complementary
markets while on the other their colleagues are actively subsidizing the entry of
competitors and publicly refusing to use Intel's control of the architecture to advantage
internal divisions. Intel must make money in complementary markets – but not too much.
We believe that these results – and the intriguing interplay they suggest between strategic
interaction and organizational structure -- have potential implications for both theoretical
work and further empirical research, and for both business strategy and public policy.
The rest of the article is structured as follows: Section 2 presents a short literature
review , Section 3 the methods and data and Section 4 the results of the study. Section 5
presents a discussion of the results, clarifies the directions in which they extend existing
literature, and offers some conclusions.

2. LITERATURE REVIEW
We focus our theoretical discussion and our empirical research around “platforms”,
where we define a product as a “platform” when it is one component or subsystem of an

“Job 1” refers to the task of expanding demand for the microprocessor, whereas “Job 2” refers to the task
of growing profitable businesses in complementary markets .
2

5

evolving technological system, when it is strongly functionally interdependent with most
of the other components of this system, and when end-user demand is for the overall
system , so that there is no demand for components when they are isolated from the overall
system. 3 We define a platform “owner ” as a firm that owns a core element of the
technological system that defines its forward evolution. In this sense both Intel and
Microsoft are platform “owners”.
From this perspective, the relationship between a platform owner and other firms who
are actual or potential owners of other components of th e system is well modeled as that
between an incumbent monopolist and actual or potential competitors in other,
complementary markets, since demand for the platform is derived from the demand for
the overall system.
However the literature exploring a monopolist’s incentive to enter the market for
complements is subtle and complex, and one can draw no quick conclusion as to whether a
monopolist will choose to enter complementary markets or as to whether such entry will
enhance or reduce social welfare.
Work focusing on the multiproduct problem and on bundling (see for example work
by Schmalensee, 1981; Panzar, 1989; Whinston, 1990, Nalebuff, 2004) has examined entry in
complementary markets, but without paying particular attention to platform dynamics or
network effects. By and large, these authors suggest that monopolists have several strong
reasons for entering complementary markets in order to offer a bundle or a tie. Most
critical, of course, is that identified initially by Cournot (1838). Multiproduct firms – those
producing both products, in the case of two complementary markets – internalize the
demand externality across markets while single product firms do not, so that in the simple
case both consumer welfare and total profits are increased if both products are produced
by a single firm. Firms may also enter multiple markets to weaken rivals through price
competition, driving the price of the complement down and raising the price of the
Our definition therefore differs from the definition of “platform” current in the multi-sided market
literature (e.g., Rochet and Tirole, 2003, 2004) which includes real-estate agencies, or dating bars – as these
assume that the complementary markets are pre -defined, well-known, and that the platform scope is
static. Our definition is closer to the one of Bresnahan and Greenstein (1999) who define a platform as a
bundle of standard components around which buyers and sellers coordinate efforts, or West (2003) who
defines it an architecture of related standards, allowing modular substitution of complementary assets
such as software and peripheral hardware – but we do not require components to be “standards”.
3

6

essential good to capture the available rent (Ordover et al., 1985). This may or may not be
predatory or exclusionary: it depends on how much the monopolist “squeezes” the
complementors since a price squeeze induces complementors to offer as much surplus as
possible in the complementary market (Whinston, 1990; Nalebuff, 2004). However these
models ignore the effect of entry on complementors’ incentives to innovate.
The related multi-sided market (MSM) work stream (Rochet and Tirole, 2003, 2004;
Caillaud and Jullien, 2003; Hagiu, 2004) focuses on the pricing problem faced by platform
owners in two-sided markets when they aim to encourage adoption of the platform. More
recently, Hagiu (2005) explores the effect of platform pricing on complementors’
innovation incentives, but focuses exclusively on the platform owner s’ choice between
charging complementors fixed fees or variable fees (royalties), to find the optimal royalty
rate. The main insight of this stream of work is that two-sided platform owners will
subsidize one “side” of the platform (e.g., complementors) in order to create or jumpstart a
double-sided market . It thus follows the same logic as the “internalize-the-externalities”
argument of the multi-product/bundling literature but focuses on subsidy rather than on
entry as the central mechanism through which it can be accomplished.
Recent work has focused on the effects of entry in complementary markets on
complementors’ incentives to innovate. Choi and Stefanadis (2001) show that with
uncertain investment, a monopolist’s entry in complementary market result s in a potential
price squeeze that may deter innovation by rivals. Heeb (2003) also confirms that price
squeezes may deter complementary innovation.
Three recent papers enable us to refine our understanding of entry’s incentives in the
particular case when platform owner’s capabilities are not equivalent to those of entrants
(Farrell and Katz, 2000; Becchetti and Paganetto, 2001; Miller, 2005). These papers suggest
that when an incumbent monopolist lacks the organizational capabilities of potential thirdparty complementors it will have an incentive to encourage third-party innovation, but
that the if the monopolist’s incentive to engage in ex-post price “squeezes” is sufficiently
strong, entrants may have no ex-ante incentive to engage in innovation at all. This work
suggests that if the monopolist cannot duplicate the entrants’ innovation at a reasonable
cost, then it may have strong incentives to try to commit to entrants that it will not enter

7

the market for complements as a way to encourage the competitive efforts of independent
suppliers of the complementary product . The difficulty is that, even if the overall ex-ante
effects of a squeeze are negative for the monopolist, it may be difficult for him to commit
not to engage in one ex post, particularly if he is already integrated into the supply of other
complementary products. Taken together, these papers warn of the possible adverse
effects of integration into complementary markets on incentives to innovate for
complementors.
Of course there are other – well-known -- reasons why a platform owner might not
want to enter complementary markets. They might already be fully competitive. They
might have too small an impact on platform demand to be worth the effort, or entry might
be more effort than it is worth. A monopolist might be capital constrain ed or might fear
retaliation from powerful competitors.4
Intriguingly, none of these models considers the case in which the interface between
complementary markets may be evolving. In the few articles that do consider platform
evolution, the consequences for the players’ incentives to innovate are ambiguous. Farrell
et al. (1998) can be interpreted as suggesting that when interfaces are likely to evolve such
that a platform owner is likely to lose control of the architecture, the platform owner
should integrate into the interface. Similarly Carlton and Waldman (2002) suggest that
strategic tie-ins to evolving complementary markets may be a way to extend monopoly
power into a newly emerging market. Both models would seem to suggest that in these
cases innovation in complementary markets is likely to be suppressed. But Davis et al.
(2002) suggest that Microsoft’s entry into complementary markets, followed by product

In 1996 Intel attempte d to extend its platform into Microsoft’s territory, through the development of
“Native Signal Processing,” which allowed much of the manipulation of audio and video traditionally
carried out on specialized chips on the computer’s motherboard to be built into the microprocessor itself.
Jackson (1997) reports: “In principle, NSP was in both companies’ interest. The problem was that the NSP
technology Intel had developed didn’t slot into DOS or Windows. It stood alone, and by doing so, it
appeared to challenge Microsoft’s hegemony over software standards. The reaction from Microsoft was
swift and vicious. Without saying anything to Intel, Microsoft warned the PC manufacturers that it had
no intention of supporting NSP in future releases of Windows, effectively forcing them to sacrifice 100
percent compatibility with Microsoft’s standards if they went along with Intel’s initiative.” Intel later
halted its NSP investments.
4

8

integration, facilitated the development of new applications.5 Closest to our own approach,
West and Dedrick (2000)’s and West (2003)’s case studies suggest that the treatment of
intellectual property (whether the platforms are “open” or “proprietary”), as well as the
availability of appropriate development tools affects the platform owner s’ ability to control
the evolution of the platform architecture, and the likelihood of innovation in
complementary markets.
Taken together, these articles suggest that it is generally in the interest of a platform
owner to enter complementary markets, but that such entry must be balanced against the
costs of discouraging entry by new firms. However the existing literature offers us no
guidance as to how th is tradeoff should be managed and no evidence as to how – or
whether -- it is being managed in practice. How do incentives to enter in order to
internalize externalities trade off against the need to encourage entry when the relevant
organizational capabilities are scarce or unavailable? How does a platform owner commit
to not entering a market when, once that market is established it will have a strong
incentive to do just that? In the dynamic case, if the platform owner has strong incentives
to enter to control the evolution of a platform, how does this shape action? How does it
shape complementors’ behavior? Will it be seen as exactly the kind of ex-post squeeze that
other models suggest may be very destructive? How can one distinguish, empirically,
between entry to control platform direction, and entry to internalize externalities? Is it
useful to draw a distinction between them?
Our paper contributes to this debate by allowing us to distinguish between the
different drivers of entry into complementary markets, by exploring the degree to which
Intel balances it own strong incentives to enter against the risk of discouraging
complementors’ innovation, and by highlighting the significance of the organizational
structure and processes of the firm in enabling Intel to manage these tradeoffs.

Davis et al. (2002) claim that integration in complementary markets reduces the cost of complementors’
innovation. They do not however balance this effect with the potential entry deterrence effect. They point
principally to the release of Application Programming Interfaces (“APIs” – software tools that allow
complementors to develop complementary applications that will interoperate smoothly with the
platform) to facilitate complementary innovation.
5

9

3. DATA AND M ETHODS
We draw on extensive qualitative data drawn from Intel’s recent history to explore
these issues. Intel offers a particularly favorable setting for an in-depth case study of our
central question for several reasons. First, entry and innovation in complementary markets
were a central and recurring strategic problem for the firm. As the provider of an essential
element of the personal computer, Intel’s choices of entry in complementary markets
strongly affected its relationship with external providers of complementary products.
Second, as the largest global producer of microprocessors between 1990 and 2004, Intel
was clearly a platform owner, and plausibly had considerable market power for most of
the period. 6 Intel also changed strategic focus twice between 1990 and 2004. The period
thus allows us to explain a wide spectrum of Intel’s behaviors vis-à-vis complementors.
Our data covers the period 1990 to 2004. The empirical analysis draws on a sequence of
72 in-depth qualitative interviews conducted with senior managers at Intel, as well as on
primary and secondary literature. We gathered data on 27 projects, which between them
constituted what we believe to be all the projects and initiatives that Intel undertook – or
considered undertaking -- between 1990 and 2004 that had effects on complementors and
complementary markets. The complete list of these projects is given in Appendix Table I.
We conducted interviews during three visits to Intel to sites in both California and
Oregon between November 1997 and April 2000. We explained to our respondents that
we were doing a study of the ways in which Intel had attempted to have an effect on
innovation in “complementary products”, i.e., products whose supply could have a
demand-enhancing effect on the microprocessor. The interviews were semi-structured
(that is, respondents were provided with a list of interview questions beforehand, but were
not held to them as the interview progressed). Most interviews lasted about an hour,
although some lasted much longer. All the interviews were taped and transcribed. The
initial interviews covered a broad range of topics, including company history and
structure, industry innovation and competition, the relationships between Intel and other
Between 1991 and 2000, Intel revenue increased from $4.8 billion to $33.7 billion, wh ile profits grew from
$819 million to $10.5 billion over the same period. Return on assets over the period averaged around 25%.
However, like every technology company, Intel was hit hard by the burst of the Internet bubble. Revenues
for 2001 were $26.5 billion, while net income for 2001 only $1.3 billion. In 2003 however, Intel posted
revenue of $30.1 billion and net income of $5.6 billion.
6

10

firms, customers, suppliers, and complementors. Later interviews focused on the history of
the many facets of Intel’s involvement in innovation in complementary products, and went
deeper into the managerial processes by which Intel attempted to influence innovation. We
were also given access to a wide range of internal do cuments, including organization
charts, company brochures, project planning documents, internal presentations documents
and project information, and we were invited to attend several internal company meetings.
The use of a qualitative approach has both advantages and limitations. Comprehensive
studies of firm decision-making that focus on economically significant decisions are rare.
Given that it is difficult to measure the extent to which several variables affect entry
decisions in particular markets, systematic qualitative data about organizational process,
structure and internal beliefs provide an important alternative source of evidence. During
the course of our research we took a number of measures to ensure that as far as possible
we were not simply hearing the “party line” from our informants. We describe these in
more detail below. In consequence, we believe that our results accurately describe the
beliefs of Intel’s senior and middle management, and that these beliefs had important
effects on Intel’s actions.
In an attempt both to avoid problems of retrospective bias and also in order to avoid
being given “official propaganda”, we interviewed managers at several different levels of
seniority, including senior officers, team leaders, engineers and marketers. One set of
interviewees was approached through initial contacts with the managers of the Intel
Architecture Lab. Another set of interviewees came from an initial contact with a member
of the board of directors of Intel, who arranged for interviews with Intel’s top management
team. The final set of interviewees was derived from recommendations from the first two.
The gradual accretion of interviewees allowed the reach of the interviews to move well
beyond the initial group of IAL personnel and top managers. Interviews were conducted
in 11 different functional groups and at 5 different sites. Most of the interviewees had a
long tenure at Intel and had worked in several groups throughout their career. At the end
of each interview, each interviewee was asked to suggest names of other employees who
might be able to confirm the interviewer’s own account or who might be able to provide a
contrasting perspective. One of the reasons that we believe these interviews to reflect the

11

genuine beliefs of Intel managers is that we often uncovered conflicts between different
managers, different groups, and different hierarchical levels. This suggested to us that we
were not being given a “party line” but were gaining a true sense for the basis on which
key strategic decisions had been made within the firm. Further details can be found in
Gawer (2000).
In the analysis below, we attempt to summarize the interviews, and the understanding
of Intel’s strategy and beliefs that we gained as a result of conducting them, through the
use of brief quotations. We have endeavored to ensure that the quotes are representative in
that they catch the sense of a number of interviews and the perspectives of a number of
different managers.

4. RESULTS
One of the most striking findings from the interviews is that of Intel’s strategic
sophistication with respect to the dynamics of the markets for complements. It is clear,
first, that Intel understands the importance of generating complements to the success of
their microprocessor business. Gerald Holzhammer – the director of the Intel Architecture
Lab in 1997 and the director of the desktop architecture lab from 1998 on - described the
decision to focus on software in an attempt to stimulate growth in demand for computers
in terms that could have come directly from a textbook:
There was a master plan . . . that said we need to encourage innovation on
software applications . It all came about fairly naturally. . . . If the end user
doesn’t see really immediate added value by buying the next-generation
processor, then Intel will not grow. Intel will have a huge problem. We
are spending billions of dollars building these new manufacturing
plants. If people don’t come, don’t buy, we will fall off a cliff. That’s the
reason why we have an Intel Architecture Lab, whose fundamental mission
is to grow the overall market. We need to amortize our manufacturing
capacity in a large number of units. That will happen only if there are
new applications. How do you grow a market? Intel has 80, 85, 90
percent market segment share for CPUs. You don’t grow by getting
another 2 percent. You grow by growing the entire pie. How do you grow
your pie? By getting new applications, find new users for the PC. 7

Interview with Gerald Holzhammer, then director of the Architecture Lab, Hillsboro, Oregon,
Novermber 11, 1995. Emphasis added.
7

12

Given this appreciation of the demand enhancing effect of activity in complementary
markets it is perhaps not surprising that of the 27 cases in which we know that Intel
actively considered entry, the firm actually entered 17 times, or 63% of the time. Moreover,
consistent with the literature, there is some evidence that Intel’s entry decisions were
shaped by whether or not it believed that it possessed the requisite capabilities. For
example, Claude Leglise, director of the Developer Relations Group, insisted:
I have no intention whatsoever of getting into the software business.
Intel has no corporate competence in entertainment software. We don’t
know how to do video games, so forget it. We’re not trying to go into their
space. We’re trying to get them on the same strategic road map so that the
overall ecosystem will benefit.8

Intel entered all 9 of the nine markets in which Intel managers reported to us that they
believed that Intel had both the necessary technical and commercial capabilities, while of
the 18 cases in which they believed Intel lacked at least one critical capability, the firm
entered only 8.

5 of the 8 occurred during the Internet bubble, and appear to have

reflected the rather different strategic priorities of the firm during that period9.
However understanding Intel’s actions in light of the existing literature – even with
this promising beginning – is complicated by the fact that the complementary markets
Intel faces are both more dynamic and more numerous than can be encompassed in a
formal model. Most importantly, in the ‘90s the “ecosystem” was both highly dynamic and
“multi-layered”. Whereas the standard treatment of the problem considers the case of a
monopolist in one market considering integrating into a second, Intel faced something

Interview with Claude Leglise, director of the Developer Relations Group, Intel Corp., Santa Clara,
November 13, 1997.
9 A major strategic shift occurred between 1998 and 2001. For the first time in a decade, Intel’s profits fell,
and the firm was obliged to cut its dividend. Management lost faith in its microprocessor business’ ability
to grow the firm and meet stockholders’ expectations. In 1997, Craig Barrett, then Chief Operating Officer
of Intel, noted that “microprocessors by themselves will not be the growth engine that they have been in
the past.” Meanwhile, the opportunities offered by rapidly emerging Internet-related markets seemed
extremely promising. Intel made several attempts to diversify, harnessing internal frustrations that the
single -minded focus on Job 1 had prevented the development of other businesses (Burgelman, 2002).
Under Barrett’s direction, Intel shifted its focus to regenerate growth by entering new markets: Intel
entered in 5 markets during this period, namely Web hosting and online services, toys, audio products,
internet appliances, and wired and wireless handheld PC accessories, in none of which it had previously
identified internal organizational capability. Intel exited all of them by the end of 2001.
8

13

closer to a “stack” of markets whose nature and extent cou ld not be identified ex ante.
(Figure 1)

FIGURE 1: A STACK OF C OMPLEMENTARY M ARKETS

Appl’n (e.g.,
Printing)

Appl’n (e.g., 3-D
Graphics

Connector (e.g., Chipsets)

Appl’n (e.g.,
Internet Video

Appl’n (e.g.,
Gaming)

Connector (e.g,. Motherboards)

Microprocessor

This stack was “dynamic” in the sense that technical progress and the evolution of
demand continually expanded the potential set of “connector” and “application” markets,
and in the sense that the nature of the interfaces between them was unknown ex ante.
All of these markets are “complements” in the classical sense, but some – notably the
connector markets – are likely to be significantly more strategic than others. This is both
because their existence enables other markets and thus because they have a
disproportionate effect on demand, but also because in many cases they are central to the
structure of competition. If Intel can retain architectural control over the interface markets
– or at the very least prevent other firms from gaining control – it greatly increases the
likelihood of Intel, in turn, retaining control of the microprocessor architecture.
Intel’s entry decisions appear to have been shaped dramatically by whether a
complementary market was viewed as a “connector” market or not. Of the 17
complementary markets that the firm entered, 12 entries were connector markets while the
remaining 5 were the disastrous diversification attempts of the bubble years. These
“interfaces” markets include chipsets, motherboards, and other network connectivity

14

products.10 11 Of the 20 cases that we were told had significant implications for the interface
with the microprocessor Intel only entered 12 times, or 60% -- possibly because it lacked
the necessary capabilities . Table 1 summarizes these numbers. (The Appendix gives a
variety of data on the 27 projects that Intel explored during this time period.)

TABLE 1: INTEL’S DECISION TO ENTER :
Did Intel have the necessary capabilities?

Connector Market
Not a connector
market

Yes

Partially

9 entry

3 entry
8 no entry
1 no entry

No

1 no entry
5 entry (followed by rapid exit)

They give the impression that under “normal” conditions Intel enters only those
complementary markets that have implications for control of the platform architecture and
only those for which it believes it has the requisite capabilities. The qualitative evidence
appears to be consistent with this hypothesis. Intel’s first entry into “connector” markets
was in 1994. Intel invented a new “bus architecture” – the Peripheral Component Interface
-- that increased bus speed by a factor of five, and that provided fast links to other crucial
components of the PC, such as hard disk and graphics.12 Intel first attempted to leave the
production and commercialization of the PCI to the traditional chipset makers on whom

Chipsets embody the physical and electrical “interfaces” to the platform’s new external interfaces,
therefore provide an essential function of data transfer into and out of the microprocessor. A motherboard
is the main circuit board in a PC, containing the microprocessor, the memory, and other support chips
Network connectivity products embody physical and electrical connections between different
components of the PC system when integrated into a network of computers and peripheral devices such
as printers.
11 Examples following PCI (1993) include the Universal Serial Bus (USB) launched in 1997, followed by the
Advanced/Accelerated Graphics Port (AGP) in 1997, and another bus dedicated to fast graphics (FireWire,
also called IEEE 1394) in 1998, and the wireless data transfer protocol BlueTooth (1998). More recent
interfaces include Universal Plug-and-Play, Wireless USB, and Ultra-Wideband (UWB) wireless radio
technology in 2004 (USB transmits data between consumer electronics, PC peripherals and mobile devices
within short range at very high speeds). Source: Intel Annual Reports 1996-2003 and Intel Press Release,
February 18, 2004.
12 Yu (1998), p.55. A bus is a data pathway that ensures data transfer between different components of the
PC.
10

15

Intel had historically relied, but after being disappointed with their performance Intel
ended up deciding to enter this market itself.
Entry was justified on both technical and strategic grounds. On the technical front Will
Swope, vice president of the Intel Architecture Business Group, explained:
The real way you make money is by selling faster processors. And you
can’t sell a faster processor if you don’t have data to operate on – [data that
is brought to the chip through the chipsets.]13

On the strategic front, Bill Miller , from the Sales and Marketing group, explained:
We got into the chipset business in a ma jor way to accelerate platform
transitions. To unleash the power of the Pentium, we had to introduce the
new PCI bus.[..]. Our market segment share in the desktop chip set
business is equal or greater than processors. This helps our ability to
establish platform standards significantly. Having some market segment
share in chip sets makes it easier for us to advance the platform.
Our foray into the motherboard business used to be sort of a
manufacturing foray, and now is more of a licensing foray. We
manufacture some, but mostly we have licensed our designs. This allows
us to have influence over other areas of the platform as well. If you are
defining how a certain percentage of the motherboards are designed, you
then can make a good technical argument and have a good volume
argument. Standards follow volume, which seems pretty obvious. The
simplest way to get a standard established is to put in a product that sells
at a high volume.14

By developing chipsets and selling them in large volume, Intel attempted to accelerate
the adoption of a bus standard, which the firm saw as crucial both to growing the market
for Intel microprocessors and to maintaining Intel’s control over the architecture of the
local system. Maintaining control also allowed Intel to ensure that the markets for
complements that were running “on top of” the connectors was suitably competitive. In
the words of Craig Kinnie, director of the Intel Architecture Lab for much of 1991-2000:
We want to define how these companies will hook their pipe to the PC
and how application writers can take advantage of that pipe that we
control […]. They all will connect to the PC in exactly the same way.[…]
Coordination here now creates a common connector. […] Because we said

Interview with Will Swope, vice president, Intel Architecture Business Group and director, Platform
Planning, Hillsboro, Oregon, August 6, 1998.
14 Interview with Bill Miller, August 13, 1998, then director of Worldwide Media Relations, Sales and
Marketing Group, Intel Corp., Santa Clara, California. Emphasis added.
13

16

there should be one way to hook to a PC and we are going to make it
happen, they all now have to compete to deliver to that socket, -- whereas
if they had been all allowed to have a different connector and one of them
won, there wouldn’t even be competition: it would be one guy or two. 15

This concern with stimulating demand and maintaining control was tempered, as the
raw numbers suggest, by the recognition that Intel did not have the organizational
capabilities required to enter all possible complementary markets. In chipsets, entry was
justified on the basis of a good match between the requirements of the market and Intel’s
capabilities . Said Bill Miller from the Sales and Marketing Group:
We did start by giving specifications [to the chipset manufacturers]. […]
But we realized that they weren’t fast enough, and one of the most
troublesome things was that it was really hard getting the other chipset vendors
to do PCI “right.” It was so close to the processor that we wanted them to do it
right, because our product ramp on Pentium was gated by the fact that you
needed a PCI bus to do it. The [previous industry] bus [standards] were at
the time were too stinking slow to show the benefit [of our platform]. We
had to “put our own skin in the game.” We got impatient and we said,
“This is not fast enough.” So, our PCI Components Division […] entered
the chipset business. We now provide chipsets, -- and, as we happen to
execute really well in chipsets, we are now in the chipset business in a
significant way: our market segment share in the desktop chipset business
is equal or greater than in processors.16

This strategy, however, presents Intel with exactly the dilemma identified in the
literature. Intel believed that it did not have the capabilities to identify all possible
innovations in all possible complementary markets. But given that Intel had a history of
entering complementary markets – and that this entry put it in a particularly advantageous
position with respect to other potential markets – it faced the difficult task of committing
to potential entrants that it would not act engage in precisely the kind of ex-post squeeze
identified by the literature.
Our respondents appeared to have deeply internalized this issue. As Dave Johnson
explained:

Interview with Craig Kinnie, director of Intel Architecture Lab, Intel Corp., Hillsboro, Oregon,
November 11, 1997.t.
16 Interview with Bill Miller, op. cit. Emphasis added.
15

17

The market segment gets hurt if third parties think: “Intel, the big guys,
are there, so I don’t want to be there. They’re going to crush me.” That’s
not good, and it’s not what we want, because we’re trying to encourage
people to do these complementary things.17

Similarly, in the context of the firm’s experience with videoconferencing Dave Johnson,
engineering manager at IAL, recalled:
You [as a platform owner] need to be careful not to come in so hard that you
don’t undermine the conditions in the market you enter. In some ways, what we
did with ProShare18 was to enter the market segment with a product and
expect the market to respond. But then you have to be careful because you can
undermine the whole market segment and not end up fostering innovation. Some
people claim we did just that. We wanted to deliver an affordable product
that would make videoconferencing a desktop PC add-on. We were so
intent on videoconferencing as a method for selling CPUs 19 that our own
products drove the prices down to where the channel [i.e., the existing
players] wasn’t making money, we weren’t making money, competitors
couldn’t make money — and, therefore, we didn’t help the overall
marketplace. Major players are still there, but they are weak. A number of
the more peripheral players have left.

Notice that the “layered” nature of the technical system in which Intel was embedded –
and the continuous evolution of the boundaries between components – made this problem
particularly acute. Once Intel had entered an interface layer, for example, the problem of
encouraging entry into related markets did not disappear – rather it became significantly
more acute since the interface was only likely to be valuable if there was entry into the
markets that ran “on top” of it. As the platform continuously evolved, Les Vadasz, director
of Intel Capital – the venture capital branch of Intel --, acknowledged that evolving
platform boundaries created “skirmishes” with complementors:
In our business, the boundary has always moved because the interfaces
between our customers and us have always changed as a result of the way
the technology has evolved. While I recognize that it’s moving and that it’s
always moved, it’s very important that we don’t get carried away with our
own delusions of grandeur, and that we stay in businesses that we know
we can succeed in… We have looked at our business more as a supplier of
building blocks that others can build their business on, and that continues
Interview with David B. Johnson, director of the Media and Interconnect Technology Lab, Intel
Architecture Lab, Intel Corp., Hillsboro, Oregon, August 4, 1998.
18
ProShare was Intel’s $750 million failed videoconferencing effort (1992-1998).
19 CPU (Central Processing Unit) is another name for microprocessor.
17

18

to be the majority of our business. But even there, we have skirmishes
sometimes because the interface changes. When we first started to sell
motherboards, there was a lot of paranoia amongst our OEMs. What’s our
intent? Why are we doing this? I think now it’s more of a positive to the
business than a negative. But anytime you do that, there are a lot of issues.
Also, it’s important that your complementors trust you because you need them,
they need you, and you cannot just trample all over everybody’s business willynilly. 20

Dr. Grove, CEO of Intel at the time of the interview summed this perspective up::
We are in a certain business and we are defining a platform upon which
other people are going plug in peripherals or other products. And we want
competition in those areas. And yet we want to supply there, also.
[Isn’t there a tension there?] Yes, precisely: we are defining the platform
and we want to be a participant to build on the platform. It’s a pretty
common situation. It is almost inconceivable that you can have the
expertise, the momentum, and the market credibility to define a platform
unless you are participating both above and below that platform.
Microprocessors are below. You can’t come and define buses if you don’t
know enough about chipsets and microprocessors. On the other hand, if
you are in it, you obviously have a business interest for yourself. The
resolution of these tensions is crucial for repeated success. You get to fool some
of the people some of the time, but you can’t make that an ongoing
practice.21

Intel’s actions, and the dilemma that it faced, are broadly consistent with the existing
literature. It is in the analysis of the actions that Intel took to resolve the dilemma that we
begin to enter new ground.
Intel’s first response was to attempt to develop a reputation for “treating
complementors well” and to that end the company developed a rhetoric which presented
Intel as a benevolent industry coordinator, or “honest broker”, careful to protect incentives
for external complementors. In the words of Claude Leglise:
You have to manage the future of the ecosystem. It’s really a complete
system with lots of people. So the role that we’re trying to play is one of
leadership -- which is very different from wanting to own everything. Our
future wealth is completely tied to the wealth of the ecosystem and the

Interview with Les Vadasz, senior vice president and director of the Corporate Business Development
group (renamed Intel Capital in 2000), Intel Corporation, Santa Clara, California, August 14, 1998.
21 Interview with Dr. Andrew S. Grove, CEO, Intel Corp., Santa Clara, August 18, 1998. Emphasis added.
20

19

well being of the ecosystem. Therefore, it is to our advantage to make sure
that this whole thing evolves positively. 22

It may be that Intel did indeed develop a reputation for behaving this way – we did
not have the opportunity to interview any actual or potential complementors and are thus
unable to gauge whether this was a successful strategy. Here we focus on the degree to
which Intel used its organizational structure and processes to commit to complementors
that it would not engage in exactly the kinds of “ex-post squeezes” identified in the
literature. Intel’s approach to this issue is complex, and we believe that it highlights a
number of important issues. The key to understanding Intel’s actions, we believe, is, first,
to unpack the concept of “ex-post squeeze” and second, to understand that ways in which
Intel attempted to use organizational structure and practices as a commitment mechanism.
In principle there are two ways in which Intel can “squeeze” complementors. It can
drive returns in a complementary market to zero by entering the market and depressing
prices – effectively subsidizing entry using profits derived from the primary component –
or it can enter and capture all the returns for itself by manipulating the boundary between
the market and the core of the platform in order to advantage Intel owned products. Intel
can thus either attempt to commit never to enter complementary markets – a difficult task
given its history and its obvious economic incentives – or it can commit to enter and “play
nicely” – by making money but not too much. In our view it is this second strategy that Intel
pursued, and they did so by attempting to leverage both their intellectual property
strategy and their internal organizational structure and processes.
Intel committed to making money in those complementary markets that it did
enter – and thus not to drive returns down in those markets – by committing to “job 2” –
by organizing entry into such markets as organizationally distinct units that were
measured and rewarded on the basis of their own profit and loss. It then committed not to
making too much money in these markets by aggressively subsidizing entry into these
markets, and by sharing the Intel owned IP that might otherwise give the Intel owned firm
undue advantage. This balancing act created very significant tensions within the firm that
were managed by institutionalizing the strategic imperative to stimulate entry in the
22

Interview with Claude Leglise, op. cit .

20

market for complements while simultaneously entering those markets and making money
– but not too much -- by stressing th at the task of expanding demand for the
microprocessor (a task referred to as “Job 1” within Intel) might at times be in
contradiction to the task of growing profitable businesses based on proprietary IP in
complementary markets (“Job 2”), and by structuring the organizational unit responsible
for the development of the majority of the IP – the Intel Architectural Labs, or IAL, as a
stand alone, not for profit unit.
Mike Aymar, vice president and general manager, Desktop Products Group,
discussed how this tension affected the treatment of Intellectual Property in the context of
Digital Video Disk (DVD) technology:
We worked with the suppliers and came up with some software
technology for doing the [DVD] copyright encryption. We also worked
with some participants to come up with an MPEG2 player that works on a
PC, with no additional hardware — so once you buy a certain level of PC,
this is “free.” Now, what do we do with that technology? If it is Job 1, we
probably broadly diffuse it. We make it available to as many participants
as we can, so that as many PCs in the world from any supplier, any
hardware supplier, any software supplier, all have this capability. And we
just broadly diffuse it. We may license some things, we may charge small
royalties, but in general, our main purpose is to enable and diffuse this
technology broadly.
If it is not Job 1, if it is its own business unit, they don’t want to diffuse it
broadly. They want to take that cool software we developed and go sell it
one-on-one to Compaq, Hewlett-Packard, and NEC in Japan. And they
want to do that in competition with the other people who might be selling
similar software. They don’t want to enable the other people. They want to
go win the business on their own. They want to charge money for it. They
want to make a profit. So, you have two very different ways of acting. 23

Notice that Mike Aymar’s comment highlights the fact that the units created to exploit
complementary markets are explicitly designed to encourage their managers seek profits,
but that at the same time the firm creates an expectation that the unit may need to compete
“on level ground”.

Interview with Mike Aymar, vice president and general manager, Desktop Products Group, Intel
Corporation, Santa Clara , California, November 13, 1997.
23

21

Jim Pappas, the director of Platform Initiatives at IAL also commented on the ways in
which this policy created tensions Intel’s chipset business group and IAL.
We developed the [USB] code and we gave it to our internal chipset
business group in Chandler, Arizona, who used it to do their chip. And we
also made it available to anybody in the industry. I can guarantee that
there were times where the group in Chandler was livid with me for freely
distributing this. They have competitors out there who are building
products.24

Thus one key element of the strategy was the creation of independent units charged to
do nothing but execute on “job 2” – who were “livid” when other elements of the
organization (in this case IAL) took actions that would plausible reduce their profitability.
The second element, however, was the active subsidization of entry into
complementary markets. Intel subsidized entry extensively, but, intriguingly, believed that
direct financial subsidies to complementors were found to be counterproductive. Claude
Leglise explained that he had a policy of refusing to fully subsidize entry – insisting that
complementors’ “put their skin in the game.”
The one thing that I have consistently refused to do (although we may
have done it once or twice by accident) is to pay people [external
complementors] to do a job. Tell them “I want this kind of software, build
it”. I don’t want to do that because again, back to my premise, we don’t
know software, they do. I’m much more interested in saying “this project
is very exciting. Our strategy and your strategy are very consistent, we
both agree it’s risky: I will help you mitigate the risk, I’ll pay half of it. But you
pay the other half. I want you to have some skin in it. So you are
interested in making it successful.” I want them to be successful, on their own
with their business model.
…If you look at history… rumor has it that IBM spent a billion dollars on
applications for OS2 but they bought people, they said “here, do this for
me”. And at the end, the companies turned around and said “here, it’s
done” – and IBM said “well, aren’t you going to sell it, market it? They
said “well no, our deal is to develop it: you’ve got it, now good luck.” The
same with Philips and the CD-Rom Interactive (technology): Philips did
CDI and they sprinkled money over the entire industry. It did terribly.
And they had all these developers developing stuff but there was no
business model – the business model was “I’ll pay you”. 25

Interview with Jim Pappas, director of Platform Initiatives, Desktop Products Group, Intel Corporation.,
Hillsboro, Oregon, August 4, 1998. Emphasis added.
25 Interview with Claude Leglise, op. cit.
24

22

Instead Intel used an impressively wide variety of subsidies, including the
facilitation of innovation through early diffusion of Intel technology and IP (we return to
this point below an d to its implications for Intel’s ability to commit not to squeeze entrants
ex post), the sharing of engineers, the facilitation of access to market through sharing of
marketing and commercialization resources, industry coordination initiatives including
compliance forums and Developers Forums and the sharing of development tools such as
Software Development Kits.
For example, the Intel Developer Relations Group’s resources 26 were devoted to help
external software developers innovate on software that was specifically designed to be
complementary to Intel’s latest microprocessors.

It provided a range of assistance,

including grants to external software developers, sharing market information, facilitating
entry into new markets, and sharing with them Intel technology before it appears on the
market – which them an edge over their competitors. As Leglise explains:
The first thing we’ll tell [external software developers] is to share with
them our strategy. “Here is our best understanding of what’s going to
happen. We are sharing with you our plan, our best view of the market,
and you have the opportunity to plan. […] For example, last year, my
organization took something like 20 software companies to China. We
organized meetings with the government, the retailers, the hardware and
software distributors, and we introduced them to the minister of
technology, the minister of telecommunications, 20 different retailers, 30
different computer companies, and in the matter of a month they were up
and running. Now, every one of them has at least on deal cooking, where
they’re exporting their software into China.
The second thing I do I give them early access to technology, i.e., to our
latest generation of microprocessors six to 12 months before the market,
which means six to 12 months before their competitors. […] We give them
tools to get started. Just on the hardware side it’s a five to seven million
dollar effort.27

The Software Developer Relations group also allied with Intel Marketing and Sales
group to facilitate external software developers’ commercialization of their software.

26
27

The Intel Develop Relations Group counted approximately 200 persons in 1998.
Interview with Claude Leglise, op. cit .

23

Sometimes, Intel took charge of selling the software directly to Original Equipment
Manufacturers (OEMs)28 , and paid the external complementors as royalties.
We also help them with sales and marketing. We have done a decent
job on selling the software that is bundled with computer systems by
the OEMs. We sell it to the OEMs, [with whom we have privileged
relationships], and the software companies get a royalty. 29
Table 2 summarizes the extent to which Intel licensed the IP associated with the
complementary markets that it explored:

TABLE 2: INTEL’S DECISION TO SHARE IP:
Did Intel have the necessary capabilities?

Connector Market

Yes

Partially

9 entry

3 entry
2 IP share, 1 not
8 no entry
7 IP share, 1 not
1 no entry
No IP share

9 share IP
Not a Connector
Market

No

1 no entry
Share IP
5 entry (followed by rapid exit)
No IP share

At one level these subsidies can be viewed as analytically equivalent to direct entry
by Intel itself, and our reading of the literature is that this has been the tacit
assumption of many who have studied this issue. But our experience at Intel leads us
to believe that this may be a misleading simplification. Subsidies – particularly those
that reduce the costs of all potential entrants and that simultaneously make it harder
for Intel to engage in any ex- post squeeze – and our interpretation of the widespread
dissemination of IP is that it has exactly this characteristic – appear to be a particularly
elegant way to solve Intel’s dilemma. They encourage the entry of a wide range of
firms with a wide range of skills, thus plausibly driving demand for the
microprocessor. And they also make it quite difficult for Intel to make “too much”
28
29

PC makers such as Compaq, IBM, Gateway, Dell are OEMs.
Interview with Claude Leglise, op. cit.

24

money in those markets that it does choose to enter – hence Jim’s description of his
colleague as “livid”.
Of course a reduction in entry costs is only likely to be effective in inducing entry if
potential entrants believe that Intel is not likely to change its mind and that, for
example, the next release of IP is likely to be as open, as widely disseminated, as the
current one, and that Intel will not use it’s unique knowledge of the system
architecture to advantage its own participants.
Intel appears to be very aware of this danger, and to have structured the IAL –
the Intel Architectural Lab – as a not for profit unit for precisely this reason. Andy
Grove was quite explicit in his belief that the structuring of IAL as a not for profit unit
significantly increased Intel’s credibility in the market place:
Wherever possible, it is much better that the standards be done by a group
that is not a Profit-and-Loss center. That’s where IAL came in. IAL, by and
large, was created as an architecture lab, as its name implies. IAL has no
profit and loss responsibility, and no products. Most of this work was
done by IAL. And IAL has achieved an extra measure of credibility. It comes,
first, from the fact that they are very good, and second, that they are not in a
business. For the CEG organization 30 to proselytize platform design and
architecture was much more difficult than for IAL, because CEG would be a
supplier to that platform. 31

Jim Pappas’s extended remarks convey his apparent internalization of this imperative:
We developed the [USB] code and we gave it to our internal chipset
business group in Chandler, Arizona, who used it to do their chip. And we
also made it available to anybody in the industry. I can guarantee that
there were times where the group in Chandler was livid with me for freely
distributing this. They have competitors out there who are building
products. So, there came a point where they were out there trying to sell
their chips and they would go into an account and they would explain
why they should buy the Intel chips. And the people would say, “Well,
I'm trying to decide between you and this other guy, and this other guy
uses the same [technology] as you do.”
They would tell us at IAL, “Jim, you have to stop distributing this thing
because I want to sell my product and you're basically adding credibility to
these other people because they're using the same Intel circuits that we are
CEG was the Computer Enhancement Group, which was the business group that made and sold
chipsets and motherboards.
31 Interview with Dr. Andrew S. Grove, op. cit. Emphasis added.
30

25

using. And so we want you to stop that.” I said, “No, we're not going to
stop that.” This is yet another example of knowing what your primary objective
is. 32

Many of the managers to whom we spoke at IAL were quite explicit about their view
of themselves as enablers of entrant success. Dave Ryan, director of Technology Marketing
at IAL, made it clear that IAL was assigned solely to make basic technological components
(as opposed to finished products) and to “enable” innovation in the industry:
We don’t make products at IAL. We make product components. The
core—the conferencing standards, the engines for processing the
standards-based data streams, and the engines to encode and decode video
and audio—all those basic components were developed by IAL. They’re
pieces, component parts of a product.33

Similarly Carol Barrett, an IAL marketing manager in multimedia software, saw her
job at IAL as helping sell more Intel microprocessors, by partnering, not competing, with
external developers of multimedia solutions:
I definitely don’t want to compete with 3D editing companies. My job is
demand-creation, so I’m trying to help sell our next-generation
microprocessors. I’m not trying to sell 3-D engines. My basic mechanism for
diffusion is all about partnering to provide solutions to the market. We build
media components. We don’t build products that are full solutions, but
components that really need to be incorporated into full 3D editing and
creation products, for which there are market segment leaders out there
that are well established and have excellent products. […]. We produce a
component that could be included in their product.34

Herman D’Hooge, manager in the IAL Media Interconnect Technology group,
described IAL’s “neutrality”:
IAL has this neutrality […]. Neutrality means that we really try to do this
to the betterment of the whole PC industry and not just to the betterment
of Intel. […] We are just doing this for the goodness of the whole industry
but we are privy to a lot of inside information that these people [external
firms] have and we must be careful not to broker that information to
potential Intel product groups that might be able to use it. They [external
Interview with Jim Pappas, director of Platform Initiatives, Desktop Products Group, Intel Corporation.,
Hillsboro, Oregon, August 4, 1998. Emphasis added.
33 Interview with Dave Ryan, director of Technology Marketing, Intel Architecture Lab, Intel Corp.,
Hillsboro, Oregon, August 4, 1998.
34 Interview with Carol Barrett, Marketing Manager, Intel Architecture Lab, Intel Corp., Hillsboro, Oregon,
August 5, 1998.
32

26

firm] are willing to open up and tell you their secrets about their road map,
what they see happening, and where they want to go with PCs, -- but they
don’t want to make the information readily available to a competing
product group in Intel. So, we receive information that we will not share
with product groups within Intel, simply because it would be a breach of
our neutrality in the industry. It is in our best interest for the Lab
neutrality not to go straight over to here and say, ‘Oh, guess what they just
told me, under non-disclosure.’ 35

Jim Pappas summarized the overall strategy beautifully – Intel attempts to “show faith
in the future” (by competing in, and attempting to profit from, a complementary market)
while simultaneously attempting to persuade potential entrants that Intel’s operations
wouldn’t have access to preferential information. Intel will make money in this market,
signaling that there is money to be made, while not making too much:
Once we decided we were going to put this in our chip set products, all
of a sudden there were many people working on the design. But we had a
very clear separation. We had a group that was defining the specification,
and we had other groups implementing products. They would take our
specification and implement the products, but we kept a sort of wall between
the two.
For USB to be successful, it needs to be available to the industry, and the
industry needs to believe and understand that they have a good shot at
going off and implementing it and being successful with it. The best way
to do that is to do it for real, and just to say that this group over here is
defining the — and this group over there will get the specification. They’re
going to design a product — and we make it very clear that Intel is going
to design products for this. We plan to sell a lot of products for these
things. By doing so, we are showing faith in the future. So, even though we
would develop products, at the same time, we would lose our credibility if we
were saying that this is something we’re only going to do for our internal products
and we’re not going to enable any competition here .
Other firms that would compete with the Intel product might worry that
we would be giving preferential information to our product group. So, we
took great pains not to do that. Our product group was running fast and
hard with this technology, and that’s good. 36

Interview with Herman D’Hooge, Manager, Media Interconnect Technologies, Intel Architecture Lab,
Intel Corp., Santa Clara, California, November 12, 1997. Emphasis added.
36 Interview with Jim Pappas, op. cit. Emphasis added.
35

27

5. CONCLUSION
Our examination of Intel’s history with respect to complementary markets and to potential
complementors confirms the usefulness of much of the existing literature while
highlighting a number of areas in which it could be usefully extended.
We find that Intel does indeed experience strong incentives to enter and/or subsidize
the market for complements to its core asset – the microprocessor. Both entry and subsidy,
however, are strongly conditioned by the firm’s belief that because it cannot match the
variety of competencies of potential entrants, sustaining a credible commitment not to
engage in the ex-post squeeze of entrants is critical to its success.
Sustaining such a commitment is greatly complicated by the fact that when the
interfaces between complementary markets are evolving rapidly Intel has particularly
strong incentives to enter – and that such entry itself puts the firm in a particularly strong
position to control the evolution of complementary markets because it gives the firm
control over the IP that defines each market.
Intel’s solution to this dilemma highlights a tension that to our knowledge has not
been noted before. On the one hand Intel commits to making money in complementary
markets – signaling that it will not drive returns down – by structuring entry into
complementary markets as separate organizational units with Profit & Loss responsibility
(“Job 2”). But at the same time it commits that it will not make “too much” money in these
markets by actively giving away IP and subsidizing competitive entry. This “commitment”
is sustained both by formal and informal statements of the firm and by maintaining the
organizational unit responsible for the development of key IP as an independent cost
center whose mission is to extend the size and power of the entire “ecosystem” (“Job 1”).
These results have implications for both the literature focused on the evolution and
adoption of standards and for the literature that has explored the relationship between
organizational structure and competition. With reference to the literature on complements
and standards evolution , Intel’s history underlines the complexity of the task of managing
the evolution of an evolving architecture and the difficulty of making unambiguous
welfare predictions in such cases. While it seems possible to conclude provisionally from
the Intel case that foreclosing entry by third parties to the system almost certainly reduces

28

consumer welfare, it also suggests that some entry by monopolists is almost certainly
beneficial. More broadly, Intel’s history suggests the utility of further work that is
explicitly dynamic and multilevel, and that incorporates a heterogeneous distribution of
capabilities as a fundamental assumption.
Within the organizational context, our results belong to the small stream of literature
suggesting that organizational structure can have real competitive consequences . Given
that a growing body of work in organizational economics suggests that organizational
structure and practice may be difficult to change, understanding how organizational
mechanisms may enable firms to commit to actions in the market place may be a
particularly fruitful area for further exploration.

29

REFERENCES
Becchetti, L. and L. Paganetto, 2001, “The Determinants of Suboptimal Technological
Development in the System Company-Component Producers Relationship”,
International Journal of Industrial Organization, 19(9), 1407-1421.
Brandenburger, A. and B. Nalebuff, 1997, Co-opetition: A Revolutionary Mindset
that Combines Competition and Cooperation, New York: Currency Doubleday.
Bresnahan, T.F. and S. Greenstein, 1999, “Technological Competition and the
Structure of the Computer Industry”, Journal of Industrial Economics, 47(1), 1-40.
Burgelman, R.A., 2002, Strategy is Destiny: How Strategy-Making Shapes a Company’s
Future, New York, NY: The Free Press, a Division of Simon and Schuster.
Caillaud, B. and B. Jullien, 2003, “Chicken and Egg: Competition among
Intermediation Service Providers”, RAND Journal of Economics, 34(2), 309-328.
Carlton, D.W. and M. Waldman, 2002, “The Strategic Use of tying to Preserve and
Create Market Power in Evolving Industries”, RAND Journal of Economics, 33(2),
194-220.
Choi, J.P. and C. Stefanadis, 2001, “Tying Investment and the Dynamic Leverage
Theory”, RAND Journal of Economics, 32(1), 52-71.
Cournot, A.A., 1838, Researches into the Mathematical Principles of the Theory of Wealth,
N.T. Bacon trans., Macmillan 1897. A.M. Kelley, New York, 1871. Reprint of the
1927 edition.
Davis S.J., J. MacCrisken, and K.M. Murphy, 2002, “Economic Perspectives on
Software Design: PC Operating Systems and Platforms”, in Microsoft, Antitrust
and the New Economy: Selected Essays , ed. Evans, D.S., 361-419. Springer. Previous
version

available

for

download

at

http://gsbwww.uchicago.edu/fac/steven.davis/research/
Farrell J., Monroe, H.K., and G. Saloner, 1998, “The Vertical Organization of
Industry: Systems Competition versus Component Competition”, Journal of
Economics and Management Strategy, Fall, 7(2), 143-182.
Farrell J and M.L. Katz, 2000, “Innovation, Rent Extraction, and Integration in
Systems Markets”, Journal of Industrial Economics , December, 97(4), 413-432.

30

Gawer, A., 2000, The Organization of Platform Leadership: An Empirical Investigation of
Intel’s Management Processes Aimed at Fostering Complementary Innovation by Third
Parties, MIT PhD Thesis.
Hagiu, A., 2004, “Optimal Pricing and Commitment in Two-Sided Markets”, Mimeo,
presented at “The Economics of Two-Sided Markets” conference held in January
2004 at the University of Toulouse.
Hagiu, A., 2005, “Two-Sided Platforms: Pricing and Social Efficiency”, Mimeo,
Research Institute of Economy Trade and Industry and Princeton University.
http://www.princeton.edu/%7Eahagiu/job%20market%20paper%204%202.pdf
Heeb, R., 2003, “Innovation and Vertical Integration in Complementary Markets”,
Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 12(3), Fall, 387-417.
Jackson, T., 1997, Inside Intel: How Andy Grove Built the World’s Most Successful Chip
Company, New York, NY: The Free Press.
Miller, D. A., 2005, “Invention Under Uncertainty and the Threat of Ex-Post Entry”,
February 25, Mimeo. Available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=319180
Nalebuff, B., 2004, “Bundling as an Entry Barrier”, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
February, 119(1), 159-187.
Ordover, J., A. Sykes, and R. Willig, 1985, “Nonprice Anticompetitive Behavior by
Dominant Firms towards the Producers of Complementary Products”, in
Antitrust and Regulation Essays in Memory of John J. McGowan, Fisher, F., ed.,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Panzar, J.C., 1989, “Technological Determinants of Firms and Industry Structure”, in
Handbook of Industrial Organization, Schmalensee, R. and R.D. Willig, eds.,13.
Rochet, J. -C. and J. Tirole, 2003, “Platform Competition in Two-Sided Markets”,
Journal of the European Economic Association, 1(4), 990-1029.
-------- and J. Tirole, 2004, “Two-Sided Markets: An Overview”, Mimeo, IDEI,
University of Toulouse, presented at “The Economics of Two -Sided Markets”
conference held in January 2004 at the University of Toulouse.
Schmalensee, R., 1981, “Monopolistic Two -Part Pricing Arrangements”, Bell Journal of
Economics, 11, 445.

31

Whinston, M.D., 1990, “Tying, Foreclosure, and Exclusion”, American Economic
Review, September, 837-859.
West, J. and J. Dedrick, 2000, “Innovation and Control in Standards Architectures:
The Rise and Fall of Japan’s PC-98”, Information Systems Research, 11(2), June
2000, 197-216.
--------, 2003, “How Open is Open Enough? Melding Proprietary and Open Source
Platform

Strategies”,

Research

Policy,

32(2003),

1259-1285.

APPENDIX
A PPENDIX TABLE I. LIST OF INTEL PROJECTS A NALYZED

1
2
3
4
5
6

Project Name
Initiative: Networked Multimedia
Initiative: Manageability
Initiative: Big Pipes (also called Broadband)
Initiative: Security
Initiative: Anywhere -in-the -Home
Initiative: Advance-the -Platform

7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

Interface technology: PCI (Peripheral Component Interface)
Interface technology: AGP (Advanced Graphics Port)
Interface technology: USB (Universal Serial Bus)
Interface technology: 1394 (also called FireWire)
Interface technology: TAPI (Telephony Application Programming Interface)
Interface technology: H.323 (interface for computer telephony)
Interface technology: Home RF (Home Radio-Frequency)
Interface technology: DVD (Digital Video Disk)
Interface technology: CDSA (Security)
Interface technology: Indeo (Intel Video Technology)

17
18
19
20
21
22

Products: Intel ProShare (Videoconferencing)
Products: Hood River (PC in the family room)
Products: Networking
Products: Chipsets (for PCI, USB, AGP, etc.)
Products: Motherboards (for PCI, USB, AGP, etc.)
Products: Software

23
24
25
26
27

Consumer Services: Web Hosting and Online services
Consumer products: Toys
Consumer products: Audio products
Consumer products: Internet Appliances
Consumer products: Wired and Wireless Handheld products

32

APPENDIX TABLE II. INTEL’S E NTRY IN NEW M ARKETS 1990-2004
Product
Chipsets

Motherboards

Videoconferencing (with ProShare software)
- digital PC cameras which could also be used for video
phone calls, enhancement cards that co ntained a digital
modem and audio/video compression/decompression
(CODEC) circuitry.
Networking (Network Connectivity)
- Network adapters
- “AnyPoint” networking solutions to share IT access,
music, printers, etc.
- Bluebooth products, to create wireless connections
around the mobile computer with mobile phones,
Personal Digital Assistants, etc.

Year of Entry / Year of Exit (when applicable)

•
•
•
•
•

Date of entry: 1991
Seen as mostly a complementary market to PC
microprocessors – profits not seen as the priority, rather, to
facilitate the industry transition to next versions of Intel
processors,
Competencies required: close to existing competencies
Date of exit: no exit. Still thriving as of 2005
Date of entry: 1995
Seen as mostly a complementary market to PC
microprocessors – profits not seen as the priority -- rather,
to facilitate the industry adoption to next versions of Intel
processors
Competencies required: close to existing competencies
Date of exit: no exit. Still thriving as of 2005
Date of entry: 1994
Seen as a market in which big profits were expected, as
well as a complementary market to microprocessors
New competencies required
Date of exit: 1999
Date of entry : 1991 with LAN37 network adapter cards
From 1991 to 1997 (Period 1): At first not considered
strategic (no strong complementarities perceived to
microprocessors)
From 1998 (Period 2), change of internal perception: Seen
as a market in which profits were expected (as part of
diversification effort), as well as a complementary market
to microprocessors
Still operating as of 2005, with desktop adapters, mobile
handheld adapters, server adapters, wireless networking,
and modem chipsets
Date of entry: 1999
Seen mostly as a new arena to diversify in and compete,
not as a complementary to microprocessors
Third party innovation: not critical
New competency required
Date of exit: June 2002
Date of entry: 1999
Date of exit: 2001

•
•
•
•
•

Date of entry: Jan 2001
Intel’s $299 digital music player, launched Feb 01
Date of exit: Connected Products Division shut in Oct 01
Date of entry: Jan 2001
Date of exit: late 2001

•
•

Date of entry: June 2000
Date of exit: late 2001

•
•

•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•

•

Web Hosting, Intel Online Services

PC Toys, Intel Play products
- QX3 Plus computer microscope
- Sound Morpher, Me2Cam virtual game system
Consumer Audio products
- personal audio player
- music system software
Consumer Internet (wireless and handheld) Appliances
- ChatPad
- WebPad
Consumer Wired and Wireless PC Accessories
- wired series: keyboard, mouse
- wireless series: keyboard, mouse and game-pad

37

•
•

LAN = Local Area Network. A computer network that spans a relatively small area

33

APPENDIX TABLE III.

DRIVERS OF INTEL’S E NTRY IN C OMPLEMENTARY M ARKETS 1990-2004 (1 / 3)

Projects

Type of
Project

Did Intel
believe that
this project will
help Job 1? – ie
was it a
complementary
market?

Did Intel
enter the
market?

Did Intel
exit
later?

Did Intel have
the
technological
and commercial
capabilities to
succeed in this
markets?

Did Intel
share
Intellectual
Property for
low royalties?

Y

Were the
corresponding
market products
physically
embodying one or
several interfaces –
i.e., was this a
“connector” market?
Y

Y38

Y

Y/N

N/Y39

Did Intel
engage in crossindustry
coordination, or
in other forms
of facilitation of
complementors’
innovation?
Y

1

Networked Multimedia

Initiative

2

Manageability

3

Big Pipes (Broadband)

Initiative

Y

Y

Y40

N

Y/Y

Y

Y

Initiative

Y

Y

Y41

Y

Y/N

Y

Y

4
5

Security

Initiative

Y

Y

N

N/A

Y/N

Y

Y

Anywhere -in-the -Home

Initiative

Y

Y

N

N/A

Y/N

Y

Y

6

Advance-the-Platform

Initiative

Y

Y

Y42

N

Y/Y

Y

Y

7

Interface

Y

Y

Y

N

Y/Y

Y

Y/N43

Interface

Y

Y

Y

N

Y/Y

Y

Y/N43

9

PCI (Peripheral Component
Interface)
AGP (Advanced Graphics
Port)
USB (Universal Serial Bus)

Interface

Y

Y

Y

N

Y/Y

Y

Y/N43

10

1394 (also called FireWire)

Interface

Y

Y

Y

N

Y/Y

Y

Y/N43

11

Interface

Y

Y

N

N/A

Y/N

Y

Y43

Interface

Y

Y

N

N/A

Y/N

Y

N/Y43

13

TAPI (Telephony Application
Programming Interface)
H.323 (interface for computer
telephony)
Home Radio-Frequency

Interface

Y

Y

N

N/A

Y/N

Y

Y

14

DVD (Digital Video Disk)

Interface

Y

Y

N

N/A

Y/N

Y

Y

15

CDSA (Security)

Interface

Y

Y

N

N/A

Y/N

Y

Y

16

Indeo (Intel Video)

Interface

Y

Y

N

N/A

Y/N

N/Y44

N/Y43
N/Y46
N

8

12

17
18

Intel ProShare
(Videoconferencing)
Hood River (PC in the family
room)

Product

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y/N

N/Y45

Product

Y

N

N

N/A

Y/N

N

Intel entered with Videoconferencing products. See Appendix Table II.
N at first, Y later. See Appendix Table IV .
40 Intel entered with some Networking products. See Appendix Table IV.
41 Intel entered with some Networking products. See Burgelman (2002), 279.
42 Intel entered with Chipsets and Motherboards. See Appendix Table II and Appendix Table IV.
43 See Appendix Table IV .
44 N at first, Y later. See Appendix Table IV.
45 N at first, Y later. See Appendix Table IV.
46 N at first, Y later. See Appendix Table IV.
38
39

34

APPENDIX T ABLE III.

DRIVERS OF INTEL’S ENTRY IN COMPLEMENTARY M ARKETS 1990-2004 (CONT’D )

Projects

Type of
Project

Did Intel
believe
that this
project
will help
Job 1?47

19

Networking

Product

20

Chipsets
(for PCI, USB, AGP, etc.)
Motherboards
(for PCI, USB, AGP, etc.)
Software

24

Web Hosting and Online
services
Toys

25

Audio products

26

Internet Appliances

27

Wired and Wireless handheld
PC Accessories

21
22
23

Were the
corresponding
market products
physically
embodying one or
several interfaces –
i.e., was this a
“interface”
market?
Y

Did Intel
enter the
market?

Did Intel
exit
later?

Did Intel have
the
technological
and commercial
capabilities to
succeed in this
markets?

Did Intel share
Intellectual
Property for low
royalties?

Did Intel engage
in cross-industry
coordination, or
in other forms of
facilitation of
complementors’
innovation?

N/Y48

Did Intel
believe that
the
corresponding
market was
likely to
directly
generate large
profits?
N/Y49

Y

N

Y

Y

Y

Product

Y

N

Y

Y

N

Y

Y

Y

Product

Y

N

Y

Y

N

Y

Y

Y

Product

Y

N/Y50

N

N51

N/A

N

Y

Y

Consumer
Service
Consumer
Product
Consumer
Product
Consumer
Product
Consumer
Product

N

Y

N

Y

Y

N

N

N

N

Y52

Y/N

Y

Y

N

N

Y/N53

N

Y

N

Y

Y

N

N

N

N

Y

N

Y

Y

N

N

N

N

Y

N

Y

Y

N

N

N

I.e., Did Intel believe that this market offered strong consumption complementarities with Intel’s microprocessors?
N at first, Y later (after 1998). See Burgelman (2002), 279 -281.
49 N at first, Y later (after 1998). See Burgelman (2002), 279 -281.
50 N for software applications, but Y (at least originally) with Native Signal Processing, i.e. a software tool.
51 N for software applications, and N with Native Signal Processing.
52 Y at first, N later.
53 Y at first, N later.
47
48

35

APPENDIX T ABLE IV.

IAL COORDINATION INITIATIVES IN 1997-1998

Mission

Key programs

Diffusion

Networked
Multimedia

Make multimedia pervasive on the
Net and provide the best experience
on the high-performance Connected
PC

Scalable , MMX Technology
optimized media engines; Efficient
media network transports and
services: tools and services

Manageability

Enable platform and network
infrastructure to make Intel
Architecture systems the most easily
manageable and the best managed
Increase content delivery capacity of
the connected PC to allow home and
business customers to easily receive
new broadband digital content
Make PC interaction trustworthy for
communications, commerce, and
content

Industry specifications and
industry groups; software
development kits

H.323 stack in Microsoft’s Internet Explorer 4.0; supported by
firewall vendors; but also products Indeo Video 5.0; and also
building blocks WDE ships as part of Microsoft’s Internet
Explorer 4.0; RSVP and RTP ship in Windows 98 and Windows
NT 5.0.
Specifications, Software Development Kits; but also products:
Intel NIC54 and LanDesk Software products; Also, diffused
through Microsoft, as ingredients: Wake -on-LAN55 and Wake on-Ring NICs and Modems in NT, Win 98.
Networking connectivity products.

IAL Initiative

Big Pipes

Security

Anywhere-inthe-Home
Advance-thePlatform

Unleash the potential of home PCs
with new uses that deliver computing
power and content when, where, and
how it’s is needed in the home.
Establish the media, communications,
and interconnect building blocks for
the next generation high performance
Intel Architecture platforms

Common software architecture for
PC broadband transport; reference
designs
Industry specifications and
industry groups, drives the CDSA
standardization effort; software
development kits
PC-friendly protocols and
standards; concepts demos and
prototypes.

Open specifications and industry groups, CDSA R2.0, in
OpenGroup; OpenGroup standard, IBM licensed. Products also:
IBM and Intel shipping product based on CDSA standard. And
also, licenses to Zoran: DVD copy protection
Standards, Control-InfraRed – with Hewlett Packard, Microsoft,
and Sharp; Home - Radio-Frequency – with Compaq, IBM, and
HP; and Home Device Control.

Interconnects USB, AGP, 1394 A/B;
future processor optimizations,
visual PC 2000

AGP drivers, USB compliance workshops, PC-friendly 1394A
specifications. No commercialized products. Ingredients in
Microsoft’s products: Real-time services in WDM in Windows
98 and Windows NT 5.0.

NIC = Network Interface Card, an expansion board (i.e., a printed circuit board) that can be inserted into a computer so the computer can be connected to a network. Most NICs are designed for
a particular type of network, protocol, and media, although some can serve multiple networks. (Source: www.webopedia.com)
55 LAN= Local Area Network. A computer network that spans a relatively small area.
54

36

