                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            MYTHS AND REALITIES OF AMERICAN POLITICAL GEOGRAPHY

                                           Edward L. Glaeser
                                            Bryce A. Ward

                                         Working Paper 11857
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11857


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2005




Glaeser thanks the Taubman Center for State and Local Government. We are grateful to Alice Chen and
Nate Rosenberg, Jr. for outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Edward L. Glaeser and Bryce A. Ward. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Myths and Realities of American Political Geography
Edward L. Glaeser and Bryce A. Ward
NBER Working Paper No. 11857
December 2005
JEL No. H7

                                            ABSTRACT

The division of America into red states and blue states misleadingly suggests that states are split into
two camps, but along most dimensions, like political orientation, states are on a continuum. By
historical standards, the number of swing states is not particularly low, and America's cultural
divisions are not increasing. But despite the flaws of the red state/blue state framework, it does
contain two profound truths. First, the heterogeneity of beliefs and attitudes across the United States
is enormous and has always been so. Second, political divisions are becoming increasingly religious
and cultural. The rise of religious politics is not without precedent, but rather returns us to the pre-
New Deal norm. Religious political divisions are so common because religious groups provide
politicians the opportunity to send targeted messages that excite their base.

Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

Bryce A. Ward
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
bward@fas.harvard.edu
In the aftermath of the 2000 election, David Brooks wrote in the Atlantic Monthly that
America was split into red states and blue states. In red states, people believed in God,
watched NASCAR and voted for George W. Bush. In blue states, people ate Thai food,
cared about the environment and voted for Albert Gore. The 2004 election, which
seemed geographically to be a replay of 2000, only reinforced the perceived value of this
framework. Only three states (Iowa, New Hampshire and New Mexico) switched parties
between the elections.


In this essay, we revisit America’s political geography and ask what is true and false
about the “red state/blue state” framework. We begin by identifying five myths
associated with this framework: 1) America is divided into two politically homogenous
regions; 2) The two parties are more spatially segregated than in the past; 3) America’s
political geography is more stable than in the past; 4) America’s cultural divisions are
increasing and 5) America is becoming more politically polarized.


But despite the myths surrounding the red state/blue state paradigm, there are two
important truths captured by this framework. America is a country with remarkable
geographic diversity in its habits and beliefs. People in different states have wildly
different views about religion, homosexuality, AIDS, military policy and wildly different
consumption patterns. The distribution of states along all dimensions is continuous, not
bimodal, but this continuum should never be confused with homogeneity. Moreover,
America’s ideological diversity is not particularly new. In the 1930s, New England was
much more socially liberal than the South. The extent and permanence of cultural
divisions across space is one of America’s most remarkable features. While spatial
sorting on the basis of income or tastes may seem natural to most economists, the
remarkable spatial heterogeneity of beliefs – political and otherwise – presents more of a
challenge to the standard Bayesian models of belief formation. For example, in the April
2004, CBS/New York Times poll, twenty-three percent of respondents in Oregon,
Washington and California thought that Saddam Hussein was personally involved in the
September 11, 2001, attacks. Forty-seven percent of respondents in Texas, Oklahoma
and Arkansas had that view. In the 1987-2003 PEW Values surveys, 56 percent of



                                             2
Mississippi residents think that AIDS is God’s punishment for immoral sexual behavior.
Only 16 percent of Rhode Island residents share that view.


Using state and county level regressions, we explore a number of different hypotheses
about the long run historical causes of differences in beliefs over space. We find little
support these cultural differences represent long-standing differences in religiosity or the
legacy of slavery.


Instead, our regressions support the idea that Blue State culture reflects primarily the
legacy of different ethnicities working together at high densities: the most important
historical explanatory variables are the share of the labor force in manufacturing in 1920
and the share of the population that was foreign born in 1920 strongly predict liberal
beliefs and voting for John Kerry. We interpret these results as suggesting that the
liberal views that reduced traditional social divisions came about because there were
gains to reducing economic and religious conflicts that could derail interactions in the
marketplace.


The second important truth captured by the red state/blue state framework is that political
parties and politicians have had an increasing tendency to divide on cultural and religious
issues rather than on economic differences. Again, in historical perspective, cultural
politics is not unusual. In the late 19th century, “Rum, Romanism and rebellion” were the
core issues that determined the Republican Party. The true aberration was the mid-
twentieth century era of economic politics.


Why has culture dominated politics so much more effectively than economics during
much of American history? Glaeser, Ponzetto and Shapiro (2005), following Downs
(1957), present a model where extremism occurs because political divisions are needed to
mobilize infra-marginal voters, but going to extremes is only rational when political
messages are heard disproportionately by your own supporters. Political divisions
therefore follow social cleavages because social organizations allow politicians to send
targeted messages. .This models helps us to understand why economic divisions between



                                              3
the parties only became entrenched in the middle 20th century, with the rise of the labor
movement and its growing connection to the Democratic Party, and why as unions have
lost their importance, religion has again come to dominate political debate.




    Myths of American Political Geography


We now discuss five myths of American political geography.


Myth # 1: America is divided into two politically homogeneous areas


Does the red state/blue state paradigm that describes the remarkable spatial configuration
of Democrats on the coast and Republicans in the heartland mean that Americans are
increasingly living in politically homogenous states, so that a smaller number of people
live in swing states? Is it true, as E. J. Dionne (2003) asserted, that “the red states get
redder, the blue states get bluer,” and as a result elections are being decided by a smaller
and smaller number of battleground states?


Figure 1 shows the time series of the share of electoral votes in “battleground” states,
where we define battlegrounds as those states with margin of victory that was less than
ten percent. Alternative definitions from five to twenty percent margins of victory show
similar results. The dotted line shows the share of electoral votes in battleground states in
every election from 1840 until today. The black line shows the average of the past five
elections. The gray line at the bottom of the figure shows the popular vote “margin of
victory” in the last election.


The election-by-election results show that there is a great deal of volatility in the share of
electoral votes, or population, connected with battleground states. In close elections, such
as 1960, 1968 and 1976, more than 70 percent of the electoral votes were cast in
battlegrounds. In blowout elections, like 1964 or 1972, less than fifteen percent of the
votes are in such states. In the last three elections, between 40 and 50 percent of the



                                               4
electoral votes were in swing states. These numbers lie between the high and low
extremes of the last 40 years.


To show any trends that underlie this volatility, the black line in Figure 1 displays the
twenty year moving average of the share of electoral votes in battleground states. The
moving average shows no evidence of a general downward trend in the number of swing
states. Instead, the time series suggests three periods in post-1840 U.S. electoral history.
Between 1840 and 1900, on average, around 55 percent of the electoral votes lived in
swing states. Between 1904 and 1948, around 30 percent of electoral votes were in
swing states. After 1952, the U.S. has reverted to pre-1900 patterns. The first half of the
20th century, not today, had an unusual abundance of landslide states.


Myth # 2: The two parties are more spatially segregated than in the past


Even though the number of states that can by considered “safe” for either party has not
been rising over time, there could be more political segregation at the local level.
However, the county-level evidence shows that segregation by party is not significantly
increasing, and it is in fact much lower than many other forms of segregation.


There are two usual indices of racial segregation that can also be used to measure
political segregation: dissimilarity and isolation. The dissimilarity index measures the
share of the total population of either group 1 or group 2 that would need to be moved
across areas for there to be an equal proportion of group 1 in every area. 1 A high
dissimilarity index indicates a large degree of segregation; if a large share of the
population must move in order to be evenly distributed, then the population must
currently be highly segregated. The isolation index measures the share of the population
belonging to group 1 where the average member of group 1 lives. A high isolation index


1. The dissimilarity index between group 1 and group 2 is defined as:
                                             1           Population1, Area Population 2, Area
                            Dissimilar ity =     ∑                        −
                                             2 All Areas Population1,Total Population 2,Total
where refers to the population of group i for i=1 or 2 in a geographic area and refers to the total
population of group i.


                                                          5
also indicates a large degree of segregation; if the typical member of group 1 lives in an
area where the proportion of group1 greatly exceeds the proportion of group 1 in the total
population, then the population is highly segregated.2


Following Klinkner (2004), we calculate dissimilarity indices and isolation indices for
Republicans and Democrats based on voting in the last presidential election between
1840 and today.3 In all cases, we have eliminated individuals who voted for neither
Republican nor Democratic candidates. We use counties as the units of observation.
Figure 2 shows the time patterns of these indices.


The dissimilarity index shows that there have been two time periods where the U.S. was
unusually divided spatially: the elections of 1856 and 1860, when dissimilarity topped 40
percent and the geographically based Civil War ensued, and 1924, when dissimilarity was
greater than 30 percent. Over the last 60 years, dissimilarity has generally been below 20
percent. The past four elections do show a slight upward trend, but this is nothing like
the remarkable rise seen between 1916 and 1924. Moreover, this level of dissimilarity is
much less than the dissimilarity of college and non-college educated adults across
counties (.25) or blacks and non-blacks (.46).


The isolation measures show even less of a trend. Both Republicans and Democrats live
in counties where about fifty percent of the voters share their own party. The isolation
index in 2004 was 53.4 percent for Republicans and 52.6 percent for Democrats. These
numbers are far lower than the Republican 1920s, when the average Republican lived in a
county where 70 percent of the voters also voted for Coolidge or Hoover, or the
Democratic 1930s where the average Democrat lived in a county where 60 percent of the
voters supported F.D.R. There is just no sense that people are generally living in
politically highly segregated counties.



2
   The isolation index of group 1 is defined as:
                                                  Population1, Area         Population1, Area
                             Isolation = ∑
                                        All Areas Population1,Total Population1, Area + Population 2 , Area
3
  For years prior to 1856, the segregation indices represent the segregation between Whigs and Democrats.


                                                     6
Myth # 3: America’s political geography is more stable than in the past


While the segregation of the political parties hasn’t increased significantly, it may still be
true that American political divisions are hardening, and that political patterns are
becoming more permanent. As Harold Meyerson (2004) wrote in the Washington Post,
“the battle lines of the cultural civil war that emerged in the 2000 contest have shown
themselves to be all but permeable to even the most earthshaking events.” If anything,
the stability predicted by Meyerson and many others was vindicated in the 2004 election
where only three states (Iowa, New Hampshire and New Mexico) changed parties.
Perhaps, American politics is becoming increasingly geographically stable over time.


Indeed, the myth in this case is not the stability of political geography— political
geography is quite stable— but rather that this stability is new or unusual. Figure 3
shows two measures of electoral stability over the last 150 years. The top line shows the
correlation coefficient across counties between the percent supporting the Republican
Party in the current election and the percent supporting the Republican Party in the
previous election. The bottom line shows the share of electoral votes that changed parties
since the last election.4


The top line shows just how stable political geography has been over the last 130 years.
Between 1880 and today there has only been one period where the correlation between
current and lagged percentage of Republican voters dropped significantly below 80
percent. In 1964, 1968 and 1972, the coefficient dropped wildly as the South left the
Democratic Party. In historical context, this period is unusual, not the 24 years since.




4
 In both cases, as in Figure 7 & 8 below, we deviate slightly from our usual methodology in our treatment
of the 1912 election. In that year, we treat Theodore Roosevelt’s progressive supporters as Republicans.
Since Roosevelt was a former Republican president, albeit running for election on the Progressive ticket,
his supporters do not reflect any real change in support for the Republican party, but rather a temporary
deviation to supporting a Republican political idol. Without this correction, the 1912 election would
display a particularly unusual degree of political fluidity as Republicans flocked to Roosevelt in 1912 and
then flocked back to the Republican fold in 1916.



                                                     7
The correlation between the percentage of voters supporting George W. Bush in 2004 and
the percentage of voters supporting Bush in 2000 at the county level is over 95 percent.
This is high, but not unlike the degree of electoral stability engendered in the re-election
campaigns of Eisenhower or Franklin Roosevelt. In these cases, the correlation
coefficients were also in the mid-90s. Over the past 20 years, smoothing out election-by-
election variation, the correlation has been lower than during 1932-1960 or 1868-1908.
Stability has been the norm, not the exception, in American electoral history, and recent
trends have brought us back to this norm.


Myth # 4: America’s cultural divisions are increasing


A steady stream of rhetoric proclaims that “there is a religious war going on in this
country, a cultural war as critical to the kind of nation we shall be as the Cold War itself,
for this war is for the soul of America” (this example is from Davis and Robinson, 1997).
Fiorina, Abrams, and Pope (2004) provide a rich set of examples showing that across a
wide range of issues, the distribution of preferences is single-peaked: most people are in
the middle of the distribution and not at the extreme. We will later disagree with Fiorina,
Abrams, and Pope (2004) in our interpretation of American political geography, as we
believe that there are significant cultural divisions across space and people: Mississippi is
not Massachusetts. But we do not disagree with their evidence that divisions across
people and space have not been increasing over time.


For example, consider polling evidence on extreme views about abortion. From 1972 to
2004, the share of the population taking the position that abortion should never be
permitted has varied in a narrow band between 10-13 percent, according to data from the
National Election Surveys. Conversely, the fraction of the population taking the position
that abortion should never be forbidden or that a women should always be able to obtain
an abortion (the precise wording of the question varied over time) rose from 25 percent in
the 1970s to roughly 35 percent in the 1980s, before peaking at about 45 percent in 1992
and declining back to the 1980s levels since then. Overall, any purported increase in
abortion extremism amounts to essentially no change in the share of the population who



                                              8
is extremely opposed to abortion and the share of those who believe abortion should
never be forbidden fluctuating somewhat, but currently standing at the same level as the
1980s. Similarly, while many Americans are opposed to homosexuality, on the whole,
Americans have become significantly more tolerant of homosexuality now then they
were 20 years ago. We are not living in an era of increasing cultural divisions between
people, even if politicians are increasingly dividing on these issues.


Myth # 5: America’s political divisions are increasing


A final myth is that we live in an era of increasingly polarized politics, where individuals
from different parties increasingly despise one another, or as Lawrence (2002) writes,
“when George W. Bush took office, half the country cheered and the other half seethed.”
Certainly, the heat of the last election, where Democrats accused the President of trading
blood for oil, and the Swift Boat Veterans for Truth attacked John Kerry’s war record,
does suggest rising tempers and mutual distaste.


One usual political science measure of inter-party dislike is the group “thermometer.” In
“thermometer” questions, respondents are asked to give their feelings towards a group on
a 0 to 100 scale with 100 indicating the most positive and 0 indicating the most negative.
The National Election Survey offers thermometer ratings towards the Democratic Party
and the Republican Party bi-annually since 1978 (with the exception of the 2002 survey,
which did not include this question). For the whole period, Democrats’ thermometer
rating of the Democratic Party averages 73, and their average rating of the Republican
Party averages 42. Republicans, on the other hand, rate the Republican Party at an
average of 70 and the Democratic Party at an average of 44.


Since these ratings may be influenced both by general attitudes towards politics and by
partisanship, we compute each individual’s relative taste for the Democratic Party by
subtracting the thermometer rating towards the Republican Party from the thermometer
rating for the Democratic Party. We then average this relative preference for the
Democratic Party among Democrats and Republicans separately.



                                              9
Figure 4 shows the average relative preference for the Democratic Party among
Democrats and Republicans since 1978. The difference between these two lines should
be seen as widening partisan hostility. Throughout most of the past 30 years partisanship
has been essentially stable, albeit with a slight upwards trend. There was a slight increase
in hostility in the early Reagan years and some swings during George H.W. Bush’s
presidency, but from 1982-1998 partisanship is essentially flat. Moreover, between 1978
and 1998 any rise in partisanship is statistically insignificant.


After 1998 (and particularly between 2000 and 2004), there have been sharp increases in
both Republican and Democratic partisanship. Republican enthusiasm for the
Republican Party is higher than it has ever been. Democratic hostility for the Republican
Party is higher than it has ever been. As such, there is certainly some truth to the view
that we are currently experiencing a strongly partisan period, but this does not appear to
represent any sort of a secular trend. This division really began in 2000 and seems to be
more of a George W. Bush effect than any ongoing move towards greater partisan
hostility. Of course, it remains to be seen if partisanship declines in the post-Bush era.


    The First Reality of American Political Geography: Cultural Heterogeneity


These myths have led some observers to suggest that there is no truth to the “Culture
War” metaphor or that the red state/blue state division is just plain false. While there are
misleading elements of these frameworks, amidst all myths, these ideas also contain two
great, essential truths. First, America is a nation of enormous cultural and economic
diversity. This diversity is not new and it shouldn’t be news, but it is still the central fact
of American cultural geography. We earn, consume and believe wildly different things
in different parts of this country. To an economist, perhaps the most striking thing is that
beliefs can differ so much over space.


Second, American political parties have increasingly become organized around cultural
and religious fissures. 30 years ago, income was a better predictor of party than religious



                                              10
attendance. Today, religion rather than earnings predicts Republicanism. The rise of
religious politics is not without precedent. Prior to 1930, the correlation between religion
and party affiliation across states seems to have been at least as strong as it is today.
Nonetheless, this cultural division is a central political fact of the last 25 years.


Heterogeneity of Economics and Society


Using the Pew Research Center’s 1987-2003 Values Survey (combined dataset), we have
calculated state average responses for a number of questions about values and beliefs.
Even pooling over this 16 year time period, sample sizes are often modest, so we include
only those states with more than 50 observations over the entire time period. In Table 1,
we report the ten most extreme states (including the District of Columbia) for six of these
questions. We also include the ten most extreme states in terms of median household
income and wine sales per capita.5 Since correlations across variables are far less than
one, if we followed Ansolabehere, Rodden and Snyder (2006) and look at an average
variable to classify states views as unidimensional, we would miss significant amounts of
the striking variation that exists across states.


The first panel shows the state average response rate to the question “Should schools fire
homosexual teachers?” Across the entire sample, 42 percent answered yes to this
question. There is striking geographic variation to this question. In the five most liberal
states (with respect to this statement): New Jersey, Maryland, Connecticut, the District of
Columbia and Massachusetts, less than 30 percent of respondents thought that teachers
should be fired for being gay. In the five most conservative states: West Virginia,
Oklahoma, Tennessee, Arkansas and Mississippi, a healthy majority favored firing
homosexual teachers. Indeed, almost two-thirds of Mississippi respondents favored


5
  One potential issue with a table of this nature is that these samples are not huge and we should expect to
see significant variation. However, the variation across states is much higher than we would expect from
random sampling error. On average, each state has 440 respondents, and if the true response probabilities
were the same across states, we would expect the standard deviation of state level averages to be .023. The
standard deviation of the state means is more than four times this amount. We can soundly reject the view
that differences across states just reflect sampling error.



                                                    11
firing such teachers. The standard deviation of state mean is more than four times the
standard deviation of state means that would be expected from random sampling error.




The second and third panels show similar geographic heterogeneity in the responses to
the statements “It is okay for blacks and whites to date” and “AIDS is God’s punishment
for immoral sexual behavior.” While the extreme left and ring wing states as defined by
these first three questions are not the same, the correlations among them are quite high.
e.g., the correlation between the belief that schools should fire homosexual teachers and
approval of black-white dating is -77 percent.


Figure 5 shows that responses to these cultural statements are highly correlated across
states with voting Democratic in the last election. In no state that went for Kerry did the
share of respondents agreeing with the statement “AIDS is God’s punishment for
immoral sexual behavior” exceed 38 percent. In no state that went for Bush did the share
of respondents answering no to this question fall below 28 percent. The overall
correlation coefficient across states between this variable and voting is -70 percent. The
figure also illustrates that there is a continuous distribution of beliefs over space, not two
nations. The variation is striking, but the distribution is not bi-modal.


The fourth and fifth panels show that geographic heterogeneity in political beliefs is not
limited to cultural issues, but it extends into foreign and economic policies as well.
These panels indicate the share of respondents that agree with the statements “the best
way to ensure peace is through military strength” and “when something is run by the
government, it is usually inefficient and wasteful.” The differences in the fraction who
agree with these statements between the most liberal and conservatives states are 30-40
percent. Again, America is not two nations, but it does have a lot of geographic
heterogeneity in its beliefs.


The heterogeneity of political beliefs is accompanied by striking geographic
heterogeneity in religious beliefs. The Pew data have only a limited number of questions



                                              12
on religious beliefs, such as “I never doubt the existence of God,” and “Prayer is an
important part of my daily life.” There is geographic variation in the former question: 30
percent of Delaware respondents admit to doubt, while only four percent of South
Carolina respondents admit to doubt. There is even more geographic variation in the
question on prayer. In this case the range is from 58 percent in Rhode Island to 95
percent in Mississippi.


Other data sets, such as the National Election Survey and the General Social Survey,
provide other, perhaps more interesting questions. For example, the National Election
Survey provides us with variation in belief about the literal truth of the Bible. In this
case, the most believing states were Louisiana and Alabama, where 75 and 69 percent of
respondents respectively believed in the literal truth of the bible. The least two believing
states were Massachusetts and Connecticut, where only 17 and 20 percent of respondents
respectively believed in the literal truth of the bible. The General Social Survey provides
us with belief in the existence of the devil. The General Social Survey sample is too
small to make comparisons across states, but across regions the variation is significant.
In the Pacific region, 49 percent of respondents say that they believe in the devil; in the
East South Central region, 82 percent of respondents say that they believe in the devil.6


Panel 6 of Table 1, reports the extreme states measured in terms of responses to the
statement, “We will all be called before God on Judgment Day to answer for our sins.”
The five states with the smallest fractions believing in Judgment Day are Vermont,
Rhode Island, Oregon, New Hampshire and Nevada. The five states with the highest
fractions are Tennessee, South Carolina, Oklahoma, Alabama and Mississippi. These
numbers make it clear why a New England agnostic intellectual might indeed feel that the
Deep South is another planet. After all nearly 95 percent of respondents from that state
will have a fundamentally different view of God and the after-life from this New England
agnostic.



6
 The Pacific region consists of Washington, Oregon, California, Alaska, and Hawaii. The East South
Central region consists of Kentucky, Tennessee, Alabama, and Mississippi.


                                                  13
The regional patterns on moral issues appear to be remarkably durable. Today, the New
England and Mid-Atlantic regions are today America’s most liberal regions (along with
the Pacific Coast). These regions appear to have had liberal views as early as the 1930s.
In 1936-37 Gallup polls, across the U.S., 67 percent of respondents said that they would
vote for a qualified Catholic for President and 49 percent of respondents said that they
would vote for a quality Jew for President. In New England and the Mid-Atlantic region,
74 and 79 percent of respondents said that they would support a qualified Catholic and 62
and 59 percent of respondents said that they would support a qualified Jew, which made
these two regions the most tolerant in the county along these dimensions. They were also
the most liberal regions in favoring support for federal funding of venereal disease,
supporting a free press and opposing the sterilization of criminals. Importantly, in those
days, New England had the most conservative views on economic policy.


One of the peculiarities of American geography is that ardent Christianity and belief in
the military tend to go together. Across states, the correlation between the share of
respondents who say that prayer is an important part of my daily life and the share of
respondents who say that the best way to ensure peace is through military strength is 73
percent. One can certainly interpret the Gospels as having an anti-military message, but
this doesn’t seem to be the interpretation favored by America’s most active Christians.


The country doesn’t just display remarkable difference in beliefs about religious things
like the devil; beliefs about foreign policy related facts also differ significantly across
space. For example, a CBS/New York Times poll of April 2004 asked respondents, “Do
you think Sadam Hussein was personally involved in the September 11, 2001, terrorist
attacks on the World Trade Center?” 45 percent of the South Central region respondents
said yes to this question, but only 25 percent of the Pacific Southwest respondents shared
this belief. In the same poll, 60 percent of the South Central region respondents and 62
percent of the Mountains and Plains respondents said that they think that “Iraq probably
does have weapons of mass destruction that the United States has not found yet?” Only




                                              14
forty-three percent of the Pacific Southwest and forty percent of the Pacific Northwest
respondents shared this view.7


These differences in beliefs within the U.S. drive home one central point about human
cognition: the Bayesian approach to learning offers little hope for understanding the
remarkable heterogeneity in beliefs across individuals and space (Glaeser 2004). In
these rational models, disagreement is difficult, let alone the wild level of dispersion of
beliefs that we see. After all, there is no real difference in the evidence that these
different states have been exposed to, yet they have come to radically different
conclusions, and continue to hold these conclusions despite being aware that others
disagree. Despite Aumann (1976), Americans wholeheartedly agree-to-disagree. One
natural alternative model is that people base opinions mostly on the views of those
around them. As such, local interactions are critical, and these provide plenty of
possibility for wide geographic variation (as in Glaeser, Sacerdote and Scheinkman,
1996).


Of course, the nation is different in many other ways as well. According to 2003 Census
Bureau figures, the five wealthiest states (Minnesota, Virginia, Connecticut, New
Hampshire and New Jersey) had median family incomes around $55,000. Mississippi,
Arkansas, West Virginia and Louisiana all have median family incomes that are $20,000
less than this amount. Of course, these are nominal income levels, uncorrected for state
cost of living, but certainly the ability to buy traded goods is far lower in these poorer
states. Unsurprisingly, there is a healthy correlation between attitudes and income. The
correlation between mean income and acceptance of black-white dating is 58 percent.
The correlation between income and the belief that homosexual teachers should be fired
is -68 percent. A particularly surprising relationship is the fact that the correlation
between state median income and share of respondents that say that poor people have
become too dependent on government assistance is -38 percent. As we will discuss later,


7
 The Pacific Southwest includes California, Nevada, Arizona, and Hawaii. The Pacific Northwest includes
Alaska, Washington, Oregon, and Idaho. The South Central includes Texas, Oklahoma, Arkansas,
Louisiana, and New Mexico. The Mountains and Plains include Colorado, Utah, Wyoming, Montana,
North Dakota, and South Dakota.


                                                  15
the fact that respondents in poorer states are more likely to have anti-redistribution
opinions makes us doubt whether these opinions should be seen as being exogenous
variables that reflect true economic interests. Another quite plausible view is that these
opinions are the result of political affiliation and the desire to be consistent with the party
line.


While there is a positive correlation between voting Republican and the share of
respondents that say that poor people have become too dependent on government, the
correlation between state income and Republicanism is -43 percent. Since individual
level income still positively predicts voting Republican (albeit weakly), the negative
correlation between income and Republicanism at the state level represents one of those
interesting instances in which aggregate relationships are the reverse of individual
relationships (as in Glaeser and Sacerdote, 2001). This relationship, however, disappears
if we control for state level cultural variables or even urbanization, and one explanation
for this phenomenon is that the correlation between income and culture is much stronger
at the state level than at the individual level.


Differences in consumption patterns are even greater than differences in income. The
five states with the least wine sales (West Virginia, Mississippi, Oklahoma, Arkansas and
Iowa) sold around 1 gallon of wine per capita in 2002. The five areas with the most wine
sales (Massachusetts, Nevada, Idaho, New Hampshire and the District of Columbia)
consumed nearly five times as much wine per capita. Even wine consumption is
correlated with political and social beliefs, often in surprising ways. For example, the
correlation between wine consumption and the share of respondents who think that black-
white dating is okay is 61 percent.


While the geographic differences within America are large, they are not new and they do
not seem to be growing. There is little evidence to back up E. J. Dionne’s assertion that
red states are getting redder and blue states are getting bluer. We compared the variance
of state averages during the 1987-1993 period and the 1994-2004 period. The variance
across states in the opinion that schools should fire homosexual teachers has risen



                                               16
slightly. The variance of the state average view that it is okay for blacks and whites to
date has fallen more. The variance of the view that AIDS is God’s punishment has risen.
The variance in the share of the population that takes the Bible to be the literal word of
God has fallen. The variance of the share that thinks that the government is often
inefficient and wasteful has risen. Overall, it is hard to see a general trend. The nation is
different and it has been so for many years.


The Causes of American Cultural Diversity


While the differences in political and social beliefs across space are striking and while
many of these correlations are provocative, these correlations give us little idea about
what factors explain differences in beliefs across the United States. In this section, we
consider three possible explanations: long-standing differences in religious adherence
across states, the legacy of slavery, and diversity in the marketplace. The first hypothesis
suggests that the fundamental difference between areas within the U.S. is simply the
degree of religiosity. The second hypothesis is that regional differences fundamentally
reflect the legacy of slavery and the Civil War.


The third hypothesis – diversity in marketplace-- suggests that areas where diverse
populations interacted in market settings developed beliefs that reduced ethnic and
religious conflict. According to this view, if ethnic groups interact at high densities, they
either destroy each other or eventually develop ideologies that minimize conflict.8 While
many of the “liberal” responses to survey questions suggest tolerance towards minorities
or people who violate traditional religious norms, this hypothesis does not imply that blue
state America is tolerant and Red State America is not. Blue State America is more
intolerant of some groups like the religious and Southerners. Instead, this hypothesis
suggests that Blue State ideology is tolerant in ways that reduced the ethnic and religious
conflicts that could have hurt an economy depending on ethnically diverse populations
working together at high densities.


8
 Alternatively, the hypothesis can be interpreted as suggesting a reverse causality where diverse ethnic
groups economically interact only in places that have managed to reduce conflict.


                                                    17
To measure the historical religious environment, we use the 1926 Census of Religious
Bodies which provides a count of members of different churches at both the county and
state level. Because some denominations (Catholics, Lutherans, Episcopalians) include
children in their membership, but most other Protestant denominations do not (or do not
do so consistently), we follow Johnson, et al (1974) and multiply membership in
churches which substantially underreport child participation by the total county
population divided by the population over 14. Then, using the classification groupings of
the American Religion Data Archive (www.thearda.com) based on the research of
Steensland, et al (2000), Melton (1999) and Mead (1995), we calculate the number of
church members who are evangelical.9 The county-level correlation between adherents
per capita in 1926 and adherents per capita in 1990 is .44.10 We present the results for
evangelicalism because it is both more correlated over time and more correlated with
modern religious behavior
.
To test whether current political divisions reflect the enduring legacy of slavery and the
Civil War, we use the number of slaves per capita in the state in 1850. For places that
weren’t states, this variable takes on a value of zero. Because this variable is highly
skewed, we use the logarithm of one plus this variable (none of our results change if we
use the linear specification). Our results are also unchanged if we replace this continuous
variable with a discrete variable that takes on a value of one if the state was a member of
the Confederacy.


The diversity hypothesis is tested using three different measures of diverse social
environments. First, using Census data we use the share of the population that is foreign
born in 1920. We have reproduced our results using a fractionalization index of ethnic
heterogeneity based on country of birth in the 1920 Census.11 Second, we use the share

9
  For a complete description of how the modern list was matched to historical denominations, see the data
appendix posted at http://www.people.fas.harvard.edu/~bward
10
   We exclude 5 counties with adherents per capita well above 1 in 1926 from this correlation.
11
   The results with ethnic-fractionalization indicies which include race as well as foreign-born ancestry
change the results discussed below slightly. Specifically, the significance the slavery measure increases
slightly for several of the outcomes, and the significance of the log of density decreases slightly.


                                                    18
of the population that worked in manufacturing in 1920. This variable is highly correlated
with the density and urbanization of an area, and we see it as a proxy for high density
economic interactions. We have obtained similar results using the share of the population
in 1920 that lives in cities with more than 25,000 people.


Regressions (1)-(6) show our results for states and regression (7) shows the connection
between these explanatory variables and the share voting for Kerry at the county level. In
the state level regressions, the explanatory power is quite high and r-squareds run from
48 percent to 70 percent. In the county level regressions, the r-squared is 14 percent.


The first row shows the impact of evangelism in 1926. Evangelicalism in 1926 is
statistically significant in four out of seven specifications. For example, it significantly
predicts approval of black-white dating and belief in peace through strength, and it
weakly predicts the belief that AIDS is a punishment from God and the importance of
prayer. In most cases, the coefficients are reasonably large, but due to the high
correlation of the independent variables, this variable is not highly significant. In
univariate regressions, the evangelicalism variable is almost always significant.


In the second row, we see the coefficients on the slave population in 1850. In this case,
the coefficients are typically small and quite insignificant. The same is true of the
categorical variable depicting membership in the confederacy. There are two variables
which this variable (or the confederacy variable) is correlated with – the belief in peace
through strength and, somewhat surprisingly, a belief in the efficiency of government.
These effects, while significant, are still quite small. While it is not impossible that the
legacy of slavery matters, there is no sense that support for Republicanism is determined
by the borders of the old slave states, and despite E. J. Dionne’s views, there is little
evidence to suggest that current political and social divisions reflect the ongoing legacy
of the Civil War.


In the third row, we look at the importance of percent foreign born in 1920. In this case,
the coefficients are generally significant economically and statistically. As the share of



                                              19
the state that is foreign born in 1920 increases by one percentage point, the share of
respondents who say that AIDS is God’s punishment declines by .271 percent point and
the share of respondents who say that homosexual teachers should be fired declines by
.504 percentage points. Foreign born is also negatively associated with the importance of
prayer and positively correlated with acceptance of interracial dating. Finally, this
variable is strongly positively associated with support for the Democratic Party. As the
county share foreign born in 1920 increases by one percentage point, the share supporting
Kerry increases by almost one-half of a percentage point.


The fourth row examines the impact of the share of the workforce in manufacturing in
1920. In this case, the coefficients are significant in every regression except on black-
white dating. Industrialization 85 years ago is an astonishingly good predictor of social
and cultural attitudes today across states and a good predictor of support for the
Democratic Party at both the state and county levels. As the share of the workforce in
1920 in manufacturing increases by one percentage point, the share of respondents today
believing that AIDS is punishment declines by .28 percentage points, the share believing
that military strength is the best way to peace declines by .16 percentage points, and the
share supporting John Kerry at the state level increased by .42 percentage points.


Religious and political attitudes are better predicted by industrialization and immigration
100 years ago, then by the history of slavery and religion. Traditional religious views
and voting Republican is strongly associated with places where Anglo-Americans lived
with fewer immigrants. Likewise, late industrialization is also strongly associated with
Republican ballots and views that are now Republican. History does matter, but it seems
that cultural and political divides have at least as much to do with industrialization and
immigration than with religious history or slavery.


While there are many possible explanations for the connection between immigration,
industrialization and culture, one hypothesis is that diverse populations working together
at high densities, eventually develop ideologies that minimize conflict. Alternatively,
areas that were more productive and that sought new immigrant labor encouraged views



                                             20
that minimized religious strife and encouraged financially profitable immigrants. New
York City has a remarkable history of religious tolerance dating from its founding as a
commercial colony. Its Dutch commercial leaders tolerated Jews and heterodox
Christians because their presence would increase the economic welfare of the colony.
Through the early 20th century, industrialists generally opposed the intolerant, nativist
strain that would eventually shut off the supply of cheap immigrant labor.


New England’s path to religious tolerance also shows the importance of commerce and
heterogeneity. . Early seventeenth century Massachusetts is usually put forward as a
model of intolerance, not openness, and Protestants of differing views were exiled (like
Anne Hutchison) or killed (like Quakers). However, by the 19th century, tolerant
Unitarianism had replaced strict Congregationalism, and as we have already discussed in
the first decades of the 20th century, New England was remarkably socially liberal.


The change appears to have begun even at the end of the eighteenth century, as
“merchants increasingly were dependent on their commerce with the outside world and
believed in seeking an accommodation with that world” (Bremer, 1995, p. 173).
Between 1690 and 1710, traditional Puritanism declined. The state legislature pushed
Increase Mather, a champion of traditional Puritanism, out as President of Harvard.
Merchants, like Thomas Brattle, endowed more liberal churches, and, in 1699, the
“Brattle Street Manifesto” affirmed a far more tolerant form of Congregationalism.
The decline of strict Puritanism appears to have been primarily the result of actions by
merchants like Brattle and Elisha Cooke who followed the merchant led community in
New York towards a more religiously tolerant and less religious community (the stricter
Congregationalists of course founded a competing college in New Haven).


This hypothesis does not mean to suggest that diversity always leads to tolerance.
Indeed, in many cases, diversity leads at least initially to hatred and ethnic conflict
(Glaeser, 2005). However, if different religious or ethnic groups are prevented from
using the power of the state to disenfranchise, enslave or kill each other, and if there




                                              21
exists a powerful group that benefits from eliminating conflict, then diversity can
eventually lead to a watering down of core religious tenets or ethnic animosities.


   The Second Reality of American Political Geography: Politics follows Culture


Around the 2004 election, many authors commented on the remarkable correlation
between the tendency to go to church and the tendency to vote Republican.
The overall correlation between income and Republicanism among white males is
essentially zero outside of the extremes of the income distribution (Glaeser, Ponzetto and
Shapiro, 2005). However, the relationship between Religion and Republicanism is
extremely strong throughout the distribution. Individuals who go to church once a month
vote Republican 66 percent of the time; individuals who go to church once per week vote
Republican 75 percent of the time. The correlation between the church attendance
variable and Republicanism is 20 percent.


This increasing importance of religion does represent a shift over the past 50 years.
Figure 7 shows the impact of income and religion over the past 50 years. The vertical
axis depicts the OLS coefficients from estimation of the following equation for each
election year:


(1) Pr(Republican) i = β • ln(Incomei ) + δ • church attendence i + X i ' φ + ε i ,,


where Pr(Republican) is a categorical variable taking on a value of one if the individual
votes republican, ln(Incomei ) is the logarithm of family income, church attendance is a
categorical variable taking on a value of one if the individual attends church once per
month or more. The X vector includes controls for gender, race, education and age.
As before, we have excluded voters who chose neither Republicans nor Democrats. The
black line shows the effect of log of income, and the grey line the effect of attending
church once a month or more. The coding of religion in the National Election Survey
changed in 1972, so it is inappropriate to compare the magnitude of effects before that



                                               22
date with the magnitudes after then.12 The figure suggests that in the 1970s and before,
the coefficients on income and church attendance were comparable. Since 1980, religion
has become much more important.


To analyze longer historical patterns in the relationship between income and
Republicanism, we turn to county level election returns and during each election from
1864 until today we regress:


      Republican Votes
(2)                         = α + β • Log(Median Income in 1950) + ε
        Total Votes


where α is a constant and β captures the relationship between Republicanism and
income. We use income in 1950 because income is not available before 1947 and we
wanted to be able to use a consistent measure of county wealth. Results look similar if
we use the logarithm of contemporary income for the post-1950 period. Because of the
correlation between income and the South, we also present estimates of β in regressions
that include a dummy variable indicating that the state was a member of the Confederacy
and in regressions excluding all of those states.


The top line shows the estimates from a regression with no Confederacy control and that
regression shows a straightforward rise and decline in the connection between income
and Republicanism. The most basic fact is that from the 1870s to the 1950s, richer states
were reliably more Republican and this is no longer true today. On average, a one log
point increase in 1950 median income (roughly a doubling) generally increased the share
of the population that voted Republican by 4 percent between 1868 and 1956. The
bottom line excludes the south, and in this case, there is a very long term pattern (1870-
2004) and a recent pattern (1976-2004) of declining correlations between income and
Republicanism, but over in the middle part of the 20th century, there is extreme volatility


12
   Prior to 1972, the church dummy is equal to one if the respondent attends church often or regularly. The
fraction of respondents in these categories in 1968 (the last year it was phrased in this way) is basically the
same as the fraction attending church at least once a month in 1970 (the first year of the new version).


                                                      23
in the income-Republicanism relationship mostly associated with the ability of
Democrats to attract high income urban counties. Finally, the middle line shows an even
more complex pattern, but one that still supports a declining relationship between income
and voting Republican at the county level.


Our results contrast with those presented by Ansolabehere, Rodden and Snyder (2006)
who argue that economics remains a more important predictor of political orientation
than morals. Our results differ because they use opinions on issues to predict voting and
we use actual income and religious attendance. Income doesn’t strongly predict voting
Republican but their economic issues index does. On moral issues both opinions and
harder variables like church attendance predict Republicanism.


To believe Ansolabehere, Rodden and Snyder’s (2006) view that economic issues
continue to trump moral issues, you must believe that the importance of economic voting
should be measured by using opinion surveys about economics rather than actual income.
If these survey opinions are the result of political affiliation rather than the cause (either
because of social persuasion as in Murphy and Shleifer, 2004, or because of a desire for
internal consistency), then it would make little sense to regress voting on opinions. The
first reason to question the use of these surveys is that responses are weakly correlated
with individual economic status and correlations at the state level generally go in the
wrong direction. Economic opinions don’t appear to respond to economic interests.


A second issue with the Ansolabehere, Rodden and Snyder (2006) economic issues index
is that this index is the result of factor analysis designed to find opinions that tend to go
together. The opinions that go together and are labeled “economic issues” are an odd mix
including enthusiasm for government spending, environmentalism, health insurance and
labor unions. These views have little in common other than being major parts of the
Democratic platform, and one plausible interpretation of the factor analysis is that instead
of finding exogenous preferences for economic policy, they have identified the common
factor that is ideological loyalty to the Democratic Party.




                                              24
A third reason to be suspicious of economic opinions is the pattern of regional change,
especially relative to the persistence of moral opinions (New England was liberal on
religious issues in the 1930s and remains so today). In the 1930s, Republican New
England was anti-government and pro-free market and the Democratic South was
strongly pro-redistribution. These opinions have completely flipped as party affiliations
have flipped. There is no sense that the changing patterns reflect changing economic
fortunes, because after all, these opinions remain negatively correlated with economic
realities. As such, we think that it is more sensible to look at hard variables that capture
economics and religion, like income and church attendance, and these variables show a
steady increase in the correlation between religiosity and Republicanism relative to the
constant correlation or declining correlation between Republicanism and income.


If the correlations between economics and Republicanism are open to debate, there is
little doubt the religiosity increasingly predicts voting Republican. This voting pattern is
is mirrored by changes in party policies and party platforms. Glaeser, Ponzetto and
Shapiro (2005) compare the party platforms of Republicans and Democrats in 1976 and
2004. During the earlier time period, the Democratic platform took a truly moderate
stance, recognizing the differing views of many Americans, but finding it “undesirable to
attempt to amend the U.S. constitution to overturn the Supreme Court decision in this
area.” In that platform, the Democratic platform supported “the Congressional efforts to
restrict the use of taxpayers' dollars for abortion.” In 2004, far from considering a pro-
life Amendment, the Democratic Party stood “proudly for a women’s right to choose,
consistent with Roe v. Wade, and regardless of her ability to pay.” The Republican
platform similarly trended right and in 2004 stated that “the unborn child has a
fundamental individual right to life that cannot be infringed.” Interestingly, political
rhetoric was matched with little visible action; there is no difference in the number of
abortions per capita under Democratic and Republican presidencies (Glaeser, Ponzetto
and Shapiro, 2005).


The abortion gap between the parties is mirrored by gaps in many religious or cultural
policies. The Republican platform also opposes gay marriage and embryonic stem cell



                                             25
research. Democrats have clearly taken opposing positions on these and similar issues.
By contrast, in the debate over the Iraq war, John Kerry claimed to differ primarily in his
competence and ability to bring in allies, not in his commitment to fighting America’s
enemies. In the economic sphere, both party platforms trumpet their commitment to
reducing taxes (Glaeser, Ponzetto and Shapiro, 2005). The starkest differences in both
public statements of candidates and in the wording of the platforms occur along moral
dimensions. Given the statements of party platforms, it is no surprise then that religion
predicts party preference better than income.


The recent rise in the connection between politics and religion hardly represents
something new in American politics. In the pre-modern era, religion was also a central
part of party politics. . Party platforms during the nineteenth century also often contained
significant religious or cultural statements. For example in 1880, the Republican Party
platform attacked Catholic education by endorsing a constitutional amendment “to forbid
the appropriation of public funds to the support of sectarian schools.” In 1884, the
platform resolved “that it is the duty of Congress to enact such laws as shall promptly and
effectually suppress the system of polygamy within our Territories; and divorce the
political from the ecclesiastical power of the so-called Mormon Church.” In 1888, the
platform contained a moderate pro-prohibition plank supporting “all wise and well-
directed efforts for the promotion of temperance and morality.” Fifty years later, the
Democratic platform called for a repeal of prohibition.


The relatively mild language of the platforms was coupled with stump speeches which
emphasized cultural or religious divisions. Following Samuel Burchard in 1884,
Republicans accused Democrats of standing for “Rum, Romanism and Rebellion.” By
contrast, the Democrats relied upon their urban support from Catholic immigrants from
Ireland and Germany. Indeed, the roots of the Republican Party are in the religion-
inspired battle against slavery. Protestant ministers like Henry Ward Beecher (whose
sister wrote Uncle Tom’s Cabin) fervently supported the Republican Party before the
Civil War.




                                            26
However, while these anecdotes certainly suggest that it was possible that religion
mattered as much in the past as it does today, it provides us with no quantitative evidence
on this topic. To analyze historical patterns, we turn to county level election returns and
during each election from 1864 until today we regress:


      Republican Votes                Adherents in a Set of Denominations
(3)                        = α+β•                                         +ε
        Total Votes                        Total Church Adherents


where α is a constant and β now captures the relationship between Republicanism and
religious affiliation. In this case, we present results with and without the variable
capturing membership in the Confederacy. We use two different religion variables: the
share of church members that are evangelicals and the share of church members that are
mainline Protestants. Catholics represent the main excluded category. We use religious
censuses from 1890, 1926, 1952 and 1990, and in all cases, we used the data from the
chronologically closest religious census. Given the extremely high persistence of
denomination over time (the 80+ percent correlation between evangelicalism in 1926 and
1990), these results are not particularly sensitive to using religion measures from other
years. Mainline Protestants primarily include Presbyterians, Episcopalians, Lutherans,
and Methodists, while evangelicals are more conservative and include a wide array of
groups like Southern Baptists and Pentecostals.13 Again, we use the American Religion
Data Archive (www.thearda.com) classification.


Figure 8 shows our results where the data is smoothed by averaging the estimates of β
over three elections and graphing the results. We again treat votes for Theodore
Roosevelt in 1912 as votes for the Republican Party in that year. There are obviously
many different ways of performing this exercise, but this provides a simple sense of the


13
  Steensland, et al (2000) provide a basic description of the major differences between Mainlines and
Evangelicals: “Mainline denominations have typically emphasized an accommodating stance toward
modernity, a proactive view on issues of social and economic justice, and pluralism in their tolerance of
varied individual beliefs. Evangelical denominations have typically sought more separation from the
broader culture, emphasized missionary activity and individual conversion, and taught strict adherence to
particular religious doctrines.”


                                                    27
correlates of Republicanism, at least at the county level, in the time period before opinion
polling.


The bottom line charts the changing relationship between the Republican Party and
evangelicals. During the early time period, even controlling for being a Southern county,
evangelical counties were much more likely to be Democratic than to be Republican.
Over the last 25 years that has changed, and today there is a significant positive
relationship between the share of the religious population that is evangelical and the share
of the population that voted for George Bush. As the share of the population that is
evangelical increases by one percentage point, the share voting Republican increases by
.13 percentage points.


But the graph makes it clear that while the connection between Republicanism and
evangelicalism may be new, the connection between religion and politics is not. The
connection between mainline Protestantism and Republicanism during the late 19th
century was much stronger than the correlation between evangelicalism and
Republicanism today. Even as late as the Eisenhower era, this connection remained
strong. Of course, this correlation is partly a reflection of the strong ties between the
Republican Party and the mainstream churches, but it is also a reflection of the equally
strong ties between the Democrats and the Catholic Church.


The conclusion from this graph is that religion has usually played a role in party
divisions. The patterns have changed. Today attendance is a bigger predictor of voting
Republican. In the past, mainline Protestantism predicted Republicanism. In the next
section, we turn to explanations of the connection between religion and political
divisions.


Explaining Party Divisions


The traditional problem with explaining why parties divide on some issues rather than
others is that the prevailing paradigm in political science has been the median voter



                                             28
theorem. This result pushes strongly towards the implication that parties will rush to the
center, and if all parties are at the center then there is little possibility of explaining why
Republicans and Democrats split on religion rather than economics.


To the extent that there has been an alternative paradigm, it is that the preferences of
leaders or elites pull parties away from the median voter. In this case, party leaders
sacrifice votes to achieve their own goals, and the implication is that parties will divide
on issues that party elites really care about. This theory can potentially explain the
division on religion. It wouldn’t be surprising if party leaders had stronger preferences
for religion-related issues than for tax policy, especially if they interact in social
organizations that emphasize religion (Murphy and Shleifer, 2004). Indeed, it is quite
possible that this does explain part of the tendency of parties to split on these cultural
issues: this is what party leaders do seem to care most about.


Unfortunately, this theory gives us little guidance about why the connection between
religion and party affiliation has changed over time, or why the connection between
religion and party affiliation is different in different countries. Glaeser, Ponzetto and
Shapiro (2005) show that in some countries (like India) religion correlates strongly with
political affiliation but income does not. In other countries (like Sweden), income
correlates strongly with political affiliation but religion does not. And in some places
(like Spain) both income and religion correlate quite strongly with political affiliation.
These differences can’t be explained by a general tendency of leaders to care more about
social issues.


To explain these differences over space and time, Glaeser, Ponzetto and Shapiro (2005)
present a model of strategic extremism where parties divide on issues not to appease the
tastes of the leaders but rather to increase their chances of electoral success. As Downs
(1957) intuited and Riker and Ordeshook (1973) proved, extremism (defined as party
policies that differ from those of the marginal voter) hinge on a turnout margin. If
everyone always votes, then moving away from the center is always costly for politicians
trying to get elected. Extremism can become strategic, i.e. vote enhancing, only when



                                               29
there is a turnout margin so that by moving from the center, you excite your base and get
them to come to the voting booths.14


However, a turnout margin is not enough to ensure extremism. Even with a turnout
margin, going to extremes has, in principle, equal likelihood of exciting your base and
exciting your opponent’s base in the opposite direction. As a result, a voting margin is
not enough. There must also be an asymmetry so that extremism excites your supporters
more than it enrages your opponent’s supporters. Glaeser, Ponzetto and Shapiro (2005)
suggest a natural source of this asymmetry: the ability to target messages towards one’s
own supporters. If your supporters hear your messages (speeches, platforms, etc.) more
than your opponents, then going to extremes will increase support more than it increases
opposition. In the model, the opposition support is not fooled: they correctly anticipate
what you will be saying. Nonetheless, there is still an asymmetry, because if you don’t
take an extreme position then your own supporters will know that you are centrist and
will fail to vote.


This model suggests that policy divisions will be closely tied to the ability to send coded
messages (this was called Dog Whistle Politics in the latest British parliamentary race).
Large social organizations, like churches or unions, can provide politicians with just this
ability. Inside a religious services or a labor meeting, outsiders are absent, and there is an
ability to send targeted messages. There are of course abundant examples from Henry
Ward Beecher to Pat Robertson of Churches being used to send political messages. It is
also certainly true that labor unions have historically provided a key venue for
dissemination of political positions.


The model suggests, somewhat surprisingly, that the influence of a social group is non-
monotonic and it peaks when the group represents slightly less than one-half of the
population. The intuition of this is that when the group represents the entire population,
it no longer provides an opportunity to target messages, and when the group represents no


14
  A contribution margin can work just as well. The key is that there is some margin where intensity of
support matters.


                                                   30
one, it is no longer an important political force. When the group is slightly less than one-
half of the population, then its key issues (economics in the case of unions and social
issues in the case of churches) will come to dominate political division and debate.


One particularly clear example of how social groups determine policy divisions is the
role of the Grand Army of the Republic (GAR) in the rise of the Grand Old Party. The
GAR, a vast veteran’s group from the Civil War, provided the Republican Party with a
natural means of sending targeted messages reminding voters of Democrat’s activities in
the civil war (“not every Democrat was a rebel, but every rebel was a Democrat”) and
pledging future Republican policies towards veterans and freed slaves. This access
ensured that Democrats and Republicans would continue to divide on Civil War related
issues for 50 years after the war.


This theory then provides us with two hypotheses for the changing importance of
economic and social issues in American politics and for the realignments throughout the
20th century. One candidate is the rise and fall of unionization in America. At the
beginning of the century, unions were a small part of the population. Only in small areas
of the population did they provide an opportunity for targeting a significant fraction of
the population. In mid-century, they rose to over 30 percent of all workers and today
they are back down to 12 percent (Troy 1965, www.laborresearch.org).


The rise and fall of unionization corresponds reasonably with the connection between
income and Republicanism shown in Figure 10. The middle decades of the 20th century
were the high point of unionism and they were also the high point of the correlation
between income and Republicanism. During this time period, the Democratic Party had
access to the labor unions and this created an incentive for Democrats to move to the left
on economic issues to get support in this important base. The rise and decline of unions
provides at least one possible reason why economic issues rose and then fell in
importance.




                                             31
A second hypothesis explaining the rise and fall of religion is the changes in the religious
market. Over the past 80 years, there has been a decline in the numbers of mainline
Protestants and a rise in the number of evangelicals. According to this hypothesis, as the
mainline Protestants declined in importance, the Republican Party stopped catering to
their interests, and gradually switched to issues that were more significant to the growing
numbers of evangelicals. Democrats have been more successful at connecting with the
rise in non-Christian religious groups (Fogel, 2001).


While this story makes perfect sense from a Republican stand point, it makes less sense
for Democrats. Why didn’t Democrats move to capture the votes of evangelicals?
Certainly, the presidency of Jimmy Carter suggests that this was far from impossible.
There are several hypotheses. First, Democratic policies towards civil rights had
alienated a huge part of the evangelical population. Second, liberal elites in the
Democratic Party were uncomfortable with moving to the right on social issues. Third,
the Democrats were dominant during a period of rapid social change and had difficulty
running against socially liberal policies that had been enacted and popular during their
time in power.


This discussion has emphasized the role of religion as if churches were just another form
of social group and as if religious views were no different than views over fiscal policy.
But in fact, many people take their religious views far more seriously than views on other
topics, and this may also help us to understand why religion is so often an important part
of politics. It may be far easier to motivate voters by appealing to core religious values
than to topics like tax policy, and this may be the key reason why religion is so appealing
to politicians.


Whatever the cause, the trends are clear. While Republicanism used to represent
mainline Protestantism, it now represents evangelicalism. The ability to send targeted
messages helps us understand why social groups, such as churches or unions, end up
driving the key differences between parties. As such, we should neither be surprised at
today’s religious politics, nor at the politics of religion in the past. As long as churches



                                              32
provide politicians with an ability to send targeted messages to supporters, religious
issues will be important in elections and parties will divide over religion.


 Conclusion


There are many myths about America’s political geography. There has not been any
decrease in the number of swing states over time. Democrats and Republicans are no
more geographically segregated than they have been in the past. Voting patterns may
have become mildly more persistent than in the past, but persistence has usually been
quite high, except for the 12 year period when the South left the Democratic fold.
Cultural heterogeneity is not increasing and most people are in the middle, not at the
extremes (as in Fiorina et al., 2004). Political hostility between the party members is
relatively constant, although there has been an uptick in hostility over the last four years.


But all of these myths should not obscure two primary truths about American political
geography. First, America is a nation with an astonishing degree of cultural diversity.
The Red State/Blue State framework makes it appear that regions fall into one of two
groups and this is false. There is a continuum of states ranging from the poor
conservative places of the south and west to the rich, liberal places of the coasts. These
places are quite different and they have been so for many years. At the state or county
level, these differences line up well with political affiliation.


The roots of these geographic differences seem to come from two primary sources:
industrialization and immigration. Places that industrialized earlier and that attracted
more immigrants at the start of the century are much more likely to have socially liberal
attitudes, much less likely to take prayer seriously, and less likely to vote Republican.
These forces appear to be much more important in predicting attitudes and politics than
the legacy of the Civil War, or long-standing religious differences. One theory that can
explain the power of immigration and early industrialization is that the cultural attitudes
associated with the Democratic party (downplaying Religion and emphasizing some




                                               33
forms of tolerance) reflect the long run effect of ethnically and religiously heterogeneous
populations interacting over many decades in the marketplace


The second great truth is that American parties are increasing oriented around religion
and culture rather than economics. This change has occurred since the 1970s, but in
broader historical perspective it is the 1932-1976 period that is exceptional, not the
current epoch. Prior to 1932, religion also predicted voting, but during that era the key
correlation was between Republicanism and mainline Protestantism.


Why has religion or culture played such an important role in American party divisions?
We offer two explanations. Glaeser, Ponzetto and Shapiro (2005) show that parties
divide along issues where they have the ability to send targeted messages to their
supporters. Religious groups provide just this ability. Second, voting is innately
irrational, and emotional cultural topics may be much more effective in getting people
into the voting booth than naked self-interest.




                                             34
References


Ansolabehere, Stephen, Rodden, Jonathan, and James M. Snyder, Jr. “Purple America,”
      Journal of Economic Perspectives, this issue.

R. J. Aumann, “Agreeing to disagree.” Annals of Statistics, 4(6) (1976):1236 – 1239.

Bishop, Bill, “The schism in U.S. politics begins at home.” Austin-American Statesman,
       April 4, 2004.

Bradley, M. B., Green, N. M., Jones, D. E., Lynn, M. & McNeil, L., Churches
       and Church Membership in the United States, 1990, (Atlanta: Glenmary Research
       Center, 1992).

Bremer, Francis J. The Puritan Experiment: New England Society from Bradford to
      Edwards. (Hanover and London: University Press of New England, 1995).

CBS News/The New York Times. CBS News/New York Times Monthly Poll, April
     2004. ICPSR version.(Ann Arbor, MI: ICPSR 2004). Dataset 4101.

Clubb, Jerome M., William H. Flanigan, and Nancy H. Zingale. Electoral Data for
       Counties in the United States, 1840-1972. (Ann Arbor, MI: ICPSR, 2005).
       Dataset 8611.

Davis, James A., Tom W. Smith, and Peter V. Marsden, General Social Surveys, 1972-
       2002 (Ann Arbor, MI: ICPSR, 2003). Dataset 3728.

Davis, Nancy J., and Robert V. Robinson, “A War for America’s Soul: The American
       Religious Landscape.” In Cultural Wars in American Politics: Critical Reviews of
       a Popular Myth, ed. Rhys H. Williams. (New York: De Gruyter 1997).

Dionne, E.J., “One Nation Deeply Divided.” The Washington Post, November 7, 2003.

Downs, Anthony, “An Economic Theory of Political Action in a Democracy,” Journal of
      Political Economy, 55 (1957), 135—150.

Fiorina, Morris P., “Whatever Happened to the Median Voter?,” Stanford University
       Mimeograph, (1999).

Fiorina, Morris P., Samuel J. Abrams, and Jeremy C. Pope, Culture War? The Myth of a
       Polarized America (New York, NY: Pearson Longman, 2005).

Fogel, Robert W. The Fourth Great Awakening and the Future of Egalitarianism
       (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000).

Glaeser, Edward L., Bruce Sacerdote, and Jose Scheinkman, "Crime and Social


                                           35
       Interactions," Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (1996): 507-548.

Glaeser, Edward L. and Bruce Sacerdote, “Education and Religion,” NBER Working
       Paper No. 8080, 2001.

Glaeser, Edward L., "Psychology and the Market" American Economic Review Papers
       and Proceedings 94(2) (2004): 408-413.

Glaeser, Edward L., Giacomo A.M. Ponzetto, and Jesse M. Shapiro, “Strategic
       Extremism: Why Republicans and Democrats Divide on Religious Values,”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming (2005).


Haines, Michael R., and the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social
       Research. Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United
       States, 1790-2000. (Ann Arbor: MI: ICPSR, 2004). Dataset 2896.

Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research. General Election Data for
        the United States, 1950-1990. (Ann Arbor, MI: ICPSR,1995). Dataset 0013.

Johnson, Douglas W., Picard, Paul R. and Quinn, Bernard Churches and Church
      Membership in the United States, 1971. (Washington: Glenmary Research Center,
      1974).

Klinkner, Philip A., “Red and Blue Scare: The Continuing Diversity of the American
      Electoral Landscape” The Forum. 2(2) (2004).

Labor Research Association, U.S. Union Membership, 1948-2004.
       http://www.laborresearch.org/charts.php?id=29 (2004)

Lawrence, Jill, “Behind Its United Front, Nation Divided as Ever,” USA Today,
      February 18, 2002.

Leip, David, Dave Leip’s Atlas of U.S. Presidential Elections.
       http://www.uselectionatlas.org, (2005).

Mead, F. S., as revised by Hill, S. S. Handbook of Denominations in the United States,
      10th ed. (Nashville: Abingdon, 1995).

Melton, J. G., Encyclopedia of American Religions, 6th ed. (Detroit: Gale Research,
      1999).

Meyerson, Harold, “Democrats in a Divided Land,” The Washington Post. November 5,
      2004.

Murphy, Kevin M. and Andrei Shleifer, “Persuasion in Politics” American Economic



                                           36
       Review Papers and Proceedings 94(2) (2004): 435-439.

The National Election Studies, The 2004 National Election Study. (Ann Arbor, MI:
         University of Michigan, Center for Political Studies, 2004).

National Institute of Health, “U.S. Apparent Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages Based
       on State Sales, Taxation, or Receipt Data.” U.S. Alcohol Epidemiologic Data
       Reference Manual., Volume 1, Fourth Edition, NIH Publication No. 04-5563,
       June 2004.

PEW Center for the People and the Press. 1987-2003 Values Survey (combined dataset).
     (Washington, DC: Pew Center, 2003).

Riker, William H. and Peter C. Ordeshook, An Introduction to Positive Political Theory
       Prentice-Hall Contemporary Political Theory Series (Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
       Prentice-Hall, 1973).

Sapiro, Virginia and Steven J. Rosenstone, American National Election Studies
        Cumulative Data File, Vol. 8475 (Ann Arbor, MI: ICPSR, 2002).

Steensland, B., Park, J. Z., Regnerus, M. D., Robinson, L. D., Wilcox, W. B. &
       Woodberry, R. D. “The measure of American religion: Toward improving the
       state of the art”, Social Forces 79 (2000):291-3

Troy, Leo. “Trade Union Membership, 1897-1962,” National Bureau of Economic
       Research Occasional Paper No. 92. (New York: Columbia University Press,
       1965).




                                          37
                                                    Figure 1 -- Popular Vote Margin of Victory and Share of Electoral Votes in Battleground
                                                                      States (10%) in US Presidential Elections, 1840-2004

                                      1.00

                                      0.90

                                      0.80
Fracion of Electoral or Total Votes




                                      0.70

                                      0.60

                                      0.50

                                      0.40

                                      0.30

                                      0.20

                                      0.10

                                      0.00
                                             1840

                                                     1848

                                                            1856

                                                                   1864

                                                                          1872

                                                                                 1880

                                                                                        1888

                                                                                               1896

                                                                                                      1904

                                                                                                              1912

                                                                                                                     1920

                                                                                                                             1928

                                                                                                                                    1936

                                                                                                                                           1944

                                                                                                                                                  1952

                                                                                                                                                         1960

                                                                                                                                                                1968

                                                                                                                                                                       1976

                                                                                                                                                                              1984

                                                                                                                                                                                     1992

                                                                                                                                                                                            2000
                                                                                                                      year
                                                                                 Margin of Victory (percent of total popular votes)
                                                                                 Fraction of Electoral Votes in Battleground States (10%)
                                                                                 5 Election Moving Avg. of Fraction of Electoral Votes in Battleground State (10%)


             Note: Margin of Victory calculated as |(number of Democratic votes/total votes) - (number of Republican votes/total votes)|, Battleground calculated as (Margin
             of Victory) ≤ 10%.
             Sources: Clubb, et al (2005) 1840-1972; ICPSR (1995) 1972-1988; Dave Leip’s Atlas of US Presidential Elections, 1992-2004.




                                                                                                             38
                                                      Figure 2 -- County Level Dissimilarity and Isolation Indices for Whig/Republican and
                                                                           Democratic Presidential Votes, 1840-2004
                                       80.00


                                       70.00


                                       60.00
Dissimilarity or Isolation index (%)




                                       50.00


                                       40.00


                                       30.00


                                       20.00


                                       10.00


                                        0.00
                                               1840

                                                      1848

                                                             1856

                                                                    1864

                                                                           1872

                                                                                   1880

                                                                                          1888

                                                                                                 1896

                                                                                                        1904

                                                                                                               1912

                                                                                                                      1920

                                                                                                                              1928

                                                                                                                                     1936

                                                                                                                                            1944

                                                                                                                                                   1952

                                                                                                                                                          1960

                                                                                                                                                                 1968

                                                                                                                                                                        1976

                                                                                                                                                                               1984

                                                                                                                                                                                      1992

                                                                                                                                                                                             2000
                                                                                                                       Year

                                                                                  Dissimilarity Index          Republican Isolation Index          Democrat Isolation Index

                       Notes: Dissmilarity index calculated by using: dissmilarity index = (100%)*(1/2) Σ |(total vote Republican in a county/total vote Republican in US) - (total vote
                       Democrat in a county/total vote vote Democrat in US)|, and the summation was over all counties within the United States.
                       Isolation index calculated by using: isolation index for republicans = (100%) * Σ |(total vote Republican in a county/total vote Republican in US) - (total vote
                       Republican in a county/total vote vote Democrat or republican in a county)|, and the summation was over all counties within the United States. A similar calculation
                       is used for the Democrat isolation index.
                       Sources: Clubb, et al (2005) 1840-1972; ICPSR (1995) 1972-1988; Dave Leip’s Atlas of US Presidential Elections, 1992-2004.




                                                                                                               39
                                        Figure 3 -- Persistence in Presidential Voting, 1860-2004

 1.00


 0.90


 0.80


 0.70


 0.60


 0.50


 0.40


 0.30


 0.20


 0.10


 0.00
        1860


               1868


                         1876


                                 1884


                                         1892


                                                 1900


                                                         1908


                                                                 1916


                                                                          1924


                                                                                     1932


                                                                                            1940


                                                                                                   1948


                                                                                                              1956


                                                                                                                       1964


                                                                                                                                1972


                                                                                                                                        1980


                                                                                                                                                 1988


                                                                                                                                                        1996


                                                                                                                                                               2004
                                                                                 Year

                      correlation coeff. betweem pctR_t and pctR_t-1 within county                        fraction of electoral vote changing parties


Note: Calculations take into account the change of state electoral votes for each election year.
Sources: Clubb, et al (2005) 1840-1972; ICPSR (1995) 1972-1988; Dave Leip’s Atlas of US Presidential Elections, 1992-2004.




                                                                        40
                                                                                                          Figure 4 -- Political Partisanship, 1978-2004

                                                               50


                                                               40
Rating of Democratic Party minus Rating of Republican Party




                                                               30


                                                               20


                                                               10


                                                                0
                                                                     1978     1980     1982     1984     1986     1988     1990          1992   1994      1996     1998     2000      2002    2004
                                                              -10


                                                              -20


                                                              -30


                                                              -40


                                                              -50
                                                                                                                                  Year


                                                                                  D rating - R rating, for Democrats                                   D rating - R rating, for Republicans


                                                              Notes: The party trend lines represent the individuals' thermometer rating of the Democratic Party minus their thermometer rating of the
                                                              Republican Party averaged by their self-identifed party status.
                                                              Sources: American National Election Studies Cumulative Data File, 1948-2002 and 2004 National Election Study




                                                                                                                                    41
Figure 5 – Correlation between Share Voting for Kerry and Belief that AIDS is
Punishment from God.
   Fraction who agree that AIDS is punishment from God
                                                    .6

                                                                                       MISSISSIPPI
                                          .5




                                                                                 ALABAMA
                                                                             OKLAHOMA
                                                         UTAH                                TENNESSEE
                                                                                       KENTUCKY
                                                                                    SOUTH  DAKOTA
                                                                                                 ARKANSAS
                                                                                              WEST  VIRGINIA
                                                                                               NORTH  CAROLINA
                                                                                          SOUTH CAROLINA
                                                                                            LOUISIANA
                                                                                           GEORGIA
                                 .4




                                                                     IDAHO                         VIRGINIANEW MEXICO
                                                                               NORTHTEXAS
                                                                                      INDIANA
                                                                                     DAKOTA                    PENNSYLVANIA
                                                                         NEBRASKA   MONTANA                  IOWA
                                                                                                           OHIO
                                                                                                        FLOR          MAINE
                                                                                                             IDA MICHIGAN
                                                                                                      MISSOURI
                                                                                                        COLORADO
                                                                                                  ARIZONA                ILLINOIS
                                                                                                                      DELAWARE
                                                                                KANSAS                               NEW JERSEY NEW YORK
                                                                                                                 MINNWASHINGTON
                                                                                                                     ESOTA
                        .3




                                                                                                              WISCONSIN
                                                                                                          NEVADA
                                                                                                                                  VERMONT
                                                                                                                        CALIFORNIA      MASSACHUSETTS
                                                                                                                 OREGON
                                                                                                               NEW  HAMPSH  IRE MARYLAND
              .2




                                                                                                                      CONNECTICUT
                                                                                                                                RHODE ISLAND
    .1




                                                                .3                    .4                      .5                .6
                                                                                       Pct Voting for Kerry

Sources: PEW 1987-2003 Values Survey (combined dataset); Dave Leip’s Atlas of Presidential Elections




                                                                                           42
                                Figure 6 -- Trends in the Determinants of Voting Republican, 1952-2004

                  0.25




                   0.2




                  0.15
OLS Coefficient




                   0.1




                  0.05




                    0
                         1952    1956   1960    1964   1968    1972      1976    1980    1984   1988     1992   1996   2000   2004
                                                                         Election Year

                                         Attend church regularly/often           Attend church > month          ln(income)


                  Notes – ANES 1952-2004. Coefficents are from OLS regression of probability of voting R on ln of family income, dummy if attend
                  church more than once a month (or regularly or often for years before 1970), age, age2, race, and a dummy for completing
                  college.




                                                                                43
                                Figure 7 -- Relationship between ln(Median County Income 1950) and Voting
                                                                Republican
                  30


                  25


                  20


                  15
OLS Coefficient




                  10


                   5


                   0
                     64

                     68

                     72

                     76

                     80

                     84

                     88

                     92

                     96

                     00

                     04

                     08

                     12

                     16

                     20

                     24

                     28

                     32

                     36

                     40

                     44

                     48

                     52

                     56

                     60

                     64

                     68

                     72

                     76

                     80

                     84

                     88

                     92

                     96

                     00

                     04
                  18

                  18

                  18

                  18

                  18

                  18

                  18

                  18

                  18

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  20

                  20
                   -5


                  -10


                  -15
                                                                                     Election Year

                                                                      No South          South Control         Full Sample

                        Notes -- Lines represent coefficients from univariate regressions of ln(median county income 1950) on the share voting Republican. For
                        1912, we use the combined Republican and Progressive percentage.
                        Sources: Clubb, et al (2005) 1840-1972; ICPSR (1995) 1972-1988; Dave Leip’s Atlas of US Presidential Elections, 1992-2004; Haines
                        and ICPSR (2005); Bradley, et al (1992)




                                                                                 44
                          Figure 8 -- Relationship between Religion and Voting Republican at the County
                                                         Level, 1864-2004
                  60



                  40



                  20
OLS Coefficient




                   0
                     72

                     76

                     80

                     84

                     88

                     92

                     96

                     00

                     04

                     08

                     12

                     16

                     20

                     24

                     28

                     32

                     36

                     40

                     44

                     48

                     52

                     56

                     60

                     64

                     68

                     72

                     76

                     80

                     84

                     88

                     92

                     96

                     00

                     04
                  18

                  18

                  18

                  18

                  18

                  18

                  18

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  20

                  20
                  -20



                  -40



                  -60
                                                                             Election Year


                                        Fract Mainline w/ South Ctrl       Fract Mainline w/ No Ctrl           Fract Mainline No South
                                        Fract Evang w/ South Ctrl          Fract Evang no Ctrl                 Fract Evang No South


                   Notes -- Lines represent 3-election moving averages of coefficients from univariate regressions on the share voting Republican.
                   Fraction of religious adherents computed for 1890, 1926, 1952, and 1990. Coefficients are computed using the closest year. For
                   1912, we use the combined Republican and Progressive percentage.
                   Sources: Clubb, et al (2005) 1840-1972; ICPSR (1995) 1972-1988; Dave Leip’s Atlas of US Presidential Elections, 1992-2004;
                   Haines and ICPSR (2005); Bradley, et al (1992)




                                                                             45
                Table 1 -- Heterogeneity in Beliefs, Behaviors, and Economic Conditions Across States

A: Beliefs -- Fraction of state's respondents who agree with the given statement:

                                             Schools should fire                                                              It is okay for blacks and
1. State                          N         homosexual teachers.                2. State                           N                whites to date.
Massachusetts                    430                  0.23                      Kentucky                          339                   0.35
District of Columbia              74                  0.26                      West Virginia                     230                   0.40
Connecticut                      272                  0.26                      Tennessee                         497                   0.41
Maryland                         449                  0.27                      South Carolina                    322                   0.43
New Jersey                       588                  0.29                      Alabama                           382                   0.46

West Virginia                    230                  0.54                      Oregon                            240                   0.77
Oklahoma                         261                  0.56                      California                        1860                  0.77
Tennessee                        514                  0.60                      Delaware                           58                   0.79
Arkansas                         226                  0.61                      Maine                             124                   0.81
Mississippi                      283                  0.65                      District of Columbia               74                   0.88



                                          AIDS is God's punishment
                                             for immoral sexual                                                            The best way to ensure peace
3. State                          N               behavior.                     4. State                           N        is through military strength.
Rhode Island                      83                0.16                        District of Columbia               77                   0.36
Connecticut                      243                0.19                        Vermont                           52                    0.40
New Hampshire                     74                0.24                        Oregon                            257                   0.42
Oregon                           226                0.24                        Delaware                          62                    0.42
Maryland                         375                0.25                        Minnesota                         418                   0.47

Kentucky                         309                  0.46                      Idaho                             122                   0.66
Tennessee                        438                  0.47                      Oklahoma                          265                   0.68
Oklahoma                         221                  0.48                      Mississippi                       281                   0.69
Alabama                          364                  0.49                      Arkansas                          230                   0.70
Mississippi                      232                  0.56                      South Carolina                    330                   0.73


                                           When something is run by                                                         We will all be called before
                                          the government, it is usuall                                                      God on Judgement Day to
5. State                          N         inefficient and wasteful.           6. State                           N           answer for our sins.
District of Columbia              77                  0.45                      Vermont                            51                   0.53
Mississippi                      292                  0.51                      Rhode Island                       96                   0.60
Delaware                          63                  0.57                      Oregon                            250                   0.63
Nevada                            87                  0.57                      New Hampshire                      88                   0.65
South Carolina                   339                  0.58                      Nevada                             79                   0.67

Montana                          113                  0.72                      Tennessee                         492                   0.92
Nebraska                         189                  0.72                      South Carolina                    299                   0.93
Arkansas                         242                  0.74                      Oklahoma                          247                   0.94
Oregon                           262                  0.74                      Alabama                           377                   0.94
South Dakota                      71                  0.77                      Mississippi                       266                   0.95

B: Consumption and Conditions:


7. State                     Gallons of wine sold per capita, 2002              8. State                           2003 Median Household Income
West Virginia                                  0.79                             Arkansas                                      32,002
Mississippi                                    0.89                             Mississippi                                   32,728
Oklahoma                                       1.01                             West Virginia                                 32,763
Arkansas                                       1.05                             Louisiana                                     33,507
Iowa                                           1.07                             Montana                                       34,108

Massachusetts                                  4.18                             Minnesota                                      52,823
Nevada                                         4.70                             Virginia                                       54,783
Idaho                                          4.94                             Connecticut                                    54,965
New Hampshire                                  5.34                             New Hampshire                                  55,567
District of Columbia                           6.49                             New Jersey                                     56,045


Notes: Data for beliefs are from the Pew Values Survey 1987-2003 Merged File. The fraction agreeing is computed by combining individuals who completely
or mostly agree and dividing that number by the total number of respondents. Data on wine consumption per capita is from NIH Publication No. 04-5563
(2004). Median household income is from the census.
Sources: PEW 1987-2003 Values Survey (combined dataset); NIH Publication No. 04-5563 (2004); U.S. Census Bureau




                                                                         46
Table 2 -- Historical Determinants of State Beliefs and State and County Voting Patterns
                                 (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)
                                                    It is ok for    Prayer is     Ensure
                               AIDS is   Schools    blacks and     important    peace thru
                             punishment should fire  whites to      for daily    military Pct Voting for   Pct Voting
                              from God homosexuals      date           life      strength     Kerry         for Kerry

   Percent of religious
                                0.13        0.11        -0.26        0.13          0.18       -0.014         0.031
aderents evangelical, 1926
                              (0.070)*     (0.110)    (0.118)**    (0.067)*     (0.070)**     -0.079        (0.033)
ln(1+percent of population
                               -0.01        -0.01       0.02         -0.01         0.00        0.012         0.007
      slave in 1850)
                              (0.010)      (0.016)     (0.017)      (0.009)      (0.007)      (0.009)       (0.006)
   Percent of population
                               -0.27        -0.50        0.45        -0.34         0.06       0.242          0.413
    foreign born, 1920
                             (0.118)**   (0.148)***   (0.207)**    (0.147)**     (0.157)     (0.139)*      (.079)***
  Share of pop >10 yrs
                                 -0.28         -0.26           0.04    -0.23     -0.16         0.417          0.42
  working in Mfg, 1920
                              (0.060)*** (0.080)***          (0.100) (0.092)** (0.068)**    (0.073)***     (.096)***
                                 0.452         0.535           0.59     0.86     0.574         0.309          0.32
          Constant
                              (0.031)*** (0.034)*** (0.051)*** (0.035)*** (0.040)***        (0.044)***     (.023)***
Observations                       47            47             47       47        47            47           2822
R-squared                         0.67          0.7            0.58     0.65      0.48          0.56          0.14
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Notes: All results are from OLS regresstions and exclude Alsaka, Hawaii, and Wyoming.
Sources: PEW 1987-2003 Values Survey (combined dataset) ; Dave Leip's Atlas of
Presidential Election; Haines and ICPSR (2005);




                                                       47
