                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             A DUAL POLICY PARADOX:
                    WHY HAVE TRADE AND IMMIGRATION POLICIES
                   ALWAYS DIFFERED IN LABOR-SCARCE ECONOMIES?

                                          Timothy J. Hatton
                                        Jeffrey G. Williamson

                                        Working Paper 11866
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w11866


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2005




Paper presented to the conference on The New Comparative Economic History: Essays in Honor of Jeffrey
G. Williamson, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, November 4-6, 2005. We are grateful to
Toke Aidt, Pieter Bevelander, Roger Bourque, Don DeVoretz, Peter Lindert, Jim Robinson, Ken Sokoloff
and Georgios Tassoukis for help with the data underlying this paper. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Timothy J. Hatton and Jeffrey G. Williamson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
A Dual Policy Paradox: Why have Trade and Immigration Policies always Differed in Labor-
Scarce Economies?
Timothy J. Hatton and Jeffrey G. Williamson
NBER Working Paper No. 11866
December 2005
JEL No. F22, J1, O1

                                           ABSTRACT

Today's labor-scarce economies have open trade and closed immigration policies, while a century
ago they had just the opposite, open immigration and closed trade policies. Why the inverse policy
correlation, and why has it persisted for almost two centuries? This paper seeks answers to this dual
policy paradox by exploring the fundamentals which have influenced the evolution of policy: the
decline in the costs of migration and its impact on immigrant selectivity, a secular switch in the net
fiscal impact of trade relative to immigration, and changes in the median voter. The paper also offers
explanations for the between-country variance in voter anti-trade and anti-migration attitude, and

links this to the fundamentals pushing policy.

Timothy J. Hatton
Department of Economics
Australian National University
Canberra, Australia
tim.hatton@anu.edu.au

Jeffrey G. Williamson
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jwilliam@fas.harvard.edu
                                        Introduction


          We live in a world where trade policies are liberal and immigration policies are
restrictive. Recent globalization discussions give the impression that this policy
difference is a modern phenomenon (Wellisch and Walz 1998; Hillman and Weiss 1999),
implying that trade policy was liberal and open on all fronts a century ago. This turns out
to be quite wrong. Instead, while most labor-scarce economies today have open trade and
closed immigration policies, a century ago the labor-scarce economies had just the
opposite, open immigration and closed trade policies. Thus, the inverse policy correlation
has persisted for almost two centuries.
          Why have policies towards the movement of labor and goods always been so
different in labor-scarce economies? After all, importing labor-intensive products is
pretty much like importing labor. So shouldn’t trade and migration policies reinforce
each other? Consider for a moment the simple 2×2×2 model in which trade is driven by
factor endowments. Furthermore, let us think about the country where labor is relatively
scarce since that’s the country for which immigration policies matter. Suppose such a
country puts up a tariff to protect the scarce factor, labor. In the absence of immigration,
wages will increase. But if labor is allowed to move across borders, the tariff-induced
wage increase will be undone by immigration (Mundell 1957). By the same logic, an
immigration policy designed to protect domestic labor will be undone by free trade: the
desired effect will only be achieved by restricting both trade and immigration. Simple
theory predicts that immigration and import restriction should go together. In fact, they
never have. Therein lies the policy paradox.
          There are many reasons why reality might deviate from the simple Heckscher-
Ohlin and Stolper-Samuelson predictions. Specific factors, increasing returns, and
Ricardian differences in productivity are but three. Thus, trade and migration may be less
than perfect substitutes, or they might not be substitutes at all (Markusen 1983; Faini,
DeMelo and Zimmermann 1999). Nevertheless, the simple model does provide a useful
roadmap for exploring the persistent inverse correlation between trade and immigration
policy.




                                               3
        The rest of this paper is organized as follows. First, it traces out the histories of
trade and migration policy in labor-scarce economies since the early nineteenth century.
We find it particularly useful to compare the two great globalization eras: the half century
from 1860 to World War I, and the half century from 1950 to the present. Next, we
explore some of the fundamentals that have influenced the evolution of trade and
immigration policy. Key among them are the decline in the costs of migration and its
impact on immigrant selectivity, a secular switch in the net fiscal impact of trade relative
to immigration, and changes in the median voter and their impact on the political
economy of tariff and immigration policy. We also offer explanations for the variation
between countries in voter attitudes towards trade and migration, and link this to the key
forces underlying policy. We conclude with some comments about current policies in
historical perspective.


              The Evolution of a Dual Policy Paradox Over Two Centuries

        One could easily get the impression from today’s labor-scarce economies that
there is something immutable about a world in which the movement of labor is far more
tightly constrained than the movement of goods. But things were very different a century
ago. The conventional wisdom views the nineteenth century as the canonical liberal
period in which globalization was fostered by free trade and open immigration policies.
Such conventional wisdom may fit the predictions of the simple 2x2x2 model in which
trade and migration policy go together, but it is a complete myth.
        Consider first the evolution of tariff policy. Recent research has shown that
protection was at very high levels before 1914, much higher than is often recognized, and
especially so in labor-scarce New World economies (Coatsworth and Williamson 2004a,
2004b; Williamson 2005a, 2005b). Figure 1 plots the average ad valorem tariff rate for
35 developed and underdeveloped economies between 1870 and 2000, a sample that
accounted for about 90 percent of world 1900 population, and even more of its GDP.
Figure 2 plots the average tariff rates 1870-1938 for six regions. 1 Tariffs were on the rise

1
 In addition to the United States, the countries included are: 3 members of the European industrial core
(France, Germany, United Kingdom); 3 English-speaking European offshoots (Australia, Canada, New
Zealand); 10 from the industrially-lagging European periphery (Austria-Hungary, Denmark, Greece, Italy,


                                                    4
between 1870 and 1890, and from then until World War I they averaged around 16
percent, a value exceeding every subsequent decade except the 1930s. The view that the
pre-1914 years were ones of relatively free trade stems from an obsessive focus on the
European industrial leaders -- Britain, France and Germany -- whose combined average
tariff was no more than 6 or 7 percent. Even lower tariffs characterized Asia and the
Middle East, most of which was under the domination of the free-trading European
imperial powers. The average for the European periphery was much higher, pretty close
to the average for all 35 countries.
        The big regional outliers from free trade policy were the labor-scarce European
overseas offshoots: Latin America raised tariffs to almost 30 percent by the 1890s; the
United States had average tariff rates above 30 percent as late as the 1880s, and still equal
to highly protective Latin America by 1900; and the remaining European offshoots
reached tariff levels of about 20 percent, double or triple that of industrial Europe.
Furthermore, tariffs in labor-scarce economies were far higher on imported manufactures
than these averages would suggest. In short, labor-scarce countries with tariff autonomy
that were not yet industrialized had high and rising tariffs in the global century before
World War I. What produced the spectacular trade boom up to 1914 was not free trade,
but rather a transportation revolution that drastically cheapened the cost of trade between
countries, and industrial revolutions that augmented GDP and augmented import demand
within labor-abundant Europe. The world trade boom would have been much bigger had
free trade prevailed in the labor-scarce parts of the world and in the industrially backward
parts of Europe.
        Dramatic interwar de-globalization saw tariffs soar (and non-tariff barriers
multiply), a shift led by the European core and its colonial empire (Figure 2), while the
rest of the world simply reconstructed the high protective walls they had erected before
1914. With the resumption of peace in 1945, average tariffs stood at about 15 percent 2 a
figure similar to the average for 1870-1914. But by the early 1960s, the trend in world
tariff rates was steeply downwards, so much so that by 1970 the average for these 35


Norway, Portugal, Russia, Serbia, Spain, Sweden); 10 from the Asian and the Middle Eastern periphery
(Burma, Ceylon, China, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Japan, the Philippines, Siam, Turkey); and 8 from the
Latin American periphery (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Cuba, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay).
2
  As noted above, tariffs were much higher on industrial goods, around 40 percent.


                                                   5
countries was lower than at any previous period, barring the inflationary war years. 3 The
fact that the Third World stuck to highly protective ISI strategies does not change our
characterization of the free trade trend since it is the labor-scarce OECD countries that
matter to the policy paradox. Tariffs were lower in the half century following 1950 than
they were in the half century following 1860, and they would look much lower if the
comparison was restricted to the labor-scarce immigrant countries. Similarly, tariffs were
lower in the last 30 years of the twentieth century than they were in the 30 years
following the Cobden-Chevalier Treaty of 1860, the start of the mis-named free trade
period.
          What about immigration policy? Here, there is no convenient summary statistic to
describe immigration restriction, encouragement or neutrality: immigration policies
typically involve rationing rather than taxing, so they don’t generate tariff-equivalent
measures. Furthermore, some countries used complex subsidies involving reduced
steerage costs in transit, help with job search upon arrival, and cheap (or even free) land
for settlement. The best we have is an index of policy stance constructed for five labor-
scarce and immigrating New World countries from 1860 to 1930 (Timmer and
Williamson 1998). The five include the United States, Canada, Argentina, Brazil, and
Australia and the index ranges from –5 for extreme pro-immigration policy to +5 for
extreme anti-immigration policy, and zero for a neutral policy. The average policy stance
for these five countries between 1860 and 1890 was mildly pro-immigration. But from
the 1880s onwards, Figure 3 documents a gradual tightening as some countries reduced
or eliminated their immigrant subsidies, and some started to experiment with outright
barriers. This mild trend towards restriction was followed by a very sharp increase, led by
the United States introduction of the literacy test in the Immigration Act of 1917 and a
quota in 1921, the latter progressively tightened in 1924 and 1928. With the onset of the
Great Depression and trouble in local markets, there was a general clampdown on
immigration, not just in the five countries underlying the Figure 3 index, but all around
the world.


3
 Most tariffs were imposed as specific duties a century ago, that is, cents per pound and yen per yard, not
ad valorem, that is, percent of the total franc value. Thus, during inflation, the duties collected per value
imported dropped as the value of the import rose, so the imputed ad valorem tariff rate fell. During postwar
deflation, the opposite was true, when ad valorem tariff rates rose to resume their prewar levels.


                                                     6
       In summary, over the half century prior to 1914 labor-scarce economies slowly
retreated from their initial pro-immigration policies to a more neutral stance, and this
trend correlates in the predicted way with rising protection there. However, the level of
immigration restriction on the eve of World War I was still benign. The average policy
index score in Figure 3 is about zero, implying policy neutrality: thus, immigration policy
was still very open compared with the high tariff walls these labor-scarce economies had
erected over a half century or more. Thus, the paradox: protective trade policy coexisted
with open immigration policy in labor-scarce economies before 1914.
       The immigration regime that emerged after World War II reflected the full
panoply of controls that was the legacy of the interwar period -- nationality laws, passport
controls, entry visas and, above all, quotas. Some of these constraints were temporarily
lifted early on to accommodate refugee resettlement and guestworker programs in Europe
and the United States, and migrant subsidies in Australia and New Zealand were also
temporarily resumed. Labor-scarce countries also started to open their doors to
immigrants from Latin America and the Third World, an important event that will get
more of our attention below. But these temporary easements had disappeared by the early
1970s: guestworker programs in the west had ended, overseas migrant subsidies had
evaporated, skill-based points systems had been introduced, legislation which promised
to penalize employers of illegal immigrants had been passed, and so on. Immigration
policies have become even tougher since the 1970s. The fact that immigration into the
labor-scarce OECD has risen significantly does not require some modification of this
characterization of the policy trend: world migration would have grown much more
quickly had post-World War II policies been as liberal as pre-World War I policies. That
surge in world migration was triggered in large part by a release in Third World poverty
constraints and by the help offered by rising numbers of previous immigrants resident in
the OECD (Hatton and Williamson 2005, Chps. 10 and 11).
       Ironically, no immigration policy index exists for the recent era like the one
plotted in Figure 3 for the earlier period. The best we can do is use the periodic surveys
taken by the United Nations which asks governments whether their policy aim is to
reduce immigration, increase it or keep it the same. The proportion of labor-scarce
developed country governments seeking to reduce immigration increased from 18 percent



                                             7
in the mid 1970s to 60 percent in the mid 1990s (Table 1). That proportion also increased
within less developed labor-abundant countries, but from a much lower base. To repeat,
this index does not measure how restrictive immigration policy is, but rather the way
governments view their policy intent. Still, the index does suggest that immigration
policies have become much more restrictive since the early 1970s.
           Thus, another paradox: liberal trade policy coexists with restrictive immigration
policy today.


         Comparing Trade and Immigration Policy in the Two Global Centuries 4

           It has become common to compare the first and second global centuries (e.g.
Baldwin and Martin 2000). There are both similarities and differences between them, but
there is no bigger difference than that of trade and immigration policy. Pro-immigration
policies were already established in labor-scarce economies early in the first global
century, but trade policy was already protectionist and it became even more so as the
century progressed. Pro-trade policies eventually emerged in the labor-scarce OECD as
the second global century unfolded, but immigration policies never underwent the same
liberal reversal. There are, of course, national eccentricities that leave their mark on the
timing and magnitude of individual country policy changes, but they share three common
attributes: the fundamentals driving world migration and its selectivity; the net fiscal
implications of trade and immigration; and the role of democracy in changing the median
voter.


Immigrant Selectivity, Immigrant “Quality” and Immigrant Policy
           In the early 1800s, European overseas emigration was a mere trickle compared
with what came later in the century. Those early migrations were led by landed or renting
farmers (as opposed to landless labor) and better-off urban artisans (as opposed to
unskilled urban labor), typically traveling in family groups with the intention of settling
permanently at the New World’s frontier. The less fortunate sometimes got their way
paid by traveling as indentured servants (or even as convicts), but for most the costs and


4
    This section draws heavily on Hatton and Williamson (2005, Chps. 16 and 17).


                                                     8
risks were just too great to make an investment in the move. Those who did migrate came
from the relatively developed European northwest, and from the middle and upper parts
of the income and wealth distribution. If the overseas native-born had a preference for
west European immigrants, there was no need for host governments to develop
discriminatory policies to achieve that end since long distance, high transport costs, and
poverty at home were barriers enough to prevent immigration from poorer countries in
the south and east of Europe, or from Asia, or even by poorer individuals from the richer
countries in the European northwest.
        Anti-immigration voices got louder in labor-scarce host countries as the
nineteenth century progressed, as the immigrant numbers rose, and, most importantly, as
their relative skills and education fell. The latter was induced by the gradual
disappearance of poverty in Europe, carried by a spreading industrial revolution, and by
the fall in the cost of the move, carried by a transportation revolution: both helped release
the poverty constraint on the emigration of the poor (Hatton and Williamson 2005, Chp.
4). The upper panel of Table 1 documents this effect by reporting the ratio of the GDP
per capita in source countries relative to the host country, where the former is weighted
by the changing shares of immigrants by source entering the host country in question. US
contemporary observers made much of the declining “quality” of the new immigrants as
their source shifted from the richer northwest Europe to the poorer south and east Europe.
The US index dropped from 92.3 in the 1870s to 49.5 in the 1900s, or by 46 percent.
Over the same half-century, the Canadian and Argentine indices dropped by 42 and 50
percent, respectively.
        Although anti-immigrant sentiment ebbed and flowed, there was no call for
outright immigrant restriction in the US during most of the nineteenth century, except for
the demand for Chinese exclusion in the 1880s by west coast interests. 5 When the US did
begin to close the door to immigrants, that policy move was driven largely by complaints
from the median US voter (the unskilled and semi-skilled working man in urban
occupations) who thought they were being crowded out by the relatively low-skilled ‘new


5
 The US Congress did not debate immigration until the 1890s when the numbers from the poorer parts of
Europe began to surge. When incipient flows from poorer regions such as China and Japan began to offer
an immigration ‘threat’ to the west coast of North America (the western US states and British Columbia),
exclusion was swift and decisive. Thus, the US enacted the Chinese Exclusion Act as early as 1882.


                                                    9
immigrants’ from southern and eastern Europe (Timmer and Williamson 1998). After
more than two decades of debate, restrictive policy was introduced in 1917 with a literacy
test (Goldin 1994) followed by country of origin quotas in 1921, 1924 and 1928. The US
quotas had two goals: reducing the total numbers, and reducing the share from poor
source countries. Every labor-scarce host country followed the US lead by implementing
measures that restricted immigration of the unskilled from poor source countries. But the
vast majority of this anti-immigrant selectivity reaction took place after the first global
century had ended.
         Things have evolved very differently during the second global century. First,
discriminatory exclusion of those from poor source countries gradually disappeared,
replaced by non-discriminatory immigration policies of which the 1965 Amendments to
the US Immigration Act and the abolition of the White Australia policy in the 1970s are
but two examples. Removal of discriminatory exclusion might not have mattered much
were it not for the fact that the poverty trap was at the same time also gradually unlocked
in the poorer parts of the world, and for the fact that family reunification policies allowed
the ‘friends and relatives effect’ to do its multiplicative work. Compared with the native-
born, the labor market quality of immigrants deteriorated in the major host countries, and
it deteriorated by an even faster pace than it had in the previous century (Hatton 2000;
Williamson 2004; Hatton and Williamson 2005, Chps. 8 and 15).
         What role did changing immigrant sources play? As the lower panel of Table 2
shows, the US index of source versus host country GDP per capita fell by 54 percent over
the half-century between the 1950s and 1990s. The Canadian and German indexes fell by
almost exactly the same proportion. The Australian index fell by somewhat less and the
British index (from the 1970s) not at all. 6 7 It should be noted that these declines in


6
  The figures in the bottom half of the table can be compared with those calculated by the OECD for a
larger set of countries for the single year 1997: Australia, 60.7; Belgium, 77.7; Canada, 44.4; Denmark,
70.4; Finland 43.4; France, 28.3; Germany 47.1; Italy, 40.8; Japan, 43.2; Netherlands, 73.4; Norway, 71.8,
Sweden, 90.1; Switzerland, 76.3; UK, 71.5; US, 22.0 (OECD 2000, p. 191).
7
  The lack of decline in the UK index may come as something of a surprise, but it may be explained by the
following factors: (1) there would probably have been some decline between the 1950s and the 1970s; (2)
UK data are for those staying at least a year but not exclusively long-term immigrants; (3) they also include
increasing proportion of “immigrants” from the EU who do not require visas; and (4) while the UK did not
have a points system it did operate what might be called covertly selective immigration policies (Hatton
and Wheatley Price 2005)


                                                     10
source to destination GDP occurred despite increasingly selective immigration policies
that might have been expected to mitigate it. Having opened the door wider to the poorer
parts of the world, restrictions on all potential immigrants had to be tightened with quotas
and points systems in order to limit the size of the inflows and to raise the labor market
quality of those admitted. Thus, immigration policy is much tougher now than a century
ago simply because there are far more potential immigrants from poor countries to keep
out.


The Fiscal Implications of Trade and Immigration
       Trade and Revenue Tariffs. Customs duties were a major source of central
government revenue in the nineteenth century. In recently independent countries with
little experience with tax collection, few bureaucratic resources to implement it
efficiently, and limited access to foreign capital markets, customs revenues were an easy-
to-collect fiscal source essential to support expenditures on defense and civil
administration. This was certainly true of the United States and Latin America in the first
half of the nineteenth century, although the US had more success in gaining access to
European capital markets. Furthermore, customs revenues were especially important for
federal governments in labor-scarce and land-abundant countries since low population
and taxpayer density made other forms of tax collection inefficient. The average share of
customs duties in total revenues across eleven Latin American republics was 57.8 percent
between 1820 and 1890, and the share was even higher for federal governments (65.6
percent), since local and state governments were typically reluctant to give up their
limited tax weapons after joining a federation (Coatsworth and Williamson 2004b, p.
216). The share was no lower in the United States. Alexander Hamilton thought “the
tariff was more important as a tool of fiscal policy than as a instrument for promoting
manufactures” (Irwin 2002, p. 16) and subsequent nineteenth century figures certainly
seem to prove him right.
       The importance of taxes on external trade for the labor-scarce, newly-independent
countries in the first global century, and their unimportance in the OECD in the second
global century, can be seen in Table 3. In the mid-nineteenth century, the customs
revenue share in total tax revenue was 90 percent for both Australia and the US. As late



                                             11
as the 1890s, the customs revenue share still averaged almost 58 percent for seven labor-
scarce overseas countries. In contrast, the figure for the UK, France, and Germany was
about 29 percent, and it was only about 16 percent for the first two. By the time the
second global century had emerged after World War II, the customs revenue share had
fallen to tiny levels everywhere in the labor-scarce OECD: the average of the six reported
in Table 3 for the 1970s is only 4 percent.
        Immigrants and the Welfare State. In contrast, immigration had little or no
fiscal impact in the first global century. Since there was no welfare state, threats to the
treasury from immigration were mostly irrelevant: migrants generated no federal income
tax revenues and they received no federal transfers. Thus, tariffs brought plenty of fiscal
benefits in the era before 1914 while immigrants brought no fiscal costs. With the sharp
rise of the welfare state from the 1930s to the 1970s, social services expanded
dramatically while federal and central governments diversified their sources of tax
revenue. Between 1910 and 1970, social transfers (health, welfare, unemployment,
pensions, housing subsidies) as a share in GDP rose in the US from 0.6 to 10.4 percent,
an increase of more than seventeen times, while it rose from 0.7 to 14.8 percent for the
median OECD country, an increase of more than twenty-one times (Lindert 2004, Table
1.2, pp. 12-13). These figures confirm that the rise of the welfare state was more dramatic
in Europe than it was in North America (up by a factor of 20 in France and 33 in
Germany). Figure 4 plots the rise of the welfare state 8 and it documents graphically the
dramatic rise between 1930 and 1960, a rise that continued until the 1980s. In short,
while the fiscal implications of the immigrants may have been irrelevant in the first
global century, they were very relevant in the second global century. Figure 4 also
documents an OECD hierarchy in terms of commitment to the welfare state: by 1980, the
US and Canada were at the bottom while Germany, France and Sweden were at the top.
We will show below how this hierarchy has influenced public opinion about immigration.
        The fact that New World immigrants in the late twentieth century suffered a far
greater earnings disadvantage in labor markets than did those a century earlier has added


8
  Welfare spending in Figure 4 includes unemployment benefits, welfare, health and pensions, thus
excluding education and housing. The exclusions were necessary to make the 1880-1930 figures
comparable with the 1960-1980 figures. The measured rise in the welfare state is in no way affected but
these definitions, however.


                                                    12
further fuel to fiscal anti-immigration fires in the modern era. That is, while US
immigrant men earned 16.3 percent less than native-born men in 1990, they earned only
6.4 percent less in 1909 (Hatton and Williamson 2005, Chp. 15). Relative to native-born,
immigrants today are less productive than they were a century ago. 9 Relative to native-
born, immigrants today are therefore far more likely to need social transfers than they
were a century ago (when, of course, such transfers were not a possibility anyway). Thus,
United States poverty rates in 1959 were 20.9 percent for households with native-born
heads and 14.2 for households with foreign-born heads, much lower for the foreign-born.
Those rates had reversed dramatically by 1999: 11.8 percent for native-born and 17.4
percent for foreign-born (Hoynes et al. 2005).
        Table 4 reports for the EU percentage point differences between immigrants and
nationals in their dependence on different welfare benefits in the mid-1990s. For these
eight European countries, immigrants have on average higher dependence on
unemployment and family benefits, but a lower dependence on pensions. Their higher
dependence on the welfare state reflects both demography (the immigrants are younger
and have more children) as well as differences in labor market status (the immigrants
have higher unemployment rates and lower levels of schooling). Their lower impact on
pensions also reflects demography (the immigrants are younger). The table also
documents important differences between countries. With the exception of Finland, those
EU countries which have been able to positively select educated immigrants, tend to have
lower rates of unemployment welfare dependency. With no exceptions, those EU
countries whose immigrants have fewer children have lower family benefit dependency.
Immigrant characteristics and the generosity of the welfare state interact: the immigrant
welfare burden is greatest where they are poorly qualified for the market and where the
welfare state is relatively generous. 10




9
  Much of the source country differences in labor market performance is accounted for by the wage gap
between ‘old’ and ‘new’ immigrants.9 The wage gap in 1909 between immigrants from northwest Europe
(old) and those from southern and eastern Europe (new) was 6.7 percent. By contrast, the wage gap in 1980
between Europeans and those from Africa, Asia and South America was 30.7 percent. Since wage gaps
across major source regions is much wider in more recent times, the effects of changing nationality mix are
potentially more powerful.
10
   See also Boeri et al. (2002), Smith and Edmonston (1997), and Hatton and Williamson (2005, Chp. 14).


                                                    13
                 Voting Rights, Immigration Policy, and Trade Policy

       It is one thing to identify changes in the immigrant mix and in budgetary
imperatives as key elements in the clamor for restrictive policies. It is quite another to
explain the process by which these translate into policy. Two key questions are, first who
stood to gain and who stood to lose, and, second, who had the vote? The classic analysis
of tariff protection starts from the Stolper-Samuelson theorem: owners of the scarce
factor(s) should favor protection. Much of tariff history has been written in terms of a
three-factor world: labor, capital and land (Rogowski 1989). In land abundant New
World countries, the Stolper-Samuelson prediction is that labor should have searched for
other scarce factors, like capital, to try and get enough votes to protect them from an
invasion of imported labor-intensive manufactures. Owners of land and natural resources
should have resisted, lobbying for free trade. Such thinking seems to work relatively well
for trade policy but can it also be applied to immigration policy? Let us turn to the second
question first: who had the vote?
       Figure 5 shows the percentage of adults voting in five New World countries
between 1850 and 1940. By 1880 a quarter of adults were voting in North America while
in South America the figure was less than ten percent well into the twentieth century.
Figure 6 shows a similar contrast between the industrial leaders and the continental
followers until about 1910, which marked the beginning of a steep ascent to the interwar
period. Although suffrage in the nineteenth century looks very limited, the fact that it was
universally male means that male voting rates were roughly twice the rates in Figures 5
and 6. This in turn means that in North America and in the European leaders, voting
percolated well down the hierarchy of class and income, giving a strong voice to labor. In
South America and the European followers it may have extended down to the urban
middle and artisan classes, but not much beyond that.
       The story of trade policy in Western Europe is well known. The final abolition of
the British Corn Laws in 1846 represents the triumph of labor and capital over landed
interests and it was underpinned by the combination of a shrinking share of agriculture
and electoral reform that shifted the political balance towards urban interests. Stories that
are similar in essence but different in detail and timing can be told for Belgium,



                                             14
Switzerland and France (Rogowski 1989, pp. 34-38). Farther to the east, the results were
different, with Bismarck’s marriage of iron and rye reflecting the political strength of a
coalition of land and capital. Elsewhere in Europe where land and capital were relatively
scarce and where voting was restricted to a small minority, protectionist forces were in
the ascendancy from mid-century. One might also have predicted that emigration would
have been encouraged in Western Europe and discouraged further south and east, but in
fact there was little need for it. As we have seen, until late in the nineteenth century the
main transatlantic flows came from the north and west of Europe. When the Southern and
Eastern Europe did join, governments found the costs of trying to control emigration too
great, and the benefits too limited in the face of crumbling capital/labor coalitions.
        In the New World, the United States, Canada, Australia and New Zealand set their
tariffs high, once they had the independence to do so. Despite the importance of
agriculture, scarce capital and scarce labor won the day in nineteenth century tariff
debates. But the story is complicated by the wide diffusion of both voting rights and
landholding. Here, tariff revenues were particularly important. They were used to buy the
votes of the vast rural interiors in exchange for infrastructure development, particularly
railways. In the antebellum US, this was played out as a coalition between the
Northeastern and the Western States against the South (Irwin 2005), a coalition that was
underpinned after 1862 by the expansion of settlement in the west under the Homestead
Act. In Canada, the National Policy of 1879 explicitly aimed to build on the Dominion
Lands Act of 1877 to promote western settlement, principally by financing railways with
tariff revenue (Pomfret 1981, p. 87). Australian post-Federation policies explicitly aimed
to promote a high wage economy by protecting industry at the expense of agriculture. 11
        Given that the capital-labor coalition had the upper hand in these countries, how
do we explain why open immigration policies persisted well into the twentieth century?
Although anti-immigrant sentiment came and went with the Know Nothing movement in
the US, pressure began to build only at the end of the century, and for two reasons. One is
11
   Australia is a particularly interesting case. Until Federation in 1901 it consisted of separate British
colonies, the most important of which were New South Wales and Victoria. In Victoria, where
manufacturing was important the pre-Federation tariff was high as compared the more agricultural, and
largely free trade colony of New South Wales. When the Australia-wide tariff was raised in the first decade
of the century, it was explicitly linked to the new minimum wage set under the Harvester judgment of
1907. Import competing firms benefited from the tariff only if they paid the minimum wage; otherwise they
would pay an excise duty that cancelled out the effect of the tariff.


                                                    15
that open immigration policy was explicitly linked to the expansion of tariff-financed
infrastructure in the interior. 12 The second is that mass migration of low skilled workers
from relatively poor countries gained momentum after the 1870s in the US and
Argentina, and even later in Canada (Table 2). As Goldin (1994) has shown, in 1917,
after 20 years of debate, the political balance eventually tipped in favor of restriction as
wage competition shifted northeastern labor against immigration, with the support of the
South. Elsewhere too, pressure for restriction mounted with the fact or the threat of low-
skilled immigration. 13
         In South America the continuation of open immigration policy is easier to
explain, as much of the political power lay in the hands of the free trading Latifundia. But
things were not quite that straightforward since landowner power would also predict free
trade, and contrary to popular belief, tariffs were higher in nineteenth century South
America than almost anywhere else. Given literacy and wealth requirements for voting as
well as the lack of secret ballots (Engerman and Sokoloff 2000, p. 226), urban capitalists
formed the other half of the governing oligarchy. Both groups had strong interests in
open immigration but their interests in tariff protection typically diverged. While tariffs
would have hurt the exporters of agricultural goods and minerals, the alternative of taxes
on land and mineral rights would have been even more painful. As in North America,
tariff revenues were important—indeed recent empirical analysis suggests that revenue
was the most important determinant of South American tariff levels (Coatsworth and
Williamson 2004a). But the political imperatives for revenue were not just (or even
mainly) infrastructure for the rural interior (much of which was financed from abroad).
Above all these revenues were used to fight the endemic wars that plagued the region. 14
         We might also add that, for South America, low-skilled immigration would have
been less of a threat, even if those potentially threatened had had a bigger voice. Populist

12
   In the US and elsewhere, those moving to the rural interior after mid-century were not necessarily
immigrants, but immigration was nevertheless important. In an earlier study, we found that for every
hundred immigrants to States in New England, the Mid-Atlantic and East North Central, 40 non-
immigrants were displaced, moving west (Hatton and Williamson 1998, pp. 167-9).
13
   Several countries introduced a dictation test ahead of the US. It was one of the first Acts of the newly
federated Australian Commonwealth, and because the language was English (strictly speaking it was at the
discretion of the Immigration Officer), this formed the basis of what became known as the White Australia
Policy.
14
   Centeno (1997) lists 33 major international and civil wars between 1819 and 1880, although this
excludes numerous small and medium scale internal conflicts and a number of costly international wars.


                                                    16
regimes that restricted both imports and immigration had to await the Great Depression
of the 1930s.
        Thus three factors conditioned trade and immigration policies in the labor scarce
economies of the New World: revenue needs for development or war; sending country
poverty constraints that kept immigration small and selective for most of the period; and
the often-limited political franchise. But what about the second great era of globalization:
the period since the 1950s? Agricultural interests had declined almost everywhere and the
extension of the franchise ensured that the labor’s voice gained increasing, if not
overwhelming, weight. Democratic governments increasingly needed the support of grass
roots public opinion for their policies. For the modern period we can examine individual
attitudes directly and so we turn to this next.


                             Public Opinion and Public Policy


        Most observers agree that policies should reflect public opinion where the
franchise is universal. Thus, attention has focused recently on measuring and explaining
individual attitudes towards immigrants and imports. We are interested here in two key
questions. First, is public opinion more negative towards immigration than towards trade?
If it is, we would then have an explanation as to why trade policies have been more
liberal than immigration policies in the postwar era. If it is not, we need to offer an
explanation for the apparent conflict between policy and public opinion. Second, what
explains individual attitudes towards trade and immigration? What are the individual and
the country characteristics that determine individual opinions? While the recent literature
has explored the former at length, it has devoted very little attention to the latter, and it is
the latter that helps unravel the policy paradox.
        Recent opinion surveys make it possible to measure the intensity of individual
attitudes towards trade and immigration on the same basis across a large number of labor-
scarce economies. The most widely used evidence is that taken from the National Identity
module of the ISSP survey, conducted in 24 countries in 1995/6. Here we assess opinion
in 14 OECD countries in the ISSP survey so as to focus on opinion in those that are
relatively labor-scarce. Respondents were asked whether they would like to see



                                               17
immigration increased a lot, increased a little, kept the same, reduced a little or reduced a
lot. A similar question was asked about attitudes towards imports and both sets of
responses are placed on a scale of 1 to 5, with the value 5 representing the most intense
opposition.
        The average survey responses to these two questions are presented in Table 5.
Three features stand out. First, the average citizen would like to see both immigration and
imports reduced. Second, there is very little difference between the average opposition to
immigration and to imports. On the basis of this evidence, the reader might find it hard to
see why trade policy has been so much more liberal than immigration policy over the last
three or four decades. We think there is an obvious answer and we shall return to it
shortly. Third, the correlation between attitudes towards immigration and imports across
the individuals in the survey are not particularly strong: the correlation coefficient is only
about 0.24 for the full sample. Hence, opposition to imports and immigration could very
well reflect the attitudes of rather different individuals.
        Several recent studies have explored the association between attitudes towards
immigration and socio-economic characteristics of the respondents (O’Rourke 2003;
Mayda 2004; O’Rourke and Sinnott 2004) as well as their attitudes towards imports
(O’Rourke and Sinnott 2001; O’Rourke 2003; Mayda and Rodrik 2005). The regressions
in Table 6 follow their lead, but with some significant differences. We estimate ordinary
least squares rather than ordered probits, which makes comparison across the anti-
immigrant and anti-imports equations possible. Even more important, we replace their
country dummies (country fixed effects) with a number of country-specific variables that
allow us to assign explicit explanations to country differences in public attitude. These
country-specific variables are especially relevant to the preceding discussion about the
evolution of policy since the mid-nineteenth century, but we are able to include only a
few, given the limited number of countries in the ISSP sample. The results are displayed
in Table 6, with robust standard errors clustered by country.
        Following O’Rourke and Sinnott (2004), we characterize prejudice against things
foreign by the variables labeled ‘patriotism’ and ‘chauvinism’. Patriotism is measured by
the average response to four questions that elicit the extent to which the individual
believes that his or her country is superior to others. Chauvinism is measured by the



                                               18
average response to three questions that capture the individual’s sense of loyalty to his or
her country. 15 As the first two columns of Table 6 illustrate, these variables contribute
strongly and positively to individual anti-immigration and anti-import sentiment. They
provide compelling evidence that this kind of prejudice is an important component of
individual attitudes.
         Relative to non-immigrants, first generation immigrants are opposed to
immigration and imports while the second generation strongly favor immigration but are
opposed to expanding imports. Females have stronger anti-trade opinion than males while
age has very marginal effects in both equations. Consistent with other studies, the highly
educated are more strongly in favor of both immigration and imports. While they may
have more enlightened views than the less educated, they may also suffer less from
competition from the low skilled and may therefore fear immigration less. Being
employed also lowers anti-immigration attitudes, but the effect is relatively small and not
significant in either equation. Following previous studies we also interacted the education
dummy with the country’s GDP per capita and with the country’s inequality, but these
interactions never proved to be significant when the country-level variables were also
separately included and hence they were eliminated. 16
         The remaining variables in Table 6 are the country-specific effects (taking one
value for each country). The log of GDP per capita is strongly positive in the equation for
immigration opinion but not in the equation for import opinion. This is consistent with
the view that immigration depends on absolute advantage while trade depends on
comparative advantage. Thus, individual attitudes are more anti-immigration in the richer

15
   These variable clusters are those identified by O’Rourke and Sinnott (2004, p. 24) using principal
components analysis. Those that comprise the patriotism index are the (appropriately scaled) responses to
the questions (e.g. for an Australian respondent): (1) “Generally speaking, Australia is a better country than
most other countries”; (2) “The world would be a better place if people from other countries were more like
Australians”; (3) “I would rather be a citizen of Australia than of any other country in the world”; and (4)
“It is impossible for people who do not share Australian customs and traditions to become fully
Australian.” The components that comprise the chauvinism index (again, appropriately scaled) are: (1)
“People should support their country even if the country is in the wrong”; (2) “Australia should follow its
own interests, even if this leads to conflicts with other nations”; and (3) “How important do you think each
of the following is for being truly Australian … to have been born in Australia?”
16
   The idea underlying these interactions is that the scarce factor should feel more threatened by
immigration and by imports. Thus in rich countries, where human capital is relatively abundant, the less
skilled should feel most threatened, and the sign of the interaction between high education or skills and
GDP per capita should be negative. We obtained the expected sign on the interaction term but the
coefficient was never significant in the presence of the absolute level of GDP per capita.


                                                     19
country where there is a greater absolute income gap between it and potential source
countries. The level of inequality has a positive effect on both types of opinion. It seems
likely that this reflects a general perception that both trade and migration increase
inequality in the labor-scarce country. The population variable controls for country size
but it has opposite effects on opinion towards immigration and imports and it is not
significant in either equation. 17
         Variables specific to the immigration opinion equation are the share of
expenditure on welfare in GDP and the share of the population that are foreign nationals.
Both of these have strong positive effects. Thus, the higher the percentage of foreign
nationals in the population and the more generous is the social security system, the more
public opinion opposes immigration. Since high levels of immigration have been
associated with immigration from relatively poor source countries, this, combined with
generous host-country welfare systems, makes immigrants a bigger perceived fiscal
threat to the median voter there.
         In the import opinion equation, we include the ratio of imports to GDP and the
ratio of OECD trade (imports plus exports) to GDP. Import penetration has the expected
positive sign – more imports associated with more trade opposition -- but with very low
significance. We expect the coefficient on the OECD trade ratio to take on a much
smaller positive sign since trade among rich countries is taken to be far less damaging to
unskilled labor. The result is consistent with that prediction since the coefficient is
insignificant. In short, economy-wide variables seem to matter much less for imports than
for immigration. Adding economy-wide variables raises the R2 by 8 percentage points in
the immigration opinion equation but by only 3 percentage points in the import opinion
equation. We suspect that this result is driven by the fact that the labor-scarce OECD
trades mostly with itself, while its immigrants come entirely from labor-surplus poor
sources.
         As we noted earlier, the fact that opposition to imports is nearly as intense as
opposition to immigration seems inconsistent with observed policy outcomes. That
puzzle can be resolved, at least in part, once we recognize that policy itself is

17
   The population variable was included in order to capture scale effects. For small countries the optimal, or
acceptable, trade and immigration ratios may be higher so that the effect of scale is predicted to be positive
(a given level of immigrant/import penetration is less acceptable the larger the country).


                                                     20
endogenous. This is illustrated in Figure 7, which depicts anti-immigration and anti-
import opinion as upward sloping functions of the immigrant/population ratio and the
imports/GDP ratio respectively. The anti-immigration opinion function is steeper than
the anti-import opinion function (the result in Table 6) and it crosses the horizontal
(dashed) line at a lower level of penetration. If there is a political threshold beyond which
negative opinion is translated into policy action, then immigration policy ought to be
more restrictive than trade policy in order to gain similar levels of public acceptance.
       In the data underlying Table 6 the mean ratio of foreign nationals to population is
6 percent while the mean level of imports to GDP is a little more than 29 percent.
Although these ratios are not really fully comparable, they are useful for illustration. If
the foreign nationals share was raised by 23 percentage points (from 6 to 29 percent) then
anti-immigration opinion would increase by 23 × 0.044 = 1.01. Thus, public opinion
would become more negative by one full unit on a one-to-five scale. Even an increase in
the foreign nationals share by, say, 10 percentage points (well within the range of the
data) would increase anti-immigrant opinion by 0.44 units, which is greater than the
standard deviation of the country means in Table 5 (0.34). By contrast, policies that
increase the import share by 10 percentage points would have only small effects given
that the coefficient on the imports/GDP ratio is small and insignificant. Hence, the
political ‘costs’ of liberalization seem to be much greater for immigration than for trade.


                     Trade and Migration Policies: Then and Now

       We observe a policy paradox for labor scarce economies in 1900 – restricted trade
but unrestricted immigration. We observe a policy paradox again today – restricted
immigration but unrestricted trade. What accounts for the policy paradoxes, and why the
switch? Let’s start with immigration policies.
       We have argued that the progressive toughening of immigration policy and the
progressive liberalization of tariff policy can be explained by a combination of factors.
When the costs and risks of intercontinental migration were large, the ‘threat’ of low-
skilled immigration was muted since few of them could finance the move. Changes in the
immigrant mix towards poorer source countries plus the increase in their numbers were



                                             21
the underlying anti-immigrant fundamentals at work, while macroeconomic shocks were
the events that dictated the timing of the sharp changes towards more restrictive policies.
As the gap between poor sending and rich receiving countries increased, policy got
tougher. In the nineteenth century, immigrants might not have been a burden on the
welfare state but they certainly did compete with the native-born in labor markets since
immigrant skills were similar to so many native-born. The policy backlash was muted in
some places by a limited franchise and delayed in others by developmental coalitions and
party politics.
        The recent past suggests that differences across countries in anti-immigration
opinion are driven by the scale of immigration, which represents the labor market threat,
and by the size of the welfare state, which reflects the potential welfare burden. And
given a universal franchise those concerns are reflected in tough immigration policies. On
the face of it, the puzzle might seem to be that public opinion isn’t more negative towards
immigration. Two explanations account for the puzzle. First, public opinion would be
much more negative if immigration policies were more liberal. Second, given fairly tight
immigration policies, the median voter today is less threatened by labor market
competition than the median worker would have been a century ago. As Table 6 showed,
the richer the country, the more anti-immigrant is public opinion, but within a country,
more highly educated individuals are less anti-immigrant. The fact that the median voter
is no longer unskilled and that the gap between the skills of natives and immigrants has
been widening together offer an important reason why opinion isn’t even more negative
and immigration policies aren’t even tougher than they are.
        What about trade policies? Recent research has shown that they were much more
restrictive in the past than has often been recognized—and especially in labor scarce
economies. Why isn’t the same true today? While the revenue motive was paramount in
the nineteenth century, that imperative waned as revenue sources widened in the
twentieth century. But that fact cannot fully explain the evolution from the high tariffs in
the past to the low tariffs in the present. After all, there are other motives for protection
besides revenue needs. Indeed, the results in Table 6 suggest that anti-import opinion is
driven by much the same individual characteristics that determine anti-immigrant
opinion. Thus, what applies to immigration also applies to imports: the median voter who



                                              22
is no longer unskilled faces less of a threat from the low skilled labor embodied in
imports from relatively poor countries. And ‘prejudice’ does just as much damage to
import opinion as it does to immigration opinion, and, in any case, why should it change?
Thus, the real difference between attitudes (and policies) towards imports and
immigration cannot lie with ‘prejudice.’
       Some clues about the underlying fundamentals can be found in Table 6. First,
anti-immigration sentiment increases with the scale of immigration but anti-import
sentiment does not increase with the scale of imports, or at least not nearly as much.
True, an increase in imports hurts some more than others: using the ISSP data Mayda and
Rodrik (2005) find that those who are employed in import-competing industries are
substantially more anti-imports than those who are not. Indeed, those who have skills
specific to export sectors might be expected to gain. One reason why tariffs were so high
a century ago, and so low today, is that the median voter is so different. Today there is a
balance across voters between those who lose and those who gain from trade, because
trade is more intra-industry than it was a century ago. Hence, an increase in imports has a
more mixed effect on public opinion today than it did a century ago.
       Second, higher GDP makes opinion more anti-immigration but not more anti-
import. The richer the country, the greater the immigration ‘threat’ from low income
countries. For those well below the skills of the median voter, the threat is labor market
competition. For the median voter, however, the threat is the fiscal implications of the
welfare state. This latter part of the dual threat is far greater now than it was a century
ago due to the rise of the welfare state, and due to the fact that the poverty trap, which in
the past held emigrants back in their poor sending countries, has been released, thus
vastly widening the pool of potential poor and less skilled immigrants compared with the
native-born.




                                              23
                                      References

Aidt, T. S., Dutta, J. and Loukoianova, E. (2005), “Democracy Comes to Europe:
        Franchise Extension and Fiscal Outcomes 1830-1938,” European Economic
        Review (forthcoming).
Baldwin, R. and Martin, P. (2000), “Two Waves of Globalisation: Superficial similarities
        and Fundamental Differences.” In H. Siebert (ed.), Globalisation and Labor,
        Tubingen, Germany: Mohr.
Barnard, A. (1986), “Some Government Financial Data, 1850 to1982,” Source Papers in
        Economic History 13, Canberra: Australian National University (August).
Boeri, T., Hanson, G. and McCormick, B. (eds.) (2002), Immigration Policy and the
        Welfare System, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Coatsworth, J. H. and Williamson, J. G. (2004a), “The Roots of Latin American
        Protectionism: Looking Before the Great Depression.” In A. Estevadeordal, D.
        Rodrik, A. Taylor A. Velasco n(eds.), FTAA and Beyond: Prospects for
        Integration in the Americas, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Coatsworth, J. H. and J. G. Williamson (2004b), “Always Protectionist? Latin American
        Tariffs from Independence to Great Depression,” Journal of Latin American
        Studies 36 (May), pp. 205-32.
Centeno, M. A. (1997), “Blood and Debt: War and Taxation in Nineteenth Century Latin
        America, American Journal of Sociology 102: 1565-605.
Engerman, S. L. and Sokoloff, K. L. (2000), History Lessons: Institutions, Factor
        Endowments, and Paths of Development in the New World,” Journal of
        Economic Perspectives 14: 217:232.
Engerman, S. L. and Sokoloff, K. L. (2005), “The Evolution of Suffrage Institutions in
        the New World,” Journal of Economic History (forthcoming).
Faini, R, J. DeMelo and K. Zimmermann (eds.) (1999), Migration: The Controversies
        and the Evidence, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ferenczi, I. and W. F. Willcox (1929), International Migrations, Vol. I, New York:
        National Bureau of Economics Research.
Goldin, C. (1994), "The Political Economy of Immigration Restriction in the United
        States, 1890 to 1921." In C. Goldin and G. D. Libecap (eds.), The Regulated
        Economy: A Historical Approach to Political Economy, Chicago: University of
        Chicago Press.
Hatton, T. J. (2000), “How Much Did Immigrant “Quality” Decline in Late Nineteenth
        Century America?” Journal of Population Economics 13, pp. 509-25.
Hatton, T. J. (2005), “Explaining Trends in UK Immigration,” Journal of Population
        Economics, (forthcoming).
Hatton, T. J. and Wheatley Price, S. (2005), “Migration, Migrants and Policy in the
        United Kingdom,” in K. F. Zimmermann (ed.) European Migration: What Do We
        Know? Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hatton, T. J. and Williamson, J. G. (1998), The Age of Mass Migration: An Economic
        Analysis, New York: Oxford University Press.
Hatton, T. J. and Williamson, J. G. (2005), Global Migration and the World Economy:
        Two Centuries of Policy and Performance, Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press
        (forthcoming).


                                           24
Hillman, A. L. and Weiss, A. (1999), “Beyond international factor movements: cultural
       preferences, endogenous policies and the migration of people: an overview,” in R.
       Faini, J. de Melo and K. F. Zimmermann (eds.), Migration: The Controversies
       and the Evidence, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 76-91.
Hoynes, H., Page, M. and Huff Stevens, A. (2005), “Poverty in America: Trends and
       Explanations,” unpublished, Department of Economics, University of California,
       Davis (June).
Irwin, D. A. (2002), “The Early Trade Policy Experience of the United States, 1789-
       1820,” unpublished, Department of Economics, Dartmouth College (September).
Irwin, D. A. (2005), “Antebellum Tariff Politics: Coalition Formation and Credible
       Commitments,” Unpublished Paper: Dartmouth College.
Lindert, P. H. (2004), Growing Public: Social Spending and Economics Growth since the
       Eighteenth Century, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Maddison, A. (1995), Monitoring the World Economy 1820-1992, Paris: OECD
       Development Centre Studies.
Maddison, A. (2001), The World Economy: A Millenial Perspective, Paris: OECD.
Markusen, J. R. (1983), “Factor Movements and Commodity Trade as Complements,”
       Journal of International Economics, 13, pp. 341-356.
Mayda, A. M. (2004), “Who is Against Immigration? A Cross-Country Investigation of
       Individual Attitudes Towards Immigrants,” IZA DP No. 1115, Bonn (April).
Mayda, A. M. and Rodrik. D. (2005), “Why are Some People (and Countries) More
       Protectionist than Others?” European Economic Review, (forthcoming).
Mitchell, B. R. (1992), International Historical Statistics: Europe 1750-1988, 3rd ed.,
       New York: Stockton Press.
Mitchell, B. R. (1993), International Historical Statistics: The Americas 1750-1988, 2nd
       ed., New York: Stockton Press.
Mitchell, B. R. (2000), International Historical Statistics: Africa, Asia and Oceania
       1750-2000, 4th ed., London: Macmillan.
Mundell, R. A. (1957), “International Trade and Factor Mobility,” American Economic
       Review, 47, pp. 321-335.
OECD (2000), Economic Outlook, 68, Paris: OECD.
O’Rourke, K. H. (2003), “Heckscher-Ohlin Theory and Individual Attitudes Towards
       Globalization.” Paper presented to the Eli Heckscher Celebratory Symposium,
       Stockholm School of Economics, May 22-24.
O’Rourke, K. H. and Sinnott, R. (2001), “What Determines Attitudes Towards
       Protection?” in S. M. Collins and D. Rodrik (eds.), Brookings Trade Forum 2001,
       Washington DC: Brookings Institute Press.
O’Rourke, K. H. and Sinnott, R. (2004), “The Determinants of Individual Attitudes
       Towards Immigration,” unpublished paper, Trinity College Dublin.
Pomfret, R. (1981), The Economic Development of Canada, Toronto: Methuen.
Rogowski, R. (1989), Commerce and Coalitions: How Trade Affects Domestic Political
       Alignments, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Smith, J. P. and Edmonston, B. (eds.) (1997), The New Americans: Economic,
       Demographic and Fiscal Effects of Immigration, Washington D.C: National
       Academy Press.
Timmer, A. and Williamson, J. G. (1998), “Immigration Policy Prior to the 1930s:



                                          25
       Markets, Policy Interactions, and Globalization Backlash,” Population and
       Development Review, 24, pp. 739-771.
United Nations (2002), International Migration Report 2002, New York: United Nations.
Wellisch, D. and Walz, U. (1998), “Why do Rich Countries prefer Free Trade over Free
       Migration? The Role of the Modern Welfare State,” European Economic Review,
       42, pp. 1592-1612.
Williamson, J. G. (2004), The Political Economy of World Mass Migration: Comparing
       Two Global Centuries, Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute Press.
Williamson, J. G. (2005a), “Explaining World Tariffs 1870-1938: Stolper-Samuelson,
       Strategic Tariffs and State Revenues.” In R. Findlay, R. Henriksson, H. Lindgren
       and M. Lundahl (eds.), Eli F. Heckscher, 1879-1952: A Celebratory Symposium,
       Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press (forthcoming).
Williamson, J. G. (2005b), Globalization and the Poor Periphery Before the Modern
       Era: The Ohlin Lectures, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press (forthcoming).




                                          26
                                          Table 1
                        Government Immigration Policies, 1976-2001
                    (Percent of governments aiming to restrict immigration)

Year                                           1976             1986              1996              2001
All Countries                                    7               20                40                40
More Developed Countries                        18               38                60                44
Less Developed Countries                         3               15                34                39

Source: United Nations (2002), p. 18.




                                     Table 2
         GDP Per Capita Ratio: Average Source Country/Destination Country

Country                    1860s              1870s              1880s              1890s              1900s
US                          95.4               92.3               73.3               64.0               49.5
Canada                     154.8              183.1              159.4              136.7              107.0
Argentina                  114.2              110.2               89.8               68.4               54.6

Country                    1950s              1960s              1970s              1980s              1990s
US                          49.1               40.8               29.8               24.0               22.4
Canada                      64.5               60.0               40.8               33.7               30.8
Australia                   73.4               75.4               64.5               55.5               49.0
Germany                     95.6               70.1               61.1               51.1               44.7
UK                            --                 --               75.3               83.1               86.2

Notes: Immigration weights by source country are constructed from data on annual gross immigration
flows, summed by decade, where immigrants are classified by country of birth or last residence and where
those not classified are allocated to a residual group for each world region. These weights are applied to the
mid-decade estimate of GDP per capita at constant purchasing power parity for individual countries or
country groups.
Sources : 1860s to 1900s: weights for gross immigration from Ferenczi and Willcox (1929), Table 14, pp.
274-87, by country with residuals by continent; GDP per capita from Maddison (1995), Appendix D, pp.
194-206 (by country) and Appendix E, pp. 212 (by broad region), with interpolations where necessary.
Cross-border migration between the US and Canada is excluded from the migration weights. 1950s to
1990s: weights for gross immigration, for the US from US Immigration and Naturalization Service (2002)
Table 2 at http://uscis.gov/graphics/shared/aboutus/statistics/Immigs.htm; for Canada immigration data to
1979 kindly supplied by Don DeVoretz and for 1980-2000 by Roger Bourque (Statistics Canada); for
Australia from DIMIA (2001) http://www.immi.gov.au/statistics/publications/federation/body.pdf; for
Germany data kindly supplied by Georgios Tassoukis; for the UK from the dataset used in Hatton (2005).
Weights exclude cross border migrants between the US and Canada and between the UK and Ireland; for
Germany they exclude flows of ethnic German ausseidler. GDP per capita for countries and regional
residuals from Maddison (2001) Appendix C, pp. 267-333.




                                                      27
                                         Table 3
                Share of Customs Revenue in Total Tax Revenue, 1840s-1970s

           1840s 1850s 1860s 1870s 1880s 1890s 1900s 1910s 1920s 1930s 1950s 1960s 1970s
                                     European Leaders
UK           41.1 36.3 32.8 26.6 22.4 19.4 21.4 14.9 12.9 21.1
France             10.7 6.8     6.3 10.2 12.0 12.0 17.0       8.1 15.5    9.3 11.0    7.3
Germany                        46.4 55.7 54.9 53.3 33.3 12.3 14.2         4.6   3.6   1.6
                                   Labor-scarce Countries
Australia          90.0 92.2 91.3 83.0 78.2 64.2 44.7 37.4 31.3           7.7   5.7   5.1
N. Zealand               42.5 38.8 35.7 36.2 34.5 23.8 28.2 25.5 13.9           9.7   3.9
US           87.8 90.3 56.6 52.1 56.3 48.1 47.1 31.4 12.4 10.8            0.9   1.2   1.4
Canada                         58.4 60.3 54.3 56.8 57.7 33.8 22.2         9.2   7.7   6.0
Argentina                                  60.7 49.9 46.6 48.8 33.8
Brazil                                            52.3 46.6 37.9 32.4
Chile                                      69.1 89.4 43.4 63.0 41.2
Uruguay                                    58.9 54.9 79.7 37.7 39.6

   Sources: UK, France Germany from Mitchell (1992) pp. 806-33; Australia from Barnard (1986) pp.38-41,
   New Zealand from Mitchell (2000) pp. 932-4; US, Canada, Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay from Mitchell
   (1993) pp. 668-85. The UK series is not reported for the 1950s-1970s since excise is aggregated with
   customs in the official data, and excise is much bigger.




                                                    28
                                        Table 4
          Welfare Dependency and Personal Characteristics in the EU 1994-6
                   (differences between immigrants and EU nationals)

Country         Percentage point difference              Difference in characteristics between
                between immigrants and EU                immigrants and EU nationals
                nationals in receipt of
                Unemp.        Family         Pensions    Low          High         Age         No. of
                Benefit       Benefit                    educated     educated     (years)     children
Germany                 1.6             --          --        21.2         −5.5         −8.6         0.54
Denmark               24.5           5.3        −17.9         14.7           0.6        −7.8         0.47
Netherlands             7.0          7.9        −14.9         22.7           5.3        −7.7         0.65
Belgium                 6.7          1.1          −6.1        10.6        −14.1         −2.5         0.12
France                  4.9         16.7        −12.8         22.5         −7.2         −3.6         1.10
UK                      0.6          0.6        −23.4        −15.4         21.2         −8.7         0.85
Austria                 8.9          8.1        −18.0           7.8        12.2        −10.6         0.35
Finland               31.7           0.2        −12.7        −12.3         17.5         −7.4         0.04

Source: Boeri et al. (2002: 74-5).
Notes: Data for those aged 16 and above are from the European Community Household Panel. The first
three columns refer to differences between non-EU citizens and EU citizens in the percentage receiving
benefit. The next two columns are differences in the percentage with less than completed secondary school
education and the percentage with college degrees. The penultimate column refers to those adults in older
age groups, and the last column refers number of children per household.




                                                   29
                                          Table 5
                      Attitudes Towards Immigration and Trade, 1995/6

Country                   Anti-                 Anti-Imports          Correlation             No of
                          Immigration           opinion               coefficient             observations
                          opinion
Australia                      3.768                  3.999                  0.271                2318
Austria                        3.808                  3.907                  0.267                 923
Canada                         3.311                  3.292                  0.284                1310
Germany                        4.270                  3.283                  0.370                1630
Great Britain                  4.060                  3.772                  0.325                 955
Ireland                        3.073                  3.664                  0.178                 919
Italy                          4.148                  3.599                  0.243                1020
Japan                          3.373                  2.939                  0.219                1000
Netherlands                    3.822                  2.930                  0.272                1864
New Zealand                    3.737                  3.401                  0.310                 950
Norway                         3.845                  3.146                  0.240                1333
Spain                          3.385                  3.889                  0.180                1014
Sweden                         3.970                  3.254                  0.253                1132
USA                            3.880                  3.765                  0.249                1090
All countries                  3.770                  3.480                  0.237               17458

Source: Based on data from the 1995 International Social Survey (ISSP) module on national identity,
details at http://www.gesis.org/en/data_service/issp/data/1995_National_Identity.htm. These figures are
the average attitude towards immigration and imports on a five point scale where respondents were asked
whether the number of immigrants/imports into their economy should increased a lot (1), increased a little
(2), kept the same (3), reduced a little (4), or reduced a lot (5). The sample used here excludes cases where,
for either immigration opinion or trade opinion, there was a non-response or where the response was ‘don’t
know’.




                                                     30
                                     Table 6
          The Determinants of Anti-Imports and Anti-Immigration Attitudes

 Explanatory                                     (1)                                  (2)
 Variable                              Anti-Immigration Opinion               Anti-Imports Opinion
 Individual-level variables
 ‘Patriotism’                                        0.055    (1.81)                   0.201    (7.39)
 ‘Chauvinism’                                        0.374    (8.23)                   0.397    (13.7)
 Foreign-born                                       -0.035    (0.32)                  -0.130    (1.99)
 2nd Generation Immigrant                           -0.283    (6.21)                   0.085    (2.11)
 Female                                              0.035    (1.13)                   0.304    (11.3)
 Age/100                                             0.009    (0.07)                  -0.001    (1.08)
 Married                                             0.038    (1.77)                   0.029    (1.40)
 Highly Educated                                    -0.219    (7.13)                  -0.280    (7.32)
 Employed                                           -0.008    (0.51)                  -0.032    (1.07)
 Country-level variables
 Log GDP Per Capita                                  0.692    (2.58)                  -0.294 (0.57)
 Inequality                                          1.850    (2.26)                   4.043 (2.23)
 Log Population                                      0.077    (1.51)                  -0.072 (0.64)
 Welfare Expenditure /GDP                            0.047    (7.26)
 Share of Popn Foreign                               0.044    (3.13)
 Imports/GDP                                                                           0.006 (0.28)
 OECD Trade/GDP                                                                       -0.009 (0.93)
 R2                                                           0.207                           0.219
 No of obs                                                    14820                          14820

Notes: The countries included are those listed in Table 5 above. The number of observations is reduced due
to missing data for some of the individual level explanatory variables. t-statistics in parentheses are from
robust standard errors clustered by country.
Sources: ISSP survey as Table 5 above. Sources for the country-specific variables are as follows.
Population and Real GDP Per Capita at constant 1996 US dollars, purchasing power parity adjusted, from
A. Heston, R. Summers and B. Aten, Penn World Table Version 6.1, Center for International Comparisons
at the University of Pennsylvania (CICUP), October 2002:
http://pwt.econ.upenn.edu/php_site/pwt61_form.php.
For inequality, gini coefficients are taken from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators, 2003,
Table 2.8 p. 64-66 at: http://www.worldbank.org/data/wdi2000/pdfs/tab2_8.pdf. Welfare expenditure/GDP,
Imports/GDP and OECD Trade/GDP are from the World Bank’s Global Development Network databases
(Government Finance and Macro Time Series) at:
http://www.worldbank.org/research/growth/GDNdata.htm. The share of foreign nationals in the population
is taken from the Council of Europe’s Demographic Yearbook, 2001, at:
http://www.coe.int/t/e/social_cohesion/population/demographic_year_book/2001_Edition/default.asp, and
for non-European countries from Migration Information Source at: http://www.migrationinformation.org/.
The figures for countries for which only foreign-born numbers are available (as distinct from foreign
nationals), were adjusted downwards accordingly. All the variables are for 1995 or the closest year
available.




                                                    31
                                                          Figure 1
                                          Average Tariff, 35 countries 1870-1998

                      25



                      20



                      15
  Percent




                      10



                      5



                      0
                       1870   1880   1890 1900   1910   1920 1930       1940    1950 1960   1970   1980 1990
                                                                  Year

Source: Williamson (2005a).

                                                       Figure 2
                                Unweighted Average of Average Tariffs Before World War 2
                      45
                                                   US                    Lat Am             Offshoots
                      40
                                                   Euro Periph           Core               Asia
                      35

                      30
     Tariff Percent




                      25

                      20

                      15

                      10

                       5

                       0
                        1865 1870 1875 1880 1885 1890 1895 1900 1905 1910 1915 1920 1925 1930 1935
                                                                 Year

Source: Williamson (2005a).




                                                                 32
                                                                          Figure 3
                                                         New World Immigration Policy Index 1860-1913

                                     4

                                     3
    Restrictiveness Index




                                     2

                                     1

                                     0

                               -1

                               -2

                               -3
                                 1860 1865 1870 1875 1880 1885 1890 1895 1900 1905 1910 1915 1920 1925 1930
                                                                                     Year

Source: Timmer and Williamson (1998).




                                                                              Figure 4
                                                                 Welfare State Spending 1880-1980
                                     30


                                                    US               Canada           France
                                     25
                                                    Germany          UK               Sweden

                                     20
                    Percent of GDP




                                     15



                                     10



                                         5



                                         0
                                             1880   1890      1900   1910     1920        1930   1960   1970   1980
                                                                                 Year



Source: Data underlying Lindert (2004) pp.12-14, kindly supplied by Peter Lindert.



                                                                                     33
                                                            Figure 5
                                         Percent of Adults Voting: New World, 1850-1940

                     70

                     60

                     50
    Percent Voting




                     40
                                           US
                     30

                                          Canada                                          Argentina
                     20

                     10
                                                      Chile
                                                                                         Brazil
                      0
                       1850       1860       1870        1880      1890          1900   1910          1920   1930    1940
                                                                          Year



Source: Data from Engerman and Sokoloff (2005) kindly supplied by Ken Sokoloff.

                                                            Figure 6
                                          Percent of Adults Voting: Europe, 1850-1940
                     100

                     90

                     80

                     70

                     60
  Percent




                     50

                     40

                     30       France


                     20
                                                              UK
                     10                   Germany   Netherlands
                                 Italy
                                                                          Sweden
                      0
                       1850       1860       1870        1880      1890          1900   1910      1920       1930   1940
                                                                          Year



Source: Data from Aidt et al. (2005) kindly supplied by Toke Aidt.



                                                                    34
                             Figure 7
     The Response of Public Opinion to Immigrants and Imports


Negative
Public
Opinion
                                     Immigration




                                                            Imports




                                             Immigration or Imports




                                35
