                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     HOW DO BUDGET DEFICITS AND ECONOMIC
                     GROWTH AFFECT REELECTION PROSPECTS?
               EVIDENCE FROM A LARGE CROSS-SECTION OF COUNTRIES

                                               Adi Brender
                                               Allan Drazen

                                          Working Paper 11862
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11862


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2005




We wish to thank Mark Duggan for useful comments and Amir Marchak, Lior Gallo and Sagie Dagan for
superb research assistance. Drazen wishes to thank the Israel Science Foundation, the National Science
Foundation, grant 418412, and the Yael Chair in Comparative Economics, Tel Aviv University for financial
support, as well as the Research Department of the Bank of Israel for its hospitality. The views expressed
in the paper do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of Israel. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Adi Brender and Allan Drazen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
How Do Budget Defecits and Economic Growth Affect Reelection Prospects? Evidence from a
Large Cross-Section of Countries
Adi Brender and Allan Drazen
NBER Working Paper No. 11862
December 2005
JEL No. D72, E62, H62

                                              ABSTRACT

Conventional wisdom is that good economic conditions or expansionary fiscal policy help
incumbents get re-elected, but this has not been tested in a large cross-section of countries. We test
these arguments in a sample of 74 countries over the period 1960-2003. We find no evidence that
deficits help reelection in any group of countries        developed and less developed, new and old
democracies, countries with different government or electoral systems, and countries with different
levels of democracy. In developed countries, especially old democracies, election-year deficits
actually reduce the probability that a leader is reelected, with similar negative electoral effects of
deficits in the earlier years of an incumbent's term in office. Higher growth rates of real GDP per-
capita raise the probability of reelection only in the less developed countries and in new democracies,
but voters are affected by growth over the leader's term in office rather than in the election year itself.
Low inflation is rewarded by voters only in the developed countries. The effects we find are not only
statistically significant, but also quite substantial quantitatively. We also suggest how the absence
of a positive electoral effect of deficits can be consistent with the political deficit cycle found in new
democracies.

Adi Brender
adib@bankisrael.gov.il

Allan Drazen
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
drazen@econ.umd.edu
1. Introduction
          Manipulation of economic policy in election years has been widely studied. Following
Nordhaus’s (1975) influential model of how expansionary policy before an election can help
incumbents to get reelected, there has been a search for empirical evidence linking economic
policy and economic performance before elections to the votes that an incumbent receives.
          Most research on pre-electoral manipulation did not however examine directly whether
expansionary policies or good economic outcomes succeed in attracting votes. Instead, the focus
has been on the existence of political business cycles (increases in economic activity in election
years relative to non-election years) or political budget cycles (election-year increases in deficits
or expenditures or cuts in taxes). The evidence for the former in developed countries is not
strong. Alt and Chrystal (1983) summarize early empirical studies for the United States as
showing a little evidence of a political business cycle, a point reinforced by results summarized in
Alesina, Roubini, and Cohen (1997). Faust and Irons (1999) come to a similar conclusion.
Similarly, there is no strong evidence of a significant political business cycle in unemployment or
economic growth in other developed economies (Paldam [1979], Lewis-Beck [1988], Alesina,
Roubini, and Cohen [1997]).
          There is also a literature examining the effects of economic growth on the probability of
reelection directly, mostly in developed countries. Generally, the effect of growth on reelection
was found to be insignificant in most cross-section studies in developed countries (Powell and
Whitten (1993), Paldam (1991), Strøm and Lipset (1984) and Lewis-Beck (1988)). The U.S.
seems to be an exception to these findings, where Fair (1978) found a significant effect of growth
on voting in presidential elections, as did Alesina and Rosenthal (1995). No similar analysis was
done for less developed countries.
          The lack of convincing evidence for a political business cycle led researchers to focus on
political cycles in economic policy. Though Nordhaus considered expansionary monetary policy
(inducing a movement along the Phillips curve), current research focuses on the effect of
expansionary fiscal policy, especially higher deficits, on an incumbent’s reelection prospects.
Many empirical studies find evidence of a political budget cycle, with the common view that
political budget cycles are a phenomenon more of less-developed countries than of developed
ones. 1


1   For a summary see Drazen (2001) or Brender and Drazen (2005a).

                                                    2
       Two recent studies find evidence that the political budget cycle is present in both
developed and less-developed countries. Shi and Svensson (2002) in a panel data set of 91
countries over 1975-95, both democracies and non-democracies, find that, in an election year, the
government surplus falls significantly in both less-developed and developed countries (though the
effect is far stronger in less-developed countries). Persson and Tabellini (2003, chapter 8) argue
that there is a strong political budget cycle in both developed and less-developed democracies
over the period from 1960 to 1998. They find a political revenue cycle (government revenues as
a percent of GDP decrease before elections), but no political cycle in expenditures, transfers, or
the overall budget balance.
       In contrast, Brender and Drazen (2005a) argue that political budget cycles found in such
large cross-section studies are driven by the experience of “new democracies”, that is, by the
experience of newly democratic countries in up to the first four elections after the transition to
democracy. It is the strong fiscal cycle in these countries that accounts for the finding of a fiscal
cycle in larger samples including these countries, which disappears once the new democracies are
removed from the larger sample. The political budget cycle in new democracies accounts for any
significant cycle in both developed and less developed economies; for the finding that the cycle is
stronger in weaker democracies; and for differences in the political cycle across government or
electoral systems.
       In contrast to the fairly extensive direct tests of overall macroeconomic performance on
election outcomes, there are few tests of fiscal performance on election outcomes, and none on
the national level of which we are aware. 2 Peltzman (1992), Brender (2003), and Drazen and
Eslava (2005a) examine the direct effect of fiscal performance on reelection at the state and local
level in a single country (the United States, Israel, and Colombia respectively), and find that
voters punish – rather than reward – loose fiscal policies in general, as well as in election years.
None of these country studies examines directly whether fiscal expansions during election years
at the national level help incumbents to get reelected. Moreover, any empirical conclusions one
might draw should, strictly speaking, be limited to these countries, rather than applicable to a
broad cross-section of countries analogous to the studies of the political budget cycle itself.
       To summarize, existing studies do not provide a direct answer to the question whether



  2
     Alesina, Perotti and Tavares (1998) analyze the effects of fiscal adjustments in a cross section of
OECD countries, but focus on cabinet changes, rather than on election results.

                                                   3
election year deficits are a useful instrument for gaining reelection in those countries for which a
political deficit cycle has been found, nor in the broader cross-section of countries for which
political budget cycles have been studied. That is, the key question which forms the basis of large
cross-country studies of the political budget cycle has not been tested on a data set covering the
same countries!
       In the current study we look directly at the effects of fiscal performance and growth on
reelection in various groups of countries. Using information on 350 election campaigns in 74
democracies we examine whether: 1) increased deficits during an election year raise the
probability of reelection; 2) loose fiscal policies during the term in office help reelection; 3) GDP
growth during the term in office, and specifically in the election year, helps incumbents to get
reelected; and, 4) these forces work differently in countries at different levels of economic
development, strength of democracy, or with different electoral or government systems.
       The plan of the paper is as follows. In the next section we summarize some of the
conceptual arguments on how fiscal or economic performance may affect voting behavior. In
section 3, we describe the dataset and variable definitions. Section 4 sets out the basic empirical
results on the effect of deficits and growth on the probability of a leader’s reelection. We find no
evidence that larger deficits during an election year or over the term increase the probability of
reelection, with rising deficits having a clear negative effect in developed and old democracies.
Economic growth over the leader's term has a positive effect on the probability of reelection only
in less developed countries and new democracies. In section 5 we examine the robustness of these
findings to various different specifications. In section 6 we consider differences in the effects of
deficits and growth on reelection in old and new democracies, while in section 7 we investigate
the importance of different government or electoral systems, or the level of democracy for these
effects. The lack of support for the electoral value of deficit spending characterizes all these
different country groupings. In section 8, we consider some alternative explanations of our
results, as well as addressing the question of why expansionary fiscal policy doesn’t appear to
gain votes for the incumbent even in new democracies where our earlier work found a clear
political budget cycle. Section 9 contains conclusions.


2. Performance and Reelection
       In this section we review both the conceptual arguments on why election-year expansions
in general or fiscal expansions in particular might help an incumbent's reelection prospects, as


                                                 4
well as some of the arguments why in fact we may not observe such effects and may even
observe punishment for election-year deficits.


A. Economic growth and reelection
         There are a number of basic, intuitive arguments on why growth could help reelection.
Most obviously, since economic policies affect economic performance, it would not be surprising
that good macroeconomic results would be taken as indicating that a leader has good skills to run
the country.
         This may reflect simple retrospective voting rules. As Nordhaus (1989, p. 39) puts it:

      In light of their rudimentary understanding of the intricacies of legal, political, and economic
      structures, voters might be generally unable to distinguish policy shocks from external shocks
      and simply hold the incumbent government responsible for whatever events transpired. In short,
      … retrospective evaluation of the performance of incumbents on the bases of simple and easily
      understood indexes (such as unemployment, GNP growth, or inflation) might be a reasonable
      way for many voters to make political decisions.

The use of such retrospective voting rules by rational, forward-looking voters could be motivated
by assuming that good performance may be a sign of competence, which is valued by voters but
cannot be directly observed, as for example, in Persson and Tabellini (1990). (Rogoff [1990] and
Rogoff and Sibert [1989] were the first to formalize this for fiscal policy, as discussed below. 3
         On the other hand, voters may perceive that in a global economy governments may matter
only a little for certain types of economic performance, including sustained economic growth.
Their voting behavior might then be relatively unaffected by some measures of good economic
performance, especially in small open economies. (The significant effect of economic growth on
election results found for the United States may be due in part to its being a dominant and
relatively closed economy.) A growth spurt in the election year itself might be especially
suspicious and hence would be less likely to affect voters.
         Which of the general views set out in the previous two paragraphs better describes voters
in a given country may depend on its characteristics, specifically the newness of the democracy
and whether it is a developed or less developed economy. The first distinction follows our results
discussed above on the presence of a fiscal cycle in new democracies versus its absence in


  3
      Another argument is simply that high GDP implies higher government revenues and thus improved
government services. To the extent that voters tie these improvements to the current incumbent, his re-
election chances may be improved.

                                                     5
established democracies. Based on this difference, it would not be surprising if voting patterns
responded in fact to economic outcomes more in new than in old democracies. A further piece of
evidence suggesting different voter response is based on responses reported in the World Values
Survey (Inglehart et al. [2004]). In new democracies used in our study that were covered by the
World Values Survey, respondents care more about good economic performance than in old
democracies. A statistically significant larger fraction of respondents in new democracies
responded that a high level of economic growth or (separately) a stable economy is the most
important target for their country among several policy targets. This effect is significant even
when one controls for the level of income and the demographic structure of the country. The
same analysis also showed a statistically significant negative correlation between the proportion
of respondents who thought that these two targets were the most important and the level of GDP
per-capita in a country. 4 Hence, the empirical question arises as to whether the effect of economic
growth on voter behavior is in fact different in new versus old democracies and in developed
versus less developed countries, questions that we address here.
       The possible difference in voter response to economic growth in developed versus less
developed countries is suggested by the difference in the existence of a political business cycle in
the two types of economies – that is, the clear absence of a cycle in developed economies versus
the seeming less clear rejection in less developed economies. Here too, there is no empirical study
of a large cross-section of developed and less developed countries that addresses whether there is
a difference in the effect of economic growth on an incumbent’s reelection chances. We address
this question as well.


B. Deficits and reelection:
       Analogous to our discussion in the previous subsection, we begin by reviewing the
arguments on why an incumbent’s reelection chances may be helped (or harmed) by
expansionary fiscal policy in general, and in election years in particular. We begin with the
arguments of why fiscal expansions and deficit spending may help incumbents gain votes so that
politicians may be expected to engage in it and that empirically it is widespread. Such a view
underlies much of the literature on the political budget cycle.
       The simplest argument follows from the argument above that good economic performance


  4
       For more details see Brender and Drazen (2005b).

                                                  6
helps an incumbent’s reelection chances. To the extent that expansionary fiscal policy can be
successfully used to manipulate macroeconomic outcomes and provide higher growth, which in
turn, it is argued, gains votes for the incumbent, loose fiscal policy will help an incumbent’s
reelection prospects. As already noted, there is also theoretical work, such as Rogoff (1990),
arguing how fiscal expansions during election years could lead rational voters to vote for
incumbents who produce them because it signals high competence when there is uncertainty
about the incumbent's ability.
       Another argument concerns the effectiveness of “pork barrel” spending – that is, spending
targeted to specific groups – in gaining votes for the incumbent. There is a large literature
investigating the use of such spending projects to gain votes, (as well as a large folk wisdom
about its extensive use), though much of it not in the context of political budget cycles per se.
       A third, general sort of argument on the effectiveness of fiscal policy in gaining votes is
that voters simply prefer low taxes and high spending and reward politicians who deliver these.
Of course, there is the question of why such voters would “ignore” the government’s
intertemporal budget constraint in rewarding deficit-producing politicians. One set of responses
focus on various sorts of fiscal illusion. The Rogoff argument mentioned above relies on
imperfectly informed, rational voters, who observe higher expenditures (or lower taxes) but
believe that more competent policymakers can provide these without necessarily incurring higher
deficits. 5 More generally, the type of Nordhaus (1989) argument set out above on voter response
to good economic performance might justify similar response to low taxes or high expenditure.
       As with the effect of good economic performance, there are a number of reasons to
believe that loose fiscal policy need not help an incumbent’s reelection chances and may actually
harm them. Rational voters may well be “fiscal conservatives” who punish rather than reward
deficit spending and fiscal manipulation, even more so if it is perceived as electorally motivated.
The competence models of Rogoff and others rely on imperfect information about fiscal policy;
were information perfect, rational voters would not be swayed by electoral manipulation.
Peltzman (1992), for example, shows that voters in the U.S. are less likely to support a state or
local official who has increased overall spending before the election.




5
 A key innovation of Shi and Svensson (2002) is that the policymaker chooses fiscal policy before he
knows his competence level, so that all “types” choose the same level of expansion. An implication is an
aggregate deficit cycle.

                                                   7
        Furthermore, even if good economic conditions help an incumbent’s chances of
reelection, it is not clear that fiscal manipulation will be effective. Though a “strong economy”
may help incumbents’ re-election prospects, politicians may have very limited ability to
successfully manipulate the economy to help their re-election chances.               In addition to a
policymaker’s lack of technical ability to time the expansion accurately enough to happen just
before the elections, it is argued that manipulating economic activity is considered harmful in
terms of “unsmoothing” consumption, inducing investment cycles, etc. Here too, rational, well-
informed voters should not support such policies, so that pre-electoral manipulation would be
punished rather than rewarded at the polls. Similarly, targeted spending may lose votes if it is
perceived as electoral manipulation.6
        To summarize, as in the case of the effects of economic growth on an incumbent's
reelection, there are conceptual arguments on both sides. We believe that there are good
arguments why fiscal manipulation will not work in most countries, while the arguments why it
might work are reasonable only in some groups of countries. As with economic conditions and
voting patterns, there is no empirical work testing the connection between aggregate fiscal
policies and an incumbent's budget deficits for a large cross-section of countries. The absence of
political budget cycles in fiscal aggregates in all countries other than new democracies gives
reason to doubt whether deficit spending has significant effects on voting patterns in established
democracies, even though this is the implicit assumption of papers that find such a cycle. Hence,
there is a need to confront the different views with the data.


3. Data and Variable Definitions
        The dataset used in this study is based on information from several sources (see Table A-
1). Fiscal data are taken mostly from the IFS, national accounts data from the World Bank's
World Development Indicators and the IFS, information on the political structure of countries,
their electoral system and additional political variables is constructed using the World Bank's
database of Political Institutions (DPI) and data on the level of democracy are taken from the
Polity IV dataset at the University of Maryland. A detailed description of the data sources and the
construction of the variables appears in Appendix I. The combination of sources allows us to use



  6
       Drazen and Eslava (2005b), however, present a model of political cycles in pork barrel spending in
which an expenditure cycle may exists even if a targeted group of voters know it is being targeted.

                                                   8
data for 74 countries over the period 1960-2003. Overall we have useable information on 347
election campaigns that took place in periods where these countries were democratic. The
countries and election campaigns are listed in Tables A-2 and A-3, respectively.
       The key political variable REELECT is a binary variable with a value of 1 if the
incumbent was reelected and 0 if he or she was not. Its construction was based on information
from the "World Political Leaders 1945-2005" database of Zárate's Political Collections (ZPC)
and from the "World Statesmen" encyclopedia. These data allowed us to follow the terms of
individual leaders in office from appointment to termination, and to associate them with election
dates. The decision whether the prime minister or the president is the leader is based on the DPI
dataset classification, as described in Persson and Tabellini (2003). Information on election dates
and results (presidential elections in presidential systems and parliamentary elections in
parliamentary ones) is taken from the International Institute for Democracy and Electoral
Assistance (IDEA) dataset "Voter Turnout Since 1945", from the International Foundation for
Election Systems ELECTION GUIDE dataset and is supplemented by Binghamton University's
Election Results archive.
       We use two definitions of REELECT throughout the analysis. In the narrow definition
we include only observations where the leader is running for reelection herself (either as the
leader of her party in parliamentary elections or personally in presidential ones). We constrain the
sample to observations of leaders who were in office for at least two fiscal years prior to the
elections and were candidates in the elections or retired within the month before the elections (in
which case we classify the leader as losing reelection). In the expanded definition we add cases
in which a leader was substituted by another candidate from his party under the following specific
circumstances: 1) the leader died in the year before the elections; 2) the leader could not run for
reelection due to legal term limits. In these cases the substitute leader (in the first case) or the
candidate from the leader's party (in the second case) is treated as the incumbent. Additionally, in
the expanded sample, we treat leaders who quit their job within a year before the elections as
having lost reelection (that is, the binary variable REELECT has a value of 0), while in the
narrow sample it is defined as a missing value as long as the leader quits more than a month
before the elections. This latter classification is in line with the methodology of Alesina, Perotti,
and Tavares (1998) and Brender (2003).
       In Table 1 we show the distribution of election campaigns according to the two
definitions. There are 255 campaigns in the narrow sample which are evenly split between


                                                 9
successful and unsuccessful reelection attempts. About two thirds of the observations are in
developed countries (23 OECD countries, see Table A-2) and the probability of reelection among
them is somewhat higher than in the undeveloped countries. A breakdown of the sample between
established and new democracies reveals that three quarters of the sample come from established
democracies. The use of the expanded definition adds 92 observations to the data, mostly
undeveloped countries. It also increases substantially the number of elections in new
democracies. However, the change in definitions also increases substantially the proportion of
campaigns where the incumbent (or his substitute) are not reelected. This is a reflection of both
the lower success rates of substitute candidates, and the inclusion of those observations where the
candidate has quit his job within the year before the elections.
       The use of the narrow sample has the advantage of focusing only on the cases where the
same person who led the government before the elections is the one seeking reelection. The
homogeneity of this sample may reflect a clearer relationship between performance and
reelection and avoids questions of the extent to which voters associate the new candidate with the
policies of his predecessor. On the other hand, using the narrow definition means a substantial
loss of information. We therefore present in the remainder of this paper results using both
samples.
       We examine fiscal performance using two variables BALCH_term and BALCH_ey. The
first variable reflects the change in the central government's balance (that is, budget surplus) to
GDP ratio over the term in office by comparing the average balance/GDP ratio in the two years
before the election year with that in the previous two years. The second variable is the change in
the balance/GDP ratio in the election year relative to the previous year, which is an indicator for
election year fiscal expansions. Both variables are calculated on the basis of IFS data,
supplemented with GFS data, as described in Brender and Drazen (2005a). All our data are
adjusted to fiscal years. (In 12 of the countries the fiscal year does not overlap the calendar year.)
While in some cases it is not clear which fiscal year should correspond to the election year,
especially when the elections take place in the early part of the year, Brender and Drazen (2005a)
and others (for example, Alesina, Perotti and Tavares [1998]) find that the relationship between
fiscal policy and the timing of elections is not very sensitive to the definition used. Nevertheless,
we also present below some sensitivity indicators to show that our results are not qualitatively
affected by the definition.




                                                 10
        Our indicator for macroeconomic performance is GDPPC_gr, which is the average annual
growth rate of real GDP per capita between the current and the previous election year. In cases
where the leader assumed power after the previous elections, we calculate GDPPC_gr only over
the period since his appointment. We also include, separately, in some of our equations, the real
growth rate of GDP in the election year. Finally, we calculated the deviation of GDP from its
long term trend (using a country-specific Hodrick-Prescott filter) for each country in each year,
and used this variable in some of our equations as a control for the business cycle.


4. The Effect of Deficits and Growth on Reelection
        We begin with the basic results. In Table 2 we examine the effect of deficits and growth
on the probability of reelection using Probit estimation. 7 In columns 1 and 4 we show the
unconditional effects in the narrow and expanded samples, respectively. The equations show that
voters are likely to punish persistent budget deficits over the term in office (a negative value of
BALCH_term implies a loss of votes) rather than reward leaders who create them. The
coefficient of the change in the deficit to GDP ratio over the term in office, excluding the election
year, is positive and statistically significant, indicating that the probability of reelection is
increasing when the fiscal balance improves during the leader's term in office. Moreover, we find
no indication that larger deficits during an election year (a negative value of BALCH_ey)
increase the probability of reelection. In fact, in the narrow sample we find a statistically
significant positive effect of improved fiscal balances during the election year on reelection. That
is, leaders that reduce the deficit during an election year, relative to the previous year, have a
higher probability to be reelected. The coefficient in the expanded sample is also positive but not
statistically significant (p=0.12).
        Economic growth over the leader's term also has a positive effect on the probability of
reelection, in both samples. It appears that voters attribute better macroeconomic performance, at
least to some extent, to the functioning of their government, or that stronger macroeconomic
performance allows governments to expand their services or cut taxes in a sustainable way, and
by that gain electoral support. These findings contrast with those of Powell and Whitten (1993),
Paldam (1991), Strom and Lipset (1984) and Lewis-Beck (1988) mentioned in the introduction,
who found no significant effect. We argue below that this difference in results is explained by


  7
       Logit equations yielded very similar results.

                                                       11
distinguishing developed from less developed countries.
       In addition to the fiscal and macroeconomic variables, we find that the probability of
reelection is higher in the developed countries 8 and in countries with a majoritarian electoral
system. In the narrow sample we also find that the probability of reelection is higher in new
democracies, as compared to established democracies, but this latter relationship loses its
significance in the expanded sample where the number of campaigns in new democracies is much
larger on the one hand, but it includes many campaigns where the leader is not seeking reelection
personally.
       The differences in the probability of reelection between the various groups of countries,
along with the findings in the Political Budget Cycle literature that PBCs differ across categories
of countries, suggest that the effect of deficits and growth on reelection may also vary across
these country categories, so that in some categories of countries election year deficits, or
expansionary fiscal policy in general, may be rewarded at the polls, even if they are not in the
entire sample. The large share of developed and established democracies in the sample (Table 1)
emphasizes the need for such an examination.
       In Columns 2 and 5 of Table 2 we therefore look separately at the developed countries
that constitute about two thirds of the narrow sample and one half of the expanded sample. In
column 2 we find that rising deficits over the term are associated with a lower probability of
reelection. In column 5 we find that this effect is still in the same direction in the expanded
sample, but that it loses its statistical significance (p=0.108). These results suggest that there is no
indication that expansionary fiscal policy helps a leader to get reelected and in fact is likely to
reduce his chances of reelection. The loss of significance of this coefficient in the expanded
sample may reflect the fact that in the campaigns that are added to the narrow sample, the deficits
over the term were generated by the predecessors of politician running as the "incumbent" and
were therefore rendered as less relevant by the voters.
       The effect on reelection of the change in the fiscal balance in the election year itself is
positive and statistically significant in both samples. These results show that not only that
expanding the deficit in an election year is unlikely to increase the probability of reelection, in
developed countries it is likely to lower this probability.


  8
        Using the level of GDP per capita, instead of a binary variable for developed and undeveloped
countries yielded insignificant results and did not affect qualitatively the coefficients of the other
variables.

                                                  12
        The effect of macroeconomic performance on reelection, as reflected in the real growth
rate of GDP over the term, is not significant in the developed countries, neither in the narrow nor
in the expanded samples. This finding is consistent with the studies mentioned above, which
focused on developed countries. It appears that, as found in those studies, voters in developed
economies do not attribute the economic success of their country to the performance of their
government, or at least their voting behavior is not significantly affected.
        The findings with respect to the less developed countries (columns 3 and 6) are different
in some aspects from those for the developed countries. Nevertheless, loose fiscal policies over
the term are not rewarded in the less developed countries either. The coefficient of the change in
the budget balance to GDP ratio over the term is positive, and in the expanded sample it is also
statistically significant. The size of the coefficient is identical in both samples but the additional
power in the expanded sample (the number of less developed countries' observations almost
doubles in the expanded sample) overtakes the potential moderating effect of including
candidates that were not personally in office for the full term before the elections.
        The findings are notably different than those in developed countries for the change in the
ratio of the fiscal balance to GDP in the election year. The coefficients on this variable are close
to zero and are far from being statistically significant. On the one hand, these findings suggest
that voters in less developed countries may be more tolerant towards expanding budget deficits in
election years, but on the other hand they show that even in these countries, voters do not reward
election year deficits.
        Finally, economic growth over the term in office is strongly rewarded by voters in the less
developed countries. Higher growth has a positive and statistically significant effect on the
probability of reelection in both samples. These findings suggest that in the less developed
countries voters attribute more of the economic success of their country to their leaders. It is
beyond the scope of this paper to explore why this is the case 9 , but we note that it is consistent
with the findings of the World Values Survey.
        Thus, we find out that the relationship between fiscal and macroeconomic performance
and the probability of reelection, found in the broad sample of countries reflect two distinct
influences in developed and less developed countries. While loose fiscal policies have a negative


9
  We can speculate that it may reflect the more important role of leaders in less developed countries in
determining the direction of their country or in securing order and stability which are pre-conditions for
growth, while these are taken for granted in developed countries.

                                                   13
effect on the probability of reelection in both sets of countries, deficit expansions in the election
year are punished only in the developed countries, while in the undeveloped ones they have no
significant effect. On the other hand, macroeconomic expansion has a positive significant effect
on reelection in undeveloped countries and no effect in developed ones.


5. Robustness
        In Table 3 we examine the robustness of these findings to various different specifications.
Beginning with this table we allow for different effects of the economic variables by multiplying
each one of them by a binary variable that receives a value of 1 for the respective group of
countries and a different binary variable for the remaining countries. 10 In columns 1 and 5 we
verify our results by estimating the equations for the full sample (narrow and expanded one,
respectively) but allowing different effects of the variables in developed and less developed
countries; the results match those of Table 2. In column 2 we examine the effect of including
separately the growth rate of GDP during the election year for two purposes. First, we want to test
whether including the growth rate in the election year would affect the coefficient of the change
in the deficit in the election year. Second, we want to find out if growth in the election year has a
stronger impact on voters than growth in the other years of the leader's term. We find that neither
of these effects is supported by the data. 11 In column 3 we check the first effect in an alternative
method by controlling for the deviation of real GDP in the election year from its country specific
long time trend, which is calculated using the Hodrick-Prescott filter. Again, none of the other
coefficients is affected qualitatively by this addition, nor does the variable's own coefficient has a
significant positive sign.
        In columns 4 and 6 we test whether the effect of deficits in election years is distinct of that
of deficits in earlier years. For that purpose we substitute our variable of the deficit over the term,
which excluded the election year, with a variable that includes the deficit in the election year. We
then check whether the change in the deficit in the election year has an additional effect. We find



10
   For example, the entry BALCH_term*developed in a table refers to the change in the fiscal balance
during the term in office in developed countries and the entry BALCH_term*less_developed refers to the
same variable in less developed countries.
   11
         It should be noted that the overall effect of growth in the election year in undeveloped countries
remains positive even if the negative effect of the coefficient of growth in the election year is taken into
account because its overall effect also includes the influence of growth over the term, which includes the
election year.

                                                    14
that such an effect exists and that it is positive. That is, not only that improving the fiscal balance
in general helps reelection, doing so in an election year is even more effective, but only in the
developed countries. Moreover, we find no evidence for a positive effect of increased election
year deficits in the undeveloped countries.
        In Table 4 we examine whether various country characteristics that were identified by
Persson and Tabellini (2003) and Brender and Drazen (2005a) as affecting PBCs also influence
the effects of fiscal performance and growth on reelection. In columns 1 and 4 we find that
controlling for the type of political system – parliamentary vs. presidential - has no qualitative
effect on the coefficients of the election year deficit and growth. In equations 2 and 5 we
introduce a control for whether the elections took place in their predetermined date or sooner. We
find that having the elections in their predetermined data does not change the probability of
reelection, nor does it affect the impact of the other variables on reelection. Finally, in columns 3
and 6 we test whether the level of democracy (as characterized in Appendix I) has an effect on
reelection or the signs of the other coefficients, and find no significant effect. Thus, the positive
effects of improved fiscal balances in the election year and during the term in developed
economies, and that of higher GDP growth in the undeveloped countries do not seem to reflect
these other country characteristics.
        The effects of fiscal policy and macroeconomic performance that we find are not only
statistically significant, but also quite substantial quantitatively. In Table 5 we report the effect of
each of our three key variables on the probability of reelection. 12 We find that an increase of 1
percentage point in the central government surplus ratio to GDP can increase the probability of
reelection by 3-4.5 percentage points in the developed/established democracies and that an
increase of 1 percentage point in the surplus during an election year increases the probability of
reelection by 7-9 percentage points. These magnitudes are broadly in line with those reported in
Brender (2003) for similar variables in the local elections in Israel. In the less developed
countries/new democracies raising the average growth rate during the term by 1 percentage point
is associated with a 7-9 percentage points increase in the probability of reelection.




12The probit coefficients cannot be used directly as elasticities or semi-elasticities. The effect of the
variables is calculated at the averages point for the developed and less developed countries separately.

                                                   15
6. Old and New Democracies
        Brender and Drazen (2005a) show that the existence of a statistically significant political
cycle in fiscal aggregates critically depends on the “newness” of its democratic regime; political
budget cycles are much more common in the first four elections after the country becomes a
democracy, than in later elections. In Table 6 we test whether the prevalence of PBCs in new
democracies is associated with a positive payoff to deficit spending at the polls. We estimate the
previously specified probit equations on the full samples allowing for different effect of the full-
term and election year budget balance, and of growth in new and old democracies.
        In the old democracies we find that both the full term and the election year increase in the
ratio of the fiscal surplus to GDP increase the probability of reelection, while the effect of GDP
growth on reelection is only significant when the expanded sample is used. In equations 3 and 6
we find that the positive effect of an improvement in the fiscal balance is similar in election and
non-election years in the old democracies, and equations 2 and 5 show that the relationship
between changes in the fiscal balances and reelection is not affected qualitatively by controlling
for growth in the election year.
        In the new democracies – the group of countries for which we found a significant political
budget cycle in our earlier paper – we find no significant effect of the fiscal balance on the
probability of reelection. This is an unexpected finding given the results in Brender and Drazen
(2005a), if one believes that the rationale for the existence of political budget cycle is that
opportunistic leaders run deficits because it helps (or is believed to help) their reelection
prospects. The joint findings that PBCs exist in new democracies and that fiscal expansions in
election years do not raise the probability of reelection suggest that one must find an alternative
explanation for the observed fiscal expansions in election years in new democracies. We discuss
this in more detail in section 8.
        We find a significant effect of GDP growth over the term on the probability of reelection
in new democracies, which is consistent with the importance put on economic growth by
respondents to the World Values Survey in new democracies. In equations 2 and 5 we find that
this effect is not stronger if growth takes place during the election year, as compared to earlier
years in the incumbent's term. This finding contradicts much of the logic behind the PBC
literature that argues that fiscal expansions during election years are used to accelerate growth
just before the elections. To summarize, not only are election-year fiscal expansions not rewarded




                                                 16
by voters, even in the group of countries where they are most common, but even growth in the
election year itself does not affect voters when growth over the entire term is controlled for.
         In Table 7 we allow for a more detailed breakdown of the effects of deficits and growth
by allowing for different effects in developed and less developed old democracies 13 . Deficits are
punished in old democracies that are developed, while in old democracies which are less
developed, they are not punished. However, as with all other classifications, we find no indication
that deficits – either over the term or in the election year – increase the probability of reelection.
We also find that the positive effect of growth on reelection in the established democracies is
entirely due to the less developed ones. Equations 2 and 4 show that these effects are robust to the
inclusion of a countries’ position in the business cycle, as reflected in the deviation of GDP from
its trend. 14


7. Political Characteristics and Electoral Systems
         Persson and Tabellini (2003) among others argue that the structure of the political system
and the electoral system have a substantial effect on the possibility and desire of leaders to
engage in political manipulation, which would be reflected in PBCs. There are also differences
between countries in the level (or strength) of their democratic system which may affect the
degree to which leaders may find it useful to engage in fiscal manipulation and that voters would
reward it. We therefore test below whether the effects of fiscal balances and growth on reelection
differ across these categories of countries, and whether there may be a group of countries where
fiscal expansions during election years are rewarded. In Table 8 we provide the breakdown of the
samples into the various country categories, and separately for the developed and undeveloped
countries and for the old and new democracies. We find out that there are very few developed
countries that use a presidential system and very few elections that took place in developed
countries at times that democracy was not at the highest level as measured by POLITY IV. We
also find that there are relatively few new democracies with the highest level of democracy or
with a majoritarian electoral system.
         In Table 9 we examine whether the effects of deficits and growth on the probability of

   13
         There are only 11 elections in developed new democracies so we do not present the results with a
breakdown of the new democracies to developed and undeveloped countries. Estimating the equations
with this additional breakdown did not change any of the results qualitatively.
   14
         The results are similar when we control for the growth rate of real GDP instead of the deviation
from the trend.

                                                   17
reelection differ across political and electoral system 15 . We find that the positive effect of
improved budget balances during election years remains significant in parliamentary systems in
developed countries (column 1). The coefficient for the elections conducted in developed
countries employing the presidential system is of the same magnitude but is not statistically
significant, perhaps due to the small sample. We also find the same effects in proportional
election systems while the positive effect in majoritarian elections is not statistically significant
(column 2). There is no statistically significant effect of the election year fiscal balance in any
direction in the less developed countries, regardless of the political and electoral system.
Improved fiscal balances over the term help reelection in parliamentary and majoritarian elections
in the less developed countries. Finally, growth has a significant positive effect on reelection in
the less developed countries, regardless of the political and electoral system. Overall, these
findings suggest that while the political and electoral systems may influence the relationship
between fiscal performance and reelection, in no case is there evidence that loose fiscal policies,
or fiscal expansions during an election year, help an incumbent to win.
        In columns 1 and 3 of Table 10 we examine whether the level of democracy (as measured
by POLITY IV) influences the impact of fiscal performance and growth on reelection. We find
the same positive relationship between the change in the government budget balance in the
election year and reelection, although the small number of elections in developed countries with a
low level of democracy keeps the effect in that group not statistically significant. Among the less
developed countries we find some indications for a positive effect of reduced deficits over the
term on reelection in countries with a low level of democracy, and no statistically significant
effect of the election year deficit. Finally, growth has a positive effect on reelection in the less
developed countries, regardless of their level of democracy.
        In columns 2 and 4 of the table we check whether there is a difference in these
relationships between elections that take place on their predetermined date and elections that take
place “early”. 16 Early elections may reflect an attempt of the incumbent to hold an election when
he is popular (and presumably the economy is strong), but it may also result from a weakened
leader being pushed to elections when the economic situation is bad. Hence the timing may be


  15
          We present only the results for the narrow sample, but the results in the expanded sample
(available upon request) are qualitatively the same.
   16
         If the election was held in the expected year we classified it as “predetermined”; otherwise it was
classified as “early”.

                                                    18
endogenous to the growth rate (or some other economic variable), though the sign of the relation
is not clear ex ante. This endogeneity may in turn affect the relationship between economic
conditions and the probability that the incumbent is reelected. We find that the directions of the
relationships are the same regardless of whether the elections are on the their original,
predetermined date or are held early, although the positive effect of improved fiscal balances
during the election year on reelection is significantly larger when elections are early. 17
        In Table 11 we examine the effects of the political and electoral system on the effects of
changes in the fiscal balance and growth on reelection in old versus new democracies. We find a
positive effect of improvements in the fiscal balance on reelection in old democracies with
parliamentary systems (column 1) and with proportional electoral systems (column 2). The
positive coefficient in presidential systems is even larger than in parliamentary ones, but the small
sample may account for its lack of significance. We find no effect of deficits on reelection in new
democracies, regardless of the political or electoral system, while the effect of growth in these
countries is significant in both political systems and both electoral systems, while it is not
significant in any category of old democracies.
        In Table 12 we find the same results with respect to the division of the old and new
democracies into those with a high level of democracy and those with a low level (columns 1 and
3). We find again that rising deficits hurt the probability of reelection in old democracies with a
high level of democracy and do not help it in those with a low level of democracy or in new
democracies. We also find a positive effect of growth on reelection in the old democracies, at
both levels of democracy.
        In columns 2 and 4 of the table we show the results with respect to the division of
elections in old and new democracies into those that were held on the scheduled
(“predetermined”) date and those that were held early. We find that when there are early
elections, an improved fiscal balance in new democracies helps reelection, while when the
elections were held on the originally scheduled date the effect is not statistically significant. 18
        Since we use annual data in our sample, the effects of budget deficits on reelection could


   17
         The coefficient on election year fiscal balance is 36.8 for early elections versus 16.5 for elections
held on the scheduled date in the narrow sample and 33.2 for early versus 13.9 for elections on the
scheduled date in the expanded sample. Note, However, as shown in Section 5, early elections are not
associated with a higher probability of reelection (Table 5).
   18
          One possibility is that the leaders who succeed in lowering the deficit may be the ones who call
early elections, while those who do not are more likely to postpone elections as long as possible.

                                                     19
be "clouded" by campaigns that take place in the early parts of the year, if the government
expanded the deficit in the previous year or took corrective measure in the later part of the year,
after the elections. While Brender and Drazen (2005a) find no evidence that larger fiscal
expansions take place in election years in which the elections are in the later part of the year, we
allowed for varying effects of the deficit if the elections are in the first half of the year, or in the
second half. We find that there is no statistically significant positive effect of the deficit in the
election year on reelection, even among the new democracies, either when the elections are in the
first half of the year or in the second half.
        In Table 13 we show that the positive effects of improved fiscal balances on reelection in
old democracies reflect the behavior of the old developed democracies, while the effects in the
less developed old democracies are not statistically significant. We also find that the positive
effect of growth in established democracies is entirely due to the experience of the less developed
established democracies, while in the established developed democracies the effect is far from
being significant. These results are repeated in Table 14 with respect to the different levels of
democracy and the type of elections: predetermined or early. Again, there is no group of countries
in which there is a statistically significant positive effect of budget deficits – either in the election
year or over the term – on the probability of reelection.


8. Alternative Explanations
        To characterize our main finding in a sentence: voters, especially in developed countries
and established democracies, do not like deficits, particularly in election-years. The negative
electoral effect of deficits in some groups of countries and the lack of a significant positive effect
in any group of countries seems quite clear. Are there alternative interpretations of our findings?
        One of the questions that may arise with respect to these findings is that of causality. It
may be argued that strong leaders have the political power to conduct conservative fiscal policies
(see, for example, Roubini and Sachs (1989)) and at the same time have a better chance to be
reelected. In order to control, at least to some extent, for this possibility we collected data on the
share of the votes received by each leader in the previous election and his party’s strength in the
legislature, taking into account various aspects of the nature of the electoral system. When the
leader is elected directly, the vote share he received in the previous election gives some indication




                                                   20
of his popularity and thus his political strength. 19 In a parliamentary system, the percent of seats
in the parliament held by the leader's party may, in a similar way, represent his popularity and
indicate his ability to carry out his program. In Table 15 we show that none of the relationships
we identified above is affected by the inclusion of these variables, although the additional
variables have the expected, statistically significant, effect on the probability of reelection 20 .
These findings suggest that the effect of improved fiscal positions on reelection is not merely a
reflection of the use of the leader's political power to better control fiscal developments.
        Another explanation of our findings is that voters are not bothered so much by deficits per
se, but by inflation which itself is often caused by deficit spending. Shiller (1996), Lewis-Beck
(1988) and Alesina, Perotti, and Tavares (1998), among others, find evidence that voters dislike
inflation and punish governments that create it. To control for this possibility we added in Table
16 the inflation rate in the election year, the change in the inflation rate during the election year
and the average inflation rate during the leader's term in office. We find that all these variables
have a statistically significant negative effect on the probability of reelection in the developed
countries, and no effect in the less-developed ones. However, the inclusion of these variables
does not affect the relationship between the fiscal and growth variables and the probability of
reelection. That is, our finding of dislike of deficits reflects more than dislike of inflation.
        An alternative explanation for our finding that growth has no effect on the probability of
reelection in developed countries may be that it is due to the significant impact of global
economic developments on the growth performance of these countries. If this is the case, it may
still be that voters reward policy induced growth, but this component would not be observable in
the data due to the dominant effect of global factors.
        To test this possibility we try to separate the effects of global economic developments by
running a regression of the real growth rate of per-capita GDP during the leader's term on the
product of the real growth rate of world GDP and the share of exports of goods and services in
the country's GDP (both variables taken from the WDI). We estimated these regressions



   19
         In some of the countries that have a presidential system it is not trivial to match the president with
a specific party, or even with a group of parties. We also tested the effects of the size of the coalition in the
year before the elections and (jointly) the proportion of seats held by the leader's party within the coalition
representation. This variable did not have a significant effect on the probability of reelection and did not
affect any of the other coefficients.
20
   We show in columns 1 and 5 that the results are not affected by the decrease in the number of
available observations due to the inclusion of this variable.

                                                       21
separately for developed and less developed countries. We then entered, separately, the predicted
values from these regressions and the residual growth rates into our original regressions, instead
of our original growth variable. In this way, the first variable GLOBAL_gr captures the effect of
global developments while the second, DOMESTIC_gr captures mostly domestically induced
growth. We use the same coefficient for all the countries in the group because a stronger or
weaker response in a country to global developments may itself be a policy outcome .
        The results of this estimation are reported in Table 17. We find that in the developed
countries neither the effect of global growth nor the effect of domestically induced growth is
statistically significant. This finding may suggest that in these countries even the domestic
component of growth is attributed to the success of the business sector, rather than to the
performance of the government. In the less developed countries we find that the global
(exogenous) component of growth does not have a statistically significant effect on the
probability of reelection, while the domestic component is the one that accounts for the highly
significant effect of growth that we find. This is consistent with a rational behavior of voters that
reward their leaders only for growth that is related to domestic factors, which may be more
reflective of their own performance. Finally, in both developed and less developed countries the
division of growth into the domestic and global components did not affect qualitatively any of the
other coefficients.
        Our findings for new democracies raise another question when compared with those of
Brender and Drazen (2005a) on the existence of political budget cycles. There we found that
political cycles in fiscal aggregates exist only in new democracies and that in these countries the
effect is entirely due to higher expenditures in the election year. 21 In this paper we find that even
in elections that take place in new democracies there are no indications that fiscal expansions in
the election year increase an incumbent's probability of reelection, either directly or via higher
election year growth (see Table 4). Why then would rational politicians in new democracies
engage in systematic fiscal expansions in election years, as found in our earlier paper?




  21
         In Table 17 we also test whether voters are sensitive to the source of fiscal expansion. We find
that there is no statistically significant difference in the effect of deficits that are created by higher
expenditures and those that created by lower revenue, although in the developed countries the effect of
revenue reductions (as a share of GDP) is somewhat larger.



                                                   22
       One possible explanation of these joint findings is that the fiscal expansions in election
years in new democracies do not represent an attempt to gain voter support for the leader but
reflect expenditures incurred in an attempt to consolidate democracy. As described in Brender
and Drazen (2005b, in progress), democracy is often not “consolidated” in new democracies, that
is, it is not accepted unconditionally by all citizens. We argue that an election year may be an
especially dangerous time for the existence of the democracy itself, and thus may be a time when
leaders have to spend money to retain popular support for the democratic regime to prevent its
overthrow or subversion and the return to an autocratic system. We would then observe higher
expenditures and deficits in an election year, but without fiscal expansion necessarily gaining
votes for the incumbent over the challenger. Testing this hypothesis empirically is beyond the
scope of this paper, but further conceptual discussion can be found in the above mentioned paper.


9. Conclusions
       In this paper we step backwards in the chain of reasoning underlying the opportunistic
political budget cycle to test whether an increase in the government's budget deficit during an
election year actually helps the incumbent get reelected. We find no evidence that this is the case
in any of the groupings of countries we examine. This includes: developed countries, less
developed countries; new and old democracies; countries with presidential or parliamentary
government systems; countries with proportional or majoritarian electoral systems; and, countries
with different levels of democracy. We also find that it makes no difference for the results
whether the elections take place at their originally scheduled date or are called early.
       In fact, we find that in developed countries and established democracies election-year
deficit spending and tax cuts are punished at the polls. A worsening of the government’s fiscal
balance in the election year actually reduces the probability that the leader is reelected.
       We find similar results for the effect of budget deficits in the earlier years of an
incumbent's term in office. In most countries loose fiscal policies over the incumbent’s term of
office – reflected in larger budget deficits relative to earlier periods – are also associated with a
statistically significant lower probability of reelection. Even when one cannot find a significantly
lower probability, there is no evidence that deficits raise the probability of reelection. That is, in
groupings of countries, deficits either lower the probability of reelection or have no statistically
significant effect either way. The findings with respect to election year budget deficits may
simply mirror negative voter reaction to budget deficits in other years as well. To the extent that


                                                  23
voters dislike deficits in general (that is, they are “fiscal conservatives”), it is probably especially
difficult to persuade them that they are “good” in an election year. Such fiscal conservatism
would lead rational voters to view election-year deficits as clear and costly electoral manipulation
and react quite negatively.
       We also find that strong macroeconomic performance, reflected in higher growth rates of
real GDP per-capita, is associated with a higher probability of reelection only in the less
developed countries and in the new democracies. Consistent with previous studies (other than in
the US) we do not find significant effects of growth on reelection in developed countries. We also
found that in the less-developed countries voters are affected by the overall growth performance
over the leader's term in office, but with no additional effect for growth in the election year itself.
This finding is not consistent with the proposition in the political business cycle literature that
leaders could gain voter support by manipulating the economy to grow faster in election years.
       Moreover, the effects we find are not only statistically significant, but also quite
substantial quantitatively. An increase of 1 percentage point in the central government surplus
ratio to GDP can increase the probability of reelection by 3-4.5 percentage points in the
developed/established democracies and an increase of 1 percentage point in the surplus during an
election year increases the probability of reelection by 7-9 percentage points.
       Our results should raise further questions about the existence of political cycles in fiscal
aggregates and especially in deficits as a widespread occurrence. We are not arguing that
election-year political manipulation does not exist as a general phenomenon. It may take the form
of changing the composition but not the level of expenditures (as in Drazen and Eslava [2005a])
or in targeting some voters at the expense of others so as not to increase the overall deficit (as in
Drazen and Eslava [2005b]). But, our results say clearly that running deficits in an election year
is not an effective tool to help reelection and in fact is punished at the polls in developed
countries that are established democracies. Politicians, take note!




                                                  24
References

Alesina, A., A. Perotti and J. Tavares (1998), “The Political Economy of Fiscal Adjustments”,
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:1998, 197-248.

Alesina A. and H. Rosenthal (1995), Partisan Politics, Divided Government and the Economy,
       Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Alesina, A., N. Roubini and G. Cohen (1997), Political Cycles and the Macroeconomy,
       Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Alt, J. and A. Chrystal (1983), Political Economy, Berkeley, CA: Berkeley University Press.

Brender, A. (2003), “The Effect of Fiscal Performance on Local Government Election Results in
      Israel: 1989-1998,” Journal of Public Economics 87, 2187-2205.

Brender, A. and A. Drazen (2005a), “Political Budget Cycles in New Versus Established
      Democracies,” Journal of Monetary Economics 52, 000-000.

________ (2005b), “Electoral Economics in New Democracies: Affecting Attitudes About
      Democracy,” in progress.

Drazen, A. (2001), Political Business Cycle after 25 Years, in B. Bernanke and K. Rogoff, eds.
      NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 75-117.

Drazen, A. and M. Eslava (2005a), “Electoral Manipulation via Voter-Friendly Spending: Theory
      and Evidence,” working paper. (Earlier version circulated as NBER Working Paper
      11085).

___________ (2005b), “Pork Barrel Cycles,” working paper.

Fair, R. (1978), “The Effect of Economic Events on Votes for President,” Review of Economics
        and Statistics 60, 159-72.

Faust, J. and J. Irons (1999), “Money, Politics, and the Post-War Business Cycle,” Journal of
        Monetary Economics 43, 61-89.

Inglehart, R., et al. (2004), “World Values Surveys and European Values Surveys, 1999-2001, ”
       Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research.

Lewis-Beck, M. (1988), Economics and Elections: The Major Western Democracies, Ann Arbor:
      University of Michigan Press.

Nordhaus, W. (1975), “The Political Business Cycle,” Review of Economic Studies 42, 169-90.




                                               25
_______ (1989), “Alternative Approaches to the Political Business Cycle,” Brookings Papers in
      Economic Activity 2, 1989, 1-49.

Paldam, M. (1979) “Is There An Electoral Cycle? A Comparative Study of National Accounts,”
      Scandinavian Journal of Economics 81, 323-42.

Paldam, M. (1991), “How Robust is the Vote Function? A Study of Seventeen Nations Over Four
      Decades,” in H. Norpoth, M.S. Lewis-Beck and J.D. Lafay, eds., Economics and Politics:
      The Calculus of Support, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Peltzman, S. (1992), “Voters as Fiscal Conservatives,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 327-
       261.

Persson and Tabellini (1990), Macroeconomic Policy, Credibility, and Politics, London:
       Harwood.

Persson, T. and G. Tabellini (2003), The Economic Effect of Constitutions: What Do the Data
       Say?, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Powell, Jr., G. B., and G. Whitten (1993), “A Cross-National Analysis of Economic Voting:
       Taking Account of the Political Context,” American Journal of Political Science 37: 391-
       414.

Rogoff, K. (1990), “Equilibrium Political Budget Cycles,” American Economic Review 80, 21-
       36.

Rogoff, K. and A. Sibert (1988), “Elections and Macroeconomic Policy Cycles,” Review of
       Economic Studies 55, 1-16.

Roubini N. and J. Sachs (1989), “Political and Economic Determinants of Budget Deficits in the
      Industrial Democracies,” European Economic Review 33, 903-38.

Shi, M. and J. Svensson (2002), “Political Budget Cycles in Developed and Developing
       Countries,” working paper.

Shiller R.J. (1996), "Why Do People Dislike Inflation?, ” NBER working paper 5539.

Strøm, K. and S. M. Lipset (1984), “Macroeconomics and Macropolitics: The Electoral
       Performance of Democratic Governments,” Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the
       American Political Science Association, Washington, D.C.

Zárate, R.O. (2005), Zárate's Political Collections (ZPC) 1996-2005.




                                               26
        Data Appendix
The data used in this study were collected from several sources covering economic, fiscal and political
data. We also used information on institutional characteristics of countries, the timing of elections and data
related to the party association and career circumstances of country leaders. The data sources which were
used in this study are listed in Table A-1.



The Sample

The fiscal and economic data from the IFS and GFS are available for the years 1960-2003, and for many
countries the period covered is shorter. We therefore restrict our sample to that period, even though
election years and election results data are available for a longer period.

To restrict our sample only to democracies, we include only the years in which the country has a non-
negative score in the POLITY democracy index. That index is calculated as the sum of the scores that each
country receives in each year on two scales: the degree of democracy (a 0 to 10 scale) and the degree of
autocracy ( a 0 to -10 scale).

In the former socialist economies in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union we exclude the
observations for the first two years after transition, as they may represent the simultaneous effect of the
shift to democracy and the collapse of central planning, rather than political manipulation of fiscal
variables. The countries and the years which are included in the sample are listed in Table A-2.

Our final sample, used for the estimation, consists only of election years in the sample period. The
information on election dates were collected from the IDEA dataset "Voter Turnout Since 1945" and
complemented by data from the CDP, IFES and the CIA's "World Factbook". 22 In Presidential systems,
we used only presidential elections and in Parliamentary systems only parliamentary ones. The
identification of the political system was according to whether the chief executive responsible for
economic policy is elected directly by the public (presidential) or by parliament (Parliamentary), as in
Persson and Tabellini (2002). For example, France is defined as parliamentary since it is the government
and the prime-minister– elected by the legislature - which are dominant in determining economic policy,
rather than the president. These definitions are based on the variable SYSTEM in the DPI dataset. All the
election years in the sample are listed in Table A-3.




22 Additional sources that were used to complement the data on election dates were: Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

(www.wikipedia.org); African Elections Database http://africanelections.tripod.com/index.html) and Lijphart
Elections Archive, in University of California, San Diego (http://dodgson.ucsd.edu/lij).


                                                        27
Fiscal Years

In those countries in which the fiscal years are not the calendar years, we adjusted all the data to the fit the
fiscal years. For example, in Canada the fiscal year starts on April 1st and ends at March 31st the following
year. Hence, elections on March 2009 will be in the 2008 fiscal year. Data about fiscal years are from the
IFS, supplemented by GFS data when information is missing in the IFS data.



The Reelection Variable

The dependent variable is Reelect – A binary variable receiving the value 1 if an incumbent leader is
reelected in the elections. Data on the names of leaders and their party association were primarily based on
ZPC data. The DPI provides data on the term of the leader in office, which allowed us to identify points of
change in the leadership of the country, and whether those were election dates or not.

We built the variable in two different ways, constructing a narrow sample and an expanded one (in the
expanded sample we add observations that were missing values in the Narrow Sample but we do not
change any of the observations in the narrow sample).

The Narrow Sample includes observations in which:

∗      The leader has been in office, at least, in the two budgetary years preceding the election year.

∗      The leader stayed in office at least until one month before the elections; if he quits within the month
       before the elections Reelect receives the value 0.

∗      There is no legal limit on the leader's term (based on the variable MULTPL in the DPI 23 ), otherwise
       the observation is excluded. Data on legal limits on leaders' term in office are taken from the DPI.

The Expanded Sample also includes:

∗      Leaders who left their position less than 365 days before the elections In these cases Reelect receives
       the value 0.

∗      Candidates replacing leaders that were subject to a legal limit, forcing them to quit at the end of their
       term. In these cases, Reelect receives the value 1 if the reigning leader's party is winning in the
       elections and 0 if it loses.



23   For missing years we assumed that the legal limit remained as in the closest year in the sample.


                                                               28
∗   Leaders replacing a previous leader who died in the election year or in the preceding it. In these cases
    the replacing leader is considered as continuing the original leader's term.



Fiscal Policy Variables

The fiscal policy variables are calculated on the basis of IFS variables, supplemented by GFS data when
needed. In some cases we used alternative sources, as detailed in Brender and Drazen (2005c, the BOI
discussion paper) Table A-I-1.

Balance is the difference between the central government's Total Revenue & Grants and Total
Expenditure (i.e., the fiscal surplus) for each country in each year. All these variables are presented as a
percentage of GDP which is also taken from the IFS.

Using Balance we calculated BALCH_term, BALCH_ey and BALCH_term+ey, in the following way:

BAL0 is the value of Balance in the election year and BAL-i is the value of Balance i years before the
elections.

•   BALCH_term = ½ * (BAL-1 + BAL-2) – ½ * ( BAL-3 + BAL-4); which is the change in the average
    central government balance in the two years preceding the elections (not including the election year)
    compared to the previous two years.
    * Where there are no data on BAL-3 and BAL-4 then: BALCH_term = BAL-1 - BAL-2

•   BALCH_ey = BAL0 - BAL-1; which is the change in the balance in the election year relative to the
    previous year.

•   BALCH_term+ey = ⅓ * (BAL0 + BAL-1 + BAL-2) – ⅓ * (BAL-3 + BAL-4 + BAL-5); which is the
    change in the average balance to GDP ratio in the last 3 years of the term, including the elections year,
    compared to the previous 3 years.
    * if there are no data on BAL-3 , BAL-4 and BAL-5 then:
        BALCH_term+ey = ½ * (BAL0 + BAL-1) – BAL-2

Economic Variables

The economic growth calculation is based on: GDPPC, real per-capita GDP for each country in each year,
which is taken from the WDI dataset of the World Bank.

Using GDPPC we calculate: GDPPC_gr and GDPPC_gr_ey in the following way:




                                                     29
GDPPC0 is the value of GDPPC in the election year, GDPPC -1 is the value of GDPPC in the previous
year and GDPPC -x is the value of GDPPC in the year in which the leader assumed his office (usually the
previous election year), where x is the number of years in office:

                         ⎛ ⎛ GDPPC        ⎞ ⎞⎟
•   GDPPC_gr = 100 • ⎜ X ⎜⎜         0
                                          ⎟⎟ − 1
                         ⎜ ⎝ GDPPC -X      ⎠ ⎟⎠
                         ⎝
                               ⎛ GDPPC       ⎞
•   GDPPC_gr_ey = 100 • ⎜⎜       0
                                    − 1⎟⎟
                         ⎝ GDPPC -1     ⎠

* In the Expanded sample GDPPC0 receives the value of GDPPC -1 if the leader left his office in the year
preceding the election year.



Economic Control Variables

GDP_trend is the trend of real GDP (country specific) which was computed using the Hodrick-Prescott
filter on the "GDP in constant 1995 US$" series of the WDI. Using this variable we calculated for each
country in every year the deviation of real GDP from its trend, and used it in the following way to
compute the change in this deviation in the election year:

GDP0 and GDP_trend0 are the values of GDP and GDP_trend in the election year, and GDP-1 and
GDP_trend-1 are the values of these variables in the year preceding the election year:

                        ⎛   GDP0        GDP-1      ⎞
•   GDPD_trend_ey = ⎜⎜               −             ⎟⎟
                        ⎝ GDP_trend 0 GDP_trend -1 ⎠



INF is the inflation rate for each country in each year, which is taken from the WDI dataset of the World
Bank, supplemented by IFS data when needed.

Using INF we calculated INFCH_ey and Average_INF in the following way:

INF0 is the value of INF in the election year, INF-i is the value of INF i years before the elections and
INF -x is the value of INF in the year in which the leader assumed his office (usually the previous election
year), where x is the number of years in office:

•   INFCH_ey = INF0 - INF-1; which is the change in the inflation rate in the election year relative to the
    previous year.




                                                     30
                            ⎛ ⎡   0
                                          ⎛ INFi ⎞⎤ ⎞⎟
•   Average_INF = 100 • ⎜ X ⎢     ∏ ⎜1 + 100 ⎟⎠⎥ − 1⎟ ; which is the average inflation rate during the
                        ⎜     ⎣ i = -X +1 ⎝       ⎦ ⎠
                            ⎝
    leader's term.

* In the Expanded sample INF0 receives the value of INF          -1   if the leader left his office in the year
preceding the election year.



In the final dataset we truncated the extreme values, and gave all values above the truncation point of a
variable the value of the truncation point. The truncation points are:

For INF – in developed countries: 20%, in less developed countries: 60%.

For INFCH_ey – in less developed countries: 60%.

For Average_INF – in less developed countries: 80%.

In those cases where the inflation variable was truncated we added a binary variable with a value of 1 in
the countries with high inflation. However, where these variables turned out not to be significant and not
to affect the other coefficients, we dropped them from the final specification.



Political Strength Control Variables

The political strength variables for each country in each election year are mainly based on DPI data about
the number of seats that the leader's party holds in parliament and the percent of votes that the president
received in the previous elections (both in the first and the last rounds).These variables (GOVSEAT,
OPPSEAT, PERCENT1, PERCENTL in DPI) are available for the period 1975-2000. For the other years:
1961-1975 and 2001-2003, we used data from IDEA and completed missing information from CDP:

PARTY - the percent of seats in the parliament held by the leader's party in the year preceding the election
year. It receives the value 0 in a presidential system (in cases where data are from IDEA it is the
proportion of the public's votes received by the party).

VOTES - the percent of votes for the leader in a presidential system in the first round of the previous
elections; receives the value 0 in a parliamentary system.

VOTES_R2 - the percent of the votes for the leader in a presidential system in the last round of the
previous elections (usually the second round); receives the value 0 in a parliamentary system and the value
of VOTES if there was no second round.




                                                      31
D_R2 - A binary variable receiving the value 1 for a leader in a presidential system who had to run in a
second round in the previous elections.



New vs. Old Democracies

New_Democracy – A binary variable, for each country in each election year, receiving the value 1 for the
period of the first 4 elections after a country with a negative polity value in the POLITY IV dataset shifted
to non-negative values, not counting the elections in the transition year. Otherwise, the country is defined
as an Old Democracy and the variable receives a value of 0.

Old – A binary variable, for each country in each election year, receiving the value 1 if country is defined
as an Old Democracy in that year. The years in which countries are defined as New Democracies are listed
in Table A-2.



Developed vs. Less Developed Countries

Developed – A binary variable, for each country, receiving the value 1 for OECD economies that were
members of the organization during the entire sample period.

Less_Developed – A binary variable, for each country, receiving the value 1 for all the countries that are
not defined as developed. The Developed countries are listed in Table A-2.



Presidential vs. Parliamentary Constitutional Rules

Based on the constitutional rules defined above we calculated the following variables:

Pres - A binary variable, for each country in each election year, receiving the value 1 in a country with a
Presidential system, and 0 otherwise.

Parl - A binary variable, for each country in each election year, receiving the value 1 in a country with a
Parliamentary system, and 0 otherwise.

The constitutional rules of the various countries are listed in Table A-2.



Proportional vs. Majoritarian Electoral Rules

The DPI provides information, in each country and in each election year, whether candidates for
presidency or parliament are elected based on the total share of votes received by their party or on the



                                                      32
majority of votes in each voting zone (e.g., district). In the former case the electoral system is defined in
the DPI as Proportional representation (PR in the DPI) and in the latter as Majoritarian representation.

Prop – A binary variable, for each country in each election year, receiving the value 1 in a country with a
Proportional electoral system and 0 otherwise.

Maj – A binary variable, for each country in each election year, receiving the value 1 in a country with a
Majoritarian electoral system, and 0 otherwise.

The electoral systems of the countries are listed in Table A-2.



Level of Democracy

We split the sample between countries with a polity score (in the DPI) of 0 to 9 and those with a score of
10. More than 50 percent of the data points represent countries with a score of 10. Where the score
changed during the covered period, we split the data points for that country according to the score in each
year. Based on the distinction between the two levels we computed the following variables:

High – A binary variable, for each country in each election year, receiving the value 1 where the polity
score is 10.

Low – A binary variable, for each country in each election year, receiving the value 1 where the polity
score is between 0 and 9.



Predetermined vs. Early Elections

Based on the legally determined frequency of elections in a country (from the CIA's "World Factbook"),
we identified when the next elections should have been held. If the elections were held in the expected
year we classified them as predetermined; otherwise they were classified as early (or endogenous).

Pred – A binary variable, for each country in each election year, receiving the value 1 if the elections are
defined as predetermined.
Early – A binary variable, for each country in each election year, receiving the value 1 if the elections are
        defined as early.




                                                     33
Table A-1: Data Sources
                                                                                                                          Available
Source Name                        Code   Dataset Producer              Date     Variables                                Years
International Financial Statistics IFS    International Monetary Fund   2003     central government total expenditure and 1960-2003
                                                                                 total revenue and grants; nominal GDP
Government Financial Statistics GFS       International Monetary Fund   2003     central government total expenditure and 1960-2003
                                                                                 total revenue and grants
World Development Indicators     WDI      The World Bank                2003     GDP per capita in constant 1995 US$,        1960-2003
                                                                                 GDP in constant 1995 US$
POLITY IV                          POLITY University of Maryland        2003     Level of Democracy index                    1800-2003
Database of Political Institutions DPI    The World Bank                2000     political system, term limits, election     1975-2000
                                                                                 results and the allocation of seats in
                                                                                 parliament, election system.

Voter Turnout Since 1945 to      IDEA     Institute for Democracy       Current election years, election results             1945-2001
Date                                      and Electoral Assistance
The Center on Democratic         CDP      Binghamton University         Current election years, election results, election   1974-2000
Performance                                                                     dates
Electionguide.org                IFES     International Foundation    Current election dates                             1998-2005
                                          for Electoral Systems
World Political Leaders          ZPC      Zárate's Political          Current leaders' names and their party association 1945-2005
                                          Collections
The World Factbook               CIA      Central Intelligence Agency Current election dates, frequency of elections in 1960-2005
                                                                              a country, political system
Table A2: Sample Characteristics.
                           Years Included in the   Elections in the   Additional Elections in   Developed   Parliamentary   Proprotional   Years as a New Democracy
No.   Country              Expanded Sample         Narrow sample 1    the Expanded sample1      Economy     System          System         in the Sample
 1    Argentina            1983-2003                  3 (3)               1 (1)                                                X           1983-2003
 2    Australia            1961-2002                  13                  1                        X           X               X
 3    Austria              1960-1999                  7                   1                        X           X               X
 4    Belgium              1960-1998                  8                   1                        X           X               X
 5    Bolivia              1985-2003                  0                   4 (3)                                                X           1982-1997
 6    Brazil               1985-1994                  0                   1 (1)                                                X           1985-1994
 7    Bulgaria             1990-2003                  1 (1)               0                                                    X           1990-2003
 8    Canada               1965-2001                  7                   2                        X           X
 9    Chile                1960-1972, 1989-2000       0                   3 (2)                                                            1989-2000
10    Colombia             1971-2003                  0                   7                                                    X
11    Costa Rica           1972-2002                  0                   8                                                    X
12    Cyprus               1975-2003                  5 (1)               0                                                    X           1975-1983
13    Czech Republic       1993-2003                  2 (2)               0                                    X               X           1993-2002
14    Denmark              1960-2000                  11                  0                        X           X               X
15    Dominican Republic   1978-2000                  2 (2)               4 (2)                                                X           1978-1994
16    Ecuador              1979-2003                  0                   5 (4)                                                X           1979-1996
17    El Salvador          1984-2000                  0                   3 (3)                                                X           1984-2000
18    Estonia              1991-2001                  0                   1 (1)                                X               X           1991-2001
19    Fiji                 1970-1986, 1990-1999       4 (4)               0                                    X                           1970-1986, 1990-1999
20    Finland              1960-1998                  7                   0                        X           X               X
21    France               1972-1997                  5                   0                        X           X               X+
22    Georgia              1998-2002                  1 (1)               0                                                    X           1998-2002
23    Germany              1971-1998                  6                   1                        X           X               X
24    Greece               1960-1966, 1975-1999       4 (2)               1                        X           X*              X           1975-1989
25    Guatemala            1966-1973, 1986-2003       0                   4 (4)                                                X           1966-1973, 1986-2003
26    Guyana               1966-1979, 1992-1997       2 (2)               1 (1)                                X*              X           1966-1979, 1992-1997
27    Honduras             1982-2000                  0                   3 (3)                                                X           1982-1997
28    Hungary              1990-2003                  2 (2)               1 (1)                                X               X           1990-2003
29    Iceland              1972-2003                  8                   0                        X           X               X
30    India                1960-2001                  5                   3                                    X               X           1960-1967
31    Ireland              1960-2002                  10                  0                        X           X               X
32    Israel               1961-1972, 1974-1984,      6                   3                                    X*              X
                           1986-2001
 33   Italy                1960-1998                  6                  0                         X           X               X
 34   Jamaica              1975-1985, 2000-2002       2                  0                                     X
 35   Japan                1970-1993                  5                  1                         X           X               X
 36   Korea                1963-1971, 1988-1997       1 (1)              1 (1)                                 X*              X           1963-1971, 1988-1997
 37   Lithuania            1993-2002                  2 (2)              0                                                     X           1993-2002
 38   Luxembourg           1970-1974, 1976-1997       5                  0                         X           X               X
 39   Madagascar           1992-2001                  2 (2)              0                                                     X           1992-2001
Table A2: Cont.
                                Years Included in the       Elections in the    Additional Elections in      Developed      Parliamentary    Proprotional   Years as a New Democracy
No.      Country                Expanded Sample             Narrow sample 1     the Expanded sample1         Economy        System           System         in the Sample
40       Malaysia               1960-1999                      7 (3)                1                                          X                            1960-1978
41       Mali                   1992-2003                      1 (1)                1 (1)                                                                   1992-2003
42       Mauritius              1981-2003                      5                    0                                          X
43       Mexico                 1988-2003                      0                    2 (2)                                                        X          1988-2003
44       Moldova                1997-2001                      1 (1)                0                                                            X          1997-2001
45       Mongolia               1990-1992, 1994-2003           2 (2)                0                                                                       1990-2003
46       Nepal                  1990-2001                      1 (1)                0                                          X                            1990-2001
47       Netherlands            1960-1998                      7                    0                            X             X                 X
48       New zealand            1960-1988, 1990-2001           10                   2                            X             X                 X+
49       Nicaragua              1990-2003                      2 (2)                0                                                            X          1990-2003
50       Norway                 1960-2003                      5                    2                            X             X                 X
51       Pakistan               1988-1998                      2 (2)                1 (1)                                      X                            1988-1998
52       Panama                 1989-2000                      0                    2 (2)                                                        X          1989-2000
53       Papua new Guinie       1975-2002                      5 (3)                0                                          X                            1975-1992
54       Paraguay               1989-2003                      2 (2)                1 (1)                                                        X          1989-2003
55       Peru                   1980-1999                      1 (1)                2 (2)                                                        X          1980-1999
56       Philipines             1960-1971, 1987-2003           2                    1 (1)                                                                   1987-2003
57       Poland                 1991-2001                      2 (2)                0                                                            X          1989-2001
58       Portugal               1976-1998                      5 (3)                0                            X             X*                X          1976-1987
59       Romania                1990-2001                      1 (1)                0                                          X                 X          1990-2001
60       Russia                 1995-2001                      0                    1 (1)                                                        X          1992-2001
61       Slovak Republic        1994-2003                      2 (2)                0                                          X                 X          1994-2003
62       Slovenia               1993-2003                      0                    1 (1)                                      X                 X          1993-2003
63       Solomon Islands        1978-1990, 1993-1999           2 (1)                0                                          X                            1978-1990
64       South Africa           1994-2003                      1                    0                                                            X
65       Spain                  1978-2003                      5 (2)                0                            X             X                 X          1978-1989
66       Sri Lanka              1960-2001                      5 (1)                1                                          X*                X+         1960-1965
67       Sweden                 1961-2000                      10                   1                            X             X                 X
68       Thailand               1978-1990, 1992-2003           4 (2)                0                                          X                            1978-1990
69       Trinidad & Tobago      1962-1972, 1976-1989,          3                    1                                          X
                                1993-1995
    70   Turkey                 1976-1979, 1983-2001            5 (4)               0                            X             X                 X          1976-1979, 1983-1995
    71   United Kindom          1960-1999                       8                   0                            X             X
    72   United States          1960-2003                       7                   3                            X
    73   Uruguay                1985-2001                       0                   2 (2)                                                        X          1985-2001
    74   Venezuela              1960-2001                       0                   6 (3)                                                        X          1960-1978

1
    The number in the parentheses indicates the number of elections that took place in a country during the years it is defined as a "new democracy".
* Some of the Elections are in a Presidential System
+ Some of the Elections are in a Majoritarian System
Table A3: Detailed Sample and Data Characteristics.
                                                                                                                         Cases in Which the Leader Additional Cases in Which
                                                                             Additional Election Years in the Expanded   was Reelected in the      the Leader was Reelected in Budget
No.   Country              Election Years in the Narrow Sample               Sample                                      Narrow Sample 1           the Expanded Sample 1       Balance   2
                                                                                                                                                                                             BALCH_ey   3

 1    Argentina            1995, 1999, 2003                                  1989                                                  1/3                         0/1              -2.4          0.1
 2    Australia            1964, 1970, 1973, 1976, 1978, 1981, 1983, 1985,   1967                                                  9 / 13                      0/1              -0.8          0.0
                           1988, 1990, 1996, 1999, 2002
  3   Austria              1966, 1970, 1979, 1983, 1990, 1994, 1999          1986                                                  4/7                        0/1               -4.3          0.2
  4   Belgium              1965, 1968, 1971, 1977, 1985, 1987, 1991, 1995    1981                                                  6/8                        0/1               -5.3          -0.2
  5   Bolivia              ..                                                1989, 1993, 1997, 2002                                 ..                        0/4               -3.5          -1.9
  6   Brazil               ..                                                1994                                                   ..                        0/1               -3.3          4.2
  7   Bulgaria             2001                                              ..                                                    0/1                        0/0               -3.8          0.6
  8   Canada               1968, 1972, 1974, 1979, 1988, 1997, 2000          1984, 1993                                            6/7                        0/2               -1.8          0.2
  9   Chile                ..                                                1970, 1993, 1999                                       ..                        1/3               -1.1          -1.8
 10   Colombia             ..                                                1974, 1978, 1982, 1986, 1990, 1994, 1998               ..                        3/7               -3.7          0.4
 11   Costa Rica           ..                                                1974, 1978, 1982, 1986, 1990, 1994, 1998,              ..                        3/8               3.6           -0.4
                                                                             2002
 12   Cyprus               1983, 1988, 1993, 1998, 2003                      ..                                                    2/5                        0/0               -4.3          -0.7
 13   Czech Republic       1996, 2002                                        ..                                                    1/2                        0/0               -1.4          -0.2
 14   Denmark              1964, 1966, 1968, 1971, 1975, 1977, 1979, 1984,   ..                                                    8 / 11                     0/0               0.7           -0.2
                           1987, 1990, 1998
 15   Dominican Republic   1990, 1994                                        1982, 1986, 1996, 2000                                2/2                        1/4               -0.3          0.2
 16   Ecuador              ..                                                1984, 1988, 1992, 1996, 2002                            ..                       0/5               -0.4          1.1
 17   El Salvador          ..                                                1989, 1994, 1999                                        ..                       2/3               -1.4          -0.2
 18   Estonia              ..                                                1995                                                    ..                       0/1               0.8           -2.5
 19   Fiji                 1977, 1982, 1994, 1999                            ..                                                    3/4                        0/0               -3.8          -1.8
 20   Finland              1966, 1970, 1975, 1979, 1987, 1991, 1995          ..                                                    0/7                        0/0               -0.6          -1.3
 21   France               1978, 1981, 1986, 1988, 1997                      ..                                                    1/5                        0/0               -1.8          -0.3
 22   Georgia              2000                                              ..                                                    1/1                        0/0               -1.3          0.6
 23   Germany              1976, 1980, 1987, 1990, 1994, 1998                1983                                                  4/6                        0/1               -1.1          0.1
 24   Greece               1963, 1985, 1989, 1993                            1996                                                  1/4                        0/1               -5.8          -1.8
 25   Guatemala            ..                                                1970, 1995, 1999, 2003                                  ..                       0/4               -1.2          -0.2
 26   Guyana               1968, 1973                                        1997                                                  2/2                        0/1               -8.2          -4.2
 27   Honduras             ..                                                1989, 1993, 1997                                        ..                       1/3               -4.5          -1.1
 28   Hungary              1998, 2002                                        1994                                                  0/2                        0/1               -5.0          -2.0
 29   Iceland              1974, 1978, 1983, 1987, 1991, 1995, 1999, 2003    ..                                                    3/8                        0/0               -1.1          -0.4
 30   India                1970, 1976, 1989, 1996, 1999                      1967, 1979, 1984                                      2/5                        2/3               -1.8          -0.2
 31   Ireland              1965, 1969, 1973, 1977, 1981, 1987, 1989, 1992,   ..                                                    4 / 10                     0/0               -5.8          -0.3
                           1997, 2002
 32   Israel               1965, 1977, 1981, 1992, 1999, 2001                1969, 1984, 1996                                      2/6                        1/3               -6.0          -0.2
 33   Italy                1963, 1967, 1972, 1979, 1987, 1992                ..                                                    1/6                        0/0               -6.0          0.5
 34   Jamaica              1980, 1983                                        ..                                                    1/2                        0/0               -6.6          -4.5
 35   Japan                1972, 1976, 1986, 1989, 1993                      1979                                                  1/5                        0/1               -3.4          -0.7
 36   Korea                1967                                              1997                                                  1/1                        0/1               1.2           0.1
 37   Lithuania            1997, 2002                                        ..                                                    0/2                        0/0               -1.9          0.5
 38   Luxembourg           1974, 1979, 1984, 1989, 1994                      ..                                                    1/5                        0/0               2.7           0.8
 34   Madagascar           1996, 2001                                        ..                                                    0/2                        0/0               -4.4          -0.2
 35   Malaysia             1969, 1974, 1978, 1986, 1990, 1995, 1999          1982                                                  7/7                        0/1               -4.5          -0.8
 39   Madagascar           1996, 2001                                        ..                                                    0/2                        0/0               -4.4          -0.2
 40   Malaysia             1969, 1974, 1978, 1986, 1990, 1995, 1999          1982                                                  7/7                        0/1               -4.5          -0.8

 41   Mali                 1997                                              2002                                                  1/1                        0/1               -3.4          0.3
 42   Mauritius            1984, 1988, 1992, 1996, 2001                      ..                                                    3/5                        0/0               -2.1          -0.9
Table A3: Cont.
                                                                                                                                                                                                            2              3
No.      Country                  Election Years in the Narrow Sample                    Sample                                           was Reelected in the        the Leader was Reelected in Balance       BALCH_ey
43       Mexico                   ..                                                     1994, 2000                                                   ..                          1/2              -1.6          -0.1
44       Moldova                  2001                                                   ..                                                         0/1                           0/0              -1.8          1.5
45       Mongolia                 1997, 2001                                             ..                                                         1/2                           0/0              -1.8          0.1
46       Nepal                    1995                                                   ..                                                         0/1                           0/0              -5.7          0.0
47       Netherlands              1971, 1977, 1981, 1986, 1989, 1994, 1998               ..                                                         4/7                           0/0              -2.0          0.2
48       New zealand              1963, 1966, 1969, 1978, 1981, 1984, 1987, 1994,        1972, 1975                                                 8 / 10                        0/2              -1.3          -0.4
                                  1997, 2000
    49   Nicaragua                1996, 2001                                             ..                                                           0/2                        0/0               -2.6          -1.8
    50   Norway                   1965, 1969, 1985, 1989, 1993                           1981, 1997                                                   3/5                        0/2               2.9           0.6
    51   Pakistan                 1991, 1997                                             1994                                                         2/2                        0/1               -5.9          -0.8
    52   Panama                   ..                                                     1994, 1999                                                     ..                       0/2               0.5           0.1
    53   Papua new Guinie         1982, 1987, 1992, 1997, 2002                           ..                                                           1/5                        0/0               -1.9          -0.5
    54   Paraguay                 1993, 2003                                             1998                                                         0/2                        1/1               -0.1          0.8
    55   Peru                     1995                                                   1985, 1990                                                   1/1                        0/2               -3.3          -0.2
    56   Philipines               1965, 1969                                             1998                                                         1/2                        0/1               -1.3          -1.8
    57   Poland                   1995, 2000                                             ..                                                           1/2                        0/0               -3.5          -0.2
    58   Portugal                 1980, 1985, 1987, 1991, 1995                           ..                                                           3/5                        0/0               -6.1          -0.7
    59   Romania                  1996                                                   ..                                                           0/1                        0/0               -2.3          -1.3
    60   Russia                   ..                                                     2000                                                           ..                       0/1               -2.3          2.7
    61   Slovak Republic          1998, 2002                                             ..                                                           1/2                        0/0               -2.2          -1.5
    62   Slovenia                 ..                                                     2000                                                           ..                       1/1               -1.0          -0.6
    63   Solomon Islands          1989, 1997                                             ..                                                           0/2                        0/0               -4.0          -3.0
    64   South Africa             1999                                                   ..                                                           0/1                        0/0               -3.1          0.4
    65   Spain                    1986, 1989, 1993, 1996, 2000                           ..                                                           4/5                        0/0               -3.6          0.6
    66   Sri Lanka                1965, 1970, 1977, 1988, 1999                           1994                                                         1/5                        0/1               -7.4          0.4
    67   Sweden                   1965, 1969, 1974, 1977, 1983, 1986, 1989, 1992,        1980                                                         6 / 10                     0/1               0.0           0.0
                                  1994, 1998
    68   Thailand                 1983, 1986, 1995, 2000                                 ..                                                            2/4                       0/0               -0.8          1.0
    69   Trinidad & Tobago        1971, 1986, 1995                                       1981                                                          1/3                       1/1               -0.6          -1.4
    70   Turkey                   1977, 1987, 1991, 1995, 1999                           ..                                                            2/5                       0/0               -5.8          -2.1
    71   United Kindom            1966, 1970, 1974, 1979, 1983, 1987, 1992, 1997         ..                                                            4/8                       0/0               -1.0          0.0
    72   United States            1968, 1972, 1976, 1980, 1984, 1992, 1996               1964, 1988, 2000                                              3/7                       2/3               -2.0          0.2
    73   Uruguay                  ..                                                     1994, 1999                                                     ..                       1/2               -1.4          -2.5
    74   Venezuela                ..                                                     1968, 1973, 1978, 1983, 1993, 1998                             ..                       0/6               1.5           -0.9


* Some of the Elections are in a Presidential System
+ Some of the Elections are in a Majoritarian System
1
    The figure on the left hand side is the number of elections where the leader was reelected. The figure on the right hand side is the total number of elections.
2
    Average for all the years included in the sample.
3
    BALCH_ey -The average change in the government deficit ratio to GDP in the election year, compared to the previous year.
Table 1: The Distribution of Election Campaigns According to Economic
                                         1
Development and the Age of Democracy

                                         Observations         Reelected        Not Reelected
Narrow Sample
Less Developed Countries                               91                 41                 50
Developed Countries                                   164                 86                 78
Old Democracies                                       194                 95                 99
New Democracies                                        61                 32                 29
Total                                                 255                127                128
Expanded Sample
Less Developed Countries                              167                 60                107
Developed Countries                                   180                 88                 92
Old Democracies                                       242                107                135
New Democracies                                       105                 41                 64
Total                                                 347                148                199

1
 For a definition of the country categories see Appendix I. For a list of the countries in each
category see Table A-2.
                                                                                                                                                              1
Table 2: The Effects of Budget Balances and Growth on the Probability of Reelection in Developed and Less Developed Economies

                                             Narrow Sample                                                            Expanded Sample
Dependent variable: REELECT                    (1)                      (2)                     (3)                     (4)                (5)          (6)
                                             All Countries            Developed               Less Developed All Countries               Developed     Less Developed
BALCH_term 2                                     8.693**                11.339**                8.363                   6.477**            7.172        8.251*
                                               [0.033]                  [0.026]                 [0.268]                 [0.040]            [0.108]      [0.082]

BALCH_ey 2                                     7.649*                   22.073***               -4.248                  6.097              19.390***    -0.521
                                               [0.095]                  [0.001]                 [0.525]                 [0.118]            [0.003]      [0.921]

GDPPC_gr 2                                     10.869***                -3.077                  22.856***               13.477***          -0.092       20.984***
                                               [0.010]                  [0.615]                 [0.001]                 [0.000]            [0.988]      [0.000]

Developed Countries                            0.510**                  0.000                   0.000                   0.437**            0.000        0.000
                                               [0.019]                  0.000                   0.000                   [0.011]            0.000        0.000

New Democracies                                0.467**                  0.000                   0.000                   0.241              0.000        0.000
                                               [0.045]                  0.000                   0.000                   [0.197]            0.000        0.000

Majoritarian Electoral System                  0.508***                 0.360                   0.494*                  0.471***           0.305        0.463**
                                               [0.008]                  [0.170]                 [0.083]                 [0.004]            [0.197]      [0.040]

Constant                                       -0.845***                0.108                   -0.974***               -0.920***          -0.068       -0.999***
                                               [0.001]                  [0.597]                 [0.001]                 [0.000]            [0.730]      [0.000]

Pseudo R2                                      0.068                    0.072                   0.125                   0.076              0.057        0.117

Akaike's criteria                              343.34                   220.59                  119.65                  451.48             245.28       202.63

Schwartz's criteria                            368.13                   236.09                  132.20                  478.43             261.25       218.22

Observations                                   255                      164                     91                      347                180          167


1
    For variables definitions see Appendix I. The figures in the table are probit coefficients and the figures in the parantheses are P-values.
2
  BALCH_term - The change in the ratio of the government deficit to GDP in the two years preceding the election year, relative to the two previous years.BALCH_ey -The
change in the government deficit ratio to GDP In the election year, compared to the previous year.GDPPC_gr - The average growth rate of real per-capita GDP during the
leader's current term.
* - Significant at the 10 percent level; ** - Significant at the 5 percent level; *** - Significant at the 1 percent level.
                                                                                                                                          1
Table 3: Additional Effects of Election Year Budget Balances and Growth on the Probability of Reelection

                                                  Narrow Sample                                                               Expanded Sample
Dependent variable: REELECT
                                                    (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)                (5)            (6)
                                2
BALCH_term * devloped                               11.847**           11.990**          12.352**           0.000              7.384*         0.000
                                                    [0.020]            [0.020]           [0.016]            0.000              [0.099]        0.000

BALCH_term * less_developed 2                       10.796             9.603             7.441              0.000              8.326*         0.000
                                                    [0.150]            [0.210]           [0.340]            0.000              [0.076]        0.000

BALCH_ey * developed 2                              23.488***          23.360***         20.881***          19.556***          19.990***      17.257***
                                                    [0.001]            [0.002]           [0.007]            [0.004]            [0.002]        [0.007]

BALCH_ey * less_developed 2                         -3.991             -3.276            -2.639             -6.875             -0.719         -3.395
                                                    [0.554]            [0.642]           [0.721]            [0.311]            [0.890]        [0.505]

GDPPC_gr * developed 2                              -3.091             -3.639            -5.261             -4.766             0.152          -1.351
                                                    [0.615]            [0.648]           [0.421]            [0.448]            [0.979]        [0.822]

GDPPC_gr * less_developed 2                         23.245***          36.461***         32.001***          21.742***          21.449***      20.039***
                                                    [0.001]            [0.000]           [0.000]            [0.001]            [0.000]        [0.000]

GDPPC_gr_ey * developed 3                           0.000              0.751             0.000              0.000              0.000          0.000
                                                    0.000              [0.906]           0.000              0.000              0.000          0.000

GDPPC_gr_ey * less_developed 3                      0.000              -13.302**         0.000              0.000              0.000          0.000
                                                    0.000              [0.015]           0.000              0.000              0.000          0.000

GDPD_trend_ey * developed 4                         0.000              0.000             6.626              0.000              0.000          0.000
                                                    0.000              0.000             [0.336]            0.000              0.000          0.000

GDPD_trend_ey * less_developed 4                    0.000              0.000             -17.224***         0.000              0.000          0.000
                                                    0.000              0.000             [0.003]            0.000              0.000          0.000

BALCH_term+ey * developed 5                         0.000              0.000             0.000              13.851***          0.000          10.089**
                                                    0.000              0.000             0.000              [0.003]            0.000          [0.016]

BALCH_term+ey * less_developed 5                    0.000              0.000             0.000              6.958              0.000          6.217
                                                    0.000              0.000             0.000              [0.288]            0.000          [0.170]

Developed Countries                                 1.338***           1.373***          1.651***           1.345***           1.047***       1.076***
                                                    [0.000]            [0.000]           [0.000]            [0.000]            [0.000]        [0.000]

New Democracies                                     0.537**            0.605**           0.682***           0.532**            0.286          0.296
                                                    [0.026]            [0.015]           [0.009]            [0.028]            [0.135]        [0.122]

Majoritarian Electoral System                       0.473**            0.502**           0.459**            0.490**            0.412**        0.424**
                                                    [0.016]            [0.012]           [0.023]            [0.012]            [0.012]        [0.010]

Constant                                            -1.282***          -1.333***         -1.569***          -1.236***          -1.159***      -1.146***
                                                    [0.000]            [0.000]           [0.000]            [0.000]            [0.000]        [0.000]

Pseudo R2                                           0.108              0.127             0.143              0.116              0.101          0.105
Akaike's criteria                                   335.32             332.65            324.41             332.46             445.89         444.03
Schwartz's criteria                                 370.74             375.14            366.81             367.88             484.38         482.52
Observations                                        255                255               253                255                347            347

1
  For variables definitions see Appendix I. The figures in the table are probit coefficients and the figures in the parantheses are P-values. An
asterisk (*) indicates multiplication by the binary variable that follows. developed - A binary variable with a value of 1 for developed countries,
less_developed - A binary variable with a value of 1 for less developed countries.
2
  BALCH_term - The change in the ratio of the government deficit to GDP in the two years preceding the election year, relative to the two
previous years. BALCH_ey -The change in the government deficit ratio to GDP In the election year, compared to the previous year. GDPPC_gr -
The average growth rate of real per-capita GDP during the leader's current term.
3
    GDPPC_gr_ey - Per-capita GDP growth in the last year of the leader's term.
4
  GDPD_trend_ey - The change in the deviation of real GDP from its trend, estimated using a Hodrick-Prescott filter, in the last year of the
leader's term.
5
    BALCH_term+ey - The change in the budget balance ratio to GDP during the leader's term, including elections year.
* - Significant at the 10 percent level; ** - Significant at the 5 percent level; *** - Significant at the 1 percent level.
Table 4: Additional Effects of the Political System, the Timing of the Elections and the Level of Democracy on the
Probability of Reelection 1

                                              Narrow Sample                                          Expanded Sample
Dependent variable: REELECT
                                                (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)               (5)         (6)
                                     2
BALCH_term * developed                          11.664**          12.200**           11.842**          7.237             7.530*      7.397*
                                                [0.022]           [0.018]            [0.020]           [0.105]           [0.093]     [0.098]

BALCH_term * less_developed 2                   10.964            10.252             10.762            8.953*            8.253*      8.306*
                                                [0.144]           [0.177]            [0.152]           [0.061]           [0.078]     [0.077]
                                 2
BALCH_ey * developed                            23.614***         24.696***          23.520***         20.262***         20.430***   19.806***
                                                [0.001]           [0.000]            [0.001]           [0.002]           [0.002]     [0.002]
                                         2
BALCH_ey * less_developed                       -2.837            -4.792             -4.006            0.822             -0.764      -0.511
                                                [0.679]           [0.481]            [0.553]           [0.877]           [0.883]     [0.922]
                                 2
GDPPC_gr * developed                            -3.335            -3.607             -3.082            -0.190            -0.052      0.108
                                                [0.588]           [0.558]            [0.616]           [0.974]           [0.993]     [0.985]

GDPPC_gr * less_developed 2                     22.891***         23.753***          23.250***         20.595***         21.653***   21.393***
                                                [0.001]           [0.001]            [0.001]           [0.000]           [0.000]     [0.000]
                             3
Parliamentary System                            0.256             0.000              0.000             0.355*            0.000       0.000
                                                [0.303]           0.000              0.000             [0.065]           0.000       0.000
                                     3
Predetermined Elections                         0.000             -0.211             0.000             0.000             -0.088      0.000
                                                0.000             [0.225]            0.000             0.000             [0.566]     0.000
                                     3
High Level of Democracy                         0.000             0.000              -0.019            0.000             0.000       0.108
                                                0.000             0.000              [0.939]           0.000             0.000       [0.611]

Developed Countries                             1.264***          1.362***           1.347***          0.870***          1.047***    0.985***
                                                [0.000]           [0.000]            [0.000]           [0.002]           [0.000]     [0.001]

New Democracies                                 0.578**           0.548**            0.533**           0.333*            0.289       0.311
                                                [0.019]           [0.024]            [0.033]           [0.086]           [0.131]     [0.115]

Majoritarian Electoral System                   0.456**           0.464**            0.473**           0.363**           0.407**     0.413**
                                                [0.021]           [0.018]            [0.016]           [0.030]           [0.014]     [0.012]

Constant                                        -1.441***         -1.164***          -1.273***         -1.294***         -1.101***   -1.198***
                                                [0.000]           [0.000]            [0.000]           [0.000]           [0.000]     [0.000]
            2
Pseudo R                                        0.111             0.112              0.108             0.108             0.101       0.101
Akaike's criteria                               336.26            335.84             337.32            444.46            447.56      447.63
Schwartz's criteria                             375.21            374.80             376.27            486.80            489.90      489.97
Observations                                    255               255                255               347               347         347

1
  For variables definitions see Appendix I. The figures in the table are probit coefficients and the figures in the parantheses are P-values. An
asterisk (*) indicates multiplication by the binary variable that follows. developed - A binary variable with a value of 1 for developed countries,
less_developed - A binary variable with a value of 1 for less developed countries.
2
  BALCH_term - The change in the ratio of the government deficit to GDP in the two years preceding the election year, relative to the two
previous years. BALCH_ey -The change in the government deficit ratio to GDP In the election year, compared to the previous year.
GDPPC_gr - The average growth rate of real per-capita GDP during the leader's current term.

3
  Binary variables indicating whether the country has a parliamentary political system, whether the elections took place in their predetermined
date and whether the country was classified as having a high level of democracy in the year of the election campaign, respectively.
* - Significant at the 10 percent level; ** - Significant at the 5 percent level; *** - Significant at the 1 percent level.
                                                                     1
Table 5: Elasticities for Different Groups of Countries

Narrow Sample                                                 BALCH_term 2              BALCH_ey 2                 GDPPC_gr      2


Developed Countries                                           4.68                      9.18                       ..

Less Developed Countries                                      ..                        ..                         9.24

Old Democracies                                               4.27                      4.13                       ..

New Democracies                                               ..                        ..                         8.69

Old & Developed Democracies                                   4.72                      7.71                       ..

Old & Less Developed Democracies                              ..                        ..                         6.14

Expanded Sample
Developed Countries                                           2.95                      7.94                       ..

Less Developed Countries                                      3.09                      ..                         8.13

Old Democracies                                               2.92                      4.01                       4.04

New Democracies                                               ..                        ..                         7.05

Old & Developed Democracies                                   3.16                      7.05                       ..

Old & Less Developed Democracies                              ..                        ..                         7.37

1
 The elasticity is the change (in percentage points) in the probability for reelection for an increase of 1 percentage point in the variable
country categories see Appendix I. For a list of the countries in each category see Table A-2.
 2
   BALCH_term - The change in the ratio of the government deficit to GDP in the two years preceding the election year, relative to the
BALCH_ey -The change in the government deficit ratio to GDP In the election year, compared to the previous year.GDPPC_gr - The a
real per-capita GDP during the leader's current term.
".." - For coefficients with a significant level of more than 10 percent.
Table 6: The Effects of Budget Balances and Growth on the Probability of Reelection in New and Old Democracies 1

                                                   Narrow Sample                                           Expanded Sample
Dependent variable: REELECT
                                                     (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)              (5)         (6)
                         2
BALCH_term * old                                     10.709**           10.808**          0.000              7.392**          7.562**     0.000
                                                     [0.018]            [0.019]           0.000              [0.042]          [0.040]     0.000

BALCH_term * new_democracy 2                         0.559              1.085             0.000              4.941            6.665       0.000
                                                     [0.956]            [0.916]           0.000              [0.431]          [0.307]     0.000
                     2
BALCH_ey * old                                       10.373*            10.491*           6.789              10.135**         9.784*      7.469
                                                     [0.078]            [0.095]           [0.237]            [0.047]          [0.068]     [0.137]
                                      2
BALCH_ey * new_democracy                             6.702              6.171             5.909              1.866            2.623       0.733
                                                     [0.361]            [0.412]           [0.464]            [0.761]          [0.677]     [0.908]
                     2
GDPPC_gr * old                                       6.330              4.969             5.069              10.204**         7.993       9.313**
                                                     [0.170]            [0.487]           [0.278]            [0.011]          [0.196]     [0.020]
                                      2
GDPPC_gr * new_democracy                             22.064***          28.463***         21.514***          18.088***        24.483***   17.622***
                                                     [0.002]            [0.001]           [0.002]            [0.001]          [0.000]     [0.001]
                             3
GDPPC_gr_ey * old                                    0.000              0.728             0.000              0.000            1.731       0.000
                                                     0.000              [0.898]           0.000              0.000            [0.727]     0.000
                                           3
GDPPC_gr_ey * new_democracy                          0.000              -8.168            0.000              0.000            -7.660*     0.000
                                                     0.000              [0.121]           0.000              0.000            [0.078]     0.000
                                 4
BALCH_term+ey * old                                  0.000              0.000             11.746***          0.000            0.000       9.233***
                                                     0.000              0.000             [0.005]            0.000            0.000       [0.009]
                                               4
BALCH_term+ey * new_democracy                        0.000              0.000             2.638              0.000            0.000       2.968
                                                     0.000              0.000             [0.759]            0.000            0.000       [0.614]

Developed Countries                                  0.468**            0.450**           0.483**            0.413***         0.401**     0.432***
                                                     [0.020]            [0.027]           [0.017]            [0.009]          [0.011]     [0.006]

Majoritarian Electoral System                        0.489**            0.487**           0.499***           0.465***         0.449***    0.473***
                                                     [0.011]            [0.012]           [0.009]            [0.004]          [0.006]     [0.004]

Constant                                             -0.674***          -0.635***         -0.653***          -0.808***        -0.777***   -0.803***
                                                     [0.002]            [0.004]           [0.003]            [0.000]          [0.000]     [0.000]
             2
Pseudo R                                             0.075              0.082             0.083              0.080            0.087       0.085
Akaike's criteria                                    344.97             346.39            342.28             453.57           454.20      451.17
Schwartz's criteria                                  376.84             385.34            374.15             488.21           496.54      485.81
Observations                                         255                255               255                347              347         347

1
 For variables definitions see Appendix I. The figures in the table are probit coefficients and the figures in the parantheses are P-values. An
asterisk (*) indicates multiplication by the binary variable that follows. new_democracy - A binary variable with a value of 1 for new democracies,
old - A binary variable with a value of 1 for old democracies.
2
 BALCH_term - The change in the ratio of the government deficit to GDP in the two years preceding the election year, relative to the two previous
years. BALCH_ey -The change in the government deficit ratio to GDP In the election year, compared to the previous year. GDPPC_gr - The
average growth rate of real per-capita GDP during the leader's current term.
3
    GDPPC_gr_ey - Per-capita GDP growth in the last year of the leader's term.
4
    BALCH_term+ey - The change in the budget balance ratio to GDP during the leader's term, including the elections year.
* - Significant at the 10 percent level; ** - Significant at the 5 percent level; *** - Significant at the 1 percent level.
Table 7: The Effects of Budget Balances, Growth and Deviations of GDP from its trend on the Probability
of Reelection in Developed, Less Developed and New Democracies1

                                                               Narrow Sample                         Expanded Sample
Dependent variable: REELECT
                                                                 (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)
                                       2
BALCH_term * old_developed                                        11.901**          12.203**           7.920*            8.252*
                                                                  [0.021]           [0.019]            [0.081]           [0.071]

BALCH_term * old_less_developed 2                                 7.465             5.335              9.934             9.144
                                                                  [0.475]           [0.620]            [0.148]           [0.185]

BALCH_term * new_democracy 2                                      1.412             1.107              5.271             7.029
                                                                  [0.891]           [0.916]            [0.415]           [0.313]

BALCH_ey * old_developed 2                                        19.541***         16.557**           17.715***         15.535**
                                                                  [0.007]           [0.049]            [0.008]           [0.041]

BALCH_ey * old_less_developed 2                                   -6.703            -9.020             3.634             3.469
                                                                  [0.560]           [0.488]            [0.666]           [0.698]

BALCH_ey * new_democracy 2                                        6.327             7.323              1.914             4.116
                                                                  [0.389]           [0.341]            [0.756]           [0.525]

GDPPC_gr * old_developed 2                                        -1.128            -3.373             0.818             -1.146
                                                                  [0.850]           [0.601]            [0.887]           [0.852]

GDPPC_gr * old_less_developed 2                                   15.438**          14.500*            19.265***         19.006***
                                                                  [0.034]           [0.078]            [0.001]           [0.004]

GDPPC_gr * new_democracy 2                                        25.385***         27.705***          20.657***         23.419***
                                                                  [0.001]           [0.000]            [0.000]           [0.000]

GDPD_trend_ey * old_developed 3                                   0.000             5.587              0.000             4.528
                                                                  0.000             [0.454]            0.000             [0.512]

GDPD_trend_ey * old_less_developed 3                              0.000             0.085              0.000             1.364
                                                                  0.000             [0.993]            0.000             [0.855]

GDPD_trend_ey * new_democracy 3                                   0.000             -13.094**          0.000             -10.716**
                                                                  0.000             [0.023]            0.000             [0.016]

Developed Countries                                               0.843***          0.863***           0.784***          0.826***
                                                                  [0.002]           [0.003]            [0.000]           [0.000]

Majoritarian Electoral System                                     0.448**           0.420**            0.420**           0.361**
                                                                  [0.022]           [0.036]            [0.011]           [0.032]

Constant                                                          -0.857***         -0.827***          -0.941***         -0.932***
                                                                  [0.000]           [0.002]            [0.000]           [0.000]

Pseudo R2                                                         0.093             0.112              0.093             0.112
Akaike's criteria                                                 344.59            341.57             453.13            449.834
Schwartz's criteria                                               387.09            394.57             499.32            507.487
Observations                                                      255               253                347               345


1
  For variables definitions see Appendix I. The figures in the table are probit coefficients and the figures in the parantheses
are P-values. An asterisk (*) indicates multiplication by the binary variable that follows. new_democracy - A binary variable
with a value of 1 for new democracies, old_developed - A binary variable with a value of 1 for old and developed
democracies, old_less_developed - A binary variable with a value of 1 for old and less developed democracies.
2
  BALCH_term - The change in the ratio of the government deficit to GDP in the two years preceding the election year,
relative to the two previous years. BALCH_ey -The change in the government deficit ratio to GDP In the election year,
compared to the previous year. GDPPC_gr - The average growth rate of real per-capita GDP during the leader's current
term.
3
  GDPD_trend_ey - The change in the difference between real GDP and its trend, estimated using a Hodrick-Prescott filter,
in the last year of the leader's term.
* - Significant at the 10 percent level; ** - Significant at the 5 percent level; *** - Significant at the 1 percent level.
Table 8: Characteristics of Election Campaigns in Developed Countries and New Democracies


                             Less Developed         Developed               Old                 New                 Total
Narrow Sample
Observations                                91                  164                 194                   61                255

Developed                                     ..                  ..                153                   11                164

Less developed                                ..                  ..                 41                   50                91

New                                         50                   11                    ..                  ..               61

Old                                         41                  153                    ..                  ..               194

Parliamentry                                57                  154                 175                   36                211

Presidential                                34                   10                  19                   25                44

Proportional                                48                  133                 140                   41                181

Majoritarian                                43                   31                  54                   20                74

Predetermined
                                            60                   96                 117                   39                156
Election
Early Election                              31                   68                  77                   22                99

High Level of
                                            28                  151                 162                   17                179
Democracy
Low Level of
                                            63                   13                  32                   44                76
Democracy
Expanded Sample
Observations                               167                  180                 242                 105                 347

Developed                                     ..                  ..                169                   11                180

Less developed                                ..                  ..                 73                   94                167

New                                         94                   11                    ..                  ..               105

Old                                         73                  169                    ..                  ..               242

Parliamentry                                68                  167                 195                   40                235

Presidential                                99                   13                  47                   65                112

Proportional                               116                  142                 178                   80                258

Majoritarian                                51                   38                  64                   25                89

Predetermined
                                           120                  106                 152                   74                226
Election
Early Election                              47                   74                  90                   31                121

High Level of
                                            40                  167                 186                   21                207
Democracy
Low Level of
                                           127                   13                  56                   84                140
Democracy

1
    For definition of the various charactaristics see Appendix I. For a list of the country categories see table A-2.
Table 9: Varying Effects of Budget Balances and Growth on the Probability of Reelection in Different
Political and Electoral Systems: Developed and Less Developed Economies 1
                                                                       2
Dependent variable: REELECT                     Narrow Sample
                                                                    (1)                                        (2)
Interaction Binary Variable:            3
                                                        parl                   pres                prop                  maj
                                  3
BALCH_term * developed                            12.152**                 -3.824            13.606**                9.448
                                                  [0.019]                  [0.893]           [0.018]                 [0.445]
BALCH_term * less_developed 3                     16.809*                  -6.118            -0.936                  24.194**
                                                  [0.065]                  [0.683]           [0.932]                 [0.036]
BALCH_ey * developed 3                            24.023***                17.776            29.313***               2.269
                                                  [0.001]                  [0.603]           [0.000]                 [0.901]
BALCH_ey * less_developed 3                       -2.939                   -3.891            -10.543                 7.067
                                                  [0.691]                  [0.819]           [0.282]                 [0.503]
GDPPC_gr * developed 3                            -2.391                   -25.574           -2.270                  -19.795
                                                  [0.700]                  [0.180]           [0.719]                 [0.267]
GDPPC_gr * less_developed 3                       24.157***                23.464**          24.836**                20.962**
                                                  [0.001]                  [0.025]           [0.016]                 [0.019]
Developed Countries 4                                           1.406***                                   1.507***
                                                                 [0.000]                                    [0.000]
                         4
New Democracies                                                  0.619**                                    0.584**
                                                                 [0.014]                                    [0.020]
Majoritarian Electoral System 4                                  0.513**                                    0.747*
                                                                 [0.014]                                    [0.054]
Constant                                                        -1.355***                                  -1.453***
                                                                 [0.000]                                    [0.000]
Pseudo R2                                                        0.118                                      0.131
Akaike's criteria                                                343.64                                     339.07
Schwartz's criteria                                              400.30                                     395.73
Observations                                                      255                                        255


1
 For variables definitions see Appendix I. The figures in the table are probit coefficients and the figures in the parantheses
are P-values. An asterisk (*) indicates multiplication by the binary variable that follows. developed - A binary variable with
a value of 1 for developed countries, less_developed - A binary variable with a value of 1 for less developed countries.
2
    There is no qualitative difference in the results when the equations are estimated for the expanded sample.
3
  BALCH_term - The change in the ratio of the government deficit to GDP in the two years preceding the election year,
relative to the two previous years. BALCH_ey -The change in the government deficit ratio to GDP In the election year,
compared to the previous year. GDPPC_gr - The average growth rate of real per-capita GDP during the leader's current
term.
4
 The coefficients in each column are for the interaction of the variable on the top of column with the variable on the left
column.
5
    The binary variables on the left column have no interaction with other variables.
* - Significant at the 10 percent level; ** - Significant at the 5 percent level; *** - Significant at the 1 percent level.
Table 10: Varying Effects of Budget Balances and Growth on the Probability of Reelection According to theTiming of the Elections and the Level of
Democracy: Developed and Less Developed Economies 1

                                              Narrow Sample                                                            Expanded Sample
Dependent variable: REELECT
                                                              (1)                                  (2)                                  (3)                             (4)
Interaction Binary Variable:
                                          2
                                                    high               low              pred               early              high               low        pred                early
                                  3
BALCH_term * developed                          12.466**            -40.680         14.203*              12.691*         7.870*               -46.060     7.235               10.140
                                                [0.016]             [0.391]         [0.054]              [0.087]         [0.081]              [0.321]     [0.259]             [0.123]
BALCH_term * less_developed 3                   4.445               15.370*         3.488                27.097          12.015               7.856       2.522               23.812*
                                                [0.770]             [0.092]         [0.699]              [0.147]         [0.338]              [0.118]     [0.671]             [0.061]
BALCH_ey * developed 3                          22.573***           27.104          16.480*              36.779***       19.689***            17.725      13.872*             33.155***
                                                [0.002]             [0.249]         [0.065]              [0.001]         [0.003]              [0.441]     [0.097]             [0.002]
BALCH_ey * less_developed 3                     12.256              -12.841         -2.578               -7.402          9.560                -3.941      -1.297              3.777
                                                [0.358]             [0.136]         [0.733]              [0.676]         [0.387]              [0.512]     [0.825]             [0.766]
GDPPC_gr * developed 3                          -1.549              -12.077         -6.531               2.142           1.393                -4.578      -3.116              5.434
                                                [0.806]             [0.412]         [0.356]              [0.768]         [0.818]              [0.746]     [0.645]             [0.437]
                                      3
GDPPC_gr * less_developed                       22.178**            27.569***       22.463***            27.842***       22.476***            21.444***   20.582***           24.223***
                                                [0.021]             [0.001]         [0.004]              [0.008]         [0.004]              [0.000]     [0.000]             [0.005]
Developed Countries 4                                      1.430***                            1.412***                              1.030***                       1.078***
                                                            [0.000]                             [0.000]                               [0.000]                        [0.000]
                         4
New Democracies                                            0.585**                              0.594**                                0.296                           0.291
                                                           [0.025]                              [0.019]                               [0.137]                         [0.139]
Majoritarian Electoral System 4                            0.484**                              0.417**                              0.417**                        0.376**
                                                           [0.015]                              [0.039]                              [0.012]                        [0.028]
Constant                                                   -1.392***                           -1.328***                             -1.163***                      -1.167***
                                                            [0.000]                             [0.000]                               [0.000]                        [0.000]
Pseudo R 2                                                  0.131                                0.128                                0.131                           0.128
Akaike's criteria                                           339.07                              340.15                                454.41                          450.36
Schwartz's criteria                                         395.73                              396.81                                516.00                          511.95
Observations                                                 255                                 255                                   347                             347

1
 For variables definitions see Appendix I. The figures in the table are probit coefficients and the figures in the parantheses are P-values. An asterisk (*) indicates multiplication
by the binary variable that follows. developed - A binary variable with a value of 1 for developed countries, less_developed - A binary variable with a value of 1 for less
developed countries.
2
    The coefficients in each column are for the interaction of the variable on the top of column with the variable on the left column.
3
  BALCH_term - The change in the ratio of the government deficit to GDP in the two years preceding the election year, relative to the two previous years. BALCH_ey -The
change in the government deficit ratio to GDP In the election year, compared to the previous year. GDPPC_gr - The average growth rate of real per-capita GDP during the
leader's current term.
4
    The binary variables on the left column have no interaction with other variables.
* - Significant at the 10 percent level; ** - Significant at the 5 percent level; *** - Significant at the 1 percent level.
Table 11: Varying Effects of Budget Balances and Growth on the Probability of Reelection
                                                                      1
in Different Political and Electoral Systems: Old and New Democracies

                                              Narrow Sample
Dependent variable: REELECT
                                                              (1)                                  (2)
Interaction Binary Variable:            2           parl               pres             prop                maj
BALCH_term * old 3                              10.975**            -10.278         10.021*              12.524
                                                [0.019]             [0.639]         [0.064]              [0.136]
BALCH_term * new_democracy 3                    4.425               -7.270          -2.662               7.634
                                                [0.738]             [0.663]         [0.818]              [0.737]
                      3
BALCH_ey * old                                  10.051*             20.932          18.582**             -5.289
                                                [0.098]             [0.396]         [0.013]              [0.607]
BALCH_ey * new_democracy 3                      10.138              -13.683         0.484                22.160
                                                [0.205]             [0.511]         [0.956]              [0.171]
GDPPC_gr * old 3                                7.129               -9.577          4.474                10.158
                                                [0.130]             [0.445]         [0.429]              [0.215]
GDPPC_gr * new_democracy 3                      19.948**            20.253*         17.161**             42.480**
                                                [0.017]             [0.071]         [0.030]              [0.017]
Developed Countries 4                                       0.393*                              0.529**
                                                            [0.061]                             [0.010]
Majoritarian Electoral System 4                            0.492**                               0.250
                                                           [0.012]                              [0.404]
Constant                                                   -0.605***                           -0.662***
                                                            [0.007]                             [0.004]
              2
Pseudo R                                                    0.087                                0.095
Akaike's criteria                                           352.59                              349.85
Schwartz's criteria                                         405.71                              402.97
Observations                                                 255                                  255

1
  For variables definitions see Appendix I. The figures in the table are probit coefficients and the figures in
the parantheses are P-values. An asterisk (*) indicates multiplication by the binary variable that follows.
new_democracy - A binary variable with a value of 1 for new democracies, old - A binary variable with a
value of 1 for old democracies.
2
 The coefficients in each column are for the interaction of the variable on the top of column with the variable
on the left column.
3
 BALCH_term - The change in the ratio of the government deficit to GDP in the two years preceding the
election year, relative to the two previous years. BALCH_ey -The change in the government deficit ratio to
GDP In the election year, compared to the previous year. GDPPC_gr - The average growth rate of real per-
capita GDP during the leader's current term.
4
    The binary variables on the left column have no interaction with other variables.
* - Significant at the 10 percent level; ** - Significant at the 5 percent level; *** - Significant at the 1 percent
level.
Table 12: Varying Effects of Budget Balances and Growth on the Probability of Reelection According to theTiming of the Elections and the Level of
                                        1
Democracy: Old and New Democracies
                                              Narrow Sample                                                            Expanded Sample
Dependent variable: REELECT
                                                              (1)                                  (2)                                  (3)                            (4)
Interaction Binary Variable:              2
                                                   high                low              pred               early              high               low        pred                early
                          3
BALCH_term * old                                10.308**            6.448           9.176                13.998**        7.151                7.072       2.782              13.831**
                                                [0.037]             [0.589]         [0.139]              [0.044]         [0.101]              [0.318]     [0.577]            [0.021]
BALCH_term * new_democracy 3                    -2.495              7.734           1.831                11.508          10.578               5.205       4.973              7.408
                                                [0.915]             [0.529]         [0.877]              [0.629]         [0.509]              [0.452]     [0.522]            [0.603]
                      3
BALCH_ey * old                                  16.393**            -13.652         5.429                19.912**        14.271**             1.464       6.934              17.332**
                                                [0.016]             [0.312]         [0.457]              [0.044]         [0.020]              [0.877]     [0.274]            [0.047]
                                      3
BALCH_ey * new_democracy                        26.543              -2.786          3.507                25.063          20.476               -3.531      -2.725             20.658
                                                [0.111]             [0.763]         [0.680]              [0.214]         [0.159]              [0.627]     [0.696]            [0.184]
GDPPC_gr * old 3                                6.397               6.627           3.700                9.290           8.514*               12.686**    8.708**            12.124**
                                                [0.213]             [0.413]         [0.471]              [0.122]         [0.075]              [0.041]     [0.048]            [0.029]
GDPPC_gr * new_democracy 3                      23.931*             24.962***       22.100***            20.596*         24.756**             17.576***   15.930***          22.229**
                                                [0.070]             [0.002]         [0.009]              [0.060]         [0.019]              [0.003]     [0.008]            [0.022]
Developed Countries 4                                      0.527**                              0.505**                              0.471***                       0.426***
                                                           [0.019]                              [0.015]                               [0.009]                        [0.008]
Majoritarian Electoral System 4                            0.450**                              0.468**                              0.441***                       0.429***
                                                           [0.021]                              [0.017]                               [0.007]                        [0.009]
Constant                                                  -0.739***                            -0.671***                             -0.826***                      -0.789***
                                                           [0.001]                              [0.002]                               [0.000]                        [0.000]
              2
Pseudo R                                                    0.098                                0.085                                0.098                           0.085
Akaike's criteria                                          348.74                               353.34                                461.37                          460.48
Schwartz's criteria                                        401.86                               406.46                                519.11                          518.22
Observations                                                 255                                  255                                  347                             347


1
 For variables definitions see Appendix I. The figures in the table are probit coefficients and the figures in the parantheses are P-values. An asterisk (*) indicates multiplication
by the binary variable that follows. new_democracy - A binary variable with a value of 1 for new democracies, old - A binary variable with a value of 1 for old democracies.
2
    The coefficients in each column are for the interaction of the variable on the top of column with the variable on the left column.
3
  BALCH_term - The change in the ratio of the government deficit to GDP in the two years preceding the election year, relative to the two previous years.BALCH_ey -The
change in the government deficit ratio to GDP In the election year, compared to the previous year.GDPPC_gr - The average growth rate of real per-capita GDP during the
leader's current term.
4
    The binary variables on the left column have no interaction with other variables.
* - Significant at the 10 percent level; ** - Significant at the 5 percent level; *** - Significant at the 1 percent level.
Table 13: Varying Effects of Budget Balances and Growth on the Probability of Reelection in Different
Political and Electoral Systems: Developed, Less Developed and New Democracies 1

                                                            Narrow Sample
Dependent variable: REELECT
                                                                            (1)                                        (2)
Interaction Binary Variable:                2                    parl                 pres                prop                    maj
                                        3
BALCH_term * old_developed                                   11.522**             26.626             13.825**                 8.346
                                                             [0.028]              [0.479]            [0.019]                  [0.488]
                                                        3
BALCH_term * old_less_developed                              9.057                -25.632            -16.044                  20.069
                                                             [0.442]              [0.424]            [0.456]                  [0.151]
                                                3
BALCH_term * new_democracy                                   3.694                -4.801             -1.995                   8.019
                                                             [0.784]              [0.779]            [0.867]                  [0.724]
                                    3
BALCH_ey * old_developed                                     18.424**             90.815             25.693***                -2.152
                                                             [0.012]              [0.163]            [0.002]                  [0.902]
                                                    3
BALCH_ey * old_less_developed                                -6.746               7.854              -16.571                  -0.565
                                                             [0.605]              [0.768]            [0.422]                  [0.969]
                                        3
BALCH_ey * new_democracy                                     8.897                -12.319            -0.082                   21.362
                                                             [0.265]              [0.566]            [0.993]                  [0.188]
                                    3
GDPPC_gr * old_developed                                     -0.191               -38.708            -0.973                   -6.382
                                                             [0.975]              [0.166]            [0.875]                  [0.706]
                                                    3
GDPPC_gr * old_less_developed                                15.906**             5.846              18.589                   13.551
                                                             [0.040]              [0.716]            [0.144]                  [0.131]
                                        3
GDPPC_gr * new_democracy                                     23.114***            25.858**           21.162**                 44.924**
                                                             [0.008]              [0.030]            [0.015]                  [0.016]
                            4
Developed Countries                                                      0.841***                                  0.936***
                                                                          [0.003]                                   [0.002]
Majoritarian Electoral System 4                                          0.527**                                     0.446
                                                                         [0.013]                                    [0.230]
Constant                                                                 -0.857***                                 -0.934***
                                                                          [0.001]                                   [0.002]
Pseudo R2                                                                 0.114                                      0.119
Akaike's criteria                                                         355.26                                    353.55
Schwartz's criteria                                                       429.62                                    427.92
Observations                                                               255                                       255

1
 For variables definitions see Appendix I. The figures in the table are probit coefficients and the figures in the parantheses are P-
values. An asterisk (*) indicates multiplication by the binary variable that follows. new_democracy - A binary variable with a
value of 1 for new democracies, old_developed - A binary variable with a value of 1 for old and developed democracies,
old_less_developed - A binary variable with a value of 1 for old and less developed democracies.
2
    The coefficients in each column are for the interaction of the variable on the top of column with the variable on the left column.
3
  BALCH_term - The change in the ratio of the government deficit to GDP in the two years preceding the election year, relative to
the two previous years. BALCH_ey -The change in the government deficit ratio to GDP In the election year, compared to the
previous year. GDPPC_gr - The average growth rate of real per-capita GDP during the leader's current term.
4
    The binary variables on the left column have no interaction with other variables.
* - Significant at the 10 percent level; ** - Significant at the 5 percent level; *** - Significant at the 1 percent level.
Table 14: Varying Effects of Budget Balances and Growth on the Probability of Reelection According to theTiming of the Elections and the Level of
Democracy: Developed, Less Developed and New Democracies 1
                                              Narrow Sample                                                             Expanded Sample
Dependent variable: REELECT
                                                               (1)                                  (2)                                 (3)                            (4)
Interaction Binary Variable:           2            high                low              pred               early             high               low        pred                early
                                       3
BALCH_term * old_developed                      12.280**             -147.115        14.738**             11.404          8.138*              -138.309    8.154              9.579
                                                [0.018]              [0.342]         [0.048]              [0.124]         [0.074]             [0.380]     [0.208]            [0.147]
BALCH_term * old_less_dev 3                     6.105                4.034           -7.216               42.565          11.503              8.832       -1.685             43.530*
                                                [0.762]              [0.754]         [0.609]              [0.159]         [0.519]             [0.233]     [0.865]            [0.085]
BALCH_term * new_democracy 3                    -1.863               8.665           4.262                14.060          10.860              5.519       5.763              8.396
                                                [0.939]              [0.488]         [0.723]              [0.578]         [0.509]             [0.438]     [0.464]            [0.604]
BALCH_ey * old_developed 3                      19.150***            17.127          15.909*              29.628**        17.475**            12.856      14.183*            27.932**
                                                [0.010]              [0.644]         [0.084]              [0.012]         [0.011]             [0.731]     [0.099]            [0.012]
BALCH_ey * old_less_dev 3                       13.701               -26.348         -16.216              10.386          11.831              -0.216      0.979              18.980
                                                [0.467]              [0.134]         [0.299]              [0.626]         [0.440]             [0.983]     [0.925]            [0.325]
BALCH_ey * new_democracy 3                      27.075               -3.142          1.877                28.942          20.381              -3.496      -3.170             22.952
                                                [0.107]              [0.734]         [0.826]              [0.155]         [0.159]             [0.633]     [0.653]            [0.147]
GDPPC_gr * old_developed 3                      -0.972               -21.115         -5.561               3.861           0.886               -17.010     -2.900             6.009
                                                [0.874]              [0.317]         [0.416]              [0.601]         [0.880]             [0.415]     [0.658]            [0.400]
GDPPC_gr * old_less_dev 3                       17.733*              13.402          13.211               17.040          20.764**            18.232***   18.534***          16.846
                                                [0.095]              [0.152]         [0.140]              [0.138]         [0.024]             [0.008]     [0.007]            [0.108]
GDPPC_gr * new_democracy 3                      26.342*              27.434***       27.443***            23.114**        26.344**            19.689***   19.489***          23.702**
                                                [0.064]              [0.001]         [0.002]              [0.045]         [0.017]             [0.001]     [0.002]            [0.018]
Developed Countries 4                                      0.906***                             0.947***                             0.802***                       0.822***
                                                            [0.001]                              [0.001]                              [0.000]                        [0.000]
Majoritarian Electoral System 4                             0.474**                              0.440**                             0.432***                       0.398**
                                                            [0.019]                              [0.029]                              [0.010]                       [0.019]
Constant                                                   -0.896***                            -0.915***                            -0.937***                      -0.947***
                                                            [0.000]                              [0.000]                              [0.000]                        [0.000]
Pseudo R2                                                    0.124                                0.117                               0.124                           0.117
Akaike's criteria                                           351.69                               354.03                               465.41                          460.74
Schwartz's criteria                                         426.06                               428.40                               546.25                          541.57
Observations                                                 255                                  255                                  347                             347

1
  For variables definitions see Appendix I. The figures in the table are probit coefficients and the figures in the parantheses are P-values. An asterisk (*) indicates multiplication
by the binary variable that follows. new_democracy - A binary variable with a value of 1 for new democracies, old_developed - A binary variable with a value of 1 for old and
developed democracies, old_less_dev - A binary variable with a value of 1 for old and less developed democracies.
2
    The coefficients in each column are for the interaction of the variable on the top of column with the variable on the left column.
3
  BALCH_term - The change in the ratio of the government deficit to GDP in the two years preceding the election year, relative to the two previous years. BALCH_ey -The
change in the government deficit ratio to GDP In the election year, compared to the previous year. GDPPC_gr - The average growth rate of real per-capita GDP during the
leader's current term.
4
    The binary variables on the left column have no interaction with other variables.
* - Significant at the 10 percent level; ** - Significant at the 5 percent level; *** - Significant at the 1 percent level.
                                                                                                                                  1
Table 15: Additional Effects of the Political Strength of the Leader on the Probability of Reelection

                                             Narrow Sample                                                            Expanded Sample
Dependent variable: REELECT
                                               (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)           (6)            (7)              (8)
BALCH_term * developed 2                       12.132**           11.262**          11.267**          11.440**          7.574*        6.611          6.640            6.856
                                               [0.018]            [0.029]           [0.029]           [0.027]           [0.091]       [0.140]        [0.139]          [0.128]

BALCH_term * less_developed 2                  11.381             6.872             7.141             5.601             8.953*        8.193*         8.484*           7.913
                                               [0.139]            [0.391]           [0.372]           [0.493]           [0.066]       [0.099]        [0.089]          [0.111]

BALCH_ey * developed 2                         24.484***          25.281***         25.259***         24.542***         20.842***     21.200***      21.143***        21.051***
                                               [0.000]            [0.000]           [0.000]           [0.001]           [0.001]       [0.001]        [0.001]          [0.002]

BALCH_ey * less_developed 2                    -1.860             -0.613            -0.411            0.530             1.122         2.792          3.455            3.403
                                               [0.820]            [0.944]           [0.962]           [0.952]           [0.850]       [0.654]        [0.583]          [0.587]

GDPPC_gr * developed 2                         -3.518             -3.455            -3.435            -1.683            -0.236        0.596          0.593            1.985
                                               [0.564]            [0.580]           [0.582]           [0.790]           [0.968]       [0.921]        [0.921]          [0.743]

GDPPC_gr * less_developed 2                    18.716**           21.036***         21.121***         22.715***         19.370***     19.525***      19.559***        20.222***
                                               [0.010]            [0.008]           [0.008]           [0.005]           [0.000]       [0.000]        [0.001]          [0.000]

PARTY 3                                        0.000              2.062***          2.062***          0.000             0.000         1.887***       1.823***         0.000
                                               0.000              [0.001]           [0.001]           0.000             0.000         [0.000]        [0.000]          0.000

PARTY * majoritarian 3                         0.000              0.000             0.000             2.337***          0.000         0.000          0.000            2.091***
                                               0.000              0.000             0.000             [0.000]           0.000         0.000          0.000            [0.000]

PARTY * proportional 3                         0.000              0.000             0.000             1.265*            0.000         0.000          0.000            1.344**
                                               0.000              0.000             0.000             [0.087]           0.000         0.000          0.000            [0.019]

VOTES 4                                        0.000              1.583**           0.000             1.362*            0.000         1.477***       0.000            1.368***
                                               0.000              [0.035]           0.000             [0.073]           0.000         [0.004]        0.000            [0.008]

VOTES_R2 5                                     0.000              0.000             1.621**           0.000             0.000         0.000          1.476***         0.000
                                               0.000              0.000             [0.039]           0.000             0.000         0.000          [0.005]          0.000

D_R2 6                                         0.000              0.000             -0.341            0.000             0.000         0.000          -0.562           0.000
                                               0.000              0.000             [0.521]           0.000             0.000         0.000          [0.140]          0.000

Developed Countries                            1.045***           1.150***          1.148***          1.349***          0.920***      0.863***       0.835***         0.976***
                                               [0.003]            [0.002]           [0.003]           [0.001]           [0.001]       [0.003]        [0.005]          [0.001]

New Democracies                                0.291              0.393             0.391             0.453*            0.099         0.198          0.193            0.227
                                               [0.251]            [0.147]           [0.150]           [0.099]           [0.618]       [0.346]        [0.358]          [0.282]

Constant                                       -0.873***          -1.835***         -1.834***         -1.840***         -0.926***     -1.678***      -1.625***        -1.670***
                                               [0.003]            [0.000]           [0.000]           [0.000]           [0.000]       [0.000]        [0.000]          [0.000]

Pseudo R2                                      0.083              0.119             0.119             0.132             0.083         0.119          0.119            0.132
Akaike's criteria                              320.55             312.49            314.68            310.24            428.15        414.15         415.86           413.46
Schwartz's criteria                            351.81             350.68            356.35            351.91            462.34        455.94         461.45           459.05
Observations                                   238                238               238               238               330           330            330              330

1
  For variables definitions see Appendix I. The figures in the table are probit coefficients and the figures in the parantheses are P-values. An asterisk (*) indicates multiplication
by the binary variable that follows. developed - A binary variable with a value of 1 for developed countries,less_developed - A binary variable with a value of 1 for less
developed countries.
2
  BALCH_term - The change in the ratio of the government deficit to GDP in the two years preceding the election year, relative to the two previous years.BALCH_ey -The
change in the government deficit ratio to GDP In the election year, compared to the previous year.GDPPC_gr - The average growth rate of real per-capita GDP during the
leader's current term.
3
    PARTY - The percent of seats in the parliament held by the leader's party, receives the value 0 in a presidential system.
4
    VOTES - The percent of the votes received by a leader in a presidential system in the first round of the previous elections.
5
    VOTES_R2 - The percent of the votes received by a leader in a presidential system in the last round of the previous elections.
6
    D_R2 - A binary variable receiving the value 1 for a leader in a presidential system, that had to run in more then one round in the previous elections.
* - Significant at the 10 percent level; ** - Significant at the 5 percent level; *** - Significant at the 1 percent level.
                                                                                                            1
Table 16: Additional Effects of the Inflation Rate on the Probability of Reelection

                                              Narrow Sample                                                           Expanded Sample
Dependent variable: REELECT
                                                (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)         (6)              (7)              (8)
BALCH_term * developed 2                        12.026**          9.889*            12.070**          11.666**          7.529*      5.883            7.260            6.991
                                                [0.021]           [0.065]           [0.021]           [0.028]           [0.098]     [0.207]          [0.112]          [0.129]

BALCH_term * less_developed 2                   11.166            5.482             5.791             5.779             9.147*      8.071            8.317            8.543*
                                                [0.142]           [0.501]           [0.476]           [0.479]           [0.060]     [0.106]          [0.104]          [0.096]

BALCH_ey * developed 2                          20.575***         17.131**          24.374***         21.562***         17.714***   15.097**         20.594***        18.424***
                                                [0.004]           [0.027]           [0.001]           [0.004]           [0.008]     [0.034]          [0.002]          [0.007]

BALCH_ey * less_developed 2                     -3.606            1.660             0.825             1.456             -0.590      4.171            3.717            3.830
                                                [0.598]           [0.853]           [0.926]           [0.870]           [0.911]     [0.512]          [0.556]          [0.546]

GDPPC_gr * developed 2                          0.714             3.292             3.119             2.790             4.462       7.136            7.230            6.873
                                                [0.916]           [0.634]           [0.651]           [0.688]           [0.489]     [0.278]          [0.272]          [0.298]

GDPPC_gr * less_developed 2                     22.999***         23.973***         21.754***         22.536***         21.125***   19.563***        19.774***        19.485***
                                                [0.001]           [0.004]           [0.007]           [0.006]           [0.000]     [0.001]          [0.001]          [0.001]

INF_ey * Developed 3                            0.000             -7.085***         0.000             0.000             0.000       -5.889**         0.000            0.000
                                                0.000             [0.005]           0.000             0.000             0.000       [0.012]          0.000            0.000

INF_ey * Less_Developed 3                       0.000             0.844             0.000             0.000             0.000       -0.188           0.000            0.000
                                                0.000             [0.547]           0.000             0.000             0.000       [0.835]          0.000            0.000

INFCH_ey * Developed 4                          -7.804*           -6.221            -6.831*           -9.606**          -8.148**    -7.027*          -7.546**         -9.949**
                                                [0.059]           [0.129]           [0.067]           [0.031]           [0.043]     [0.075]          [0.040]          [0.021]

INFCH_ey * Less_Developed 4                     3.471             0.000             1.880             2.177             0.587       0.000            0.193            0.352
                                                [0.231]           0.000             [0.519]           [0.462]           [0.542]     0.000            [0.832]          [0.713]

Average_INF * Developed 5                       -2.100*           0.000             0.000             -2.406**          -1.566      0.000            0.000            -1.950*
                                                [0.068]           0.000             0.000             [0.045]           [0.159]     0.000            0.000            [0.090]

Average_INF * Less_Developed 5                  -0.301            0.000             0.000             0.213             -0.582      0.000            0.000            -0.355
                                                [0.678]           0.000             0.000             [0.783]           [0.316]     0.000            0.000            [0.560]

PARTY 6                                         0.000             2.146***          1.803***          1.998***          0.000       1.855***         1.716***         1.795***
                                                0.000             [0.002]           [0.006]           [0.003]           0.000       [0.000]          [0.000]          [0.000]

VOTES 7                                         0.000             1.609**           1.414*            1.453*            0.000       1.490***         1.414***         1.465***
                                                0.000             [0.039]           [0.064]           [0.059]           0.000       [0.004]          [0.007]          [0.005]

Developed Countries                             1.364***          1.757***          1.048***          1.353***          0.969***    1.092***         0.716**          0.836**
                                                [0.000]           [0.000]           [0.008]           [0.002]           [0.002]     [0.004]          [0.020]          [0.014]

New Democracies                                 0.725***          0.648**           0.444             0.627**           0.369*      0.315            0.199            0.310
                                                [0.006]           [0.028]           [0.113]           [0.039]           [0.065]     [0.153]          [0.351]          [0.166]

Majoritarian Electoral System                   0.499**           0.485**           0.420*            0.435*            0.413**     0.317*           0.314*           0.291
                                                [0.015]           [0.032]           [0.056]           [0.053]           [0.016]     [0.095]          [0.091]          [0.125]
Constant                                        -1.279***         -2.340***         -1.895***         -2.111***         -1.096***   -1.798***        -1.716***        -1.725***
                                                [0.000]           [0.000]           [0.000]           [0.000]           [0.000]     [0.000]          [0.000]          [0.000]
Pseudo R2                                       0.132             0.167             0.142             0.156             0.116       0.157            0.142            0.149
Akaike's criteria                               334.90            304.94            310.95            310.55            446.54      408.26           412.85           413.54
Schwartz's criteria                             384.48            357.02            359.57            366.11            500.43      465.25           466.04           474.33
Observations                                    255               238               238               238               347         330              330              330

1
  For variables definitions see Appendix I. The figures in the table are probit coefficients and the figures in the parantheses are P-values. An asterisk (*) indicates multiplication
by the binary variable that follows. developed - A binary variable with a value of 1 for developed countries,less_developed - A binary variable with a value of 1 for less
developed countries.
2
  BALCH_term - The change in the ratio of the government deficit to GDP in the two years preceding the election year, relative to the two previous years.BALCH_ey -The
change in the government deficit ratio to GDP In the election year, compared to the previous year.GDPPC_gr - The average growth rate of real per-capita GDP during the
leader's current term.
3
    INF_ey - The inflation rate in the election year.
4
    INFCH_ey - The increase in the inflation rate from the year preceding the election year to the election year.
5
    Average_INF - The average rate of inflation rate during the leader's current term.
6
    PARTY - The percent of seats in the parliament held by the leader's party, receives the value 0 in a presidential system.
7
    VOTES - The percent of the votes received by a leader in a presidential system in the first round of the previous elections.
* - Significant at the 10 percent level; ** - Significant at the 5 percent level; *** - Significant at the 1 percent level.
                                                                                                                                   1
Table 17: Separate Effects of Global and Domestic Induced Growth on the Probability of Reelection

                                              Narrow Sample                                                           Expanded Sample
Dependent variable: REELECT
                                                (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)            (6)           (7)              (8)
BALCH_term * developed 2                        11.913**          9.670*            11.812**          11.478**          7.432          5.766         7.110            6.876
                                                [0.023]           [0.073]           [0.025]           [0.031]           [0.103]        [0.217]       [0.121]          [0.137]

BALCH_term * less_developed 2                   10.848            5.119             5.465             5.752             8.726*         8.458*        8.659*           8.689*
                                                [0.151]           [0.529]           [0.502]           [0.479]           [0.072]        [0.092]       [0.092]          [0.090]

BALCH_ey * developed 2                          20.280***         16.535**          23.577***         20.995***         17.387***      14.696**      19.981***        17.998***
                                                [0.005]           [0.033]           [0.001]           [0.005]           [0.009]        [0.039]       [0.003]          [0.009]

BALCH_ey * less_developed 2                     -2.731            0.977             0.203             0.645             -0.803         3.762         3.341            3.409
                                                [0.701]           [0.914]           [0.982]           [0.943]           [0.881]        [0.556]       [0.599]          [0.592]

GLOBAL_gr * Developed 3                         6.604             15.470            16.369            13.760            13.148         18.983        20.890           18.744
                                                [0.703]           [0.391]           [0.356]           [0.442]           [0.441]        [0.281]       [0.230]          [0.285]

GLOBAL_gr * Less_Developed 3                    29.389            -31.595           -26.583           -25.313           0.143          -18.249       -17.147          -17.299
                                                [0.654]           [0.684]           [0.733]           [0.746]           [0.995]        [0.476]       [0.501]          [0.498]

DOMESTIC_gr * developed 3                       0.059             2.084             1.700             1.544             3.771          6.059         5.900            5.889
                                                [0.993]           [0.772]           [0.813]           [0.831]           [0.573]        [0.374]       [0.388]          [0.390]

DOMESTIC_gr * less_developed 3                  23.008***         24.662***         22.314***         22.899***         21.909***      20.525***     20.699***        20.929***
                                                [0.001]           [0.003]           [0.006]           [0.005]           [0.000]        [0.001]       [0.000]          [0.000]

INF_ey * Developed 4                            0.000             -7.043***         0.000             0.000             0.000          -5.830**      0.000            0.000
                                                0.000             [0.006]           0.000             0.000             0.000          [0.013]       0.000            0.000

INF_ey * Less_Developed 4                       0.000             0.883             0.000             0.000             0.000          -0.211        0.000            0.000
                                                0.000             [0.530]           0.000             0.000             0.000          [0.816]       0.000            0.000

INFCH_ey * Developed 5                          -7.702*           -6.305            -6.808*           -9.517**          -8.119**       -7.117*       -7.554**         -10.003**
                                                [0.062]           [0.124]           [0.068]           [0.032]           [0.043]        [0.071]       [0.040]          [0.021]

INFCH_ey * Less_Developed 5                     3.654             0.000             1.853             2.039             0.396          0.000         0.179            0.197
                                                [0.204]           0.000             [0.529]           [0.491]           [0.662]        0.000         [0.845]          [0.829]

Average_INF * Developed 6                       -2.049*           0.000             0.000             -2.368**          -1.492         0.000         0.000            -1.884
                                                [0.075]           0.000             0.000             [0.049]           [0.181]        0.000         0.000            [0.104]

PARTY 7                                         0.000             2.242***          1.895***          2.049***          0.000          1.890***      1.756***         1.843***
                                                0.000             [0.001]           [0.004]           [0.003]           0.000          [0.000]       [0.000]          [0.000]

VOTES 8                                         0.000             1.699**           1.509*            1.534*            0.000          1.497***      1.431***         1.448***
                                                0.000             [0.034]           [0.053]           [0.051]           0.000          [0.005]       [0.007]          [0.006]

Developed Countries                             1.906             0.772             0.146             0.499             0.859          0.430         0.040            0.259
                                                [0.226]           [0.676]           [0.937]           [0.787]           [0.197]        [0.575]       [0.955]          [0.725]

New Democracies                                 0.715***          0.660**           0.457             0.645**           0.349*         0.323         0.210            0.299
                                                [0.006]           [0.026]           [0.104]           [0.031]           [0.079]        [0.143]       [0.327]          [0.178]

Majoritarian Electoral System                   0.509**           0.528**           0.459**           0.460**           0.460***       0.362*        0.361*           0.352*
                                                [0.014]           [0.025]           [0.044]           [0.046]           [0.008]        [0.064]       [0.060]          [0.068]
Constant                                        -1.978            -1.724            -1.382            -1.571            -1.222***      -1.467**      -1.415**         -1.486**
                                                [0.183]           [0.331]           [0.431]           [0.374]           [0.009]        [0.018]       [0.015]          [0.011]
Pseudo R2                                       0.132             0.169             0.144             0.157             0.115          0.159         0.145            0.151
Akaike's criteria                               336.73            308.27            314.21            312.10            449.28         411.26        415.71           414.93
Schwartz's criteria                             389.85            367.30            369.76            371.12            507.02         475.84        476.50           479.51
Observations                                    255               238               238               238               347            330           330              330

1
  For variables definitions see Appendix I. The figures in the table are probit coefficients and the figures in the parantheses are P-values. An asterisk (*) indicates multiplication
by the binary variable that follows. developed - A binary variable with a value of 1 for developed countries,less_developed - A binary variable with a value of 1 for less
developed countries.
2
  BALCH_term - The change in the ratio of the government deficit to GDP in the two years preceding the election year, relative to the two previous years.BALCH_ey -The
change in the government deficit ratio to GDP In the election year, compared to the previous year.
3
  GLOBAL_gr - The predicted growth rate of the country during the leeader's term in office based on a regression of the growth rates on the product of global growth and the
share of exports in the country's GDP. DOMESTIC_gr - The difference between GDPPC_gr and GLOBAL_gr.
4
    INF_ey - The inflation rate in the election year.
5
    INFCH_ey - The increase in the inflation rate from the year preceding the election year to the election year.
6
    Average_INF - The average rate of inflation rate during the leader's current term.
7
    PARTY - The percent of seats in the parliament held by the leader's party, receives the value 0 in a presidential system.
8
    VOTES - The percent of the votes received by a leader in a presidential system in the first round of the previous elections.
* - Significant at the 10 percent level; ** - Significant at the 5 percent level; *** - Significant at the 1 percent level.
Table 18: Separate Effects of Revenue and Expenditure on the Probability of Reelection 1

                                               Narrow Sample                                                           Expanded Sample
Dependent variable: REELECT
                                                 (1)              (2)                (3)               (4)               (5)         (6)             (7)               (8)
REVCH_term * developed 2                         11.083**         8.894              11.084**          10.738*           6.483       4.726           6.182             5.903
                                                 [0.049]          [0.127]            [0.048]           [0.060]           [0.193]     [0.357]         [0.213]           [0.240]

REVCH_term * less_developed 2                    11.325           6.919              6.076             6.453             12.815*     10.272          10.468            10.981
                                                 [0.235]          [0.488]            [0.542]           [0.516]           [0.069]     [0.156]         [0.153]           [0.139]

EXPCH_term * developed 2                         -10.809**        -8.613             -11.508**         -10.966**         -6.293      -4.574          -6.637            -6.188
                                                 [0.048]          [0.128]            [0.034]           [0.047]           [0.187]     [0.352]         [0.162]           [0.198]

EXPCH_term * less_developed 2                    -9.865           -4.942             -5.239            -5.086            -8.883*     -7.872          -8.199            -8.439
                                                 [0.211]          [0.551]            [0.529]           [0.544]           [0.074]     [0.118]         [0.113]           [0.103]

REVCH_ey * developed 2                           33.346***        30.668***          33.762***         32.869***         29.863***   28.176***       29.596***         29.076***
                                                 [0.002]          [0.007]            [0.002]           [0.004]           [0.003]     [0.007]         [0.004]           [0.005]

REVCH_ey * less_developed 2                      5.445            6.538              5.925             7.016             2.976       5.891           5.489             5.775
                                                 [0.548]          [0.533]            [0.571]           [0.507]           [0.658]     [0.437]         [0.468]           [0.448]

EXPCH_ey * developed 2                           -19.707***       -14.926*           -24.200***        -20.865***        -16.570**   -12.730*        -20.110***        -17.433**
                                                 [0.008]          [0.069]            [0.001]           [0.006]           [0.016]     [0.093]         [0.004]           [0.014]

EXPCH_ey * less_developed 2                      7.655            1.053              2.507             2.068             2.636       -2.993          -2.425            -2.438
                                                 [0.311]          [0.913]            [0.795]           [0.832]           [0.652]     [0.673]         [0.731]           [0.731]

GDPPC_gr * developed 2                           -0.034           2.584              2.326             1.990             3.606       6.347           6.463             6.067
                                                 [0.996]          [0.719]            [0.742]           [0.781]           [0.587]     [0.350]         [0.337]           [0.371]

GDPPC_gr * less_developed 2                      21.591***        23.518***          20.807**          21.662***         21.197***   19.625***       19.869***         19.577***
                                                 [0.003]          [0.005]            [0.011]           [0.009]           [0.000]     [0.001]         [0.001]           [0.001]

INF_ey * Developed 3                             0.000            -8.088***          0.000             0.000             0.000       -6.906***       0.000             0.000
                                                 0.000            [0.002]            0.000             0.000             0.000       [0.005]         0.000             0.000

INF_ey * Less_Developed 3                        0.000            0.978              0.000             0.000             0.000       -0.175          0.000             0.000
                                                 0.000            [0.490]            0.000             0.000             0.000       [0.846]         0.000             0.000

INFCH_ey * Developed 4                           -8.361**         -6.384             -6.965*           -10.179**         -8.596**    -7.166*         -7.655**          -10.464**
                                                 [0.045]          [0.116]            [0.062]           [0.023]           [0.034]     [0.067]         [0.036]           [0.016]

INFCH_ey * Less_Developed 4                      4.445            0.000              2.587             2.969             0.706       0.000           0.261             0.437
                                                 [0.141]          0.000              [0.399]           [0.342]           [0.462]     0.000           [0.774]           [0.649]

Average_INF * Developed 5                        -2.322**         0.000              0.000             -2.579**          -1.790      0.000           0.000             -2.132*
                                                 [0.043]          0.000              0.000             [0.030]           [0.106]     0.000           0.000             [0.063]

Average_INF * Less_Developed 5                   -0.216           0.000              0.000             0.250             -0.614      0.000           0.000             -0.377
                                                 [0.770]          0.000              0.000             [0.750]           [0.293]     0.000           0.000             [0.537]

PARTY 6                                          0.000            2.140***           1.811***          2.012***          0.000       1.846***        1.708***          1.791***
                                                 0.000            [0.002]            [0.005]           [0.003]           0.000       [0.000]         [0.000]           [0.000]

VOTES 7                                          0.000            1.557**            1.426*            1.451*            0.000       1.456***        1.397***          1.444***
                                                 0.000            [0.045]            [0.061]           [0.059]           0.000       [0.005]         [0.007]           [0.006]

Developed Countries                              1.314***         1.787***           0.995**           1.317***          0.994***    1.156***        0.727**           0.857**
                                                 [0.001]          [0.000]            [0.013]           [0.003]           [0.002]     [0.003]         [0.020]           [0.013]

New Democracies                                  0.743***         0.663**            0.442             0.641**           0.373*      0.323           0.194             0.316
                                                 [0.005]          [0.025]            [0.116]           [0.036]           [0.064]     [0.144]         [0.366]           [0.160]

Majoritarian Electoral System                    0.522**          0.479**            0.414*            0.429*            0.415**     0.310           0.310*            0.284
                                                 [0.013]          [0.036]            [0.062]           [0.059]           [0.017]     [0.105]         [0.099]           [0.137]
Constant                                         -1.216***        -2.311***          -1.833***         -2.060***         -1.100***   -1.797***       -1.710***         -1.720***
                                                 [0.000]          [0.000]            [0.000]           [0.000]           [0.000]     [0.000]         [0.000]           [0.000]
Pseudo R2                                        0.147            0.178              0.149             0.164             0.125       0.164           0.146             0.154
Akaike's criteria                                337.50           309.12             316.81            315.66            450.53      412.84          419.27            419.30
Schwartz's criteria                              401.25           375.10             379.31            385.10            519.82      485.03          487.66            495.28
Observations                                     255              238                238               238               347         330             330               330

1
 For variables definitions see Appendix I. The figures in the table are probit coefficients and the figures in the parantheses are P-values. An asterisk (*) indicates multiplication
by the binary variable that follows. developed - A binary variable with a value of 1 for developed countries, less_developed - A binary variable with a value of 1 for less
developed countries.
2
 REVCH_term - The change in the ratio of the government revenue to GDP in the two years preceding the election year, relative to the two previous years.EXPCH_term - The
change in the ratio of the government expenditure to GDP in the two years preceding the election year, relative to the two previous years. REVCH_ey -The change in the
government revenue ratio to GDP In the election year, compared to the previous year. EXPCH_ey -The change in the government expenditure ratio to GDP In the election
year, compared to the previous year. GDPPC_gr - The average growth rate of real per-capita GDP during the leader's current term.
3
    INF_ey - The inflation rate in the election year.
4
    INFCH_ey - The increase in the inflation rate from the year preceding the election year to the election year.
5
    Average_INF - The average rate of inflation rate during the leader's current term.
6
    PARTY - The percent of seats in the parliament held by the leader's party, receives the value 0 in a presidential system.
7
    VOTES - The percent of the votes received by a leader in a presidential system in the first round of the previous elections.
* - Significant at the 10 percent level; ** - Significant at the 5 percent level; *** - Significant at the 1 percent level.
