                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               CAN THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY AFFORD TO NEGLECT
                       THE NEED FOR MORE ACCOUNTABLE
                          SAFETY-NET MANAGEMENT?

                                         Edward J. Kane

                                       Working Paper 11860
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w11860


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2005




Earlier versions of this paper were presented at the following conferences: XXXV Meeting of the
European Working Group on Financial Modeling, University of Brescia, Italy, Johns Hopkins
University School of Advanced International Studies, Bologna Center, Bologna, Italy, and
Presidential Address, International Atlantic Economic Society, New York, NY. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2005 by Edward J. Kane.       All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Can the European Community Afford to Neglect the Need for More Accountable Safety-Net
Management?
Edward J. Kane
NBER Working Paper No. 11860
December 2005
JEL No. G21, G28, P51

                                          ABSTRACT

As financial institutions and markets transact more and more cross-border business, gaps and flaws
in national safety nets become more consequential. Because citizens of host (home) countries may
be made to pay for mistakes made in the home (host) country, Basel's lead-regulator paradigm
violates the principle of democratic accountability. Because important differences exist in
policymaking authority, instruments, and goals, banking supervisors need to improve their ability
to monitor and mitigate the consequences of defects in one another's performance. A straightforward
way to enhance both capacities would be to establish opportunities for public trading in debt
obligations and reinsurance derivatives issued by country-level deposit-insurance entities.

Edward J. Kane
Department of Finance
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02458
and NBER
edward.kane@bc.edu
                                                                                            December 5, 2005



CAN THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY AFFORD TO RESIST THE NEED FOR MORE ACCOUNTABLE SAFETY-
                              NET MANAGEMENT?∗
                                Edward J. Kane
                                 Boston College


        Financial- institution supervision combines a capacity to observe fluctuations in balance-

sheet values (“vision”) with a capacity to influence managerial actions (“control”) and an

incentive system that governs the pursuit and exercise of these capacities. Even when portfolios

and attendant risks are concentrated within a single country, it is difficult to establish a

combination of adequate oversight of institutional balance sheets, adequate authority to intervene

in timely fashion, and bureaucratic incentives to detect and resolve insolvent institutions in ways

that adequately protect taxpayer interests. As a result, individual countries solve this contracting

problem in different ways.

        Sincere efforts to integrate the financial markets of individual countries must also

integrate national safety nets. Safety nets are instruments for preventing and resolving financial

crises. Crisis prevention and crisis management entail a right to take over insolvent financial

institutions. Efforts to assess the viability of troubled institutions and to assign fair values to

stakeholder claims against failing firms are rife with incentive conflict.

        As European institutions and markets book more and more cross-border business, the

potential for conflict grows. This is because some or all of the bill for one country’s regulatory

mistakes or gambles can be presented to citizens of other countries. Gaps in the jurisdiction of

national regulators and supervisors can break the link between efforts to control bank and

nonbank risk-taking and the allocation of losses that taxpayers might accrue in financial-

institution failures.

∗
 This paper extends and refocuses analysis first presented in Kane (2003) and (2005). The author wishes to thank
Richard C. Aspinwall, Bill Bergman, and Mark Flannery for helpful criticisms of an earlier draft.


                                                        2
                                                                                    December 5, 2005


               To keep the discussion concrete, this paper focuses on potential cross-country

abuse of nation-based systems of explicit deposit insurance. However, it should be understood

that this is merely the tip of a global safety- net iceberg and that past abuses of the U.S. safety net

have exploited accountability breakdowns that extend de facto forms of safety-net support for

institutions and instruments that reach far beyond the limits of de jure coverages. The major

problem of modern financial regulation is to restore economic logic to the de jure and de facto

coverage of country safety nets. In the U.S., claims on banks that are not deposits and claims on

instutions that are not banks (e.g., government-sponsored enterprises, mutual funds, and even

hedge funds) have managed to extract de facto safety- net support.

       The social norms on which the regulatory systems of European countries are built

typically weaken regulators’ capacity and incentives to intervene strongly and promptly at

systemically important banks. Differences in these norms make the effort to coordinate vision,

control, and incentives across countries an especially thorny problem. Cross-border activity

expands opportunities for insolvent banks (and incentive-conflicted government officials) to hide

losses and concentrations in risk exposure from supervisors in home and /or host countries. To

lessen this danger, information-sharing arrangements between national regulatory bodies have

been expand ing as well, but unfortunately at a much slower pace (Dermine, 2003; Garcia and

Nieto, 2005; Schoenmaker and Osterloo, 2004; Schüler, 2003).

       But being able to monitor bank risk exposures is only part of the cross-border

coordination problem. Differences in regulatory authority, instruments, and goals must also be

reconciled and imbedded into a cross-border architecture of democratic accountability. Cross-

border accountability and emergency tax-collecting capacity mean that whoever manages a

multinational safety net must be accountable to the taxpayers of whatever countries supply the




                                                   3
                                                                                  December 5, 2005


risk capital safety-net managers can call upon to bail out insolvent institutions in catastrophic

circumstances. Because nation-based regulators focus primarily on effects that fall on their own

citizens, the costs of banking insolvency in one country could easily spill over onto the accounts

of taxpayers in partner countries (Vives, 2001). Moreover, gaps in information flows and

jurisdiction delay resolution activity and increase the effective burdens of proof that individual-

country supervisors must meet before they can take needed loss-control actions.

        In the EU, cross-country supervision does not entail cross-country insurance. For this

reason, the lead-regulator model -- in which home-country regulators examine multinational

conglomerates and host-country regulators rely on the results – ignores the principle of

democratic accountability. To perform the duties they owe their citizens, supervisors in different

countries must be able both to monitor and to discipline one another’s supervisory and regulatory

activity.

        This paper begins by explaining why it is hard to resist, at least as a working hypothesis,

the proposition that for the foreseeable future only painful crisis experience—and not the logical

force of abstract economic argument—could convince national authorities to cede sufficient tax

and regulatory authority to Brussels to permit the construction of an incentive-compatible

PanEuropean crisis-prevention and crisis- management agency. The existence of impediments to

efficient contracting implies that national banking supervisors would be wise to improve their

ability at least to monitor and to respond to differences in the quality of one another’s work. The

paper goes on to argue that this could be accomplished by asking individual-country

governments and the multinational bodies to encourage all countries to issue tradable country-

level deposit- insurance agency debt and reinsurance contracts.




                                                  4
                                                                                 December 5, 2005


I. Patterns of Jurisdictional Conflict in U.S. History

       Regulation is re-regulation. Both within and across countries, regulatory arrangements

evolve in a dialectical fashion (Kane, 1981). Reforms almost never obliterate pre-existing

systems; they amend them at the margin either to lighten perceived burdens or to narrow

disruptive loopholes.

       The difficulty of moving from a system of independent national regulators to one in

which cross-jurisdictional interdependence is efficiently and fairly recognized increases

nonlinearly with the number of jurisdictions that must be unified. The antagonism observed

between proponents of national and supranational banking supervision in Europe today has many

parallels in U.S. history. The United States has experienced more than 200 years of conflict

between proponents of state and cross-state (i.e., federal) supervision of its banking system.

Initially, state supervisors had the upper hand and markedly extended their power when President

Andrew Jackson refused to renew the charter of the Second Bank of the United States in 1836.

For the next 25 years, supervisory authority over U.S. banks was exercised wholly by the

individual states. However, once a national chartering authority was re-established, jurisdiction

began to move slowly and inexorably from the periphery toward the center. The “single

passport”—which enables institutions chartered by any one member country both to relocate

their headquarters and to operate through branch offices throughout the EU—promises to trigger

a similarly slow jurisdictional adjustment.

       In any union, the dialectical struggle between joint and individual interests is endless.

Increased centralization does not and cannot eliminate the conflicts generated at the periphery. It

merely confronts and resolves the conflicts in a different way (Eisenbeis and Wall, 2004). This

is why geographic limits on the scope of U.S. banking institutions and federal regulatory




                                                 5
                                                                                  December 5, 2005


jurisdiction have yet to attain a stationary equilibrium. Each successive round of adjustment

generates a new round of regulation- induced substitute institutional forms and a new set of

safety- net stresses.

        In debating whether to increase or decrease the degree of centralization in any regulatory

system, the opposing sides lay claim to different benefits and routinely exaggerate the costs of

the opposing approach. Proponents of decentralization (i.e., states rights) extol the virtues of

subsidiarization and regulatory competition and trivialize the burdens of bureaucratic

duplication. On the other side, proponents of centralization envision outsized benefits from

harmonizing and streamlining regulator-bank interfaces and avoiding regulatory duplication,

while demonizing regulatory competition as a destructive “race to the bottom.”

        This dialectical tension sustains a political and economic competition for jurisdiction

within and across countries. Jurisdictional competition creates and holds open regulatory gaps

and loopholes that banks and competing financial institutions repeatedly turn to their advantage.

The regional structure of the Federal Reserve System, the voluntary character of System

membership for state-chartered banks, and the preservation of individual-state authority to

charter, examine, and close state- licensed institutions underscore the permanence of this

competition.

        Differences in disciplinary powers and enforcement schemes open “loophole”

opportunities for regulatory arbitrage and regulated institutions’ lobbying activity encourages

jurisdictional competition that leads to incentive-conflicted politicians and regulators to tolerate

or widen these loopholes. To offset these measures, it is necessary for taxpayers to be able to

monitor the performance of top regulators and to hold them accountable for the quality of their

work.




                                                  6
                                                                                   December 5, 2005


         As long as defects in accountability allow officials to shift losses to taxpayers in ways

that in the short run are virtually invisible to outsiders, government- financed deposit-insurance

schemes are particularly vulnerable to political pressure to subsidize enterprises whose capital is

too small for the risks they have assumed (Demirgüç and Kane, 2003). In his study of 14 state-

level deposit- insurance experiments that preceded the creation of federal deposit insurance,

Calomiris (1990, 1992a and b) makes it clear that the only three schemes that forbearance

pressures did not bankrupt were ones that were privately managed and strongly incentivized to

enforce the principle of unlimited mutual liability. More recently, when accelerating inflation

drove interest rates to stratospheric levels during the 1970s and 1980s, jurisdictional competition

and weaknesses in accountability for deposit- insurance losses led federal officials (and their

counterparts in several states) to suppress critical information, grant regulatory forbearances, and

extend new risk-taking opportunities to savings institutions and insolvent large banks (Kane,

1989). Interestingly, in the face of the same economic shocks, differently incentivized managers

of the federal credit-union insurance system protected taxpayers from losses by enforcing the

unlimited mutual liability for losses that had been built into their scheme (Kane and Hendershott,

1996).



II. Country-Specific Regulatory Cultures and the Difficulty of Coordinating Them

         Government chartering and supervision of banks and payments systems are near-

universal phenomena. Regulatory activities may be described as efforts by a trusted Third Party

to intervene in the shaping, pricing, and delivery of banking products in one of three ways: by

rule- making (e.g., capital requirements); by monitoring and enforcement; or by identifying and

resolving insolvencies (i.e., shortages in bank-contributed net worth).




                                                   7
                                                                                 December 5, 2005


       The 1975 Basel Concordat and subsequent elaborations assign responsibility for

consolidated supervision of multinational banking organizations to their home countries, but call

for contact and cooperation between host and parent supervisory authorities. In the absence of

harmonizing dialogue and cooperation, contractual arrangements tie banking regulators in each

country to strictly domestic interests. Existing channels of democratic accountability encourage

them to design and operate regulatory enterprises to maximize the politically weighted welfare of

their fellow citizens. To enforce a home-country regulator’s concern for the welfare of host

countries in crisis circumstances, it must be made answerable to host-country citizens.

       In banking, depositors and other outside stakeholders may be exposed to loss from fraud,

leverage, or earnings volatility without being adequately informed or compensated for the risks

entailed. To reduce their exposure to opportunistic behavior, a bank’s counterpartie s typically:

(1) require the bank to bond itself in various ways to behave honestly and fairly; (2) negotiate a

deterrent right to punish offensive behavior; and (3) monitor information on the bank’s ongoing

performance and condition. Bonding, policing, and monitoring are not costless. The costs vary

inversely with the transparency (T) provided by the accounting and disclosure regime under

which the bank operates. But policing costs are also a function of outside stakeholders’ ability to

appreciate the implications of the information they receive and their ability to coordinate

deterrent and punitive responses with others.

       A principal goal of prudential regulation is to protect society from weaknesses in self-

discipline and market discipline that might otherwise encourage excessive risk-taking and capital

shortages at individual banks. Unconflicted policymakers would seek to remedy weaknesses in

transparency, bank bonding and depositor deterrency by developing policies for preventing,

detecting, and resolving bank insolvencies that would maximize social welfare. Mishan (1969)




                                                 8
                                                                                  December 5, 2005


stipulates that optimal decisions in any policy endeavor produce outcomes that are

simultaneously Pareto-efficient and “distributionally preferred” (i.e., they help the representative

citizen and avoid antiegalitarian redistributions of income). Because crisis-prevention and

resolution policies redistribute wealth, economists need to adopt some version of the Mishan

criterion before they can fully assess the efficiency of coordinated efforts to prevent and resolve

bank insolvencies.

       As stewards of taxpayer resources, this criterion implies that financial regulators owe

four duties to the representative taxpayer:

       1. Vision (maintaining a capacity to recognize risk-taking and capital shortages in timely

       fashion);

       2. Prompt corrective action (being committed to control the value of implicit and explicit

       government guarantees);

       3. Least-cost resolution (efficiently curing insolvencies that corrective action fails to

       avert);

       4. Truth-telling (keeping taxpayers informed about the true opportunity costs of

       regulatory strategies).

       Gaps in vision and reporting obligations undermine the effectiveness of both insolvency

prevention and crisis resolution. They strengthen short-run political and careerist pressures that

tempt top supervisors and regulators to avoid harsh criticism by not closely enforcing economic

insolvency.

       It is, of course, easier to integrate the private banking markets of any group of countries

(i = 1, . . ., n) than to integrate their private and governmental systems of banking regulation.

Regulatory integration is complicated because, even if regulatory strategies and control




                                                  9
                                                                                  December 5, 2005


structures (Ri ) did not differ greatly between the countries, individual-country regulators are

responsible to different sets of taxpayers (Ti ) and applicable legislation makes private and

governmental regulatory officials accountable to their citizens in disparate contractual ways (C i).

       When third-party guarantees don’t exist or lose credibility, private markets force banks

known to be experiencing opportunity-cost losses to adjust their affairs promptly. Troubled

banks must do one or all of three things: shrink their footings, raise more capital, or pay higher

interest rates on their deposits and other debt.

       In monitoring, disciplining, and resolving banks, the incentives of government officials to

act promptly differ from those of private creditors in important ways. Officials cannot focus

only on the projected economic costs and benefits of the intervention; they must also estimate

outside political responses to their interventions. This is important because official interventions

usually generate more publicity than private ones. Savvy government regulators must be alert to

how even small interventions might damage their professional reputations and careers if their

policies greatly distress powerful parties.

       Although many commonalities of interest exist, governmental systems for setting and

enforcing financial rules are infested with incent ive conflict. Even within a country, major

conflicts exist between and among:

   1. Regulators and the firms they regulate;

   2. Particular regulators and other societal watchdogs;

   3. Regulators and the politicians to whom they must report;

   4. Taxpayers and the politicians and regulators they put in office.

       How a country traditionally approaches and resolves these conflicts is in part hard-wired

into its political and institutional structure. For example, while many EU countries supervise




                                                   10
                                                                                 December 5, 2005


banks separately from other financial institutions, some do not. A few European countries

(Austria, Denmark, Germany, Sweden, and the United Kingdom, in particular) have established

agencies that supervise bank and nonbank financial institutions in an integrated way; others have

to some degree integrated the oversight of at least their bank and securities sectors (Schüler,

2003).

         Every country relies on regulators and other professional watchdogs to bridge gaps in the

bonding, deterrent rights (deterrency), and transparency inherent in its private contracting

environment. Over time, the interaction of private and government watchdogs generates a

regulatory culture. A culture may be defined as customs, ideas, and attitudes that members of a

group share and transmit from generation to ge neration by systems of subtle and unsubtle

rewards and punishments. A regulatory culture limits the ways in which an uncooperative or

even unscrupulous individual bank can be monitored and disciplined. It comprises a matrix of

attitudes and beliefs about how regulators should act. These slowly changing attitudes and

beliefs often express a distrust of government power that traces back to abuses observed in a

possibly distant past when the country was occupied, colonized, or run by a one-party

government. The culture’s taboos and traditions define standards for the fair use of government

power. Behind these standards are higher-order social norms that underlie a nation’s political

and legal environments.

         The character of a country’s Regulatory Culture is spanned by six specific components:

   •     Legal authority and reporting obligations

   •     Formulation and promulgation of specific rules

   •     Technology of monitoring for violations & compliance

   •     Allowable penalties for material violations




                                                 11
                                                                                     December 5, 2005


   •   Duties of consultation: To guarantee fairness, regulated parties enjoy a right to

       procedural due process that specifies burdens of proof that regulators that must meet

       before levying specific penalties

   •   Regulatee rights to judicial review: To bond the fairness guarantee, penalized parties

       have access to inside and outside appeals procedures.

   In large part, the details of each component are shaped by:

           a. Recognition and response lags generated by the interaction of weakness in the

               transparency of the nation’s accounting system with bureaucratic incentives and

               statutory and bureaucratic checks and balances;

           b. Regulatory competition brought about by the entry of foreign or differently

               regulated institutions;

           c. Regulatory personnel’s exposure to influence activity from a discipline-resistant

               firm’s political clout, consultation rights, and appeal privileges;

           d. Social norms that protect fraudsters and bumblers against prompt regulatory

               discipline.

       Lobbying activity seeks to reshape the particular objectives that officials pursue and to

constrain the tradeoffs they make within limits set by a country’s regulatory culture. How the

particular policy strategies officials adopt actually work is determined by regulatees’ ability to

delay or stymie decisive intervention and to find and exploit circumventive loopholes. Some of

these loopholes involve the ability to relocate loss exposures that are more closely supervised by

the home country (or a particular host) to venues that monitor or discipline them less effectively.

       In the absence of cross-country understandings or agreements, it is reasonable to presume

that regulators in any individual country A would focus on the politically weighted welfare of its




                                                 12
                                                                                   December 5, 2005


own citizens. They would maximize the welfare function, WA(RA; C A ; RZ), with respect to the

instruments and authority conveyed to them by the regulatory culture of A, taking as given the

regulatory culture and systems in the vector of other union countries Z (RZ). Similarly,

authorities in each other country (Z1 , . . ., Zn ) would maximize WZi (RZi; C Z ; RX), taking RX (=

RA and other Rs) as given. It is convenient to label the solutions to these uncoordinated

maximizations as WA* and WZ* .

       Assuming that cross-country conflicts are roughly symmetric, it is sufficient to focus on

the effect of allowing regulators in A to influence RZ. The simplest case is to designate A as the

prudential regulator for all of the banks that operate in Z and to allow A to set a single set of

rules and procedures R Zi = RA= R for all i. We can label the solution that would emerge after

this “regulatory centralization” as WAC , where the C stands for “common.” Whenever the

common R set by A differs from one or both of the systems WA* and WZ* , the welfare of citizens

in particular countries change. In theory, the practical restriction that the centralized regulatory

regime must be the same in each country, but must respond to at least some distinctive features

of each financial environment in Z could mean that the centralized regulator might end up

reducing taxpayer welfare in all countries. Such possibilities are what make a common scheme

fiendishly hard both to negotiate in the first place and (until and unless a crisis emerges) only

slightly easier to renegotiate over time.



III. Similarities and Differences in EU Deposit-Insurance Systems

       EU deposit-insurance systems show three common features that—according to U.S.

experience and econometric cross-country research summarized in Demirgüç-Kunt, Kane, and




                                                  13
                                                                                 December 5, 2005


Laeven (2005)—undermine a country’s ability to control moral hazard: membership is not

compulsory; funding for payouts is publicly administered; and guarantees extend to interbank

deposits. Both individually and in the aggregate, these features reduce incentives for strong

institutions to help government supervisors to discipline risk exposures at weak or overly

aggressive banks.

       On the other hand, these systems differ in important ways: in age (i.e., seasoning), in

coverage levels, in the use of coinsurance provisions, in whether they cover balances held in

foreign-currency accounts, and in the use they make of private managers. An important

consequence of home-country supervision is that member countries have had few incentives to

examine and reconcile undesirable differences in the structure of their deposit- insurance systems.

       Table 1 shows how widely EU deposit- insurance systems vary in seasoning and in their

strategies for limiting their exposure to loss. Only about half of the countries impose

coinsurance obligations on depositors. Although an EU Directive establishes a minimum

coverage of 20,000 euros, member states are free to set higher levels of compensation. Variation

in the ratio of maximum coverage to per capita GDP (pcgdp) ranges from 40 percent in

Luxembourg to 480 percent in Italy. Variation in coverage appears even wider if we deflate

coverage limits by per capita deposits instead of pcgdp.

       Figure 1 expresses 2003 pcgdp in each EU member as a percentage of pcgdp in

Luxembourg. Across the EU, variations in individual features correlate -- albeit imperfectly --

with per capita GDP and also with various indices of political competitiveness, bureaucratic

quality, and government corruption. Per capita GDP also correlates loosely with the quality of a

country’s contracting environment (i.e., with the degree of transparency, bonding, and deterrency

found in private and government contracts). Where private contracting environments are strong




                                                14
                                                                                 December 5, 2005


or government accountability is weak, net marginal benefits from offering extensive government

guarantees are hard to achieve.

       With the recent entrance of transitional Eastern European countries into the EU, the

potential for multinational banking distress seems greater than it was in the relatively benign

1975-1997 period studied by Hutchinson (2002). In the event of a threatened regional crisis or

indeed of insolvency at any multinational bank, one would expect large depositors to work with

bank personnel to arbitrage cross-country differences in effective coverages. A large depositor

could increase statutory coverage for balances by spreading its aggregate claim against the

conglomerate banking organization across branches and locally incorporated subsidiaries in

different member countries. Recognizing that the likelihood of a government’s “topping up”

payouts beyond statutory coverages would grow with a country’s fiscal capacity, such a

depositor could further strengthen the collectability of its aggregate claim by relocating deposit

balances from branches and subsidiaries in countries with low tax-collection and debt capacities

and low coverage limits (such as Hungary) to countries with stronger tax-collection and debt

capacities and very high coverage limits (such as France and Italy).

       Unlike traditional deposit runs which simply remove funds from a troubled institution,

protective deposit rebooking could preserve the liquidity and risk-taking capacity of the

consolidated organization while generating capricious pressure on individual countries’ balance

of payments and deposit- insurance liabilities. Within the European Monetary Union, exchange-

rate adjustments could not occur, so that interbank loans and adjustments in income and

employment would have to perform the necessary equilibrations. However, for countries outside

the monetary union, an intrabank deposit run could also affect foreign-exchange rates, so that the

mix of currency, income, and employment adjustments would depend on whether and how the




                                                15
                                                                                  December 5, 2005


affected institution is able to borrow from foreign banks and how it elects to manage its resulting

exposure to currency risks.



IV. Regulatory Arbitrage and Regulatory Competition

       Within and across countries, the services performed by financial institutions and financial

safety nets are jointly determined. The size and distribution of the net social benefits or costs

produced by regulatory services vary substantially from country to country. This variation fuels

interactive process of regulatory arbitrage and regulatory competition (Kane, 1981). An

aggressive regulator can increase its budget and prestige by enhancing the quality and reliability

of important services its regulatees offer to customers. In turn, aggressive institutions can modify

the form and location of their services to extract taxpayer-financed net benefits from individual-

country safety nets.

       When the value of a deposit insurer’s implicit and explicit guarantees of client-

institutions obligations exceeds the fees and implicit costs the insurer imposes on them, its

system offers regulatory clients a net regulatory benefit. In the (seldom observed) reverse case,

the insurance system would generate a net burden. Regulatory arbitrage occurs when differences

in effective burdens and benefits induce institutions to adjust their organizational form to book

particular balance-sheet positions in jurisdictions that treat these categories of deal- making most

favorably. Because financial deals and services may be conceived and executed in locations

different from those in which profits and costs formally accrue, the simplest form of regulatory

arbitrage consists of introducing into a firm’s organization chart a “booking division” whose job

it is to restructure the institution’s deal- making contracts and services-delivery mechanisms so

that its revenues and costs are allocated across nations in an advantageous fashion.




                                                 16
                                                                                 December 5, 2005


       As a straightforward example, let’s suppose that country A levies semiannual deposit-

insurance premiums on deposit balances in banking offices located within its borders on March

31 and September 30, while premiums in Z are based on June 30 and December 31 amounts. On

each country’s assessment date, it would pay the booking division of every bank that accepted

deposits in both countries to shuffle at least some of the balances of its multinational customers

to offices in the other country.



       In most regulatory cultures, a multinational bank’s booking division imposes more

competitive discipline on country- level regulators than taxpayers can. A high-burden regulator

loses budget revenue, clients, bureaucratic rents, and prestige, but market forces can seldom

force a poorly performing regulator to shut down. Its continued existence is supported by

incentive defects in public-service contracting and information exchange between government

regulators and taxpayer-suppliers of their risk capital. At best, governments are prepared to shift

the functions of a poorly performing regulator into a new agency. Although losses generate

political and bureaucratic pressures on enfeebled regulators to rebuild their market share, the

curtailment of exit pressure lessens the incentive for incumbent politicians and regulators to

respond to regulatory arbitrage by increasing the efficiency of their system. They may attempt

instead—or as well—to form cross-country regulatory cartels and to curtail industry criticism

during their watch by offering client constituencies hard-to-observe increases in supervisory and

regulatory subsidies (see, for example, Hoshi, 2002). The more difficult it is for the press to

uncover and report the costs that responses of this kind impose on taxpayers, the longer it takes

disadvantaged parties to assemble enough lobbying counterpressure to hold regulators

accountable for these costs. This is why the speed and extent to which regulatory competition




                                                17
                                                                                  December 5, 2005


leads to better regulation on average varies with the quality of the performance reporting and

cultural norms a given regulatory culture entails.



V. Consolidating versus Trading Individual-Country Exposures

       Completely autonomous national deposit- insurance systems pose two problems of

coordination. The first comes from the difficulty of identifying and mending destabilizing

elements in individual-country loss-control systems before they can harm other countries. The

second is the absence of contractual mechanisms for an adversely affected country to discipline

authorities in a problem country or even to hedge straightforwardly whatever cross-country risk

exposures it might face.

       For countries that have adopted a common currency, it seems natural to address these

coordination problems by consolidating deposit- insurance management (Schoenmaker and

Osterloo, 2004). To see the problems in this alleged solution, it is helpful to envision a

consolidated deposit insurer as a centrally managed holding company whose managers would

more or less tightly oversee insurance subsidiaries operating in individual countries. The

principal tasks of the holding company would be to measure, manage, and fund cross-country

risk, including the risk of a contagious transmission of financial-crisis pressur es from one

country to another. However, the central office would have to respect differences in regulatory

culture. The extent of these differences and their resistance to rapid change would limit how fast

and how extensively consolidation could proceed.

       Public-choice theory presumes that public officials can more easily create standards and

enforcement schemes that internalize externalities within a country or particular “regulatory

culture” than across countries or cultures. Diversity in societal norms, the uneven pace of




                                                 18
                                                                                  December 5, 2005


financial change, and the length of individual-country and cross-country regulatory lags make

differences in adaptive capacity the central issue in coordinating banking supervision.

       Although instructive parallels exist between the potential consolidation of modern

European deposit-insurance enterprises and the U.S. transition from state-level to federal deposit

insurance, the parallel fa lls short in three ways. First, although state systems were government-

created and government-supervised, they were funded entirely from client premiums. Second,

none of these systems was still in operation when cross-state consolidation was negotiated. This

simplified the turf issues that negotiators faced. Third, the design of the consolidated enterprise

was worked out in a democratically elected national legislature, subject to a system of fully

seasoned checks and balances from judiciary and executive branches of government.

       In the EU today, cross-country cooperation to lessen externalities has to be negotiated on

an ad hoc basis in European Union committees and ministries. The formulation and subsequent

enforceability of any multinational agreement that might emerge would be weakened by holes in

still-evolving checks and balances and by divergences in individual-country cultural norms,

differences in market and political structures, and variation in exposures to economic stress.

       As implicit guarantors of catastrophic losses, taxpayers in individual EU countries

resemble poorly informed corporate shareholders. Taxpayers’ inability either to observe their

implicit loss exposure or to extract appropriate compensation leaves them vulnerable to

exploitation by consolidated and individual-country regulators. A norm of nationalism is

enshrined in every regulatory culture. This norm distorts accountability for multinational losses

and undermines efforts either to empower or to oblige a consolidated supervisor or its country-

level subsidiaries to minimize the aggregate costs of incentive conflict.




                                                 19
                                                                                   December 5, 2005


       To manage externalities within the European Union, supranational managers could

eschew direct supervision and simply trade the functional equivalent of reinsurance contracts

informally within an intrafirm “capital market.” However, information asymmetries and

incentive conflicts within the opaque intercorporate network would still degrade the adjustment

process. Only in a perfect world could beneficent regulators in individual countries and the

taxpayer-principals they serve always know what coordinated adjustments in safety-net

parameters would maximize world or regional welfare and proceed to make these adjustments

promptly. In the real world, the alleged optimality of proposed adjustments is always contested

and regulators’ incentives to undertake desirable adjustments are distorted by information lags,

nationalistic biases, variation in empowerments and reporting responsibilities, lega l systems, and

cultural norms.

       Once politicians were presented with strong evidence that cross-country deposit churning

had contributed to an observed crisis, it is likely that the cause of rapid safety-net consolidation

would win important new adherents. However, waiting for unpleasant evidence to develop

seems a poor way to address the externalities involved.

       The rest of this paper argues that conflicts of interest between national deposit insurers

and domestic and foreign taxpayers could be lessened and economic efficiency increased if the

transparency and deterrency of country-level deposit- insurance loss exposures could be

enhanced. To do this without multinational negotiations, individual-country authorities could

merely acquiesce in providing new and market-driven ways to measure and fund their particular

safety- net risk exposures. Kane (2003) suggests that this could be done by organizing public

markets in deposit insurers’ debt and reinsurance derivatives. Trading contracts that reinsure

designated shares (“tranches”) of observable disbursements made in resolving bank insolvencies




                                                 20
                                                                                     December 5, 2005


within specified windows of time would allow governments to smooth their expenses over the

business cycle and to transfer selected deposit- insurance risks both to one another and to private

counterparties. Unlike intercorporate risk transfers, public trading in reinsurance contracts

would be transparent and could even be routed through an organized exchange. Prices

established in debt and derivatives markets would disclose traders’ consensus estimates of

changing national loss exposures and do so without making any government cede politically

sensitive monitoring, policing, or closure powers to a supranational entity.



VI. Value of Conceiving of Deposit-Insurance Contracts as Tradable Credit Derivatives

        A government deposit- insurance guarantee (DIG) correspond s to one side of a plain-

vanilla credit default swap (CDS) supporting a designated first- loss exposures in underlying

deposit instruments. Every CDS transfers the default-risk exposure to one or more named

borrowers (here, insured banks) from a protection receiver (here, a depositor) to a third party that

is willing and able to bear this exposure (here, the deposit insurer). In deposit insurance, the

original protection seller has the statutory right and duty to supervise proactively the institutions

whose deposits it covers. The better this protection seller can carry out its supervisory

responsibilities, the less risk exposure it and its counterparties actually share.

        In return for covering the default risk in the protection receiver’s long position in the

underlying instrument, the DIG protection seller receives contractually defined intervention

rights and collects a periodic fee from each bank it guarantees. In a fully competitive

equilibrium, the insurer’s loss-control system would be Pareto-optimal and the fee would cover

the sum of the costs (C) of the protection seller’s supervisory and portfolio activity and the

market value of the risk exposure it assumes (R). If the loss-control system were imperfect but




                                                  21
                                                                                   December 5, 2005


costless to operate, the premium would equal R. If a country’s loss-control system were both

perfect and costless, the equilibrium R and periodic premium would be zero.

        Although deposit insurance also resembles a casualty insurance policy (CIP), the

correspondence breaks down in one important respect. Deposit insurance and CIP are alike in

that:

    •   Payouts are triggered by a well-defined loss-causing event;

    •   One party is designated as providing (i.e., selling) “protection against the covered event ;”

    •   The party literally “buying protection” (here, the bank on behalf of the depositor) pays a

        fee to the protection seller on a periodic basis as long as the coverage exists;

    •   The contract stipulates how the loss associated with an insured event will be measured

        and how soon claims for damage will be paid;

    •   The protection buyer must have an “insurable position” (i.e., hold a long position in the

        covered asset).

        The critical difference between a CIP and a government- issued deposit- insurance contract

is that the insured party in a CIP has an obligation to prove the size of its loss using professional

appraisers and the insurer has both a right and a duty to challenge the proffered proof. The

resulting negotiation process is called “loss adjustment.” Both in deposit insurance and in credit

swaps, the value of the protection payment is preadjusted. Payment is governed by actual price

movements in the underlying instrument during the days and weeks covered by the contract. For

a CDS, the protection payment is determined by the price movement experienced by a “reference

security” during a specified number of days or weeks following the default event. In contrast,

assuming there is no coinsurance or deductible, a DIG pays out the par value of insured deposits

and the insurer takes control of the insolvent bank. As receiver, the insurer either sells its



                                                  22
                                                                                 December 5, 2005


ownership position to another party or it puts the bank ’s assets into liquidation. Whenever a

failed bank is sold off promptly, the cost of protection is established as the difference between

the outpayments made to depositors and the net proceeds from the sale. However, in the event

the insurer decides to liquidate the bank, the cost of protection remains stochastic and may not be

known for several years. For this reason, tradable deposit- insurance derivative contracts might

specify an operational procedure for valuing and transferring the expected value of proceeds

from the liquidation. Alternatively, the protection-supplying side of DIG reinsurance contracts

could be assigned a tradable claim to the actual cash flows generated during the liquidation.

       An additional feature of a freely tradable CDS—and, therefore, of tradable deposit-

insurance derivative contracts—is that the protection buyer need not hold a long position in the

covered asset and the short side need not be empowered to exercise any supervisory functions.

In a negotiable DIG derivative contract, any party anywhere in the world could take either side

of the default swap as long as its own credit standing and the contract’s bonding arrangements

were strong enough to control the risk of counterparty nonperformance and the trader thought it

could make a profit. Private parties entering either side of any swap would seek to uncover

nonpublic information and they would communicate their findings to the market by the trades

they make.

       As with any other publicly traded instrument, counterparties would buy and sell DIG

reinsurance contracts either on an organized exchange or through a network of respected,

government- licensed dealers. These market makers would accept a first- loss responsibility for

covering shortfalls in performance by any counterparty to whom they sell a reinsurance contract.

This responsibility would create incentives for market makers and counterparties to police

carefully the wealth and character of one another.




                                                 23
                                                                                  December 5, 2005


        Of course, projected profits would be conditional on each party’s assessment of: (1) the

capital and risk exposures of the banks and counterparties that each contract covers, and (2) the

quality of countries’ systems of safety-net loss control. Financial analysts could use the prices of

various derivatives issued directly by a country’s major banks to approximate the value of

individual-country DIG exposures. Comparing these hypothetical values with the actual prices

at which the reinsurance derivatives trade could help DIG officials in individual EU countries to

identify their cross-country exposures to loss. Unmasking these risk should encourage officials

to undertake trades and supervisory actions designed to rein in any exposures that disconcert

them.

        Every trader that takes either side of a DIG derivative enters into a de facto partnership

with the insurer of the underlying contract. Kane, Hickman, and Burger (1993) explain why

coinsurance and reinsurance partnerships between private and government deposit insurers are

socially beneficial. Such partnerships allow the government to outsource to private

counterparties risks and skills in which private parties have a comparative advantage. The result

is to integrate the timeliness and greater accountability of private initiatives with the deep-pocket

back-up protection of individual-country guarantees against catastrophic risk.

        During their lives, each private reinsurance contract would convey a specified tranche of

the aggregate losses a particular insurer incurred between specified upper and lower limits. The

more efficient an insurer’s monitoring, insolvency-resolution, and liquidation efforts, the smaller

and rarer will be the losses that the reinsurers would expect to bear. As confidence grows in a

particular insurer’s loss-control system, the upper limit may be raised (to lessen taxpayer loss

exposure) and reinsurance shares may be subdivided into finer and finer tranches.




                                                 24
                                                                                   December 5, 2005




VII. Model of Balance-Sheet Management at a Deposit-Insurance Enterprise

       Kane (2003) and Draghi, Giavazzi, and Merton (2003) model a country’s deposit insurer

as a firm in which taxpayers and insured institutions invest risk capital. As illustrated in Figure

1, an insurer’s balance sheet consists of four controllable items: (1) a portfolio of tangible assets

that constitutes its loss reserves (A); (2) the aggregate value of the intangible net loss exposures

Li that pass through from its individual client banks (i = 1,…, n); (3) a book of external hedges

(H); and (4) the value of its risk capital (R). The value of each Li is defined to be net of the

“internal” diversification benefits that correlations among the other (n-1) exposures an individual

insurer’s clients might naturally generate. This paper extends prior models by investigating how

each loss exposure varies with the quality (Q) and cost (C) of the insurer’s system for monitoring

and deterring client risk taking. Another innovation is that Q is portrayed as a function of the

transparency (T) that the monitoring system generates and the effect of the bonding (B) and

deterrent restrictions (D) that depositors and the insurer use to restrain bank risk taking.

       If loss exposures are managed efficiently, the economic value of R supports a profile of

risk from which all diversifiable risk has been removed by booking external hedges until the

marginal benefit of further hedging transactions equals their marginal hedging cost. What levels

of T, B, and D the insurer establishes and how benefits and costs are distributed between

managers, clients, and taxpayers is a matter of corporate governance. Accountability for these

decisions depends on the relative ability of the insurer’s capital-supplying sectors to monitor the

insurer’s aggregate loss exposure and to influence managerial decisions in a country’s particular

political and financial-contracting environment.




                                                  25
                                                                                   December 5, 2005


       To manage the portfolio risk a deposit insurer incurs, its staff must measure, price, and

hedge its loss exposures and calculate an appropriate level of reserves. This risk is managed

optimally when the marginal costs of all four activities are set equal to their marginal benefits.

       Costless Case. In the simplest case, measurement and portfolio activities are costless and

risk exposures are known and stationary. In this case, the insurer would charge each client only

for operating costs (C) and the undiversifiable risk that client imposed on insurance reserves and

these charges would allow the insurer to maintain an optimal fund of explicit reserves and

intangible taxpayer catastrophic support. Assuming that the loss exposures in an insurer’s client

base do not cancel out across its country- level client base, the insurer could either hedge its

idiosyncratic risk in global reinsurance markets or consolidate structurally with other countries’

insurers until all diversifiable risk disappeared from the system. Unless operating costs differed

in an important way, it would make no difference what combination of hedging and

consolidation activities management chose to pursue (Kane, 2003).

       Introducing Measurement and Pricing Costs. Realistically, deposit- insurance managers

must incur positive costs to measure and price their loss exposures. This makes it uneconomic to

pursue these activities until their marginal benefits are driven to zero. Also, individual-country

and global insurers can only estimate their efficient risk-return frontiers.

       When key parameters are both uncertain and nonstationary, information lags and

bureaucratic restraints on policy response make risk harder to measure and also make

responsibility for the costs of policy mistakes harder to assign. Suppliers of deposit- insurance

capital need to worry about how to hold country-level and relevant multinational officials

accountable for the tradeoff between the public and private benefits imbedded in the balance-

sheet structure and loss-control system they choose.




                                                  26
                                                                                   December 5, 2005


       Even in a stationary environment, imperfections in information flow support agency costs

that would be resolved differently under consolidation than under a cross-country hedging

strategy. The greater transparency of the costs and discipline generated in hedging particular

exposures in external reinsurance markets renders them more contractable than the costs of

operating a cross-country corporate structure and subjecting its managers to a governance system

strong enough to control incentive conflict in the consolidated enterprise.

       In deposit insurance, the probability of large shocks (so called “jump risk”) is non-

negligible and supervisors must allow for the possibility that large shocks may move across

countries with greater force than small ones. The infrequent occurrence of large shocks means

that policymakers have an insufficient number of observations with which to estimate reliably

the behavior of cross-country correlation coefficients in crisis circumstances. Experience

indicates that correlations among risky assets tend to rise during financial crises (see, e.g.,

Goetzman, Li, and Rouwenhorst, 2005). This suggests that a country’s pre-existing exposures to

losses in other countries might lose their diversifying power and increase contagion at critical

moments. Even so, public trading of risk exposures by country- level managers would deal better

with correlation instability because it would generate incentives for quicker and better- informed

responses by partner countries. In contrast, managers of a centralized holding company that

traded country loss exposures only in informationally and politically constrained internal capital

markets would be much slower to reallocate substantial amounts of risk capital across countries

when correlations change.

       The key point is that investors in transparent derivatives markets and the top managers of

a centralized holding company would have different ways of coordinating, verifying, and acting

on information that is collected at the country level and released by incentive-conflicted agents.




                                                  27
                                                                                  December 5, 2005


To overcome bureaucratic barriers to the efficient allocation of its risk capital, the multinational

regulatory holding company would have to establish an information system and a structure of

implicit and explicit compensation that could induce a high level of truth-telling, promise

keeping, and fair play both within and across its country- level subsidiaries. However, in tough

times, holding-company management would retain the option to decide just what information

about changing cross-country risk gets reported publicly to capital suppliers in the subsidiary

countries. When sudden adverse shocks increase the fragility of important banks in country

banking systems, the holding company is unlikely to report fully or accurately the spreads at

which it is clearing different countries’ exposures. Suppressing such information promises to

prevent bank runs during each top manager’s particular watch on the bridge, but over longer

periods it would shift more and more systemic risk onto insurance reserves. This is because

hiding the weakness of troubled banks insulates bank managers from healthy depositor discipline

and encourages them to risk deeper and deeper levels of insolvency in the future.

       Given that information on country-level loss exposures is imperfect, a major advantage of

competitive trading in deposit-insurance derivatives is that it would provide a way to reward

private analysts for uncovering information about the size of individual-country loss exposures

and the qua lity of regulatory performance. Although country-level loss exposures are bound to

vary over the life of any derivatives contract, experience indicates that bureaucrats in individual

countries are reluctant both to face up to adverse shifts or to publicize them honestly when they

first recognize them. Rather than letting incentive-conflicted holding-company executives delay

the release of information about changes in insolvency risk, derivatives trading would

immediately disclose changes in the market’s willingness to assume a particular insurer’s loss

exposures.




                                                 28
                                                                                  December 5, 2005


       Although our analysis emphasizes cross-country benefits, trading deposit-insurance

derivatives would improve managerical incentives at any deposit insurer that issued them.

Movements in the spreads observed for country- level derivatives would generate data on the

changing value of a country’s exposure to particular layers of loss. By dissecting and

reassembling the prices at which DIG derivatives trade, financial analysts could construct and

disseminate in timely fashion market-based estimates of the value of stakeholder loss exposures.

       Each contract traded would establish an implicit partnership between the insurer,

reinsurance market- makers, and contractual counterparties. In contrast to the real options that

managers retain under current arrangements, each reinsurance partnership would assign private

loss-bearers a series of well-defined and tradable loss exposures. Variation in the market price

established for individual-country contracts wo uld surface new data about the relative

performance of particular supervisory systems. Whenever a country-level deposit insurer wanted

its reinsurance derivative contracts to sell at a lower price, it would only have to formulate,

disclose, and bond itself to carry out an improved loss-control strategy.



VIII. Summary

       This paper emphasizes that differences in regulatory culture are a largely exogenous

constraint on the problem of finding and negotiating efficient ways to identify and internalize

deposit- insurance externalities across countries. It advances three hypotheses. First, in the

absence of crisis, few pairs of national deposit- insurance schemes could readily integrate their

particular regulatory systems. Second, divergences in regulatory culture make consolidation an

unpromising way for deposit insurers in any multinational community to address cross-country

externalities today. Third, opening opportunities to trade structured reinsurance derivatives




                                                 29
                                                                                 December 5, 2005


could improve the efficiency of every deposit insurer that issued them and achieve many of the

putative benefits of multinational supervisory consolidation without sacrificing the democratic

accountability inherent in the current system of country- level policymaking.

       Much as protection sellers function in existing credit-swap markets, buyers of the

reinsurance derivatives proposed here would accept a synthetic position in one or more layers of

the actual expenses incurred in resolving individual-bank insolvencies in particular countries

during specified time periods. Over time, the price a given insurer would pay for successive

units of protection would vary inversely with the condition of its banks and directly with

increases in the perceived quality of its loss-control system.

       Differences in the spreads quoted on DIG derivatives for different countries would offer

irrepressible early-warning signals of the relative weakness and strength of different countries’

crisis-prevention and crisis- management systems. The public nature of these signals and the

contractual right to offload losses would counter unhealthful political and bureaucratic pressure

to postpone the treatment of emerging problems.

       The observable benefits of achieving a lower spread would strengthen incentives for

improving individual-country insurance systems even at times when their loss exposures were

not surging out of control. If national stock exchanges or the deposit insurers of major countries

were to propose and foster trading in DIG derivatives, the desire to improve market spreads

would encourage policymakers in individual countries to improve their regulatory systems.

Making movements in spreads observable would also make it easier for empirical researchers to

identify the effectiveness of alternative design features and enforcement techniques.




                                                 30
                                                                          December 5, 2005



                                       REFERENCES



Calomiris, Charles, 1990. “Is Deposit Insurance Necessary?: A Historical Perspective,” The
      Journal of Economic History, 50(June), 283-295.

____________, 1992a. “Getting the Incentives Right in the Current Deposit Insurance
      System: Successes from the pre-FDIC Era,” in James Barth and R. Dan Brumbaugh
      (ed.), The Reform of Deposit Insurance: Disciplining Government and Protecting
      Taxpayers, New York: Harper Collins, pp. 13-35.

____________, 1992b. “Do ‘Vulnerable’ Economies Need Deposit Insurance?: Lessons from
      U.S. Agriculture in the 1920s,” and “Response” in Philip L. Brock (ed.), If Texas Were
      Chile: A Primer on Banking Reform, San Francisco: Institute for Contemporary
      Studies Press, pp. 237-314 and pp. 319-328.

Demirgüç, Asli, and Edward J. Kane, 2002. “Deposit Insurance Around the Globe: Where
      Does it Work?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16(Spring), 175-195.

Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, Edward J. Kane, and Luc Laeven, 2005. “Determinants of Deposit
      Insurance Adoption and Design.” World Bank and Boston College (unpublished).

Dermine, Jean, 2003. European Banking: Past, Present and Future, in The Transformation of
      the European Financial System, V. Gaspar, P. Hartmann, and O. Sleijpen (eds.).
      Frankfurt: European Central Bank, 31-95.

Draghi, Mario, Francesco Giavazzi, and Robert C. Merton, 2003. “Transparency, Risk
       Management and International Financial Fragility, ” Harvard Business School
       (September 24).

Eisenbeis, Robert A., and Larry Wall, 2004. “Agency Problems in Banking Supervision: The
       Case of the EMU.” Presented at a September 2-3 conference on The Structure of
       Regulation in Helsinki, Finland.

Garcia, Gillian, and Maria Nieto, 2005. “Banking Crisis Management in the European Union:
       Multiple Regulators and Resolution Authorities” (unpublished).

Goetzman, William N., Lingfeng Li, and K. Geert Rouwenhorst, 2005. “Long-Term Global
      Market Correlations,” Journal of Business, 78(January), 1-38.

Hoshi, Takeo, 2002. “The Convoy System for Insolvent Banks: How it Originally Worked
       and Why it Failed in the 1990s,” Japan and the World Economy, 14, pp. 155-180.




                                            31
                                                                        December 5, 2005


Hutchinson, Michael M., 2002. “European Banking Distress and EMU: Institutional and
       Macroeconomic Risks.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 104(no. 3), 365-389.

Kane, Edward J., 1981. “Accelerating Inflation, Technological Innovation, and the
       Decreasing Effectiveness of Banking Regulation, Journal of Finance, 36(May), 355-
       367.

________, 1989. The S&L Insurance Mess: How Did It Happen? Washington: The Urban
      Institute Press.

____________, 2003. “What Kind of Multinational Deposit-Insurance Arrangements Might
      Best Enhance World Welfare?” Pacific-Basin Finance Journal, 11(September), 413-
      428.
_____________, 2005: “Confronting Divergent Interests in Cross-Border Regulatory
      Arrangements,” Conference on Cross-Border Banking: The Regulatory Challenge,
      Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago (October).

____________ and Robert Hendershott, 1996. “The Federal Deposit Insurance Fund that
      Didn’t Put a Bite on U.S. Taxpayers.” Journal of Banking and Finance,
      10(September), 1305-1327.

____________, James C. Hickman, and Abert E. Burger, 1993. Implementing a Private-
      Federal Deposit Insurance Partnership, Madison: Center for Credit Union Research
      and the Filene Research Institute.


Mishan, E.J., 1969. Welfare Economics: An Assessment, Amsterdam and London: North
      Holland Publishing Company

Schoenmaker, Dirk, and Sander Osterloo, 2004. “Cross-Border Issues in European Financial
      Supervision,” in D. Mayes and G. Wood (eds.), The Structure of Financial Regulation.
      London: Routledge (forthcoming).

Schüler, Martin, 2003: “How Do Banking Supervisors Deal with Europe-Wide Systemic
       Risk?” Centre for European Economic Research, Discussion Paper No. 03-03.

Vives, Xavier, 2001. “Restructuring Financial Regulation in the European Monetary Union,”
       Journal of Financial Services Research, 19 (February, 57-82.




                                           32
                                                                                                                December 5, 2005
Table 1: Variation in GDP Per Capita, Deposit-Insurance Coverage Limits, and Coinsurance Provisions in European Unio n Counties,
         in 2002 and 2003
                                                                                              Coverage ratio
                                    Coverage      GDP per capita      Coverage limit-to-       adjusted for         Maximum             Coverage limit-to-
                        Date      limit in 2003       in 2003         GDP per capita in       coinsurance in       Coinsurance          deposits per capita
 Country               enacted      (in US$)      (in 1999 US$)             2002                   2002           (in %) in 2002             in 2002
 Austria                 1979            25,260             32,049                    0.8                   0.7                    10                   0.9
 Belgium                  1974          25,260              29,889                    0.8                  0.7                  10                     0.9
 Cyprus                   2000          25,260              13,467                    2.5                  2.2                  10                       2
 Czech Republic           1994          31,575               5,207                    3.6                  3.2                  10                     5.3
 Denmark                  1988          40,296              37,500                    1.2                  1.2                    0                    2.5
 Estonia                  1998           8,058               4,148                    0.5                  0.4                  10                     1.4
 Finland                  1969          31,863              30,332                    0.9                  0.9                    0                    1.9
 France                   1980          88,410              29,133                    2.7                  2.7                    0                    4.2
 Germany                  1966          25,260              31,773                    0.8                  0.7                  10                     0.8
 Greece                   1993          25,260              12,652                    1.5                  1.5                    0                    1.7
 Hungary                  1993          14,429               5,136                    0.6                  0.6                    0                    1.5
 Ireland                  1989          25,260              25,497                    0.6                  0.5                  10                     0.8
 Italy                    1987         130,457              20,302                    4.8                  4.8                    0                    8.7
 Latvia                   1998           5,545               2,476                    1.4                  1.4                    0                    5.2
 Lithuania                1996          16,293               2,215                    3.1                  2.8                 10*                    14.1
 Luxembourg               1989          25,260              53,013                    0.4                  0.4                  10                     0.1
 Malta                    2003          25,260               9,812                    n.a.                 n.a.                n.a.                   n.a.
 Netherlands              1979          25,260              30,389                    0.7                  0.7                    0                    0.7
 Poland                   1995          28,418               3,536                    3.6                  3.5                 10*                    14.3
 Portugal                 1992          31,575              12,499                    1.9                  1.9                    0                    2.1
 Slovak Republic          1996          25,260               4,180                    2.8                  2.8                  10                     4.8
 Slovenia                 2001          26,931              11,160                    1.6                  1.6                    0                      3
 Spain                    1977          25,260              16,824                    1.2                  1.2                  10                     1.4
 Sweden                   1996          34,364              30,286                       1                    1                   0                   n.a.
 United Kingdom           1982          19,611              21,616                       2                 1.8                 10*                    n.a.




Source: Demirgüç-Kunt, Kane, and Laeven (2005).
Notes: n.a.: not available
        * In these countries, coinsurance applies only for amounts above a designated account size.
                                                                               33
                   100
                   120




                     0
                    20
                    40
                    60
                    80
       Lithuania
          Latvia
          Poland
         Estonia
         Slovak
        Republic
        Slovenia
          Greece
         Belgium
         Hungary
         Ireland
         Denmark




34
         Finland
                                                                                                                        Figure 1




                         pcgdp




           Malta
          United
         Kingdom
           Italy
      Czech Rep.
           Spain
         Austria
                                                      as a Percentage of the Value for Luxembourg




        Portugal
     Netherlands
          France
          Sweden
         Germany
          Cyprus
                                 Dollar Value of 2003 Per Capita GDP in Individual European Union Countries Expressed
                                                                                                                                   December 5, 2005




      Luxembourg
                                                  December 5, 2005




FIGURE TWO: HYPOTHETICAL BALANCE SHEET FOR A DEPOSIT-
                INSURANCE ENTERPRISE



                              n

                 A            ∑ L [Q(T , D, B)]
                                     i
                              i =1


                           H
                           R




                         35
