                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        CONFRONTING DIVERGENT INTERESTS IN
                     CROSS-COUNTRY REGULATORY ARRANGEMENTS

                                              Edward J. Kane

                                          Working Paper 11865
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11865


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2005




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Edward J. Kane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Confronting Deivergent Interests in Cross-Country Regulatory Arrangements
Edward J. Kane
NBER Working Paper No. 11865
December 2005
JEL No. G21, G28, P51

                                           ABSTRACT

Although nation-based systems of financial regulation constitute a second-best approach to global
welfare maximization, treacherous accountability problems must be acknowledged and resolved
before regulatory cooperation can deal fairly and efficiently with cross-border issues. To track and
control insolvency risk within and across any set of countries, officials must construct a partnership
that allows regulators in every participating country to monitor and to influence counterpart
regulators in partnering nations. Using efforts to harmonize the Australian and New Zealand
regulatory systems as an example, this paper identifies characteristics by which regulatory systems
differ and underscores particular features that make regulatory harmonization difficult to achieve.

Edward J. Kane
Department of Finance
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02458
and NBER
edward.kane@bc.edu
                                                                                          December 2, 2005




           CONFRONTING DIVERGENT INTERESTS IN CROSS-COUNTRY REGULATORY
                                ARRANGEMENTS*
                                  Edward J. Kane
                                  Boston College



         As financial institutions and markets more and more effectively transcend
geographic borders, limitations of national systems of regulation become more
consequential. Beginning with the five-page Basel Concordat of 1975, banking regulatory
agencies in major countries have agreed that multinational banking organizations should
be supervised in a cooperative manner by both their “home” and “host” countries. The
Concordat assigns home-country supervisors responsibility for consolidated oversight of
global conglomerate banking organizations, while it leaves host-country regulators
responsible both for supervising the local operations of foreign and domestic banks and
for sharing relevant information about local operations with home-country regulators.
The Concordat’s conflicting goals were to assure adequate cross-border supervision of
multinational banks, while reducing the total regulatory burden generated across the
jurisdictions in which the bank might operate and respecting a host country’s right to set
its own domestic standards for individual-bank safety, system stability, and the
accumulation of market power.
         Under the aegis of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (the Basel
Committee), the Concordat spurred a search for minimum prudential standards that
evolved by 1997 into a 44-page statement of Core Principles for Effective Banking
Supervision. These fluid principles are gradually congealing into amplifying criteria that
teams of outside experts can use to make country-by-country assessments of regulatory
effectiveness (Basel Committee, 2001). In turn, these criteria are helping to shape a new
and more-complicated system of risk-based capital requirements knows as “Basel II”
(Basel Committee, 2003). Basel II focuses the conflict between home and host regulators
on how to verify and share information across countries and how to use whatever data
they share to allocate a conglomerate institution’s capital and diversification benefits
between local and home-country exposures to insolvency risk. As in ordinary human


                                                                                                           2
 __________________________________________________________________
* For helpful comments on earlier drafts, the author wants to thank Richard C. Aspinwall, David Mayes,
 numerous staff members at the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, and seminar audiences at Victoria University
                                                                            December 2, 2005


affairs, the need to mitigate or overcome bankers’ and foreign regulators’ incentives to
hide embarrassing information is a central feature of conscientious bank supervision.
        Although nation-based systems of financial regulation obviously constitute a
second-best approach to global welfare maximization, treacherous accountability
problems must be acknowledged and resolved before regulatory cooperation can deal
fairly and efficiently with cross-border issues. To track and control insolvency risk
within and across any set of countries, officials must construct a partnership that allows
regulators in every participating country to monitor and to influence counterpart
regulators in all partnering nations. Using efforts to partner the Australian and New
Zealand regulatory systems as an example, this paper identifies characteristics by which
regulatory systems differ and underscores particular features that make harmonization
difficult to achieve.


I. Trans-Tasman Regulatory Harmonization as an Illustrative Case


        Troubled banks routinely conceal unfavorable information about their
performance or condition from outsiders. Bank customers and counterparties acting on
their own cannot easily uncover this information. Partly to overcome this coordination
problem, government chartering and supervision of banks and payments systems are
near-universal phenomena. Regulatory activities may be described as efforts by a trusted
Third Party that affect the shaping, pricing, and delivery of banking products in one of
three ways: by rule-making (e.g., capital requirements); by monitoring and enforcement;
or by detecting and resolving insolvencies (i.e., shortages in bank-contributed net worth).
        To the extent that the beneficiaries and the regulated are different parties, banking
regulation is “other-regarding” and “other-directing.” A principal goal is to protect
society from the consequences of excessive risk-taking, capital shortages, and loss
concealment at individual banks. To maximize global welfare, contracts under which
officials are appointed would have to make them or their agencies explicitly accountable
to potential loss-bearers in all partner countries for all costs incurred in preventing,
detecting and resolving bank insolvencies.




                                                                                             3
                                                                                           December 2, 2005


         The Basel Concordat and its later elaborations call for contact and cooperation
between host and parent supervisory authorities. In the absence of harmonizing contact
and cooperation, contractual arrangements focus banking regulators in each country on
domestic interests. They would be expected to design and operate regulatory enterprises
nationalistically, i.e., with an eye toward maximizing primarily the welfare of their own
citizens.
         It is important to recognize that policy coordination cannot eliminate cross-
country and within-country incentive conflicts in banking regulation. At best, it may
establish a contractable partnership that supplements—without substituting for—policies
of sound regulatory discipline in individual countries.
         Mishan (1969) emphasizes that economic policy performance should be assessed
in two dimensions. Optimal strategies produce outcomes that are simultaneously Pareto-
efficient and “distributionally preferred” (i.e., they help the representative citizen and
avoid antiegalitarian effects on the distribution of income).1 The Mishan criterion
reminds us that cross-country arrangements to detect, prevent, and resolve bank
insolvencies must not result in increased loss exposures that disadvantage the citizens of
any partner country.
         As stewards of taxpayer resources, the Mishan criterion implies that in each
country financial supervisors and regulators owe four duties to the representative citizen:
         1. Vision (maintaining a capacity to recognize risk-taking and capital shortages in
         timely fashion);
         2. Prompt corrective action (being committed to control the value of implicit and
         explicit government guarantees);
         3. Least-cost resolution (efficiently curing insolvencies that corrective action fails
         to avert);
         4. Truth-telling (keeping voters and taxpayers informed about the true opportunity
         costs of regulatory strategies).

1
  In the words of Andrew Jackson [quoted in Todd (2002)]: “In the full enjoyment of . . . the fruits of
superior industry, economy, and virtue, every man is equally entitled to protection by law; but when the
laws undertake to add to these natural and just advantages artificial distinctions to grant titles , gratuities,
and exclusive privileges to make the rich richer and the potent more powerful, the humble members of
society—the farmers, mechanics, and laborers—who have neither the time nor the means of securing like
favors to themselves, have a right to complain of the injustice of government (1832).”


                                                                                                                   4
                                                                          December 2, 2005


       Gaps in vision and reporting obligations engender incentive breakdowns. They
reduce society’s ability to hold regulators responsible for uncovering the truth about bank
losses and acting on it. This weakness in communicating societal disapproval
undermines a regulator’s incentive to prevent insolvencies and to resolve them
efficiently. Being able to hide lapses in performance intensifies incentive conflict. It
makes it easier in tough times to pursue short-run political and career rewards that top
officials can capture by not closely enforcing economic insolvency.
       Sincere efforts to integrate the private banking markets of any two countries—in
particular, those of Australia (A) and New Zealand (Z)—must also plan to integrate their
private and governmental systems of information disclosure and banking regulation.
Regulatory integration is complicated because, even if regulatory strategies and control
structures (RA, RZ) did not differ greatly between the countries, individual-country
regulators are responsible to different sets of taxpayers (TA, TZ) and social norms and
applicable legislation makes private and governmental regulatory officials accountable to
their citizens in disparate contractual ways (CA, CZ). To maximize the joint welfare of
citizens of both countries, it is not enough to blend the countries’ strategies and control
structures. To harmonize regulatory incentives, regulatory performance measures and
reporting responsibilities must be refocused as well.
       A country’s regulatory system co-evolves with popular perceptions of what
regulatory problems cry out to be solved. When citizens believe their country’s
incentive-control system is working adequately, it is hard to build a coalition strong
enough to win marked changes in regulatory strategies and tactics. This is why
substantial regulatory reforms usually occur only in the wake of large-scale crises.
       In noncrisis times, lobbying activity can seldom achieve more than a marginal
adjustment either in the objectives that officials pursue or in the tradeoffs officials make
within the limits of their regulatory culture. How particular policy strategies actually
work in practice is co-determined by the rules officials adopt and by regulatees’ ability to
find and exploit circumventive loopholes in the enforcement of these rules. One reason
that the issue of cross-border regulatory cooperation is on the table around the world is
that exploiting loopholes often entails moving activities that one country might tax more
heavily or regulate more effectively into the jurisdiction of another.



                                                                                               5
                                                                          December 2, 2005


       With large Australian-owned institutions holding over 85 percent of the New
Zealand banking market, harmonization is a hot-button issue in both countries. Although
the two countries agreed in early 2005 to establish a joint Trans-Tasman Council on
Banking Supervision, the initial hopes and fears of officials in A and Z seemed to differ
sharply. Australian Treasurer Peter Costello portrayed harmonization as a process of
negotiation in which a single system of “seamless” regulation would be the most
desirable endpoint, while New Zealand Finance Minister Michael Cullen took care to
label a single regulatory system as merely a “possible endpoint” (Joint Press Conference,
Feb. 18, 2005).
       New Zealand citizens could draw little comfort from a follow-up interview that
Treasurer Costello offered in the February 19th Weekend Herald. He described his vision
for the two countries as one in which “goods and services will move as seamlessly across
the Tasman in much the same way they now move seamlessly across the Victorian and
New South Wales border.” To the extent that states rights in Australia fall short of
absolute sovereignty, this vision comes perilously close to expressing an intention to
reduce New Zealand financially to Australia’s seventh state or third territory.
       The over-riding task of financial regulation is to resolve diverse incentive
conflicts in financial transactions at minimum net cost to society. Treasurer Costello’s
position assumes that dual supervision generates only “duplication and unnecessary
cost.” An alternative view is that, especially where bank risk exposures and capital
positions are hard to detect and easy to shuffle across jurisdictions, two heads are likely
to prove better than one. This view is buttressed by the undeniable value to New Zealand
citizens of ensuring that officials in any post-harmonization regulatory enterprise remain
democratically accountable for identifying and protecting Kiwi interests and especially
for preventing and managing the dangers and costs of future banking crises. It is not for
nothing that the New Testament warns of the impossibility of faithfully serving two
masters.
       Any system of government generates different costs and benefits for differently
situated citizens and corporations. It is natural for large Australian banks to ask their
government to help them reduce their total taxes and regulatory compliance costs. It is
just as natural for New Zealand citizens to worry about how well their interests would be



                                                                                              6
                                                                          December 2, 2005


represented in an evolving global banking system if their concerns had to be filtered
through the economic interests of Australian banks and the political interests of
Australian regulators.
       The Trans-Tasman Council’s central contracting problem is to recognize and
ameliorate conflicts between societal and private interests that exist in Tasman-area
markets for banking services. Woolford and Orr (2005, p. 46) define the Council’s main
goal as promoting “maximum coordination, cooperation, and harmonisation of trans-
Tasman bank regulation where sensible.” To me, this means integrating one country’s
regulatory system with that of the other country without eroding the advantages and
democratic responsibilities of either. To accomplish this task, conferees must develop
transparent measures of bank and regulatory performance and incorporate these measures
into a self-enforcing contractual structure that empowers citizens of both countries to
hold officials accountable for the tradeoffs they make between joint and national interests
(Schüler, 2003).


II. Primacy of Controlling Incentive Conflict


       In banking, depositors and other outside stakeholders may be exposed to loss
from fraud, leverage, or earnings volatility without being adequately informed or
compensated for the risks entailed. To reduce their exposure to these three types of risk
shifting, a bank’s counterparties deploy three remedies: (1) they require the bank to bond
itself in various ways to behave honestly and fairly; (2) they negotiate a deterrent right to
punish opportunistic behavior; and (3) they monitor information on the bank’s ongoing
performance and condition.
       Bonding, policing, and monitoring are not costless. The costs vary inversely with
the transparency (T) provided by the accounting and disclosure regime under which the
bank operates. The more transparent the disclosure regime, the more easily and more
accurately outsiders—depositors, investors, and supervisors—can estimate the true value
of a bank’s assets and liabilities. But policing costs are also a function of outside
stakeholders’ ability to appreciate the implications of the information they receive (i.e.,




                                                                                              7
                                                                            December 2, 2005


their financial expertise) and their ability to coordinate deterrent and punitive responses
with others (i.e., their disciplinary power).
           In the absence of credible third-party guarantees, financially sophisticated
counterparties act as keynoters whose actions put strong pressure on banks known to be
experiencing opportunity-cost losses to adjust their affairs promptly. The market forces
keynoters unleash require troubled banks to do one or all of three things: shrink their
footings, raise more capital, or pay higher interest rates on their deposits and other debt.
           In monitoring, disciplining, and resolving banks, the incentives of government
officials to act promptly differ from the duties and incentives of private creditors in
important ways. Because official interventions are unusual and generate a great deal of
publicity, officials cannot focus only on the economic costs and benefits of the
intervention. Given that disadvantaged parties would be all too ready to accuse them of
creating or escalating problem situations, regulators must worry about the political and
career ramifications of even the most-dutiful interventions. Even small interventions can
damage their professional reputations and careers if their policies distress powerful
parties.
           Although many commonalities of interest exist, governmental systems for setting
and enforcing financial rules are infested with incentive conflict. Even within a country,
major conflicts exist between and among:
    1. Regulators and the firms they regulate;
    2. Particular regulators and other societal watchdogs;
    3. Regulators and the politicians to whom they must report;
    4. Taxpayers and the politicians and regulatory personnel they put in office.
How a country traditionally approaches and resolves these conflicts is in part hard-wired
into its political and institutional structure. To different extents, societies impose bonds
of community on individual citizens. Ideally, these bonds restrain corporate and
governmental decision making in socially beneficial ways. Communal bonds generate an
internally and externally enforced sense of reciprocity that inserts into individual
preference functions a concern for one another’s welfare that deters at least some forms
of opportunistic behavior. To reinforce these implicit controls, a country also works out
ways for watchdogs to fill gaps in the bonding, deterrent rights (deterrency), and



                                                                                               8
                                                                         December 2, 2005


transparency inherent in its private contracting environment. Over time, efforts to close
gaps in private and government contracting generate a country-specific regulatory
culture.




III. Difficulty of Resolving Divergences in Regulatory Culture


       When private corporations merge, the goal of the transaction is to create value by
enhancing the capabilities and performance of partner firms. To be successful, managers
of the combined enterprise must identify synergies and mitigate conflicts of interest
among various stakeholders. Especially in cross-border combinations, empirical
evidence indicates that marked differences in either the corporate cultures or strategic
orientations of partnering firms reduce the chance that they can be merged successfully
(Weston, Siu, and Johnson, 2001, p. 639); Altunbas and Ibáñez, 2004).
       This section begins by defining a regulatory analogue to the concept of corporate
culture. This concept provides a systematic way to compare and contrast the specific
regulatory strategies and tactics employed in Australia and New Zealand. Despite a
number of fundamental similarities, important differences in culture can be identified.
From an evolutionary perspective, the very persistence of these differences indicates that,
within each country, idiosyncratic features manage to resolve incentive conflicts with
reasonable efficiency. The Trans-Tasman council cannot hope to build a system that
stitches together in compromise fashion an equal number of pieces from the different
regulatory systems without losing the threads of economic logic that underlie them. If
these threads are not rewoven carefully enough, the citizens of one or both partner
countries will suffer substantial welfare losses.


The Concept of Regulatory Culture. A culture may be defined as customs, ideas, and
attitudes that members of a group share and transmit from generation to generation by
systems of subtle and unsubtle rewards and punishments. A regulatory culture is more
than a system of rules and enforcement. It incorporates higher-order norms about how



                                                                                            9
                                                                           December 2, 2005


officials should comport themselves; these norms limit the ways in which uncooperative
or even unscrupulous individual bankers can be monitored and disciplined. It includes a
matrix of attitudes and beliefs that define what it means for a regulator to use its
investigative and disciplinary authority honorably. These attitudes and beliefs set
standards for the fair use of government power. Checks and balances that bound each
agency’s jurisdiction express a distrust of government power that often traces back to
abuses observed in a distant past when the country was occupied, colonized, or run by a
one-party government. Underlying every formal regulatory structure is a set of higher-
order social norms that penetrate and shape the policy-making process and the political
and legal environments within which intersectoral bargaining takes place. These
underlying standards, taboos, and traditions are normative in two senses. They
simultaneously define what behaviors are “normal” and what behaviors regulators should
mimick to avoid criticism or shame.
       Prudential regulation imposes on regulators a duty to stop excessive risk-taking
and to find and resolve hidden individual-bank insolvencies in timely fashion. Within
any country, the Regulatory Culture within which this duty is discharged is spanned by
six specific components:
   •   Legal authority and reporting obligations
   •   Formulation and promulgation of specific rules
   •   Technology of monitoring for violations & compliance
   •   Penalties for material violations
   •   The regulator’s duties of consultation: To guarantee fairness, regulated parties
       have a right to participation and due process, which imposes substantial burdens
       of proof on the regulator
   •   Regulatees’ rights to judicial review: Intervened parties have an access to appeals
       procedures that bond the fairness guarantee.


Similarities in Australian and New Zealand Regulatory Cultures.
       In Australia and New Zealand, the last three dimensions of regulatory culture are
fundamentally the same. Both countries accept social norms that subject official
decisions to intragovernmental checks and balances and require them as well to treat



                                                                                          10
                                                                           December 2, 2005


violators as innocent until formally proven guilty and to assure that punishments meted
out do not exceed the social importance of the violations at issue. The presumption of
innocence protects fraudsters and bumblers from prompt regulatory discipline; the other
two norms make it impossible to make penalties draconian enough to eliminate risk-
shifting incentives completely.
         By increasing the difficulty of proving a bank to be insolvent, tests of regulatory
authority, fairness, and reasonableness prolong the process of detecting and resolving
insolvencies. Even a deeply insolvent institution can delay and ameliorate disciplinary
actions in two-ways: (1) by delaying writedowns of impaired assets, and (2) by
accumulating political clout and using it to generate outside (and not always proper)
interference on its behalf.


Differences in the Allocation and Implementation of Legal Authority. Despite sharing
almost identical legal norms, the regulatory systems of the two countries differ
importantly in each of the first three dimensions. The Reserve Bank of New Zealand
(RBNZ) combines specialized prudential supervision of the NZ banking system with the
tasks of conceiving and executing monetary-policy actions. Conduct-of-business
regulation and supervision of financial firms in nonbank sectors is conducted by other
agencies. In Australia, the relatively new Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority
(APRA) follows the British model of leaving monetary policy to the central bank [The
Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA)], and exercises supervisory authority in an integrated
manner over insurance companies, depository institutions, and some types of securities
firms.
         These different structures of prudential regulation allocate responsibility for
preserving financial stability in very different ways. Unlike APRA, the RBNZ at present
has no formal responsibilities for supervising nonbank institutions (Mortlock, 2003).
Unlike the RBNZ, APRA leaves policy decisions that affect interest-rate and exchange-
rate volatility to the RBA, even though monetary-policy decisions can work potentially
devastating effects on an individual bank’s solvency and risk profile.
         Several other ways of allocating legal authority for promoting financial stability
are used by other countries. For example, the U.S. central bank combines monetary-



                                                                                           11
                                                                           December 2, 2005


policy authority with supervisory responsibilities, but competes for and shares
supervisory jurisdiction over banks with many other regulators. Several European
countries task their central bank with supervising securities firms and banks in tandem.
       The great diversity we observe in how supervisory authority is allocated supports
this paper’s central hypothesis that different ways of dividing supervisory and monetary-
policy responsibility have particular advantages and disadvantages, with the balance of
costs and benefits varying with the character of a country’s financial and political
contracting environment. Common sense and Samuelson’s principle of revealed
preference tell us that each country’s current structure is better suited to its own particular
financial environment than any other country’s would be.


Interaction of Differences in Monitoring Methods, Rules, and Enforcement. The goal of
all systems for supervising banks is the same: to assure a safe and sound financial
environment by protecting depositors and the economic health of the nation as a whole
from hidden and disruptive bank risk-taking. Ideally, rules and the ways they are
enforced are designed to detect losses and imprudent risk exposures and to resolve capital
shortages at banks before they can become deep enough to cause widespread disruption.
       As explained earlier, authorities’ vision is constrained by leeway in accounting
standards and by the larger disclosure regime in which their banks operate. The rules and
enforcement methods by which authorities pursue financial stability must be tailored to
overcome weaknesses not only in their own vision, but also in the vision of partner
regulators and in the bonding, deterrency, and transparency in their private contracting
environments.
       Disclosure regimes place a web of formal and informal obligations on bank
managers, accountants, and directors. These obligations determine what asset and
liability items bank accountants must report values for, what changes in value must be
reported (either on the balance sheet or in footnotes), and when and how authorities are to
be informed about emerging losses.
       In all countries, independent external accountants assume a responsibility for
reporting accurate information to directors, creditors, stockholders, regulators, and other
outsiders, even if the managers that hire them would prefer to cook the books in



                                                                                            12
                                                                          December 2, 2005


misleading ways. Similarly, bank directors have a duty to review and test audit reports
for accuracy and to assure themselves and regulators that the bank is being managed well.
       An effective regulatory partnership must impose sensible and enforceable
regulator-to-regulator disclosure obligations all around. When top regulators receive
strong evidence that crippling losses may be emerging at an individual bank, duty must
also require them to dispatch a team of forensic analysts to measure the extent of these
losses. When the special exam is completed, regulators are expected to share the findings
with the bank’s directors. At this point, directors could request a brief window of time to
give them a chance to cure the bank’s capital shortages. If sufficient new capital is not
subscribed, the bank would be closed, offered to a new owner, or placed in statutory
management. The task of statutory managers would be to decide afresh whether and
when to liquidate the bank or offer it for sale.
       In both Australia and New Zealand, auditors are required to report to the
supervisory authority any evidence they uncover of actual or potential insolvency and to
alert authorities about possible violations of prudential standards. Accountants must attest
that nothing that “has come to their attention” in preparing or reviewing financial
statements would cause them to believe that the bank’s financial statements and
supplementary disclosures do not present a “true and fair view” of the matters to which
they relate. Section 96 of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act requires auditors to
disclose directly to the RBNZ any information that is “likely to assist, or be relevant to
the exercise by the bank of its powers under this part of this act” [i.e., the RBNZ’s
supervisory powers]. The same section obliges a bank’s auditors to alert the RBNZ if
they believe the bank is either “insolvent or is likely to become insolvent or is in serious
financial difficulties.” Section 97 requires auditors to “take reasonable steps to inform
the registered bank” of their intention before expressing their concern to the RBNZ, and
Section 98 protects auditors that make good-faith disclosures from civil and criminal
liability or professional sanctions. The legal force of these provisions is to assure that
inserting exculpatory clauses into their articles of engagement cannot relieve auditors of
legal liability for not reporting evidence of a developing bank insolvency. The social
force of these provisions comes from an individual’s desire to enjoy the esteem of his or




                                                                                             13
                                                                          December 2, 2005


her fellow citizens and to avoid disgrace. Experience suggests that most auditors are
considerably more concerned about potential lawsuits than their social standing.
       The most important difference in the supervisory regimes of Australia and New
Zealand is the strength of the obligations that they place on bank directors to uncover and
transmit unfavorable information to top regulators (Brash, 1996). In Australia (indeed in
most countries other than New Zealand), bank managers, auditors, and directors may (if
they are careful about it) use loopholes in accounting rules to delay the transmission of
adverse information to regulators. Table 1 lists the alternative ways that news of
crippling losses may first come to light. It also lists the ways that managers, directors,
and lower-level regulatory staff members may sugarcoat bad news or temporarily
blockade the various paths through which bad news can reach top regulators.
       For directors of registered banks, New Zealand’s disclosure regime imposes self-
reporting obligations that all but eliminate impunity for director-supported
misrepresentation. All directors must sign quarterly statements indicating whether “after
due enquiry” they believe: (1) that the General Disclosure statement [Tripe (2001)
describes the content of this document] contains all information required and is neither
false nor misleading, (2) that the bank has complied with various regulations (including
rules on lending to connected persons), and (3) that the bank has in place and is properly
applying systems that adequately monitor and control material risks, a great many of
which are named explicitly. Finally, to do business in New Zealand, large Australian
banks must be locally incorporated. While no explicit residential requirement yet exists, it
has been understood that the chief executive should reside in New Zealand so that he or
she could be prosecuted for false disclosures without extradition proceedings.
       So far, directorial self-reporting has served New Zealand well. The threat of legal
and reputational penalties for false attestations have surfaced relevant supervisory issues
both as a result of changes occurring at individual banks and as a result of changes made
in the wording of RBNZ attestation requirements. Cautious directors of particular banks
have on several occasions scheduled meetings with RBNZ senior staff to inform them
promptly of concerns that interfere with their signing the required statements. Similarly,
when the RBNZ has encountered inconsistencies in attestations and reports, RBNZ staff
have initiated the same sort of meetings.



                                                                                             14
                                                                           December 2, 2005


         This special channel of verification focuses rule-making on what positions or
facts should be disclosed to the RBNZ and how the accuracy of disclosures should be
certified. Except for a web of specific restrictions on insurance activities and loans to
connected firms and persons, the RBNZ eschews formal limits on the size of particular
bank positions. It presumes that directorial disclosure obligations will identify losses and
imprudent loss exposures in a more relevant and more timely manner than a rigid
program of position caps and periodic inspections for breaches by government examiners
could.
         In contrast, position caps and confidential government inspections play starring
roles in Australia’s supervision of banks. Of course, the effectiveness of either regulatory
regime is routinely undermined by regulation-induced innovation. Still, government
supervisors are never going to know enough about the motives for financial innovation to
design ratios that can serve as an effective first line of defense against risk-shifting by
troubled banks. The presumption that particular portfolio positions are either
prohibitively risky in themselves or signify failure-producing risk-taking ignores both the
value that any risky position may have in diversifying other risks and the rich and
growing menu of techniques that banks use to hedge or intensify broad categories of risk-
taking today. The pace of innovation in techniques of risk-taking and risk management
virtually guarantees that with every passing day, balance-sheet ratios that predicted
failure in the past become less and less reliable measures of a modern bank’s proneness
to failure. Both in rule-making and in monitoring, the continuing expansion and growing
complication of structured and index derivatives keep government supervisors’ risk-
assessment capabilities lagging behind those of the banks they regulate. However,
impairments to regulatory vision and verification are less daunting in that many of them
can be contracted away.


Summary. In Australia and indeed in most other countries, inspection-based supervision
is a game of hide the cheese. The cheese, of course, is adverse information about a
bank’s true condition or periodic performance. Loopholes in the rules of the game
incentivize bank directors to help managers to mislead supervisors and other outsiders.
They can do this with impunity as long as the firm makes skillful and legitimate use of an



                                                                                              15
                                                                           December 2, 2005


evolving set of professionally certified accounting loopholes. Like night-club illusionists,
managers and accountants may even expect ethically challenged directors to admire their
proficiency in using smoke and mirrors to make losses and loss exposures invisible to the
naked eye.
        The distinctive feature of New Zealand’s post-1996 regulatory culture is that self-
reporting obligations imposed on directors simplify the supervisory burden of uncovering
and proving fraud and insolvency. It makes it illegal and disreputable for individual bank
directors to assist others in perpetrating an illusion. Directors are required by law to
bring to the attention of the supervisor important adverse information they happen to
come across. This duty is enforced by substantial criminal and civil penalties and
intensified by the reputational harm that timely public exposure of formally illicit
behavior inevitably brings.
        Even with substantial prior notice, replacing either country’s regulatory system by
the other would be extremely disruptive for the country whose supervisory traditions
would be pushed aside. It seems more sensible to focus on finding ways to network the
two systems in a cooperative way and to explore experimentally which particular
strategies and tactics can provide enough vision to control economic and financial stress
within and across the partner countries.


IV. The Role of Regulatory Culture in the Insolvency Detection and Bank Failure Process


        Economists define economic net worth (NE) as the full-information value of a
firm’s tangible and intangible assets and liabilities. In statistical terms, accounting or
book-value net worth (NBV) becomes a poorer and poorer estimator of NE. As the latent
variable NE declines, the estimator NBV becomes increasingly more biased and
inefficient.
        In effect, regulatory vision falters when it is most needed. This makes accounting
insolvency a dangerously unreliable threshold for winding up the affairs of a troubled
bank. Opportunities to defer the accounting realization of economic losses render
accounting net worth a lagging indicator of the extent of a troubled bank’s capital
shortage. When a financial institution’s survival is threatened, adverse information



                                                                                             16
                                                                          December 2, 2005


becomes harder and harder to detect in accounting reports. The threshold at which
authorities can force stockholders to either recapitalize a troubled bank or surrender their
franchise must be set high enough to compensate for this predictable decline in acuity.
       Historical experience shows that, with a zero NBV threshold, financial institutions’
ability to conceal risky transactions and impairments in asset values from outside eyes
can allow economic insolvencies to reach costly depths before authorities can address
them (Honohan and Klingebiel, 2003). Weaknesses in loss detection and regulatory
intervention rights can spawn a systemic crisis by enabling insolvent institutions to adopt
aggressive risk-taking strategies that—by destroying profit margins—spread insolvency
to competing institutions.


Crisis-Driven Reforms in New Zealand and the United States According to Honohan and
Klingebiel (2003), New Zealand’s banking system was in crisis between 1989 and 1992
(see also Ledingham, 1995). Several foreign-owned banks had to be recapitalized by
their parents, but a number of financial firms failed, one of which was a major institution:
the Development Finance Corporation (in 1989). Although DFC was not a commercial
bank, it was the seventh-largest financial institution in New Zealand. As the first
important financial insolvency to occur in many years, the need to resolve its affairs was
a systemic event that disrupted credit flows and put the viability of a few other
institutions into question. Winding up its affairs took many years and absorbed a great
deal of supervisory resources.
       According to Brash (2000), the country’s largest bank [the Bank of New Zealand]
would almost certainly have failed as well if the government (as the majority shareholder
at the time) had not been willing on two occasions to provide a “capital injection.” The
size of the second (1990) injection was disclosed to be NZ$620 million. Honohan and
Klingebiel estimate that the total fiscal cost of the crisis was 1.0 percent of GDP.
Although this cost is comparatively low, in dollar terms it is substantial. The policy
lessons revealed by this turbulent episode prompted authorities to redesign the RBNZ’s
early warning system to emphasize self-reporting by directors.
       Australia experienced a crisis of similar magnitude. Although it also did not offer
explicit deposit insurance, its winding-up regime gave depositors preference over other



                                                                                          17
                                                                                       December 2, 2005


creditors (a feature enacted in 1959). Authorities made minor changes in the substance of
its disclosure, intervention, and detection regimes. Without triggering a whistleblowing
obligation, directors of a distressed Australian bank can still stand by while managers
search out and exploit loopholes that can conceal losses. Governmental intervention
rights continue to depend primarily on examiners’ ability to uncover and verify hidden
problems. However, the Australian Stock Exchange (ASX) imposes disclosure and
whistle-blowing obligations on listed banks. These obligations fall on the banking
“entity” rather than specific officeholders and shift the burden of further disclosure onto
the ASX2. This leaves the forensic accounting burden that supervisory officials must
meet before they can intervene somewhat higher in Australia than in New Zealand and
more subjective than in the U.S.
         Although the U.S. operates an insolvency-detection regime similar to Australia’s,
taxpayer losses in the savings-and-loan debacle led Congress to beef up and mechanize
regulators’ intervention and winding-up rights. Along a specified ladder of positive net-
worth thresholds, U.S. banking law now authorizes an escalating series of interventions
and requires regulators to intervene ever more strongly as a bank’s accounting net-worth
declines. The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991 instructs
bank regulators to demand that banks take particularly strong corrective actions whenever
their book-value net worth falls below 4 percent of assets. If these remedies fail to stop
the slide in a bank’s accounting net worth, regulators must order a stockholder
recapitalization. If the recapitalization does not materialize or proves insufficient,
authorities must—after due notice—put the bank into a receivership or conservatorship
(in most circumstances) once its book-value net worth falls below 2 percent of assets.
Putting stockholders on notice lets them avoid closure by injecting new capital or finding
a merger partner. They should exercise one of these options if they believe that NE is still
positive. The alternatives that these options offer prevent the 2-percent threshold from
being characterized under common law as an “unjust taking” of private assets by the
government.



2
  ASX Listing Rule 3.1 states: “Once an entity is or becomes aware of any information concerning it that
any reasonable person would expect to have a material effect on the price or value of an entity’s securities,
the entity must immediately tell ASX that information.”


                                                                                                           18
                                                                         December 2, 2005


       APRA employs triggers for intervention as well. The process is called
PAIRS/SOARS. Experts evaluate the financial health of a bank and its systemic
significance. This evaluation feeds into a four-way classification scheme for calibrating
the need for regulatory attention and discipline: normal; oversight; mandated
improvement; restructuring. Quantitative elements in these assessments influence but do
not formally dictate APRA’s response.


Potential Conflict between the Australian and New Zealand Strategies for Insolvency-
Detection The success of any partnership depends on how much the partners disagree
and how well they can handle disagreement. Potential conflict between host-country and
home-country supervisors intensifies as a bank weakens. Divergences in disclosure and
detection regimes allow home and host regulators to compile and react to evidence of
bank weakness in different ways.
       Mayes (2005) distinguishes four regimes of market and supervisory response to
individual-bank accounting reports. In the first regime, market participants and
supervisors are satisfied with the bank’s condition and performance and impose no
penalties. In the second regime, the bank manages to meet all supervisory tests, but
market participants begin to impose risk premiums. In the third case, supervisors begin
to be concerned and should be acting to strengthen the bank. In the fourth case, the bank
is economically insolvent and authorities need to take over the bank and relicense it.
       Within Mayes’ third regime, home and host supervisors may not be equally
concerned. Even when both sets of regulators enjoy the same acuity of vision,
nationalistic norms and reputational concern might tempt home-country officials to delay
insolvency resolution (Kane, 1989). Home-country delays give managers of a failing
institution an opportunity to shift bad assets to the host jurisdiction. When banking
problems surface during a top official’s watch, his or her reputation is at risk. In some
cases, agency leaders may even be grateful that accounting trickery can temporarily hide
evidence of weakness from the market. Similarly, in the host country, effective action
may also be delayed by the threat of career and reputational penalties that politically
important foreign banks may be able to exert on particular ministers both directly and
through the press.



                                                                                            19
                                                                            December 2, 2005


        As the home-country regulator, it is APRA’s job to assess the strength of each
cross-country conglomerate institution. Although rumors can speed up the process,
Australia maintains a traditional zero-value accounting threshold for failing a bank or
banking conglomerate. It is easy to imagine circumstances in which information
transmitted by resident directors would lead the RBNZ to recognize the insolvency of an
Australian bank’s New Zealand subsidiary long before periodic reports and APRA’s
examination-based verification methods could ascertain whether the economic net worth
of the Australian parent was truly strong enough to cover New Zealand losses on a
consolidated basis.
        These are precisely the circumstances in which preserving RBNZ intervention
rights would protect New Zealand taxpayers from potential weaknesses or mistakes in
Australian supervision. In cases where the conglomerate organization was in fact weak,
home-country managers would not want the RBNZ to force APRA to examine their
accounts more closely. Given the RBNZ policy of local incorporation, a supervisorily
compliant, but economically insolvent Australian parent would recognize the value of
making sure that, at each quarterly reporting date, it had shuffled enough good assets to
its New Zealand subsidiary to keep local accountants and directors from blowing any
whistles. Backed up by local directors’ obligation to inform the RBNZ of any transaction
than weakens a New Zealand institution, this incentive protects New Zealand taxpayers
from being saddled with losses incurred in Australia. However, this protection would
unravel either if Australian banks were allowed to operate in New Zealand through
branch offices or if the Australian scheme for insolvency detection were simply to
displace the New Zealand one.


V. Summary


        Prudential regulation seeks to assure the safety and soundness of the financial
sector. As institutions and markets evolve, so must processes for resolving incentive
conflicts in financial transactions.
        The inherited regulatory cultures of Australia and New Zealand show differences
in the structure of legal authority, in their reliance on position limits and other rules, and



                                                                                             20
                                                                         December 2, 2005


in the technology used to monitor bank risk-taking and net worth. Lasting differences in
regulatory culture evolve experimentally, as tentative solutions to recognized societal
problems that prove themselves able to meet the test of time.
       The persistence of substantial differences implies that authorities in the two
countries have had to respond to fundamental differences in operative political, cultural,
and risk-taking environments. Replacing New Zealand’s financial regulatory system
with that of Australia would simultaneously deny New Zealand citizens the hard-won
benefits of this evolutionary process and make it hard for them to hold regulatory
officials in Australia accountable politically for costs their policy decisions might impose
on the Kiwi economy.
       The Mishan welfare criterion tells us that trans-Tasman regulatory arrangements
cannot be fairly harmonized unless and until political mechanisms can be established that
enable regulators and citizens of both countries to observe and adequately discipline the
tradeoffs that responsible officials make between their own and partner-country interests
when these interests diverge. Only by crafting the equivalent of a strong and fair
prenuptial agreement can efforts to marry the regulation of individual-country banking
markets be expected to succeed. At a minimum, each prenuptial agreement must impose
bilateral obligations to intervene well in advance of book-value insolvency and to
disclose emerging concerns to partner regulators promptly. To back up these obligations,
the agreement should authorize partner regulators to sue in a neutral court to recover
damages from countries whose officials appear to have violated this right.




                                                                                          21
                                                                     December 2, 2005


                                   REFERENCES


Aghion, Philippe, Patrick Bolton, and Steven Fries, 1999. “Optimal Design of Bank
      Bailouts: The Case of Transition Economies,” Journal of Institutional and
      Theoretical Economics, 55(March), 51-70.

Altunbas, Yener, and David Marqués Ibáñez, 2004. “Mergers and Acquisitions and
      Performance in Europe: The Role of Strategic Similarities,” Frankfurt: European
      Central Bank, Working Paper No. 398 (October).

Bank for International Settlements, Committee on Banking Regulations and Supervisory
       Practices, 1975. Report to the Governors on the Supervision of Banks’ Foreign
       Establishments (the “Concordat”), Geneva (September 26).

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, 1997. Core Principles for Effective Banking
       Supervision, Geneva (September).

_________________, 2001. Core Principles: Cross-Sectional Comparison, Geneva
      (November).

_________________, 2003. High-Level Principles for the Cross-Border Implementation
      of the New Accord, Geneva (August).

Brash, Donald T., 1996. “A New Approach to Bank Supervision,” Address to the Center
       for the Study of Financial Innovation, London (June 5).

_________________, 2000. “Central Banks and Financial System Stability in an
      Uncertain World,” Address to the Belgian Financial Forum (June 6).

Honohan, Patrick, and Daniela Klingebiel, 2003. “The Fiscal Cost Implications of an
      Accommodating Approach to Banking Crises.” Journal of Banking and Finance,
      27(August), 1539-1560.

Joint Press Conference, 2005. Transcript of Proceedings Featuring Michael Cullen, New
        Zealand Finance Minister and Peter Costello, Australian Treasurer, Wellington,
        NZ (Feb. 17).

Kane, Edward J., 1989. “Changing Incentives Facing Financial-Services Regulators,”
       Journal of Financial Services Research 2(September), 265-274.

Ledingham, Peter, 1995. “The Review of Bank Supervision Arrangements in New
      Zealand: The Main Elements in the Debate,” Reserve Bank of New Zealand:
      Bulletin, 58 (September), 163-171.




                                                                                     22
                                                                     December 2, 2005


Mishan, E.J., 1969. Welfare Economics: An Assessment, Amsterdam and London: North
      Holland Publishing Company

Mayes, David G., 2005. “Crisis Resolution of Large Banks in Small Countries,”
      Slideshow Prepared for Norges Bank Conference on Banking Crisis Resolution—
      Theory and Policy (June).

Mortlock, Geof, 2003. “New Zealand’s Financial Sector Regulation,” Reserve Bank of
      New Zealand: Bulletin, 66(December), 5-49.

Schüler, Martin, 2003. “Incentive Problems in Banking Supervision – The European
       Case,” Mannheim, Germany: ZEW Discussion Paper No. 03-62.

Todd, Walker, 2002. “Central Banking in a Democracy: The Problem of the Lender of
      Last Resort,” in P.A. McCoy (ed.), Financial Modernization after Gramm-Leach-
      Bliley, Newark, NJ: Matthew Bender.

Tripe, David, 2001. “Banking Supervision by Disclosure: A Review of the New Zealand
       Regime,” Centre for Banking Studies, Massey University, Palmerston North, NZ
       (unpublished).

Weston, J. Fred, Juan A. Siu, and Brian A. Johnson, 2001. Takeovers, Restructuring, and
      Corporate Governance, Third Edition. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall
      Inc.
Woolford, Ian, and Adrian Orr, 2005. “The Limits to Hospitality,” The Financial
      Regulator, 10(June), 41-46.




                                                                                    23
                                                                         December 2, 2005



                                        TABLE 1
        PATHS BY WHICH BAD NEWS MAY REACH TOP REGULATORS


  Ways in Which          Initial Source of       Ways in Which           Ways in Which
  Crippling News            Corrective          Bank Management          Regulators Can
     Surfaces                Pressure           Can Challenge or        Lessen the Call to
                                                 Stifle Bad News        Action Generated
                                                                        by the Bad News
1. Government-         Government               Exercise rights to     Higher-ups may
   Initiated Path      examiners discover       appeal examiner        modify examiner’s
                       irregularities in loan   writedowns             “pencil report”
                       underwriting,
                       documentation, or
                       loss reserves during
                       an ordinary bank
                       examination
2. Bank-Initiated      A conscientious          a. Auditors may be  a. Not applicable
   Paths               internal                    persuaded to     b. Not applicable
                       whistleblower               ignore or        c. Regulators may
                       provides evidence to        marginalize the      treat the
                       either:                     evidence             whistleblower as
                       a. the bank’s            b. Boardmembers         a mean-spirited
                           external auditor        may be persuaded     troublemaker
                       b. the bank’s board         to ignore the
                           of directors            evidence
                       c. regulatory            c. Managers may
                           staffmembers.           succeed in
                                                   demonizing the
                                                   whistleblower
3. Auditor-Initiated Auditor finds              Managers concoct a Regulators may
   Path              irregularities and         persuasive cover    ignore the audit
                     either quits, is fired,    story for the       impasse
                     or issues a qualified      impasse.
                     report
4. Creditor-Driven News about auditor           Managers may           Central bank may
   Path              issues, leaks, or          collateralize and/or   replace private
                     autonomous rumors          pay very high          funding with
                     undermine depositor        interest on large      discount-window
                     confidence or the          deposits or            loans
                     confidence of              interbank loans
                     suppliers of
                     interbank loans



                                                                                          24
