NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT ADVERTISING ON TELEVISION
AND ITS INFLUENCE ON CHILDHOOD OBESITY
Shin-Yi Chou
Inas Rashad
Michael Grossman
Working Paper 11879
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11879
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2005

Research for this paper was supported by grant number 1R01 DK54826 from the National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases to the National Bureau of Economic Research. Preliminary
versions of the paper were presented at the Fifth World Congress of the International Health Economics
Association, the 2004 Eastern Economics Association Conference, the 2004 Southern Economic Association
Conference, the 2005 Chinese Economists Society Convention, and at seminars at Lehigh University and the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. We wish to thank the participants in these conferences and
seminars for helpful comments and suggestions. This paper has not undergone the review accorded official
NBER publications; in particular, it has not been submitted for approval by the Board of the Directors. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of NIDDKD or NBER. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2005 by Shin-Yi Chou, Inas Rashad, and Michael Grossman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Fast-Food Restaurant Advertising on Television and Its Influence on Childhood Obesity
Shin-Yi Chou, Inas Rashad, and Michael Grossman
NBER Working Paper No. 11879
December 2005
JEL No. I10, I12
ABSTRACT
Childhood obesity around the world, and particularly in the United States, is an escalating problem
that is especially detrimental as its effects carry on into adulthood. In this paper we employ the 1979
Child-Young Adult National Longitudinal Survey of Youth and the 1997 National Longitudinal
Survey of Youth to estimate the effects of fast-food restaurant advertising on children and
adolescents being overweight. The advertising measure used is the number of hours of spot
television fast-food restaurant advertising messages seen per week. Our results indicate that a ban
on these advertisements would reduce the number of overweight children ages 3-11 in a fixed
population by 10 percent and would reduce the number of overweight adolescents ages 12-18 by 12
percent. The elimination of the tax deductibility of this type of advertising would produce smaller
declines of between 3 and 5 percent in these outcomes but would impose lower costs on children and
adults who consume fast food in moderation because positive information about restaurants that
supply this type of food would not be banned completely from television.
Shin-Yi Chou
Department of Economics
College of Business and Economics
Lehigh University
621 Taylor Street
Bethlehem, PA 18015-3117
and NBER
syc@lehigh.edu
Inas Rashad
Department of Economics
Georgia State University
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
irashad@gsu.edu

Michael Grossman
City University of New York Graduate Center
365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10016-4309
and NBER
mgrossman@gc.cuny.edu

I. INTRODUCTION

Childhood obesity around the world, and particularly in the United States, is an
escalating problem that has received much attention of late. In less than thirty years, the
prevalence of overweight children and adolescents in America has more than doubled. In
the 1963-1970 period, 4 percent of children aged 6 to 11 years and 5 percent of
adolescents aged 12 to 19 were defined as being overweight. The percentage of children
who are overweight has more than tripled by 1999, reaching 13 percent. For adolescents,
the incidence of overweight has nearly tripled in the same period, reaching 14 percent
(Centers for Disease Control 2001).
Finding the causes of this dramatic increase in obesity among children and
adolescents is an important input in designing prevention policies. On the simplest level,
weight gain is caused by more energy intake than energy expenditure over a long period
of time. The problem of energy imbalance is not purely due to genetics, since our genes
have not changed substantially during the past two decades. Researchers have tended to
focus on environmental factors such as the availability of highly palatable and caloriedense fast food to promote high energy intake as well as the appeal of television, video
games, and computers to discourage energy expenditure.
Children and adolescents are increasingly engaging in sedentary behavior,
spending less time exercising outdoors and more time watching television and playing
video games. The Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (1988-1994)
indicates that 20 percent of US children aged 8 to 16 participated in 2 or fewer bouts of
vigorous activity per week, and more than 26 percent watched at least 4 hours of

television per day and 67 percent watched at least 2 hours per day (Andersen et al. 1998).
Television viewing may contribute to childhood obesity both by reducing energy
expenditure from displacement of physical activity and increasing energy intake from
increased snacking during television viewing or as a result of exposure to food
advertising.
How the commercial advertising of foods contributes to the epidemic of obesity
among children and adolescents is still an ongoing debate. There is widespread
speculation that the exposure to food advertising may contribute to unhealthy food
choices and weight gain. Despite lacking evidence showing the direct linkage between
television food advertising and childhood obesity, several industrialized countries such as
Sweden, Norway, and Finland have banned commercial sponsorship of children’s
programs. Sweden also does not permit any television advertising targeting children
under the age of twelve (Kaiser Family Foundation 2004). In the United States, most
recently, companies such as Kraft Foods have decided to curb advertising aimed at
children in an effort to encourage better eating habits (Mayer 2005). However, the Bush
administration has argued that no one has proven that advertising causes obesity and did
not take any action in regulating advertising directed at children, after the World Health
Organization proposed that countries be urged to limit advertisements that encourage
unhealthy diets, especially those directed at children.
The purpose of this paper is to explore the causal relationship between exposure
to fast-food restaurant advertising on television and childhood obesity. We employ two
individual-level data sets: the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 for
adolescents aged 12 to 18 and the Child-Young Adult National Longitudinal Survey of

2

Youth 1979 for children aged 3 to 11. The data for fast-food restaurant advertising on
television are appended to the individual-level data by designated market area and year.
We employ several different specifications and most results show a positive impact of
fast-food restaurant advertising on television on body mass index and the probability of
being overweight for children and adolescents, some estimates being statistically
significant and others not.

II. BACKGROUND AND LITERATURE REVIEW

Obesity is measured by the body mass index (BMI), also termed Quetelet’s index,
and defined as weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared. Persons 18
years of age and older with a BMI greater than or equal to 30 kg/m2 are classified as
obese. An overweight child or adolescent (the term obese is reserved for adults) is
defined as one having a BMI at or above the 95th percentile based on age- and genderspecific growth charts for children and adolescents in the second and third National
Health Examination Surveys (NHES II and NHES III), conducted between 1963 and
1965 and between 1966 and 1970, respectively, and from the first, second, and third
National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys (NHANES I, NHANES II, and
NHANES III), conducted between 1971 and 1974, 1976 and 1980, and 1988 and 1994,
respectively.1

1

Prior to 2000, the growth charts excluded data from NHANES II and III. The 2000 revisions included
children and adolescents in NHANES II and children under 6 in NHANES III to make the charts more
nationally representative. There is little difference, however, between the two sets of charts, especially for
children over the age of 1 (Kuczmarski et al. 2002). In particular, trends are not distorted by the use of
examinations in different years to construct the growth charts.
3

Trends in the mean body mass index of persons ages 3-11 (hereafter termed
children) and the percentage overweight between 1963 and 2000 are presented in Table
1a. Similar data for persons aged 12-18 (hereafter termed adolescents or teenagers) are
presented in Table 1b. These data come from heights and weights obtained from physical
examinations conducted in NHES II and III, in NHANES I, II, and III, and in 1999-2000
NHANES (NHANES 99).2 Both tables show dramatic increases in the percentage of
overweight children and teenagers between 1978 (the mid-year of NHANES II) and 2000.
This percentage doubled for teenagers and almost tripled for children. For teenagers, the
relatively flat trend prior to 1978 and the rapid increase since that year mirror the
behavior of the trend in obesity for adults (Chou et al. 2004). For children, the picture is
somewhat different. There appears to be an upward trend throughout the period, but the
figures for 1963-65 pertain to children ages 6-11. As shown by Ogden et al. (2002), if
the series on overweight is limited to this age range, there is no increase between 1964
(the mid-year of NHES II) and late 1972 (the mid-point of NHANES I, which began in
May 1971 and ended in June 1974). This percentage rises between 1972 and 1978 for 611 year-olds, but it does not rise for 3-5 year-olds. In any case, data from the most recent
NHANES survey suggest that the upward trend in the percentage of children and
teenagers who are overweight between NHANES II and NHANES III continued through
the year 2000.
Obesity puts children and adolescents at risk for a range of health problems and
can affect cardiovascular health (hypercholesterolemia and dyslipidemia, hypertension),
the endocrine system (hyperinsulinism, insulin resistance, impaired glucose tolerance,
2

For adolescents in the earliest period, NHES I, conducted between 1959 and 1962, is used for 18-yearolds.
4

type II diabetes mellitus, menstrual irregularity), and mental health (depression, low selfesteem) (Krebs and Jacobson 2003). For example, the prevalence of type II diabetes in
children, originally termed adult-onset diabetes, went from four percent in 1982 to 16
percent in 1994 (Squires 1998). Overweight children and adolescents are likely to grow
into overweight adults. The probability of childhood obesity persisting into adulthood is
estimated to increase from about 20 percent at 4 years of age to approximately 80 percent
by adolescence (Krebs and Jacobson 2003). Some estimates suggest that the increasing
prevalence of overweight and obesity accounts for approximately 300,000 deaths every
year, next only to the preventable mortality associated with cigarette smoking (McGinnis
and Foege 1993; Allison et al. 1999). In a more recent study, Flegal et al. (2005) report a
smaller but still substantial figure of approximately 112,000 excess deaths in the year
2000. Aggregate medical spending for the United States that is attributed to obesity
accounted for 9.1 percent of total annual medical expenditures in 1998, as high as $78.5
billion (Finkelstein et al. 2003).
Behavioral and environmental factors are large contributors to the obesity
epidemic and also the most easily modifiable causes of obesity among children (Hill and
Peters 1998; US Department of Health and Human Services 2001). Television viewing is
suspected to be one potential contributor to childhood obesity through several possible
avenues.3 First, television viewing time will displace time spent engaging in physical
activity. The sedentary nature of watching television further encourages one to consume
unhealthy foods. Moreover, being exposed to food advertisements on television, children
and adolescents are more prone to developing unhealthy dietary habits that are likely to
carry over into adulthood. Most studies using cross-sectional data have found a
3

See Kaiser Family Foundation (2004) for a more detailed report on the role of media in childhood obesity.
5

significant correlation between obesity prevalence and television viewing (Dietz and
Gortmaker 1985; Gortmaker et al. 1996; Crespo et al. 2001; Andersen et al. 1998), but
others have not (Robinson et al. 1993). The results based on a randomized controlled
school-based trial aimed at reducing television viewing for school-aged children has
provided strong evidence to support the role of limiting television time in the prevention
of childhood obesity (Robinson 1999). Two longitudinal studies also found the persistent
effect of television viewing on body fat over time (Hancox et al. 2004; Proctor et al.
2003). Hancox et al. (2004) have shown that television viewing during childhood and
adolescence is associated with an increased likelihood of being overweight in early
adulthood. Proctor et al. (2003) found that preschool children who watched the most
television had the greatest possibility of becoming overweight adolescents.
In the period during which childhood obesity increased so drastically, there was
also an increased amount of time spent watching television and an increased exposure to
food advertising by children and adolescents. Around 1950, only two percent of
households in the United States had television sets; by the early 1990s, 98 percent of
households owned at least one, and over 60 percent had cable television (Huston 1992;
Donnerstein et al. 1994). In the late 1970s, children viewed an average of about 20,000
commercials aired on television per year. The number increased to 30,000 per year in the
late 1980s and more than 40,000 per year in the late 1990s (Kunkel 2001). Moreover, the
majority of advertisements targeted at children are ones of food with minimum nutritional
value: candy (32 percent of all children’s ads), cereal (31 percent), and fast-food
restaurants (9 percent) (Kunkel 2001). In 1997 US food manufacturers spent $7 billion

6

on product advertising. Money spent on fast-food restaurant advertising made up about
28 percent of advertising, up from only five percent in 1980 (Gallo 1999).
While most prior studies have confirmed correlations between television watching
and obesity in children, few studies have looked at the effect that fast-food restaurant
advertising on television per se might have on childhood obesity. Several studies
reviewed by the Kaiser Family Foundation (2004) indirectly pointed to the positive
relationship between television advertising and caloric intake. For example, Giammattei
et al. (2003) found that middle-school children who watched more television tended to
consume more soft drinks, a possible consequence of exposure to food advertising on
television. Borzekowski and Robinson (2001) have shown that even brief exposures to
televised food commercials can influence preschool children’s food preferences. Based
on a randomized trial, children exposed to videotapes with embedded commercials were
significantly more likely to choose the advertised items. However, two cross-sectional
studies cited in Ashton (2004) supported the argument that there was no causal
relationship between television advertising and childhood obesity. One study showed
that childhood obesity rates were no different in Quebec, where food advertising aimed at
children has been banned since 1980, from those rates in other Canadian provinces. The
other showed that Sweden, where a similar advertising ban has existed for over a decade,
did not have lower childhood obesity rates.
Among many potentially important contributors to a positive energy balance, fastfood restaurant advertising on television is the main focus of this study. Children are
easily molded by what they see in television commercials. Studies indicate that the more
children watch television, the more they specifically request the brand-name products that

7

are advertised on television when at the grocery store.4 Consumer behavior in response
to advertising could be explained using Becker and Murphy (1993), where a model in
which a brand’s advertising level interacts with consumption in the consumer’s utility
function is proposed. In this model, by treating advertising as a complementary good,
consumers may simply derive more utility from consuming a more advertised good. As
an example, it may be that a child values the toys that go together with the commercial
products, and advertising may then serve as an input that enables the consumer to derive
more utility when the advertised product is consumed. Moreover, children – especially
younger ones – may not be able to distinguish advertisements from regular programs and
have little understanding of their persuasive intent. Using children’s favorite characters
and linking products with concepts such as fun, happiness, and well-being, food
advertisements can successfully entice children to consume their products.
Nevertheless, the effect of television advertising on childhood obesity is complex,
dealing with the interplay between the characteristics of the children, the attitudes of their
parents, and environmental settings. Our empirical study attempts to isolate the effect of
fast-food restaurant advertising on television on obesity in children and adolescents.

III. DATA AND SAMPLE

The micro-level data set that we use for adolescents aged 12 to 18 is the National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997. The National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997
(hereafter NLSY97) is a nationally representative sample of the US population aged 12 to
16 years old as of December 31, 1996. The initial sample in 1997 consists of 8,984
4

See Kaiser Family Foundation (2004) for a reference.
8

respondents originated from 6,819 unique households. Two subsamples comprise the
NLSY97 cohort. The first is a nationally-representative sample of 6,748 respondents
born between 1980 and 1984. The second consists of 2,236 oversampled black and
Hispanic respondents for that age group. The survey has collected extensive information
about youth labor market behavior and educational experiences over time. Round 1 of
the NLSY97, which took place in 1997, contains a parent questionnaire that generates
information about the youth’s family background and history. Only 7,942 youth
respondents, out of 8,984, have information available from a parent interview. The
NLSY97 also contains information on time use including the amount of time spent in the
prior week watching television from youth aged 12 to 14 in Round 1.5
We pool 3 rounds of NLSY97 for the analysis: 1997 (N=8,984), 1998 (N=8,386)
and 1999 (N=8,209).6 Before any state-level or advertising data are appended to the
NLSY97, the pooled sample size is 14,852 when observations with missing values are
deleted. Note that a large percentage of observations are dropped due to the missing
values on television watching time. This question is not asked of youth over the age of
14 in 1997 (Round 1), and it is not asked after that year. Therefore, we assume that the
1997 values also apply to 1998 and 1999.
We also use the matched mother-child data from the National Longitudinal
Survey of Youth 1979 (hereafter NLSY79) for children aged 3 to 11. The NLSY79 is a
nationally representative sample of 12,686 individuals, of whom 6,283 were women who
were 14-22 years old when they were first surveyed in 1979. In 1986, biennial interviews
of all children born to female respondents began, making up the Child and Young Adult
5

Out of 8,984, only 5,419 youth respondents were between the ages of 12 and 14 in Round 1. Thus, 40%
of our sample was dropped due to the missing values on television watching time.
6
We do not use the year 2000 for NLSY97 because our advertising data are from 1996 to 1999.
9

File. We use three survey years of data, 1996, 1998, and 2000. The television watching
variable is available in each of these years. We restrict both final samples to those
individuals that have a body mass index not less than 11 kg/m2 and not greater than
140kg/m2.
Fast-food restaurant television advertising data are obtained from Competitive
Media Reporting (CMR), the largest provider of advertising tracking services in the
United States. This has exposure information and dollar expenditures for a wide array of
fast-food restaurant chains in the United States from 1996 to 1999.7 Competitive Media
Reporting was formed in 1992 by combining several advertising tracking and broadcast
proof-of-performance companies. The exposure variable equals the annual number of
seconds of fast-food restaurant messages aired on television. This variable is then
divided by a factor of (60*60*52) or 187,200 to convert it into the weekly number of
hours of fast-food restaurant advertising messages aired. The unit of observation for this
variable is the DMA, or Designated Market Area, which is similar to a Metropolitan
Statistical Area. The designated market area is a region composed of counties (and
occasionally split counties) that defines a television market. Thus, the advertising data
were appended to our individual records by DMA and year.8 Out of about 210 DMAs,
the top 75 (in terms of TV households) are contained in the CMR database and used in

7

The corporations we chose for this analysis that we believed best reflected the fast-food industry were:
A&W Restaurants Inc, AFC Enterprises, Allied Domecq Plc, Arthur Treachers Inc, Carrols Corp, Chester
Fried Chicken Restaurants, Chick-Fil-A Inc, Cici Enterprises Inc, Cke Restaurants Inc, Culver Franchising
System Inc, Diageo Plc, Dominos Pizza Inc, Fatboys Franchise Systems Inc, Foodmaker Inc, Galardi
Group, Hungry Howies Pizza & Subs Inc, Ich Corp, In-N-Out Burgers Inc, Inno-Pacific Holdings Inc,
Krispy Kreme Doughnut Corp, Krystal Co, Leeann Chin, Little Caesars Enterprises Inc, Long John Silvers
Inc, McDonalds Corp, Panda Express, Papa Ginos Inc, Papa Johns Intl Inc, Quality Dining Inc, Ranch 1,
Rax Restaurants Inc, Showbiz Pizza Time Inc, Sizzler Intl Inc, Sonic Corp, Speedy Burgers Inc, TCBY
Enterprises Inc, Triarc Cos Inc, Tricon Global Restaurants Inc, Wendys Intl Inc, Whataburger Inc, and
White Castle System Inc.
8
We append 1999 advertising data to 2000 NLSY79 data by DMA.
10

our study. As a consequence, our final sample sizes, when the advertising data are
appended, are 6,322 person-years for respondents aged 3 to 11 (NLSY79) and 6,818
person-years for respondents aged 12-18 (NLSY97).
Note that network television, syndicated television, and cable network
television advertising are not included in our data because they have no local
variation. National advertising effects cannot be obtained in the specifications that
we employ since they contain dichotomous year indicators. Spot television
advertising has local variation and is reported by year and by market area by CMR.
That is the type of advertising that we consider.
An important conceptual issue that arises in measuring the impact of exposure to
advertising on consumer behavior is whether the effect on any one consumer depends on
the total number of minutes of advertising aired on television in the consumer’s DMA or
on the per capita number of minutes aired. This depends on whether advertising is
treated as a public good. Public goods are non-excludable and non-rejectable. If street
signs are public goods, then a billboard showing an ad, for example, can be viewed as a
public good (or a public “bad” if over-provided). This is not as straightforward with
advertisements on television, which could be excludable (unless everyone owns a
television set) or rejectable (as one can turn the channel if one chooses to do so).
The advertising literature seems to be mixed with regard to using total exposure
or this variable per capita.9 The most compelling justification for total exposure is that
two consumers cannot eat the same apple, but two consumers can watch the same
advertisement. The most compelling justification for the per capita specification is that
9

For example, Saffer (1997), Tellis and Weisee (1995), and Tellis et al. (2000) use advertising only, while
Saffer and Dave (2003) use exposure per capita.
11

there are more television stations in larger market areas. This lowers the probability that
two consumers will see the same advertisement in a larger market even if they spend the
same amount of time watching television. Because the first factor seems to us to be more
important than the second (two consumers in the same market area certainly can view the
same advertisement no matter how large the area), we emphasize results with total
exposure. In preliminary research, we found that results for per capita exposure were
similar to those with total exposure.
As will be described in more detail in Section IV, we will employ a two-stage
least squares estimation to correct for the potential endogeneity of the advertising
variable. The price variable, which is used as an instrument in our study, is created by
dividing dollar expenditures by exposure time (messages aired) within a designated
market area. CMR is also the source for the number of households in a DMA with a
television set, also used as an instrument for the exposure variable. Annual temperature,
our third instrument, pertains to the mean 1976 temperature in the county of residence,
and is obtained from the 1998 Area Resource File.
To control for other factors that might affect caloric intake and caloric
expenditure, we also include several state-level variables that are appended to the
individual data by state and year. The number of fast-food restaurants and the number of
full-service restaurants are taken from the Census of Retail Trade. Three food prices are
also included: full-service restaurant price, fast-food restaurant price, and food at home
price. The first price variable is taken from the same source as the number of restaurants,
namely the Census of Retail Trade. The last two price variables are obtained from the
American Chamber of Commerce Researchers Association (ACCRA). The price of

12

cigarettes is taken from the Tax Burden on Tobacco (Orzechowski and Walker 2002).
Clean indoor air laws are taken from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
website (http://www2.cdc.gov/nccdph/osh/state). More detailed descriptions of the
definitions and construction of these variables and their roles in equations for weight
outcomes can be found in Chou et al. (2004).

IV. EMPIRICAL IMPLEMENTATION

We employ parental reports of height and weight in NLSY79 and adolescent
reports of height and weight in NLSY97 to construct two dependent variables: body mass
index (BMI) and an indicator that equals one if the child or adolescent is overweight.
Given the large sample size, we fit linear probability models rather than logit or probit
models when the overweight indicator is the outcome. Our most inclusive regression
model is
Yijt = α + γ 1Sijt + γ 2Tijt + β o X ijt + β1M ijt + β 2 Z ijt + µ j + ν t + ε ijt .

(1)

In this equation, the dependent variable (Yijt) is the weight outcome (BMI or overweight)
for person i in DMA j surveyed in year t. The regressors are the number of hours of spot
television fast-food restaurant advertising messages seen per week (Sijt); the number of
hours per week spent watching television (Tijt); a vector of demographic variables for
children or adolescents, including age, race, and gender (Xijt); a vector of variables
containing mother’s employment status, household income, a dummy for missing income,
and dummy variables indicating whether the mother is overweight (BMI of 25 kg/m2 or
greater) or obese (Mijt); a vector of state-specific variables including the per capita

13

number of fast-food restaurants, the per capita number of full-service restaurants, the real
cigarette price, dichotomous indicators for clean indoor air laws, the real full-service
restaurant price, the real food at home price, and the real fast-food restaurant price (Zijt);
and vectors indicating DMA (µj) and year (νt). The disturbance term is εijt.
Whether the mother is overweight or obese helps to partially capture the genetic
component that determines a child’s body mass index. The effect of food advertising on
children and adolescents also depends on the resources allocated by parents for food
consumption by the family, to parental response to their children’s food purchase
requests, and to parental control of their food consumption. We include family income
and mother’s employment status to control for parental influence on children’s and
adolescents’ food consumption.10 Anderson et al. (2003) focus on children and find that
maternal employment has an effect on obesity in children.
Our main variable of interest is the number of hours of spot television fast-food
restaurant advertising messages seen per week (Sijt). We compute this as
Sijt = pijtAjt,

(2)

where Ajt is the number of hours of messages aired per week and pijt is the probability
that a given child or adolescent saw one hour of advertising. In turn, this probability is
estimated as
pijt = Tijt/168

(3)

where Tijt is the number of hours per week that the child or adolescent watches television
and 168 equals the total number of hours in a week. This assumes that the ratio of hours

10

We do not account for the potential endogeneity of mother’s employment status in our regressions, as
that is not the main focus of this paper. See Anderson et al. (2003) for an analysis of the impact of
mother’s employment status on childhood obesity while accounting for potential endogeneity.
14

of advertising seen to hours of advertising aired is equal to the ratio of hours of television
seen to hours available for all activities including sleep.
An advantage of the specification given by equation (1) is that it allows the
amount of time spent watching television to have an effect on weight outcomes that is
independent of the number of minutes of fast-food restaurant advertising messages seen.
One disadvantage is that Tijt and Sijt are highly correlated, which makes it difficult to sort
out the partial impact of each factor. A second disadvantage is that the relationship
between watching television and weight reflects causality in both directions: more
overweight children tend to be more sedentary and thus watch more television. To
circumvent the first problem, we fit a second model that omits Tijt as a regressor. To
circumvent the second, we estimate a third model in which advertising exposure is given
by Ajt, the number of hours of messages aired.11
By including DMA or area effects, we control for time-invariant unmeasured
factors that are correlated with television advertising and weight outcomes. For example,
fast-food restaurants may choose to place more advertisements in areas where residents
have a higher than average taste for caloric foods, and hence a larger percentage of the
population is overweight. Since the children of overweight parents are more likely to be
overweight than the children of normal-weight parents, advertising effects are biased if
area effects are omitted.
Although an individual fixed effects model controls for DMA fixed effects if
individuals do not move, we estimate a DMA fixed effects model for several reasons.
First, the amount of time spent watching television in the NLSY97 is available only in the
11

It should be noted that children or adolescents who do not watch any television are also assumed to be
exposed to fast-food advertising in this specification, possibly through interactions with peers.
15

first year of the panel and cannot be used as a regressor with individual fixed effects.
Second, the key unobservables governing area-level advertising decisions are
characteristics pertaining to the population of the area. Since an individual picked at
random in an area with a strong taste for dining in fast-food restaurants is likely to share
the tastes of the area, the area indicator reflects that factor.
The last factor is important because the area fixed effects model is more efficient
than the individual fixed effects model. This is true because the former model involves
the estimation of far fewer parameters. Indeed, preliminary results revealed similar point
estimates of advertising coefficients but larger standard errors in individual fixed effects
models compared to area fixed effects models.12 We do account for the panel nature of
the data and for the measurement of at least one component of the advertising variable at
the area level by clustering by DMAs in obtaining standard errors of regression
coefficients. This allows the disturbance term (εijt) to be correlated for the same person
over time and to be correlated among different persons in the same DMA both at a
moment in time and over time.
If advertising is determined simultaneously with consumption in fast-food
restaurants, then the advertising variable in each of our models is correlated with the
disturbance term or at least with its component that varies within areas over time (εjt).
Put differently, the advertising coefficient is inconsistent if it is obtained by ordinary least
squares (OLS) because the amount of advertising in an area is positively related to
consumption in fast-food restaurants and hence to the mean BMI or the percentage of the
population that is overweight in the area. To deal with this problem, we estimate two of
12

This comparison could only be done for NLSY79 because we could not estimate individual fixed effects
models for NLSY97, as explained above.
16

our three specifications by two-stage least squares (TSLS) with the relevant advertising
measure (Sijt or Ajt) treated as an endogenous variable. We use the price of advertising,
the number of households in the DMA with a television set, and the average annual
temperature in the respondent’s county of residence as instruments.
We do not estimate the specification that includes both the amount of time spent
watching television (Tijt) and messages seen (Sijt) in our TSLS models because the former
variable is likely to be endogenous, and we lack instruments to predict both. Note that
the model that omits Tijt but includes Sijt can be viewed as a quasi-structural equation in
the sense that Tijt has been replaced by its determinants, all of which enter the pure
structural equation. Similarly, the model that omits Sijt but includes Aijt can be viewed as
a quasi-reduced form because Sijt is replaced by its key determinant, which is omitted
from the quasi-structural equation. We estimate the quasi-structural equation and the
quasi-reduced form equation by TSLS as well as by OLS.
Means and standard deviations for the NLSY79 and NLSY97 data sets are
reported in Tables 2a and 2b. These means and the regressions in the next section
employ the NLSY sampling weights. In NLSY79, heights and weights are obtained from
measurements taken by interviewers for approximately 75 percent of the sample. The
remainder of the height and weight data are reported by mothers. All of our regression
models for this sample include a dichotomous indicator that equals one if BMI and
overweight are based on mother reports since they are more likely to result in errors in
BMI and in the classification of overweight status. In NLSY97, heights and weights are
reported by adolescents.

17

The average BMIs are 17.60 kg/m2 and 22.11 kg/m2 for children aged 3-11 and
adolescents aged 12-18, respectively. Moreover, 15.6 percent of the children (NLSY79)
and 10.4 percent of the adolescents (NLSY97) are overweight. All of these figures
except for the last one are comparable to those from NHANES99 in Tables 1a and 1b.
To be specific, adolescents are 40 percent more likely to be overweight in NHANES99
than in NLS97. Almost all of this difference results because adolescent girls are twice as
likely to be overweight in NHANES99 than in NLSY97. Undoubtedly, this reflects a
reluctance by adolescent girls to report their true weight.
Inclusion of a gender indicator in NLSY97 regressions controls for the source of
response error just described. Of course, one cannot decompose the gross difference in
overweight status between adolescent males and females or the difference net of other
regressors into a component due to response error and a component due to other factors.
But as long as response error is uncorrelated with variables other than gender, regression
coefficients of these variables are unbiased, although their standard errors are inflated.
Hence, the t-ratios on which tests of significance are based are conservative lower-bound
estimates.
If reporting errors result in a constant percentage reduction in BMI, all slope
coefficients involving this outcome, including those associated with fast-food advertising,
are understated. When the probability of being overweight is the outcome, the bias is
less obvious even if, as we hypothesize, overweight girls are more likely to be found in
areas with relatively large amounts of fast-food advertising on television. That depends
on the distribution of girls around the overweight cutoff among areas and the degree to
which response error in percentage terms is correlated with true weight. If too few girls

18

are classified as overweight in areas with relatively large amounts of advertising, the
associated coefficients are conservative lower-bound estimates. Note that all percentage
changes in BMI and in the number of overweight children and adolescents computed
from regression results in Sections V and VI employ NHANES99 means. If slope
coefficients are unbiased, this corrects for the upward bias in the absolute value of the
impact of a change advertising on the percentage change in the number of overweight
adolescents that would result if NLSY97 means were employed in the computations.

V. RESULTS

Table 3 presents results where the body mass index is the dependent variable for
children aged 3-11 (upper panel) and for adolescents aged 12-18 (lower panel).
Regressions are also run separately by gender because the results of Chow tests (not
shown) indicate significant differences between male and female slope coefficients in
most specifications.13 Pooled regressions are presented for completeness, for the interest
of the reader, because they are based on more observations than the gender-specific
regressions, and because of the response errors associated with weight outcomes of
adolescent girls discussed in the previous section. Moreover, the policy initiatives that
we consider at the end of this section are not gender-specific. In almost all cases, the
advertising coefficient in a given regression is a simple average of the corresponding
gender-specific coefficients. Hence, the pooled coefficient can be used to evaluate the
impact of the policy at issue.

13

These tests allow the intercept to vary by gender.
19

In all specifications, individual characteristics, as well as DMA and year fixed
effects, are included. In specification 1, we include both television watching time (T) and
fast-food restaurant advertising messages seen on television (S) as explanatory variables.
We find a positive and significant relationship between advertising and children’s body
mass index.14 Moreover, advertising has a larger and more significant impact on boys
than on girls. Yet TV watching time does not have a significant impact on children’s
body mass index, regardless of gender. Results suggest that increasing exposure to fastfood advertising by a half hour per week (an approximate one standard deviation increase)
will increase a boy’s BMI and a girl’s BMI by 0.30 kg/m2 (or 2 percent) and 0.12 kg/m2
(or 1 percent), respectively.15 On the contrary, the messages seen variable is insignificant
for adolescents but television watching time is shown to have a positive and significant
effect on body mass index for adolescents.
Since television watching time and advertising messages seen are highly
correlated, we only include the messages seen in the second specification to sort out the
impact of advertising. Results show that the number of hours of messages seen on
television has a strong positive effect on BMI for both children and adolescents.
Messages seen have similar effects on BMI for boys and girls aged 3-11 but have a larger
impact on teenage boys. Results also suggest that fast-food restaurant advertising has a
larger impact on adolescents than on children, despite the latter group’s longer exposure
to fast-food restaurant advertising due to longer television viewing time. Several
possibilities could be attributed to this finding. Adolescents have larger influences on
family purchasing decisions than children and also purchase more fast food with their
14

We evaluate the significance of advertising coefficients with one-tailed tests since the alternative
hypothesis is that these coefficients are positive.
15
We use the means from the NHANES 99 data set to calculate the percentage change.
20

own money than younger consumers.16 Adolescents make up a large portion of the labor
force at fast-food restaurants, where they may receive discounted or free food as part of
their compensation. Moreover, preponderant fast-food restaurant advertising may have
an everlasting and progressive influence because of the cumulative effects of repetitious
messages. Bowman et al. (2004) confirm the positive association of fast food restaurant
consumption with age. Our results suggest that increasing fast-food restaurant
advertising messages seen by a half hour per week will increase both a boy’s BMI and a
girl’s BMI by 0.16 kg/m2 (or roughly 1 percent). The same increase of exposure to fast
food restaurant advertising will increase a teenage boy’s BMI and a teenage girl’s BMI
by 0.49 kg/m2 (or 2 percent) and 0.37 kg/m2 (or 2 percent), respectively.
We do not find a significant impact of messages seen on overweight status for
either children or adolescents when television watching time is included in the
regressions (Table 4, specification 1), although we wish to emphasize again that
television watching time is highly correlated with messages seen. When television time
is excluded (specification 2), advertising messages seen significantly increases a child’s
probability of being overweight. The effect for boys is somewhat larger than that for
girls (upper panel of Table 4). Advertising has a larger impact on the probability of being
overweight for adolescents, but the messages seen coefficient shows statistical
significance only for all teenagers and teenage males (lower panel of Table 4). Our
results indicate that increasing fast-food restaurant advertising messages seen by a half
hour per week will increase the probability of being overweight by 1.6 percentage points
(11 percent) and 1.1 percentage points (8 percent) for boys and girls aged 3-11,
16

See Nestle (2002), p.178. Those aged 10-12 and aged 7-9 spend 25 percent and 16 percent of their own
money on fast food, respectively.
21

respectively. An equivalent increase in fast-food restaurant advertising messages seen for
teenage males and females will increase their probabilities of being overweight by 3.2
percentage points (21 percent) and 0.6 percentage points (4 percent), respectively. The
larger effects for males relative to females, especially in the adolescent sample, may
reflect a greater concern by females about their weight. They may also reflect in part
underreporting of weight by adolescent females.
To account for the possible endogeneity of the advertising exposure variable, we
fit instrumental variables models in which the price of advertising (measured in dollars
per seconds of messages aired), the number of households with a television in the DMA,
and average annual temperature serve as instruments for advertising.17 In conducting the
instrumental variable regressions, we employed specification 2 where the endogenous
variable is exposure to fast-food restaurant advertising (messages seen). Personal
characteristics, DMA and year fixed effects, and state variables are all included in the
model. Partial first stage results are shown in Panel C of Table 5. The price of an
advertisement significantly reduces fast-food restaurant advertising exposure on
television. The number of households with television sets has a significantly positive
effect on exposure in the regressions for adolescents.
The IV test results reported in Panels A and B of Table 5 suggest that the
messages seen variable is not endogenous – all the Durbin-Wu-Hausman tests are not
rejected, regardless of the sample. To verify the validity of our instruments, we also
conduct overidentification tests (Hansen’s J statistics) and F tests of the significance of
17

The use of lagged values for the advertising variable in an attempt to get around the possible endogeneity
problem is not an attractive strategy, as it has been shown that advertising effects depreciate rapidly (Boyd
and Seldon 1990). The shape of the response function is believed to be concave-downward, so that
exposure to a given advertising message has diminishing effects, or conveys less and less information with
each additional exposure (Simon and Arndt 1980).
22

the set of instruments in the first stage. None of the Hansen’s J statistics is rejected at the
5 percent level. This implies that the null hypothesis – that the instruments are
uncorrelated with the error terms – is confirmed. The F statistics range between 19 and
51, suggesting that the IV estimates are not biased because the instruments are weakly
correlated with the endogenous explanatory variables (Bound et al. 1995; Staiger and
Stock 1997). Given the test results, we do not further report the IV results on advertising
in this specification.
To further explore the endogeneity of advertising and television viewing and the
problems caused by measurement error in the viewing variable, we estimate a model in
which advertising exposure is measured by the number of hours of messages aired in the
respondent’s DMA in Table 6. The results of overidentification tests and F tests of the
significance of the instruments in the first stage are similar to those in Table 5. DurbinWu-Hausman tests are not rejected, suggesting that the exposure variable is not
endogenous. Hence, only OLS advertising coefficients are shown in Table 6.
For children aged 3-11, the exposure variable has a positive effect on the body
mass index and the probability of being overweight, but results are not statistically
significant. The advertising exposure variables are positive in all regressions for
adolescents and have larger and more significant impacts in male regressions. These
results suggest that increasing the messages aired in a respondent’s DMA by an hour
(approximately a one standard deviation increase) will increase a child’s BMI by 0.04
kg/m2 (0.2 percent) and the probability of being overweight by 0.6 percentage points (4

percent). It will also increase teenage BMI by 0.09 kg/m2 (0.4 percent) and the
probability of being overweight by 0.6 percentage points (4 percent).

23

Finally, regression results for other explanatory variables are reported in Table A1
(for children aged 3-11) and Table A2 (for adolescents aged 12-18) in the Appendix. For
children aged 3-11 (Table A1), BMI increases with age, but the probability of being
overweight is negatively associated with age. Hispanic boys and black girls are
associated with higher body mass indexes and higher probabilities of being overweight.
Boys are also more likely to be overweight. Higher family income significantly reduces
a child’s body mass index and the probability of being overweight, regardless of gender.
A wealthy family is more capable of choosing a healthy diet by staying away from
calorie-rich but relatively cheap fast food. Yet they are also more able to consume at
“upscale” restaurants where food is rich in calories as well. Our results suggest that the
first factor dominates the second one. Mother’s weight status is a strong predictor of a
child’s body mass index and the probability of being overweight, revealing a powerful
genetic component. Mother’s employment status has no impact on these outcomes.
For adolescents aged 12-18 (Table A2), being a black teenage female is strongly
associated with having a higher body mass index and a higher probability of being
overweight. Family income is associated with a lower body mass index and the
probability of being overweight. Again, a mother’s overweight or obese status is strongly
associated with the body mass index and the probability of being overweight, but a
mother’s employment status is not significantly associated with these outcomes.
Most state variables are not statistically significant in the regressions. We
summarize some interesting findings with regard to those state variables. First, a higher
cigarette price leads to a higher probability of being overweight for teenage females
(Table A2, the last column). This finding is consistent with several streams of literature:

24

The price elasticity of cigarettes for youth is large and smoking cessation usually results
in weight gain. Moreover, teenage girls are more sensitive to their body weight and are
more likely to control weight by smoking (Cawley et al. 2004). Second, higher fast-food
prices will lead to lower body mass indexes for adolescents. Fast food is rich in calories
and its consumption may further adversely affect diet quality such as by reducing daily
servings of fruit and vegetables (Bowman et al. 2004; French et al. 2000). Higher fastfood prices may reduce its consumption and decrease the body mass index. Third, the
number of fast-food restaurants is positively associated with a child’s BMI and the
probability of being overweight.

VI. DISCUSSION
The investigation of the causal relationship between fast-food restaurant
advertising and body weight among children and adolescents is important when forming
policies to cope with the obesity epidemic. Overall, our results show a strong positive
effect of exposure to fast-food restaurant advertising on the body mass index for children.
The effect on the probability of being overweight is less significant. It only shows
statistically significant results for the probability of being overweight when we do not
allow the television watching time to have an effect that is independent of advertising.
We also obtain mixed results for adolescents. When we include both the amount of time
spent watching television and the number of advertising messages seen, advertising does
not appear to have an effect. The former variable is available only in the first year of the
adolescent panel and hence measured with error. When we exclude it, we conclude that

25

advertising on television is associated with an increased likelihood that adolescents are
overweight. This conclusion is not altered when we treat advertising as endogenous.
Our results could be used to estimate the impact of a fast-food restaurant
advertising ban on television on childhood obesity. A complete advertising ban on
television would reduce the number of overweight children aged 3-11 in a fixed
population by 10 percent.18 The decline for boys is approximately 3 percentage points
larger than that for girls. The impact of this policy for adolescents aged 12-18 amounts to
a slightly larger decline of 12 percent. Here the effect is much more pronounced for
males than for females; the difference is approximately 15 percentage points.
These computations underestimate the impact of a complete advertising ban on
television because they are based on local or spot television advertising and ignore
advertising associated with network, syndicated, and cable television advertising because
they have local variation. On the other hand, our results could overestimate the impact of
an advertising ban because we ignore advertising in other media (i.e. radio, magazines,
outdoor, newspaper). If advertising were equally effective in all media and total
advertising remained the same, there would be no impact. If advertising in other media
were less effective, especially since we are dealing with youth, and/or the increase was
less than the reduction in television advertising, the number of overweight children would
fall but by less than our estimates predict. If advertising in all media were banned, the
media substitution would be eliminated, and our estimate would be a lower bound.
However, such a ban might be difficult to legislate and would not exclude other types of

18

Calculations use specification 2 in Table 4 and means for the percentage overweight from NHANES 99.
The number of advertising messages seen is assumed to fall from its age- and gender-specific mean to zero.
26

marketing, such as sports and cultural events sponsorships, consumer novelties, and the
internet.
Another policy option is to eliminate food advertising as ordinary business
expenses that reduce taxable corporate income. Since the corporate income tax rate is 35
percent, elimination of the tax deductibility of food advertising costs is equivalent to
increasing the price of advertising by about 54 percent. Based on our results, the
elimination of tax deductibility of food advertising would reduce fast-food restaurant
messages seen on television by 48 percent and 25 percent for children and adolescents,
respectively. As a result, elimination of tax deductibility would reduce the number of
overweight children and adolescents by 5 percent and 3 percent, respectively.19
Clearly, we have not provided enough information to fully evaluate the two
policies just discussed. Indeed, we have not addressed the larger issue of whether the
government should intervene in the food purchase decisions of its citizens. Obesity
carries a high personal cost. But does it carry a high enough social cost to make it a
concern of public policy? The answer is no if consumers are fully informed, and if the
obese bear all the consequences of their actions. The answer is yes if consumers do not
have full information or something that reasonably approximates it, or if third parties like
Medicare, Medicaid, private health insurance companies, and ultimately the non-obese
end up bearing significant amounts of the costs.

19

These computations employ specification 2 in Table 4 and the reduced-form advertising price
coefficients for each age group in Table 5. To be specific, let α be the coefficient of messages seen in the
overweight regression, let β be the coefficient of price in the messages seen regression, let p be the mean
price of a message seen, and let t be the corporate tax rate. Then the reduction in the percentage
overweight due to the elimination of the tax deductibility of advertising is 100αβpt/(1 - t). Although α is
bigger for teenagers than for children, β is larger in absolute value for the latter group by an amount
sufficient to make the reduction in the percentage overweight slightly larger for children.
27

In the case of children, one justification for government intervention is that
society as a whole may reap substantial current and future production and consumption
benefits from improvements in children’s health. The deep government involvement in
children’s lives reflects these potential benefits. Through its sponsorship of school
programs, school lunches, and recreational facilities, the government can more easily and
immediately affect the choices of children than adults. The case is strengthened because
overweight children are extremely likely to become obese adults and because children are
less likely to have information about the consequences of their actions or to heavily
discount these consequences.
Of course, one would still need to consider the degree of government involvement
that is merited and the costs of alternative policies. Relative to positive efforts such as
subsidies to programs that encourage children to exercise, advertising bans or increases in
the price of advertising impose welfare costs on children and adults who consume fast
food in moderation. Additional welfare costs arise because consumers are denied
positive information conveyed by advertising. Not surprisingly, an advertising ban not
accompanied by media substitution produces larger reductions in the number of
overweight children and adolescents than the elimination of the tax deductibility of
advertising. But the welfare costs of the former policy are likely to be much larger than
those of the latter. Moreover, implementation of both policies raises the difficult issue of
distinguishing between fast-food and full-service restaurants and between fast food and
other types of food. Hence, more research is required to evaluate the effectiveness of
these policies and others. Our study should be viewed as one of many inputs in this
process.

28

REFERENCES
Allison DB, Fontaine KR, Manson JE, Stevens J, VanItallie TB. 1999. Annual Deaths
Attributable to Obesity in the United States. Journal of the American Medical
Association 282: 1530-8.
Andersen RE, Crespo CJ, Bartlett SJ, Cheskin LJ, Pratt M. 1998. Relationship of
Physical Activity and Television Watching with Body Weight and Level of
Fatness Among Children: Results from the Third National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey. Journal of the American Medical Association 279: 938-42.
Anderson PM, Butcher KF, Levine PB. 2003. Maternal Employment and Overweight
Children. Journal of Health Economics 22: 477-504.
Ashton D. 2004. Food Advertising and Childhood Obesity. Journal of the Royal Society
of Medicine 97: 51-2.
Becker GS, Murphy KM. 1993. A Simple Theory of Advertising as a Good or Bad.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 108: 941-64.
Borzekowski DL, Robinson TN. 2001. The 30-Second Effect: An Experiment Revealing
the Impact of Television Commercials on Food Preferences of Preschoolers.
Journal of the American Dietetic Association 101: 42-6.
Bound J, Jaeger DA, Baker RM. 1995. Problems with Instrumental Variables
Estimation when the Correlation between the Instruments and the Endogenous
Explanatory Variable Is Weak. Journal of the American Statistical Association
90: 443-50.
Bowman SA, Gortmaker SL, Ebbeling CB, Pereira MA, Ludwig DS. 2004. Effects of
Fast-Food Consumption on Energy Intake and Diet Quality Among Children in a
National Household Survey. Pediatrics 113: 112-8.
Boyd R, Seldon BJ. 1990. The Fleeting Effect of Advertising: Empirical Evidence from a
Case Study. Economics Letters 34: 375-79.
Cawley J, Markowitz S, Tauras J. 2004. Lighting Up and Slimming Down: the Effects
of Body Weight ad Cigarette Prices on Adolescent Smoking Initiation. Journal of
Health Economics 23: 293-311.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2001. Overweight Among US Children and
Adolescents. National Center for Health Statistics.
Chou S-Y, Grossman M, Saffer H. 2004. An Economic Analysis of Adult Obesity:
Results from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System. Journal of Health
Economics 23: 565-87.

29

Crespo CJ, Smit E, Troiano RP, Bartlett SJ, Macera CA, Andersen RE. 2001. Television
Watching, Energy Intake, and Obesity in US Children: Results from the Third
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1988-1994. Archives of
Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine 155: 360-5.
Dietz WH, Jr., Gortmaker SL. 1985. Do We Fatten Our Children at the Television Set?
Obesity and Television Viewing in Children and Adolescents. Pediatrics 75: 80712.
Donnerstein E, Slaby RG, Eron LD. 1994. The Mass Media and Youth Aggression. In
Reason to Hope: A Psychosocial Perspective on Violence and Youth, ed. LD Eron,
JH Gentry, P Schlegel. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Flegal KM, Graubard BI, Williamson DF, Gail MH. 2005. Excess Deaths Associated
with Underweight, Overweight, and Obesity. Journal of the American Medical
Association 293: 1861-67.
Finkelstein EA, Fiebelkorn IC, Wang G. 2003. National Medical Spending Attributable
to Overweight and Obesity: How Much, and Who'
s Paying? Health Affairs
(Millwood) Suppl Web Exclusives: W3-219-26.
French S, Harnack L, Jeffery R. 2000. Fast Food Restaurant Use Among Women in the
Pound of Prevention Study: Dietary, Behavioral, and Demographic Correlates.
International Journal of Obesity 24: 1353-59.
Gallo AE. 1999. Food Advertising in the United States. In America's Eating Habits:
Changes and Consequences, ed. E Frazao, pp. 173-80. Washington, DC: United
States Department of Agriculture.
Giammattei J, Blix G, Marshak HH, Wollitzer AO, Pettitt DJ. 2003. Television Watching
and Soft Drink Consumption: Associations With Obesity in 11- to 13-Year-Old
Schoolchildren. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine 157: 882-6.
Gortmaker SL, Must A, Sobol AM, Peterson K, Colditz GA, Dietz WH. 1996. Television
Viewing As a Cause of Increasing Obesity Among Children in the United States,
1986-1990. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine 150: 356-62.
Hancox RJ, Milne BJ, Poulton R. 2004. Association Between Child and Adolescent
Television Viewing and Adult Health: A Longitudinal Birth Cohort Study. Lancet
364: 257-62.
Hill JO, Peters JC. 1998. Environmental Contributions to the Obesity Epidemic. Science
280: 1371-4.
Huston AC. 1992. Big World, Small Screen: The Role of Television in American Society.
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. 195 pp.

30

Kaiser Family Foundation. 2004. The Role of Media In Childhood Obesity, Menlo Park,
CA.
Krebs NF, Jacobson MS. 2003. Prevention of Pediatric Overweight and Obesity.
Pediatrics 112: 424-30.
Kuczmarski RJ, Ogden CL, Guo SS, et al. 2002. 2000 CDC Growth Charts for the United
States: Methods and Development. National Center for Health Statistics. Vital
Health Stat 11(246).
Kunkel D. 2001. Children and Television Advertising. In Handbook of Children and the
Media, ed. DGSaJL Singer, pp. 375-93. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Mayer CE. 2005. Kraft to Curb Snack Food Advertising. Washington Post January 12:
E01.
McGinnis JM, Foege WH. 1993. Actual Causes of Death in the United States. Journal of
the American Medical Association 270: 2207-12.
Nestle M. 2002. Food Politics: How the Food Industry Influences Nutrition and Health.
Berkeley: University of California Press. xii, 457 pp.
Ogden CL, Flegal KM, Carroll MD, Johnson CL. 2002. Prevalence and Trends in
Overweight among US Children, 1999-2000. Journal of the American Medical
Association 288: 1728-32.
Orzechowski W, Walker R. 2002. The Tax Burden on Tobacco: Volume 36, 2001.
Arlington, VA: Orzechowski and Walker.
Proctor MH, Moore LL, Gao D, Cupples LA, Bradlee ML, Hood MY, Ellison RC. 2003.
Television Viewing and Change in Body Fat from Preschool to Early
Adolescence: The Framingham Children'
s Study. International Journal of Obesity
and Related Metabolic Disorders 27: 827-33.
Robinson TN. 1999. Reducing Children'
s Television Viewing to Prevent Obesity: A
Randomized Controlled Trial. Journal of the American Medical Association 282:
1561-7.
Robinson TN, Hammer LD, Killen JD, Kraemer HC, Wilson DM, Hayward C, Taylor
CB. 1993. Does Television Viewing Increase Obesity and Reduce Physical
Activity? Cross-Sectional and Longitudinal Analyses Among Adolescent Girls.
Pediatrics 91: 273-80.
Saffer H. 1997. Alcohol Advertising and Motor Vehicle Fatalities. Review of Economics
and Statistics 79: 431-42.
Saffer H, Dave D. 2003. Alcohol Advertising and Alcohol Consumption by Adolescents.
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, NBER Working Paper 9676.

31

Simon JL, Arndt J. 1980. The Shape of the Advertising Response Function. Journal of
Advertising Research 20: 11-28.
Squires S. 1998. Obesity-Linked Diabetes Rising in Children. In Washington Post
November 3.
Staiger D, Stock JA. 1997. Instrumental Variables Regressions with Weak Instruments.
Econometrica 65, 557-86.
Tellis GJ, Chandy RK, Thaivanich P. 2000. Which Ad Works, When, Where, and How
Often? Modeling the Effects of Direct Television Advertising. Journal of
Marketing Research 37: 32-46.
Tellis GJ, Weiss DL. 1995. Does TV Advertising Really Affect Sales? The Role of
Measures, Models, and Data Aggregation. Journal of Advertising 24: 1-12
US Department of Health and Human Services. 2001. The Surgeon General's Call to
Action to Prevent and Decrease Overweight and Obesity, US Department of
Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Office of the Surgeon
General, Rockville, MD.

32

Table 1a
Trends in Body Mass Index and the Percentage Overweight,
Persons 3 to 11 Years of Agea

Males only
BMIb Overweightc

Females only
BMIb Overweightc

4.24

16.57

4.00

16.68

4.50

16.44

5.33

16.46

5.74

16.42

4.92

1976-1980

16.64

7.33

16.64

7.22

16.64

7.44

NHANES III

1988-1994

17.15

10.59

17.09

10.25

17.22

10.95

NHANES 99

1999-2000

17.37

14.26

17.38

14.74

17.36

13.76

Survey

Period

BMIb

Overweightc

NHES II

1963-1965

16.63

NHANES I

1971-1974

NHANES II

a

The surveys are as follows: National Health Examination Survey II (NHES II), National Health
and Nutrition Examination Survey I (NHANES I), National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey II (NHANES II), National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey III (NHANES III),
and National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 1999-2000 (NHANES 99). NHES II
pertains to children 6-11 years of age. Survey weights are employed in all computations.
b

Weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared. Actual weights and heights are used
in calculations.
c

Percentage with BMI equal to or greater than the 95th percentile based on Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention growth charts. See http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts.

33

Table 1b
Trends in Body Mass Index and the Percentage Overweight,
Persons 12 to 18 Years of Agea

Males only
BMIb Overweightc

Females only
BMIb Overweightc

4.45

20.47

4.50

20.76

4.40

20.97

6.82

20.81

6.83

21.13

6.82

1976-1980

21.03

5.63

20.92

5.39

21.16

5.89

NHANES III

1988-1994

22.11

10.62

21.95

11.48

22.28

9.72

NHANES 99

1999-2000

22.82

14.75

22.52

15.03

23.13

14.45

Survey

Period

BMIb

Overweightc

NHES I,III

20.61

NHANES I

1959-1962,
1966-1970
1971-1974

NHANES II

a

The surveys are as follows: National Health Examination Survey I and III (NHES I,III), National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey I (NHANES I), National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey II (NHANES II), National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey III
(NHANES III), and National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 1999-2000 (NHANES
99). NHES I was used for adolescents aged 18, while NHES III was used for those between the
ages of 12 and 17. Survey weights are employed in all computations.
b

Weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared. Actual weights and heights are used
in calculations.
c

Percentage with BMI equal to or greater than the 95th percentile based on Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention growth charts. See http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts.

34

Table 2a
Definitions, Means, and Standard Deviations of Dependent Variables
Variable

Body mass index
Overweight
Sample size (person-year)

Definition

Weight in kilograms divided by height
in meters squared
Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if
the body mass index is equal to or
greater than the 95th percentile

Mean (Standard Deviation)
Ages 3-11 (NLSY79)
Ages 12-18 (NLSY97)
Whole
Male
Female
Whole
Male
Female
Sample
Sample
17.603
17.690 17.513
22.114
22.554
21.655
(4.643)
(4.502) (4.785)
(4.429)
(4.590)
(4.207)
0.156
0.174
0.137
0.104
0.137
0.069
(0.363)
(0.379) (0.344)
(0.305)
(0.343)
(0.254)
6,322

35

3,228

3,094

6,818

3,527

3,291

Table 2b
Definitions, Means, and Standard Deviations of Explanatory Variables
and Instrumental Variables
Variable
TV Time (TV)
Messages seen

Messages aired
Age
Hispanic
Black non-Hispanic
Other race
Male
Family income
Income missing
Weight reported by
mother
Height reported by
mother
Mother overweight
Mother obese
Mother employment
Yr98

Definition
Time spent by child watching television
(in hours per week)
Hours of fast-food restaurant
advertising messages seen per week in
respondent’s Designated Market Area
(see text for more details)
Hours of fast-food restaurant
advertising messages aired per week in
respondent’s Designated Market Area
Age of respondent
Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if
respondent is Hispanic
Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if
respondent is black but not Hispanic
Dichotomous variable if respondent’s
race is other than white, black, or
Hispanic
Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if
respondent is male
Real household income in tens of
thousands of 1982-84 dollars
Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if
family income is missing
Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if
weight is reported by mother
Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if
height is reported by mother
Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if
mother’s body mass index is equal to or
greater than 25 kg/m2
Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if
mother’s body mass index is equal to or
greater than 30 kg/m2
Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if
mother is employed
Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if
year=1998

36

Mean (Standard Deviation)
Ages 3-11 Ages 12-18
(NLSY79) (NLSY97)
25.391
18.754
(25.529)
(14.547)
0.529
0.432
(0.593)

(0.413)

3.507
(1.195)

3.809
(1.406)

7.288
(2.546)
0.059
(0.236)
0.125
(0.331)
---

14.779
(1.392)
0.111
(0.314)
0.156
(0.363)
0.013
(0.113)

(---)
0.511
(0.500)
7.159
(10.521)
0.036
(0.185)
0.283
(0.450)
0.233
(0.423)
0.480
(0.500)

0.510
(0.500)
5.499
(4.220)
0.133
(0.339)
--(---)
--(---)
0.495
(0.500)

0.217
(0.412)

0.210
(0.408)

0.692
(0.462)
0.340
(0.474)

0.711
(0.453)
0.337
(0.473)

Yr99
Yr00
Fast-food restaurants
Full-service
restaurants
Cigarette price
Government

Private

Restaurant
Other
Full-service
restaurant price
Fast-food restaurant
price
Food at home price
Sample size
(person-year)
Instrumental Variable
Price of
advertisement
Number of
households with TV
Average annual
temperature
Sample size
(person-year)

Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if
year=1999
Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if
year=2000
Number of fast-food restaurants per
10,000 persons in respondent’s state of
residence
Number of full-service restaurants per
10,000 persons in respondent’s state of
residence
Real cigarette price in respondent’s
state of residence in 1982-1984 dollars
Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if
smoking is prohibited in government
workplaces in respondent’s state of
residence
Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if
smoking is prohibited in private
workplaces in respondent’s state of
residence
Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if
smoking is prohibited in restaurants in
respondent’s state of residence
Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if
smoking is prohibited in other public
places in respondent’s state of residence
Real full-service restaurant meal price
in respondent’s state of residence in
1982-1984 dollars
Real fast-food restaurant meal price in
respondent’s state of residence in 19821984 dollars
Real food at home price in respondent’s
state of residence in 1982-1984 dollars

--(---)
0.295
(0.456)
7.118
(0.565)

0.345
(0.475)
--(---)
7.228
(0.490)

7.147
(0.927)

7.233
(1.001)

2.487
(0.533)
0.883
(0.321)

2.525
(0.495)
0.864
(0.342)

0.551
(0.497)

0.453
(0.498)

0.682
(0.466)

0.657
(0.475)

0.924
(0.265)

0.923
(0.267)

9.000
(1.875)

9.260
(1.980)

4.530
(0.267)

4.559
(0.250)

2.013
(0.231)

2.026
(0.267)

6,322
Real dollar expenditures per second of
exposure
Number of households in respondent’s
designated market area owning a TV set
in hundreds of thousands
Mean 1976 temperature in respondent’s
county of residence

3.184
(2.811)
1.648
(1.591)

3.358
(2.593)
1.752
(1.544)

55.368
(7.678)

55.683
(6.996)

6,288

37

6,818

6,743

Table 3
Regression Results
Dependent Variable: Body Mass Indexa

Messages seen
TV time (10 hours)
Other variables
Individual variablesb
DMA fixed effects
Year fixed effects
State variablesc
Sample
R-squared

Messages seen
TV time (10 hours)
Other variables
Individual variablesb
DMA fixed effects
Year fixed effects
State variablesc
Sample size
R-squared

Ages 3-11 (NLSY79)
Specification 1
Specification 2
Whole
Male
Female Whole
Male
Female
0.442**
0.598*
0.247
0.315*** 0.313**
0.319***
(1.859)
(1.637)
(1.063) (2.843)
(1.754)
(3.058)
-0.031
-0.068
0.018
(0.611)
(0.923)
(0.341)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

6,322
0.148

3,228
0.173

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

6,818
0.192

3,527
0.193

3,291
0.235

6,818
0.190

3,527
0.191

3,291
0.234

3,094
6,322
3,228
3,094
0.158
0.148
0.173
0.158
Ages 12-18 (NLSY97)
Specification 1
Specification 2
Whole
Male
Female Whole
Male
Female
-0.089
-0.097
-0.032
0.881*** 0.970*** 0.731***
(0.240)
(0.256)
(0.050) (4.193)
(3.421)
(2.573)
0.282*** 0.312*** 0.223*
(2.632)
(2.202)
(1.363)

a

All regressions are weighted by NLSY sampling weights. T-ratios are reported in parentheses.
*** Significant at the 1% level (one tailed test). ** Significant at the 5% level (one tailed test). *
Significant at the 10% level (one tailed test). Regressions are clustered by DMA.
b
Individual variables include age, black non-Hispanic, Hispanic, other race (NLSY97 only), male,
family income, missing income dummy, mother overweight, mother obese, mother employed,
and dummies for weight and height reported by mothers (as opposed to actual measurements –
NLSY79 only).
c
State variables include the per capita number of fast-food restaurants, per capita number of fullservice restaurants, real cigarette price, dummies for clean indoor air laws, real full-service
restaurant price, real food at home price, and real fast-food restaurant price.

38

Table 4
Regression Results
Dependent Variable: Overweighta

Messages seen
TV time (10 hours)
Other variables
Individual variablesb
DMA fixed effects
Year fixed effects
State variablesc
Sample
R-squared

Messages seen
TV time (10 hours)
Other variables
Individual variablesb
DMA fixed effects
Year fixed effects
State variablesc
Sample size
R-squared

Whole
0.010
(0.454)
0.004
(0.811)

Specification 1
Male
0.035
(1.026)
-0.001
(0.139)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

6322
0.088

3228
0.101

Whole
0.005
(0.201)
0.010
(1.216)

Ages 3-11 (NLSY79)
Specification 2
Female Whole
Male
Female
-0.018
0.026*** 0.032**
0.021**
(0.681) (2.533)
(1.856)
(2.002)
0.010*
(1.346)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

3094
6322
3228
3094
0.101
0.088
0.101
0.101
Ages 12-18 (NLSY97)
Specification 1
Specification 2
Male
Female Whole
Male
Female
-0.007
0.015
0.040*** 0.064*** 0.011
(0.220)
(0.511) (2.724)
(2.985)
(0.746)
0.021** -0.001
(2.005)
(0.112)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

6,818
0.096

3,527
0.103

3,291
0.125

6,818
0.096

3,527
0.102

3,291
0.125

a

All regressions are weighted by NLSY sampling weights. T-ratios are reported in parentheses.
*** Significant at the 1% level (one tailed test). ** Significant at the 5% level (one tailed test). *
Significant at the 10% level (one tailed test). Regressions are clustered by DMA.
b
Individual variables include age, black non-Hispanic, Hispanic, other race (NLSY97 only), male,
family income, missing income dummy, mother overweight, mother obese, mother employed,
and dummies for weight and height reported by mothers (as opposed to actual measurements –
NLSY79 only).
c
State variables include the per capita number of fast-food restaurants, per capita number of fullservice restaurants, real cigarette price, dummies for clean indoor air laws, real full-service
restaurant price, real food at home price, and real fast-food restaurant price.

39

Table 5
Instrumental Variable Regression Results
Endogenous Variable: Messages Seen (Specification 2)a
Whole

Ages 3-11 (NLSY79)
Male
Female

Whole

Ages 12-18 (NLSY97)
Male
Female

Panel A: IV Test Results (Dependent Variable: Body Mass Index)
Durbin-Wu-Hausman endogeneity test χ2(1)
0.592
Reject the null at 5% level?
No
Hansen J statistic overidentification test χ2(3)
0.008
Reject the null at 5% level?
No

0.284
No
0.174
No

0.400
No
0.169
No

2.158
No
0.308
No

2.183
No
0.889
No

0.134
No
0.056
No

Panel B: IV Test Results (Dependent Variable: Overweight)
Durbin-Wu-Hausman endogeneity test χ2(1)
1.552
Reject the null at 5% level?
No
Hansen J statistic overidentification test χ2(3)
2.442
Reject the null at 5% level?
No

1.477
No
1.171
No

0.148
No
1.240
No

0.407
No
0.011
No

0.456
No
0.004
No

0.183
No
0.198
No

Panel C: First stage results (Partial results are reported)b
Price of advertisement
Number of households with TV in the DMA (000,000)
Average annual temperature
Sample size
R-squared
F test of the excluded instruments

-0.148***
(10.937)
0.100*
(1.563)
4.711
(0.857)

-0.145***
(11.035)
0.108*
(1.511)
9.701*
(1.313)

-0.156***
(6.898)
0.102
(1.140)
-0.662
(0.096)

-0.060***
(11.322)
0.300***
(4.185)
1.366
(0.593)

-0.068***
(10.038)
0.268***
(3.592)
1.467
(0.326)

-0.056***
(8.183)
0.348***
(4.498)
-0.456
(0.072)

6,288
0.181
41.922

3,211
0.189
46.539

3,077
0.196
19.018

6,743
0.266
51.466

3,496
0.271
37.051

3,247
0.309
25.553

a

All regressions are weighted by NLSY sampling weights. T-ratios are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1% level (one tailed test). ** Significant at the 5% level
(one tailed test). * Significant at the 10% level (one tailed test). Regressions are clustered by DMA. All regressions include individual characteristics, DMA and year fixed
effects, and other state variables (Specification 2).
b
First stage regressions also include individual characteristics, DMA and year fixed effects, and other state variables. Dependent variable in the first stage regression is messages
seen.

40

Table 6
Regression Results Using Messages Aired in Respondent’s DMAa

Dependent Variable: Body Mass Index
Messages aired (OLS) (’00)
Endogeneity test χ2(1)
Reject the null at 5% level?
Overidentification test χ2(3)
Reject the null at 5% level?
Dependent Variable: Overweight
Messages aired (OLS) (’00)
Endogeneity test χ2(1)
Reject the null at 5% level?
Overidentification test χ2(3)
Reject the null at 5% level?
First stage results (Partial results are reported)b
Price of advertisement
Number of households with TV in the DMA (000,000)
Average annual temperature

Sample size
R-squared
F test of the excluded instruments

Ages 3-11 (NLSY79)
Whole
Male

Female

Ages 12-18 (NLSY97)
Whole
Male

Female

0.043
(0.485)
3.311
No
0.058
No

-0.012
(0.096)
1.833
No
0.256
No

0.141
(1.253)
1.552
No
0.102
No

0.088**
(1.864)
0.492
No
0.966
No

0.125*
(1.340)
1.999

No

0.055
(0.899)
0.166
No
1.099
No

0.006
(0.850)
3.779
No
3.043
No

0.008
(0.635)
2.051
No
1.681
No

0.006
(0.554)
1.493
No
1.378
No

0.006**
(1.902)
0.049
No
0.349
No

0.011**
(2.215)
0.586
No
0.062
No

0.002
(0.472)
0.015
No
1.504
No

-0.475***
(9.414)
1.676***
(2.635)
0.024*
(1.457)
3,247
0.868
55.759

-0.834***
(7.777)
-0.083
(0.398)
-0.002
(0.654)
6,288
0.922
20.477

-0.823***
(7.871)
-0.132
(0.706)
-0.004
(0.948)
3,211
0.924
20.930

-0.846***
(7.645)
-0.040
(0.171)
-0.001
(0.232)
3,077
0.922
20.184

-0.484***
(11.423)
1.850***
(3.028)
0.018*
(1.317)
6,743
0.872
70.565

-0.540***
(13.707)
2.009***
(3.739)
0.005
(0.489)
3,496
0.891
66.800

1.093

No

a
All regressions are weighted by NLSY sampling weights. T-ratios are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1% level (one tailed test). ** Significant at the 5% level
(one tailed test). * Significant at the 10% level (one tailed test). Regressions are clustered by DMA.
b
Individual variables include age, black non-Hispanic, Hispanic, other race (NLSY97 only), male, family income, missing income dummy, mother overweight, mother obese,
mother employed, and dummies for weight and height reported by mothers (as opposed to actual measurements – NLSY79 only).
c
State variables include the per capita number of fast-food restaurants, per capita number of full-service restaurants, real cigarette price, dummies for clean indoor air laws, real
full-service restaurant price, real food at home price, and real fast-food restaurant price.

41

Table A1
Complete Regression Results for Children Aged 3-11 (Specification 2 of Tables 3 and 4)a

TV*exposure
Age
Hispanic
Black
Male
Family Income
Income missing
Mother overweight
Mother obese
Mother employed
Fast-food restaurants
Full-service restaurants
Cigarette price
Government
Private
Restaurant
Other
Full-service restaurant price
Fast-food restaurant price
Food at home price
Sample size
R-squared
a

Dep. Variable: Body Mass Index
Whole
Male
Female
0.315***
0.313*
0.319***
(2.843)
(1.754)
(3.058)
0.429***
0.472***
0.399***
(15.365)
(10.788)
(13.147)
0.646***
0.860***
0.515
(3.039)
(3.250)
(1.644)
0.609***
0.345
0.902**
(3.119)
(1.179)
(2.342)
0.103
----(0.646)
(---)
(---)
-0.013*** -0.011**
-0.015**
(2.904)
(1.961)
(2.343)
-0.486
-0.644*
-0.301
(1.328)
(1.692)
(0.558)
0.689***
0.667***
0.717***
(3.940)
(2.943)
(2.795)
0.836***
0.560**
1.124***
(3.792)
(2.055)
(3.622)
-0.095
-0.227
0.016
(0.550)
(1.067)
(0.062)
0.750
1.115
0.387
(1.516)
(1.577)
(0.833)
-0.075
-0.292
0.130
(0.243)
(0.715)
(0.317)
-1.073
-1.129
-1.104
(1.544)
(1.174)
(1.278)
0.802
-0.095
-0.330
(0.984)
(0.103)
(0.497)
-0.060
-0.310
0.221*
(1.082)
(0.359)
(1.744)
-0.106
0.148
-1.402
(0.106)
(0.175)
(0.608)
-0.708
0.907
0.847
(0.158)
(0.911)
(0.299)
0.125
-0.093
0.418
(0.668)
(0.306)
(1.500)
-0.659
-1.023
0.025
(0.718)
(1.027)
(0.023)
1.131
2.984*
-1.436
(0.826)
(1.694)
(0.643)
6,322
3,228
3,094
0.148
0.173
0.158

Dep. Variable: Overweight
Whole
Male
Female
0.026**
0.032*
0.021**
(2.533)
(1.856)
(2.002)
-0.006***
-0.003
-0.009***
(2.637)
(0.987)
(3.078)
0.073***
0.087***
0.061*
(3.422)
(2.756)
(1.832)
0.057***
0.030
0.085***
(3.255)
(1.339)
(3.058)
0.037*** ----(3.467)
(---)
(---)
-0.001***
-0.001***
-0.001**
(4.723)
(3.298)
(2.360)
-0.030
-0.023
-0.039
(0.914)
(0.596)
(0.838)
0.056***
0.055***
0.052**
(3.589)
(2.747)
(2.511)
0.061***
0.053**
0.070**
(3.344)
(2.232)
(2.526)
0.013
0.008
0.017
(0.916)
(0.393)
(0.967)
0.048**
0.056
0.038
(1.966)
(1.453)
(1.023)
-0.035**
-0.029
-0.041**
(2.074)
(0.965)
(2.147)
-0.023
-0.030
-0.046
(0.486)
(0.443)
(0.690)
0.031
0.084
-0.098**
(0.050)
(0.034)
(2.394)
-0.002
-0.012
0.005
(0.299)
(1.070)
(1.423)
0.107**
0.076
0.141
(2.182)
(1.385)
(0.111)
-0.011
0.002
0.057**
(0.851)
(0.198)
(2.020)
0.009
-0.001
0.025**
(0.803)
(0.042)
(2.127)
-0.046
-0.074
0.000
(0.736)
(1.310)
(0.002)
0.089
0.120
0.040
(1.446)
(1.422)
(0.488)
6,322
3,228
3,094
0.088
0.101
0.101

All regressions are weighted by NLSY sampling weights. T-ratios are reported in parentheses. Regressions are
clustered by DMA. Regressions also include year and DMA fixed effects, and dummies for weight and height reported
by mothers (as opposed to actual measurements). Intercepts are not shown. *** Significant at the 1% level (two tailed
test). ** Significant at the 5% level (two tailed test). * Significant at the 10% level (two tailed test).

42

Table A2
Complete Regression Results for Adolescents Aged 12-18 (Specification 2 of Tables 3 and 4)a

TV*exposure
Age
Hispanic
Black
Other race
Male
Family Income
Income missing
Mother overweight
Mother obese
Mother employed
Fast-food restaurants
Full-service restaurants
Cigarette price
Government
Private
Restaurant
Other
Full-service restaurant price
Fast-food restaurant price
Food at home price
Sample size
R-squared

Dep. Variable: Body Mass Index
Whole
Male
Female
0.881***
0.970***
0.731**
(4.193)
(3.421)
(2.573)
0.612***
0.564***
0.654***
(6.525)
(3.939)
(6.516)
0.535
0.699
0.612
(1.428)
(1.329)
(1.472)
0.981***
0.225
2.021***
(3.431)
(0.494)
(4.714)
0.566
1.910*
0.087
(1.223)
(1.683)
(0.161)
0.763*** ----(4.913)
(---)
(---)
-0.038**
-0.029
-0.041
(2.130)
(1.284)
(1.642)
-0.617*** -0.781**
-0.352
(2.647)
(2.408)
(1.158)
0.972***
1.261***
0.617***
(5.554)
(4.734)
(2.914)
2.028***
1.512***
2.470***
(6.989)
(3.219)
(6.578)
0.177
0.215
0.181
(0.821)
(0.669)
(0.725)
0.222
0.096
0.069
(0.940)
(0.264)
(0.256)
-0.069
-0.178
0.041
(0.606)
(1.184)
(0.260)
0.247
-0.044
0.757
(0.474)
(0.054)
(1.151)
-0.441
0.832
-0.140
(0.591)
(0.151)
(1.419)
0.207
-0.765**
0.585
(1.610)
(2.198)
(0.312)
-0.622**
0.144
1.360
(1.970)
(0.108)
(1.136)
1.097
-0.123
-2.667
(0.484)
(1.241)
(1.281)
0.024
0.029
0.017
(0.291)
(0.237)
(0.162)
-1.406**
-1.378
-1.429*
(2.063)
(1.328)
(1.819)
-0.170
-1.910*
1.051
(0.155)
(1.676)
(0.581)
6,818
3,527
3,291
0.192
0.193
0.235

Dep. Variable: Overweight
Whole
Male
Female
0.040***
0.064***
0.011
(2.724)
(2.985)
(0.746)
-0.004
-0.008
-0.000
(0.746)
(0.913)
(0.073)
0.026
0.055
0.011
(1.104)
(1.550)
(0.438)
0.045**
0.020
0.085***
(2.297)
(0.632)
(3.174)
0.042
0.129
-0.000
(0.904)
(1.153)
(0.021)
0.061*** ----(5.411)
(---)
(---)
-0.002
-0.001
-0.003**
(1.597)
(0.668)
(2.469)
-0.044***
-0.064***
-0.018
(3.055)
(2.644)
(1.196)
0.041***
0.056***
0.016
(3.408)
(2.587)
(1.491)
0.128***
0.118***
0.138***
(6.100)
(3.524)
(4.290)
0.016
0.019
0.014
(1.261)
(0.976)
(1.085)
-0.003
-0.001
-0.007
(0.243)
(0.021)
(0.558)
0.007
-0.003
0.019
(0.533)
(0.207)
(1.106)
0.039
0.017
0.073**
(1.173)
(0.371)
(2.403)
-0.028
-0.055
0.155*
(1.265)
(0.300)
(1.731)
-0.063
0.006**
-0.183*
(0.138)
(2.071)
(1.665)
-0.005
0.028
-0.024
(0.392)
(0.360)
(0.706)
0.067**
0.023
-0.071
(1.987)
(0.107)
(1.368)
-0.002
-0.008
-0.003
(0.348)
(0.939)
(0.250)
-0.027
-0.022
-0.037
(0.662)
(0.379)
(0.766)
0.016
-0.128
0.121
(0.146)
(0.920)
(1.003)
6,818
3,527
3,291
0.098
0.106
0.127

a
All regressions are weighted by NLSY sampling weights. T-ratios are reported in parentheses. Regressions are
clustered by DMA. Regressions also include year and DMA fixed effects. Intercepts are not shown. *** Significant at
the 1% level (two tailed test). ** Significant at the 5% level (two tailed test). * Significant at the 10% level (two tailed
test).

43

