NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE IMPACT OF REGULATIONS ON THE SUPPLY AND QUALITY OF CARE
IN CHILD CARE MARKETS
V. Joseph Hotz
Mo Xiao
Working Paper 11873
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11873
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2005

This paper reports the results of research and analysis undertaken while the authors were research
affiliates at the Center for Economic Studies at the U.S. Census Bureau. It has undergone a Census
Bureau review more limited in scope than that given to official Census Bureau publications. Research
results and conclusions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily indicate concurrence
by the Census Bureau. It has been screened to ensure that no confidential information is revealed.
We thank the referees for excellent comments on previous drafts of this paper. We thank Juan Pantano
for his excellent research support and Rebecca Acosta and Kevin McKinney at the California Census
Research Data Center for their administrative support. We also thank Khalid Chaudhry, Mark Ginsberg,
Siobhan Kelleher, and Pat Mucci at NAEYC for making the administrative accreditation records available
to this study. Seminar participants at Carnegie Mellon, Duke, Princeton, Washington University-St.
Louis, Penn State, UNC-Greensboro, Notre Dame, the Wharton School, UCLA, the 2005 International
Industrial Organization Conference, the 2005 Census Research Data Center Conference, the 2008
ASSA Annual Meetings, the 2008 Econometric Society North American Summer Meetings, and the
2009 International Symposium on the Regulation of Occupations provided valuable comments.
© 2005 by V. Joseph Hotz and Mo Xiao. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Impact of Regulations on the Supply and Quality of Care in Child Care Markets
V. Joseph Hotz and Mo Xiao
NBER Working Paper No. 11873
December 2005, Revised August 2010
JEL No. L5,L8
ABSTRACT
We examine the impact of state child care regulations on the supply and quality of care in child care
markets. We exploit panel data on both individual establishments and local markets to control for state,
time, and, where possible, establishment-specific fixed effects to mitigate the potential bias due to
policy endogeneity. We find that the imposition of regulations reduces the number of center-based
child care establishments, especially in lower income markets. However, such regulations increase
the quality of services provided, especially in higher income areas. Thus, there are winners and losers
from the regulation of child care services.
V. Joseph Hotz
Department of Economics
Box 90097
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708-0097
and NBER
hotz@econ.duke.edu
Mo Xiao
260 Heady Hall
Iowa State University
Ames, IA 50011-1070
mxiao@email.arizona.edu

One of the most notable and consequential recent trends in the U.S. labor force has been
the rise of women in the labor force, especially among those with young children. In 1975,
33.2% of mothers with children under age of 6 were employed; by 2005, this group’s
employment rate had increased by over 25 percentage points to 58.3%. 1 This increase, among
other factors, fueled a substantial expansion of the market for child care services. In the spring of
2005, 7.2 million children under the age of 5 (36.9%) were in some form of non-relative care,2 of
which 4.6 million (23.3%) were in some form of organized child care, i.e., a day care center, a
nursery school/preschool or a Head Start program. Among employed mothers with a child under
5, 5.9 million of their children (52.1%) were in non-relative child care, of which 3.6 million
(31.9%) were in an organized care facility. 3
The increasing utilization of nonparental child care arrangements to care for preschool
age children has led to a policy interest in insuring the quality and safety of these marketsupplied services. Child advocates and researchers argue that there is an under-provision of
developmentally-enriching, high quality care services, 4 either because parents are unable to
evaluate and/or monitor the quality of services their children receive (Naci Mocan, 2007) or they
fail to take account of the full social benefits of exposing their preschool children to
developmentally-enriching child care. 5 One response to this potential problem is for government

1

U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics (2009), Women in the Labor Force: A Databook, Report
1018, September 2009.

2

Non-relative child care consists of the following child care arrangements: 1) organized child care, i.e., child care
centers, nursery schools and preschools and Head Start programs; 2) family day care homes, which is provided in
the provider’s home; and 3) other non-relative care, i.e., babysitters, nannies, etc., which is typically provided in the
child’s home. Children also may be cared for by relatives, including by grandparents, siblings and other relatives.

3

U.S. Census Bureau. Who’s Minding the Kids? Child Care Arrangements: Spring 2005, Tables 1A and 1B,
http://www.census.gov/population/www/socdemo/child/ppl-2005.html.

4

Studies by Marcy Whitebook, Carollee Howes, and Deborah Philips (1989) and the Cost, Quality and Outcomes
Team (1995) estimate that only about 15% of all child care programs provide care that truly supports a child’s
physical, emotional and social and cognitive development.
5

For example, parents may not take account of the externality that an ill-prepared child entering the first grade can

1

to regulate the market for nonparental child care services with the intended consequence of
improving their quality. In the U.S., such regulations are almost exclusively the domain of states.
States do not regulate the quality of child care services directly. Rather, they impose standards
for inputs to the production of child care services that are thought to improve the level of quality
of these services. For example, most states require licensed child care providers to limit the
number of children per staff in a facility or classroom, to hire staff that meet certain educational
and training requirements and/or to require facilities and staff to meet certain safety standards.
At issue is whether such regulations necessarily improve the well-being, or welfare, of
young children and their parents. While the regulation of such services may improve their
quality, there are a number of reasons why they may have unintended consequences. First,
because states regulate inputs, rather than quality itself, the mapping between the quality of
services and the stringency of regulations is indirect at best. Regulations can induce providers to
engage in input substitution that leads to no, or possibly negative, effects on the quality of child
care services (David Blau, 2003 and 2007). For example, imposing a regulation that requires
teachers in child care centers to have college degrees may not increase the quality of services if it
induces child care centers to use less-skilled aides and fewer teachers. Second, to the extent that
imposing regulations actually eliminates lower quality child care services, some parents and
children – especially those who are poor – may be “priced out” of the market for such services or
face inadequate supplies of such services. Finally, states only regulate part of the market for
nonparental child care services and the stringency of these regulations can vary across types of
child care providers. While most states regulate the providers of organized child care (e.g., child
care centers), they often impose fewer and less stringent regulations on other non-relative forms

impose on the learning of other children (Edward Lazear, 2001).

2

of care (e.g., family day care homes), and typically do not regulate care provided by relatives
(e.g., grandparents) at all. Because compliance with regulations usually is costly and can result in
higher prices, some parents may be induced to substitute away from regulated providers so their
children may end up in lower quality care.
To determine the intended and unintended consequences of the child care regulation, we
investigate the impact of imposing minimum standards on the inputs used in production of child
care services on supply and quality of such services. For this purpose, we have assembled a
unique panel dataset obtained by merging child care center data from the Census of Services
Industries (1987, 1992, and 1997) with state regulation data and information on the accreditation
of child care centers by the National Association of Education for Young Children (NAEYC).
The resulting data set contains detailed information on establishments, including their legal form
of organization, tax-exempt status, revenue, payroll, employment and accreditation, as well as
the state-level child care regulations on various aspects of the provision of child care services.
Furthermore, we have gathered state-level data on family day care homes for the corresponding
Census years to examine the cross-effects of center regulations on this alternative form of child
care.
Ours is not the first study seeking to estimate the causal effects of child care regulations
on the supply side of the child care market. Studies by Tasmeen Chipty and Anne Witte (1997),
Blau (2007) and others 6 have examined the effects of state child care regulations on the input
utilization, prices charged, wages paid and alternative measures of the quality of child care
services. But, the data sources used in this study, and the econometric methods they allow us to
employ, enable us to provide a more comprehensive and robust assessment of the impact of

6

See William Gormley (1991), Anton Lowenberg and Thomas Tinnin (1992) and Chipty (1995).

3

regulation on the supply side of the child care market compared to the existing literature in
several ways. First, we are able to better address the identification of the causal effects of
regulation on the choices made by child care providers. Previous empirical investigations are
based on cross-sectional samples of child care centers and, as a result, must rely on the variation
in regulations across states at a point in time for identification. While there is substantial
variation in regulations across states, they are likely to be correlated with various factors that also
directly affect the behavior of child care establishments, such as other state policies, labor market
conditions, and the preferences of consumers. Failure to adequately control for these
confounding factors in estimation can produce biased estimates of the causal effects of state
regulations. We attempt to reduce, if not eliminate, such bias by exploiting panel data on child
care centers and local child care markets to control for state, time, and establishment-specific
fixed effects in the empirical models we estimate. Second, we not only exploit the across-state
and over-time variation in the stringency of existing regulations, but also differences in whether
states impose any regulations on certain dimensions of child care center operations. This allows
us to distinguish between the marginal effect of changes in the stringency of a standard,
evaluated at prevailing levels of stringency, and the average effect of imposing a standard
relative to imposing none. As has been noted in the recent treatment effects literature, these two
effects measure different things and can have different signs. 7 Third, we investigate the indirect,
cross effects of regulation of child care centers on family day care homes in order to assess the
spillover and possible crowd-out effects of regulating only part of the market for child care
services. Finally, we examine whether the impacts of the regulation of child care centers differ
by the characteristics of local markets. In particular, we examine whether the imposition or
7

See James J. Heckman and Edward Vytlacil (2005) and Richard Blundell and Monica Costa Das (2009) for more
on the distinction between treatment effects in the presence of heterogeneity.

4

stringency of regulations has different consequences for poorer versus wealthier markets in order
to develop a better understanding of which consumers gain and which lose from regulating the
provision of child care services.
We have three sets of findings. First, the imposition and greater stringency of regulations
of child care centers reduces the number of these centers in local markets and thereby reduces the
availability of such services to parents. Moreover, the magnitudes of these impacts on the
number of centers for plausible changes in regulations are not trivial. We also find no evidence
that the day care centers that remain in business respond to these regulations by hiring more
workers to increase their size. Taken together, these findings indicate that the imposition and
increased stringency of these regulations reduce the availability of services in the center-based
sector of the child care industry. Moreover, this reduction of the availability of center-based child
care is greater in poorer markets.
Second, we examine how regulating child care centers affects the home-based sector of
the child care industry. While more stringent regulations of child care centers has no effect on
the number of family day care homes in local markets, more stringent staff-to-child ratio
requirements for child care centers do lead to higher revenues in family day care homes, with the
larger increases in higher income markets. As we argue below, some or all of these higher
revenues is the result of more children being cared for in these homes. Thus, some of the
children who are crowded out of child care centers as a result of more stringent regulations end
up in family day care homes, especially in higher income markets. Furthermore, this substitution
to family day care homes is not accommodated by an increase in their staff, since the only staff
in these homes are proprietors. 8 What are the consequences of this substitution of types of child
8

As we explain below, none of the family day care homes that we analyze have employees, so all of the labor is
supplied by the proprietor.

5

care for the well-being of parents and children? Based on the existing evidence (e.g., NICHD
Early Child Care Research Network and Greg Duncan, 2003; Susanna Loeb, Margaret Bridges,
Daphna Bassok, Bruce Fuller, and Russell Rumberger, 2007; Raquel Bernal and Michael Keane,
2010), it appears the crowding out of children from child care centers into day care homes, or
other types of child care for that matter, is likely to hamper the cognitive development of
preschool children and their readiness for primary school. Furthermore, this substitution results
in an increase of the number of preschoolers per day care home which may adversely affect
children’s development, although no reliable evidence exists on the consequences of the latter.
Third, in contrast to the negative effects of more stringent regulations on the availability
child care services in local markets, such regulations do increase the fraction of centers that are
of sufficient quality to be accredited. We find conclusive evidence that the imposition and
increasing stringency of state standards that regulate the labor intensiveness of child care center
services significantly increase the rate of accreditation. It also appears that the average effect of
imposing minimum educational requirements on child care center staff on accreditation rates is
positive. Finally, the improvements in quality of child care services due to state regulations
appear to accrue disproportionately to higher income markets, although these differences by
income are not always precisely estimated.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section I frames our empirical analyses in the context of
the theoretical literature and the particular features of the child care market. Section II discusses
the data we use on child care establishments, state regulations, accreditation, and market
definition. Section III describes our empirical methodology. Section IV presents our findings.
Section V offers some concluding observations about our findings and their consistency with
other evidence of the impacts of child of child care regulations for children in their parents.

6

I.

Theoretical Considerations
To help frame our empirical investigations and findings, we briefly review the existing

theoretical literature on the effects of regulating the quality of products on the behavior of firms
and indicate the key differences in the child care market from the settings considered in this
literature.
The theoretical literature most relevant for our work is on the effects of minimum quality
standards and/or licensing. Hayne Leland (1979), Carl Shapiro (1986), and Benjamin Klein and
Keith Leffler (1981) focus on the effects of minimum quality standards or licensing requirements
in the presence of informational asymmetries between buyers and sellers. Assuming a
competitive environment, they argue that imposing binding minimum quality standards that
increase the marginal cost of (higher quality) products can lead to low-quality firms exiting the
market and deterring their future entry. At the same time, the imposition of minimum quality
standards increases, all else equal, the average quality available to consumers, thereby increasing
their willingness to pay a higher price for these goods and services. Which of these two effects –
the cost-of-quality effect and the quality-assurance effect – prevails depends on the availability
of substitutes for the product, how price-sensitive consumers are with respect to the quality of
products and the relative importance of the marginal to fixed costs of quality.
Consumer welfare, the distribution of quality in a market, as well as the profitability of
firms, also is affected by the market structure. For example, Uri Ronnen (1991) and Claude
Crampes and Abraham Hollander (1995) find that imposing more stringent minimum quality
standards can induce quality (and possibly price) competition among sellers in markets that are
less than perfectly competitive. That is, sellers may find it in their strategic interests to increase
the quality of their products in response to the imposition of minimum quality standards, even
though these standards are not binding on their pre-regulation quality levels. This is because

7

high-quality sellers will want to produce even higher quality in order to differentiate themselves
from firms selling lower-quality products to mitigate the degree of price competition with their
regulated low-quality rivals. As a result, the quality of products of all firms in an industry, and
not just those on whom the standards are binding, will increase, even if price competition
between rivals may reduce the price of each firm’s product. As a result, consumers are better off
and their demand for all products will increase. More recently, Paolo Garella and Emmanuel
Petrakis (2008) have shown that this strategic, quality-increasing and consumer welfareincreasing response to imposing minimum quality standards is sensitive to the degree of
substitutability of products, the share of consumers in the market with limited information and
the presence of variable costs of producing quality.
There are two important features of the child care market and its regulation that are not
adequately captured in the existing theoretical literature. First, as noted above, states do not
regulate the quality of child care services directly. Rather, they regulate the production of these
services by imposing restrictions on the inputs used such as imposing minimum staff-to-child
ratios for children in different age groups. Complications immediately arise from regulating
inputs rather than quality directly as regulating inputs may distort care providers’ incentives
concerning input use and substitution. For example, providers may hire employees who are
lower in quality of other dimension to satisfy education requirement. With such distortion, the
success of these regulations in increasing and maintaining the quality of care provided in the
child care market becomes in question. In the empirical analysis below, we explicitly investigate
what happens to the quality of child care provided in local markets subject to more stringent
child care regulations on inputs used in the production of such services.
Second, the existing theoretical literature does not adequately characterize the alternative

8

options facing parents when assessing the impact of more stringent regulations on their choice of
child care services. As noted in the Introduction, the child care market consists of two types of
providers, child care centers and family day care homes that are subject to different regulations.
Moreover, there are other options for the care of young children available to parents – such as the
use of relatives or babysitters – that are not directly regulated at all. These “outside options” for
child care services make the evaluation of welfare effects of imposing more stringent regulations
on a subset of the providers in the child care market more complicated. For example, one might
expect that more stringent regulations of child care centers would induce parents to move their
children into the family day care sector. To the extent that there is capacity to absorb these
children, evidence of reductions in available supply in the child care center sector would not
necessarily imply any reduction of access by parents to market-based child care services.
Moreover, the presence of these alternative forms of care is likely to influence the strategic
response of firms in the regulated (or more highly regulated) sector in ways that are not captured
by the above simple models. For example, more-regulated firms may want to switch to operate in
the less regulated sector of the industry. A full exploration of how the imposition of regulations
affects the behavior of firms and the well-being of consumers in the presence of segments of
markets that are differentially regulated is beyond the scope of this paper. However, we do
explore the extent to which regulations of child care centers affect the availability of child care in
the less-regulated, loosely-structured sector of the market, family day care homes.
II.

The Data
We combine several sources to create a unique panel dataset of child care centers, family

day care homes, NAEYC accreditation, and state regulation. The main data we use on the child
care industry is from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Census of Service Industries. Every 5 years, the

9

Census Bureau obtains data on all establishments in the service sector that filed federal income
tax returns, regardless of whether they had tax liabilities. We are interested in those
establishments listed as child care providers, preschools and Head-Start programs whose primary
focus is the care of children under the age of five. Among these child care establishments, the
Census Bureau distinguishes between those that are: (1) nonemployer establishments, which are
owned by an individual and hire no employees; and (2) establishments that have an employee
payroll with one or more employee in addition to the owner of the establishments. Child care
centers fall into the second category of establishments, whereas family day care homes –
providers who care for preschool age children in their homes – fall into the first category.
Accordingly, throughout the remainder of this paper, we shall refer to the establishments with
payrolls as child care centers and those nonemployer establishments as family day care homes.
Under the Research Data Center program at the U.S. Bureau of the Census, we obtained
access to establishment-level data for all child care establishments with an employee payroll for
the Census of Service Industries conducted in 1987, 1992 and 1997. However, due to
confidentiality concerns about nonemployer data in the Census of Services, we were not able to
obtain the corresponding establishment-level for nonemployer establishments. 9 Rather, as we
describe below, we were only able to obtain data aggregated to the state level on this sector of
the child care market. 10 We do not have data on child care provided by relatives (e.g.,
grandparents) or non-relatives that care for children in the child’s home (e.g., babysitters and

9

In contrast to information obtained for establishments with an employee payroll, all of the information obtained on
nonemployer establishments comes from tax returns collected and “owned” by the U.S. Internal Revenue Services
(IRS). We were not granted access to the establishment-level data for the latter type of establishments.
10

Thus, our data on family day care homes is for those proprietors who reported business income on the 1040
Schedule C of their individual/family returns or filed as a business entity with the Internal Revenue Service. It is
possible that some of these homes did not comply with the federal tax code and, thus, may not be included in the
data we use. However, we note that proprietors of family day care homes do have an incentive to file in order to
claim allowable business expenses against either the personal or business incomes.

10

nannies).
A. Child Care Centers and Child Care Markets
As noted, our primary analysis is of establishment-level data for all child care
establishments with an employee payroll, i.e., child care centers, from the Census of Services in
1987, 1992 and 1997. For each of these establishments, we were given access in a secure site run
by the Census Bureau to the following information: (a) Establishment identifiers, which we used
to match establishments over time and determine the chain-status of an establishment. 11 (b)
Street address and business names for each establishment, which we used to organize our data
into local geographic markets, link in data on various characteristics of these markets, and to link
in a measure of the quality of the child care services described below from an external source. (c)
Characteristics of these establishments and their operation, including the legal form of
organization, tax-exempt status, operating receipts and revenues, operating expenses, number of
employees, payroll, ownership, etc.
Child care markets are very localized markets. Few parents will travel more than fifteen
miles to send their children to day care (Chipty, 1995; Sandra Hofferth, April Brayfield, Sharon
Deich, and Pamela Holcomb, 1991). For most of the results presented below, we use zip codes as
our measure of local markets. Based on the 2000 population Census, a typical zip code covers a
radius of 3 to 4 miles, roughly consistent with the area that a child care center could cover. In
order to assess the robustness of our findings based on our preferred zip-code market definition,
we conducted all of our analyses using other definitions of local markets, including zip-code

11

We define multiple establishments sharing the same IRS-generated establishment identification number (EIN) in
the same Census year as affiliated with a chain. A chain has as few as 2 establishments and as many as around 1,000
establishments in the data.

11

bundles and counties. 12
Finally, in order to characterize differences in the populations residing in our local child
care markets, especially families with younger children, we used data from the 1990 and 2000
Censuses of Population to construct market-level measures of the demographic characteristics,
including ethnic mix, median income of the local population; the percentage of population living
in rural areas; the number of children under age 5; indicators of the typical household
composition (e.g., the average number of people in a household and whether it is femaleheaded), labor market conditions (e.g., the percentage of females over 16 not working and the
local unemployment rate), and indicators of commuting patterns (the percentage of the working
population over 16 working at home and spending more than 40 minutes commuting). 13 We
include these variables as regressors in our establishment- and market-level analyses presented
below.
After merging the data on child care centers across the three Censuses, we ended up with
a panel dataset with approximately 150,000 establishment-year observations. We also organized
our data into local markets under the alternative definitions noted above. Based on the zip-code
definition, we had approximately 10,000 markets for each of the three years of the Censuses of
Services. Using the data from these surveys, we constructed a number of different outcomes and
characteristics of these centers at both the establishment and market levels. We provide summary
statistics for the resulting establishment- and market-level data in Tables 1 through 5.
In Table 1 we summarize various characteristics of child care center establishment. There
are several notable patterns. First, the number of child care establishments has dramatically
12

We form zip-code bundles as the geographic areas encompassed by a zip code and all its neighboring zip codes
within a 5-mile (or 10-mile) radius of the zip-code’s population centroid.
13

The 1990 Census of Population is merged into the 1987 and 1992 Census of Services, and the 2000 Census of
Population is merged into the 1997 Census of Services.

12

increased over the decade we analyze, rising from 40,628 in 1987 to 51,299 in 1992 to 61,882 in
1997, which is a rise of 26% between 1987 and 1992 and 21% from 1992 to 1997. Second, with
respect to the type of local organization, child care centers in 1987 were most likely to be
organized as a corporation (49.2%), followed by an sole proprietorship (30.7%), a partnership
(4.0%), and the remaining establishments having had some other legal structure, including being
a government entity (16.1%). Over the period, there was a slight increase in the percentage of
child care centers that were incorporated, largely at the expenses of partnerships. In 1987, a little
over one-third of centers were tax-exempt, not-for-profit entities, although the incidence of this
status declines over time. About 18% of centers were a part of a chain in 1987 and this rate
grows slightly to 21.5% by 1997. Third, despite the rise in centers organized as corporations, it is
clear that these establishments are small businesses as they have a relatively small number of
employees as well as modest payrolls and revenue. A typical child care center hires 8 to 10
employees depending on the year, paying around $10,000 salary per employee and generating
less than $25,000 revenue per employee. At the same time, all three of these dimensions of
centers increased over the period we examine.
In Tables 2 and 3, we provide summary statistics for child care markets, using zip-codes
as the measure of local markets. In 1987, child care centers operated in roughly one third of all
30,000 U.S zip codes, and by 1997 in roughly half of these zip codes. On average, three to four
child care establishments operate per zip code, about two of which have entered in the last five
years, and one to two of which will exit in the next five years. For every 1000 children under 5
years of age, there are approximately 7 child care establishments in 1987, 8 in 1992 and 9 in
1992. Given the average numbers of employees an establishment hires (8 to 10) and the
minimum staff-child ratio requirement (around 0.133, or 7 or 8 children to every staff member)

13

over the three Census years, it is straightforward to figure out that these establishments do have
the capacity of accommodate a significant portion of children under 5. For example, in 1997
about 40 child care center employees in a typical zip code have the capacity of taking care of
around 300 children, which account for about 25% of population under 5. In Table 3 we provide
summary statistics for the demographics of the zip codes in which child care establishments
operate from the 1990 and 2000 Census of Population. They tend to be more heavily populated,
wealthier, better-educated, and less-rural zip codes than the average U.S. zip code.
B. Quality of Child Care Services: NAEYC Accreditation
A key feature of our study is to examine the effects of regulation on the quality of child
care services available to parents. There is a growing consensus among child developmental
specialists that a good measure of whether a child care center provides high-quality services is
whether it is accredited. 14 The National Association of Education for Young Children (NAEYC)
has administered a national accreditation system for almost two decades. Any early childhood
program—child care center, preschool, kindergarten, or before- and/or after-school program—
can voluntarily apply for NAEYC accreditation. The applying program must submit extensive
information about its program and undergo a site-visit to validate the accuracy of this
information. This includes assessments of the nature and extent of interactions among teachers
and children, a center’s curriculum, relationships between teachers and families, staff
qualifications and professional development, the quality of a center’s administration, center
staffing and the extent of staff turnover, a center’s physical environment, whether a center meets
various health and safety standards, and the quality of the nutrition and food services it provides.
14

The 1988 National Child Care Staffing Study (Whitebook, Howes, and Philips 1989) found that accredited child
care centers provided higher-than-average-quality services to children and Mo Xiao (forthcoming) found that
parents were willing to pay a premium for the accredited centers, especially newly opened centers that had not yet
established a reputation about the quality of their services among parents.

14

As a final step, this information is reviewed by a national commission of recognized experts in
child care and early childhood education to determine whether a center meets NAEYC’s criteria
for a high quality child care program. If so, the commission accredits the center for a three-year
period. In 1997, the last year in our data, around 6,500 programs were accredited. As we shall
see below, this is a fairly small fraction of all child care centers, reflecting the fact that only very
high quality programs are able to comply with the NAEYC’s standards.
We obtained administrative accreditation records from the NAEYC, which contain
information on the accreditation status of individual child care providers over the period 198797. These records included information on the provider’s exact address (street address, city,
county, state, zip) and information on their accreditation history (application date, initial
accreditation date, expiration date, and accreditation status). We used this address information to
determine the accreditation status of establishments in the Census of Services data in 1987, 1992
and 1997. We also used the NAEYC data to measure the fraction of child care center
establishments that are accredited, or accreditation rates, by year for each of our local markets.
Accreditation rates at the establishment and market levels are recorded at Table 4. There
is a substantial discrepancy in these rates, with accreditation rates based on establishment data
substantially lower than those measured at the zip-code/market level. This discrepancy is a result
of the lower rates of matching at the establishment level between the establishments in the
Census of Services data and the NAEYC accreditation database. The latter was done using the
addresses and names of establishments in the two data sets. In all three Census years, we only
match approximately 60% of the NAEYC accredited establishments with Census establishments.
If there is no match, we assume that the Census establishment was not accredited, which may be
incorrect. The main reason for this low match rate, we suspect, is that many child care centers

15

have changed their addresses and business names during our sample period. 15 In contrast, the
market-level accreditation rates were obtained by dividing the number of accredited
establishments in the NAEYC data located in the geographical market, i.e., within a particular
zip-code, by the number of child care center establishments from the Census data in that market.
While also potentially subject to misclassification error, this latter set of rates only required
matching on the geographical unit of the market, e.g., zip codes and, we suspect, are less subject
to measurement/classification error. Focusing on the latter rates in Table 4, we find a sizeable
increase in accreditation rates over time. While only 0.8% of child care establishments were
NAEYC accredited in 1987, 3.8% were accredited in 1992 and 9.4% in 1997. Still, only a small
proportion of establishments have received accreditation, which partially reflects the fact that the
accreditation status serves as an indicator of high-end child care services.
C. Family Day Care Homes
Given the structure of the child care industry, it is important to assess whether regulation
of child care centers leads to changes in the number of children cared for in family day care
homes that comprise the less-organized sector of this industry. As noted earlier, we have more
limited data for family day care homes – which the Census of Services classifies as nonemployer
establishments – than we have for day care centers. In particular, we only have state-level data
on these providers, including number of providers in a state in a given year and the total revenues
these providers received for their services as claimed on their tax returns. We also do not have
comparable measures of the quality of their services as we have for child care centers as NAEYC
does not accredit family day care homes. Nonetheless, we are able to analyze the spillover
effects of child care center regulations on several aspects of the operations in family day care
15

The Censuses of Services records the addresses and the business names in 1987, 1992, and 1997 respectively,
while the NAEYC only keeps the most recent addresses and business names.

16

homes.
We present, in Table 5, descriptive statistics for family day care home establishments for
the years 1987, 1992 and 1992. As one can see, there are a large number of these establishments.
In 1997, there were on average 9,583 family day care homes per state or 488,734 in the nation as
a whole, with family day care homes making up 89% of all child care establishments in our data.
We note that there appears to have been a large increase in the number of family day care homes
between 1987 and 1992. While there may have been a dramatic growth of family day care homes
between these two years, it is more likely that the 1987 number is the result of an undercount in
these establishments. It turns out that 1987 was the first year in which nonemployer
establishments were included in the Census of Services. Data from these establishments are
obtained solely from federal tax returns and a substantial number of family day care homes were
misclassified in terms of their industrial code in this initial year. 16 We deal with this potential
undercount in our empirical analyses of the effects of child care regulations by dropping 1987
nonemployer data for robustness check in our nonemployer regressions. Finally, we note that
compared to child care centers, the average annual revenues of a family day care home is
relatively low ($9,382 in 1997), indicative of the fact that these establishments are truly small
businesses. As the SIPP estimated that on average $68 per week was paid per preschooler to
family day care homes in 1997 (Smith, 2002), which amount to about $3,000 per year, the
average annual revenues of a family day care home suggests that a typical owner takes care of
about 3 children.
D. State Child Care Center Regulations
In this section, we briefly describe the regulation of the child care industry and the data
16

See Grace O’Neill and Martin O’Connell (2001) for more on the nonemployer establishment data for child care
providers.

17

we use to measure these regulations. Which aspects of a center’s operation are regulated, and the
stringency of those regulations, differs by types of child care provider. One set of regulations
applies to center-based care provided in day care centers, preschool and/or nursery schools and
Head Start programs. A different set applies to family day care homes, i.e., care provided by a
provider, typically in their own home. Given that the primary focus of this paper is on the
provision of center-based care, we limit our discussion to the regulation of this sector of the child
care market.
In the analysis presented below, we focus on the effects of state regulations of the labor
intensiveness (e.g., maximum child-to-staff ratios and group sizes by age group) and staff
qualifications (e.g., minimum educational requirements and requiring criminal background
checks for child care workers) of child care center services. 17 Previous studies have found that
these two aspects of the production of child care services appear to be associated with objective
measures of child care quality, such as the cognitive, emotional and social development of young
children. 18 However, even within these categories of regulations, states tend to impose different
standards for the care of children of different ages. Furthermore, as Blau (2003) points out and
Currie and Hotz (2004) confirm, many of these regulations are highly correlated with one other.
For example, states which impose stringent requirements on child-staff ratios also tend to restrict
group sizes, i.e., the total number of children in a particular child care setting. This correlation
makes it difficult to identify separate effects of individual regulations. Accordingly, we use two
17

Other requirements include requiring use of a developmental curriculum, carrying liability insurance, and meeting
certain health and safety standards such as immunization and fire-safety equipment. Some states even specify the
frequency of government inspections on licensed child care centers.
18

Ruopp, Travers, Glantz and Coelen (1979) and Mocan, Margaret Burchinal, John Morris, and Suzanne Helburn
(1995) find evidence that more labor intensive and better qualified child care staff improve the development of
young children. Also see Cheryl Hayes, John Palmer and Martha Zaslow (1990) and Blau and Currie (2006) for
summaries of these and other studies. An important exception to these findings is Blau (2000). He finds, using the
same data as in the Mocan, Burchinal, Morris, and Helburn (1995) study, that only educational qualifications have
an effect on measures of children’s development once one controls for center-specific fixed effects.

18

alternative strategies to characterize state regulations. Under one strategy, we make use of sets of
representative standards for labor intensity and staff qualifications, such as staff-child ratio
requirements for infants and the education requirement for directors since most states regulate
these dimensions and they differ across states. 19 This strategy is used by Chipty and Witte
(1997), Blau (2007) and Currie and Hotz (2004). Following Blau (2003), we also construct
summary indices of the stringency of state standards for labor intensiveness and staff educational
qualifications. In particular, for staff-child ratio requirements, we average the requirements for
the six age groupings and, for staff qualifications, we use the average of the number of years of
schooling required for center directors and teachers.
Table 6 presents summary statistics for the minimum staff-to-child ratios for child care
centers and educational requirements for center directors and teachers in 1987, 1992, and 1997. 20
On the surface, there are no discernable trends in the various measures of regulation amongst
those states that had regulations. However, one does see an increase in the number of states that
began to regulate certain aspects of the production of child care services over this period. For
example, between 1987 and 1997 five states started regulating staff-child ratios for infants and 4
states changed its regulatory stringency and ten states went from no regulation on directors’
education levels to having a regulation. More generally, as shown in the last column of Table 6, a
sizeable number of states changed their individual regulations over this period. This variation –
i.e., where states changed particular regulations over our sample period – will turn out to be
essential for our ability to identify the causal effects of these regulations on the availability and
quality of child care services. We also note that there is considerable variation in the stringency
19

The staff-child ratio requirements for toddlers and preschoolers have comparable variation in data, but labor
intensiveness matter the most for infants.

20

The information on state child care regulations was gathered by Hotz, in collaboration with Rebecca Kilburn of
Rand for the period 1983-1997. These data are available upon request.

19

of regulations across states. Some states (e.g. Maryland, Kansas, and California) require one staff
member to take care of no more than 3 or 4 toddlers, while other states (e.g. South Carolina,
Idaho) allow one staff member to take care of as many as 8 to 12 toddlers. As for the education
requirements, states range from imposing no educational requirements on any child care center
employees (e.g., Florida, Idaho) to requiring that directors have high-school diplomas (e.g.,
Connecticut, Michigan), to requiring that child care center directors and teachers have some
college education (e.g. South Dakota, New Jersey).
III.

Econometric Methods
In this section, we briefly outline our estimation strategy and describe the alternative

measures of the effects of regulation.
As we noted in the introduction, there is a potential for bias in the estimation of the causal
effects of regulation stringency on the child care market. The most challenging source of such
bias is “policy endogeneity” (Timothy Besley and Anne Case, 2000), i.e., the possibility that
state policies are influenced by (or correlated with) unobserved state-level factors or conditions
that influence the behavioral outcomes under investigation. For example, suppose some states
may have a high proportion of parents who prefer to provide their children with high quality
child care – and are willing to pay for it – while the parents in other states do not. Furthermore,
suppose that parents vote their preferences and either support or oppose the imposition and
stringency of regulations as a way to promote higher quality child care. Then failure to control
for the potentially unobserved differences in the distribution of tastes across states – as well as
other differences across states and over time – will result in biased estimates of the effects of
policy on the outcomes of interest.
To mitigate the influence of this type of policy endogeneity, we exploit two features of

20

our data. First, we control for as rich a set of observable establishment- and market-level
characteristics that might account for this source of bias in the regression analyses presented
below. Second, we exploit our panel data on establishments and local markets to control for
state, time, and, where possible, establishment fixed effects in these regression models. Including
establishment fixed effects in these models not only controls for time-invariant state-specific
sources of unobserved heterogeneity – none of the child care establishments in our data are
observed to relocate across state lines – but also controls for time-invariant establishment-level
factors that could cause bias in our estimates of the effects of regulations. More precisely, for
market-level analyses we can estimate regressions of the following form:
(1)

Ymst   0  1 REGst   2 NoREGst   5 X mst   t   s   mst ,

where Ymst are outcomes of interest for market m in state s in year t, REGst is a vector of the child
care regulations in that state as of year t, NoREGst is a vector of dummy variables that equal 1 if
the state did not mandate a particular regulation in year t and equal to 0 otherwise, Xmst is a
vector of market-level population characteristics and economic conditions, t, and s, are,
respectively, year and state fixed effects, and 1 is the vector of the impacts of state child care
regulations on Ymst. And, for establishment-level analyses, we can estimate the following
regression models:
(2)

Y jmst   0  1 REGst   2 NoREGst  5 X mst   6 Z jmst  t  s   j  v jmst ,

where Yjmst are outcomes for establishment (child care center) j located at local market m within
state s in year t, Zjmst denotes a vector of establishment characteristics, ωt, s and j are,
respectively, time, state and establishment fixed effects and 1 is the vector of the impacts of

21

state child care regulations on Yjmst. 21 In order to examine how the effects of regulations differ
across the population of consumers (parents), we also estimate the following variants of (1) and
(2):
(1)

(2)

Ymst   0*  1* REGst   2* NoREGst   3* REGst  Cmst   4* NoREGst  Cmst
*
,
 5* X mst   t*   s*   mst

Y jmst   0*  1* REGst   2* NoREGst   3* REGst  Cmst   4* NoREGst  Cmst
  5* X mst   6*Z jmst  t*  s*   *j  v *jmst ,

where Cmst denotes characteristics of the populations of local markets and we use median
household income as such a characteristic in this study.
The inclusion of state and establishment fixed effects implies that our effects of
regulations are identified holding constant any time-invariant differences across markets in (1)
and any time-invariant differences across establishments in (2). 22 The inclusion of year fixed
effects implies that we also hold constant any shocks which hit all the states in the same year.
Our data allow us to support a richer set of strategies to mitigate policy endogeneity bias than
any previous attempts to estimate the effects of regulations on the availability or quality of child
care services. 23
The specifications in the above regression models allow us to estimate two alternative
and distinct effects of regulations on Ymst and Yjmst. The coefficients 1 and 1 in (1) and (2),
respectively, measure the marginal effect of a change in the stringency of an existing standard,

21

Controlling for firm, rather than establishment fixed effects – multiple establishments can belong to the same firm
– produced results that were similar to those reported below.
22

The extent to which there are other, unobserved market-level factors that are time-varying and correlated with our
regulation variables, our results still may be biased.
23

Both Chipty and Witte (1997) and Blau (2007) use cross-sectional data to identify the effects of regulations on the
supply and quality of child care services. For example, Blau (2007) uses a detailed cross-sectional sample of child
care centers surveyed in four states and uses within state variation in differences in regulations by age groups of
children and by types of center staff to estimate causal effects of these regulations.

22

REG, given that this dimension of child care is regulated. 24 This causal effect considered in
previous studies of child care services. But, as suggested by the theoretical work on the effects of
regulations discussed in Section I, one is often interested in the effect of imposing some standard
relative to no standard at all. This latter effect corresponds to average treatment effects
considered in the evaluation literature. In particular, let Y1 denote the potential outcome when a
state regulates a particular dimension of child care centers and Y0 denote the potential outcome
when it does not. Then, the average effect of regulation is defined to be
1R   2
in (1) and (2)

E Y1  Y0 REG  R   *
*
*
*
1 R   3 R  C   2   4 C in (1) in (2),



(3)



where θi = i in (1) and i in (2) and i*   i* in (1) and  i* in (2). Below, we present estimates
of the average effect of a regulation at its sample mean, i.e., R  R .
It is important to note that the marginal effect and average effect of regulation
characterize two different effects of regulation and, in general, they need not be of the same sign.
The regression specifications above allow for this possibility. For example, it follows from (3)
that the average effect of imposing any regulation, evaluated at certain level of regulation, R , is
positive, even though the marginal effect of a change in that level is negative.
Finally, we estimate the variance matrix taking into account unobserved heterogeneity
influencing seller behavior at the state-year level in all sets of regressions. Specifically, we allow
the error terms to cluster by state-year group, that is, we allow each state-year group to have a
different and unrestricted covariance structure but assume that errors are uncorrelated across

The corresponding measures of marginal effects for alternative values of Cmst  C are given by 1*   3*C mst and
 *   *C , respectively.

24

1

3

23

groups (Brent Moulton, 1986). 25
IV.

Results

Tables 7 through 12 present results on the effects of state child care regulations on the
supply and quality of child care services. To keep the size of these tables manageable, we only
report the coefficients on our regulation variables and their interactions with the median
household income in the local markets. 26 For every table, we include two panels: the upper panel
(Panel A) presents estimates of the effects of specific regulations, i.e., those for the minimum
staff-child ratio requirement for infants in day care centers and educational requirements for
center directors. The bottom panel (Panel B) presents estimated effects of the stringency indices
on minimum staff-child ratio and educational requirements that we described in Section II.
We begin by making some general observations about our empirical findings. First, we
consistently find that the estimated effects of regulations (marginal effects and average treatment
effects) that control for time, state and/or establishment fixed effects are markedly different from
those that do not. For example, the estimated effects results often switch signs – including from
negative and significant to positive and significant – when we control for fixed effects.
Furthermore, unlike in Blau (2007), we do not find that controlling for fixed effects
systematically render the estimated effects of regulations to be statistically insignificant. Rather,
for many outcomes, regulations do significantly affect firm behavior, even after we control for
various sets of these fixed effects. Second, the signs and statistical significance of the effects of
regulations on firm and market-level outcomes are not very sensitive to whether we use direct

25

If we cluster error terms by state instead of state-year pair, we lose significance in a few cases but our inferences
about the effects of regulations remain largely intact.
26

In all of our regressions, we control for the variables listed in the top part of Table 1 and in Table 3. Versions of
Tables 7 to 12 with a complete set of coefficient estimates and their robust standard errors are available at
www.econ.duke.edu/~vjh3/working_papers/Hotz-Xiao-Tables.pdf.

24

measures of regulations or the stringency indices we constructed. Nor are our results on the
effects of minimum staff-child ratios or staff educational requirements sensitive to whether we
hold constant measures of regulations on other dimensions of the production of child care
services or whether we control for indicators of whether a state actually imposed any regulatory
restriction. Finally, the signs and statistical significance of the effects of regulations on the
outcomes we exam are robust to the particular way we define local markets, i.e., whether they
are defined local markets as zip codes, zip code bundles, or counties. To conserve on space, we
do not report on all of the robustness checks we performed. Detailed results for these analyses
are available upon request.
A. Effects of Regulations on the Number of Child Care Centers in Local Markets

As we noted in Section I, one cannot sign the effects of the imposition of regulatory
standards or of increasing their stringency on the production of child care services. They depend
on the balance between the increased costs centers face of complying with regulations and the
increased willingness of consumers to pay higher prices for care because of their increased
assurance of the quality of services. Moreover, the fact that inputs, rather than quality, are
regulated implies that the mapping between the quality of services and the stringency of
regulations is not as direct as suggested by the theoretical literature on minimum quality
standards. In this section, we examine estimates of the net effect of these forces on the supply of
child care services as measured by the number of establishments per local market.
Table 7 presents results on the effects of state child care regulations on the number of
child care centers in a local market, using zip codes to define these markets. The regressions both
without and with state and time fixed effects (column 4) show that the average effect of imposing
minimum staff-child ratio requirements, where the regulation is evaluated at its sample mean

25

(estimates in “Ave. Effect of Regulation” rows) and the marginal effect of increasing the
stringency of this standard significantly reduce the number of establishments operating in a local
market, although the average effect of the minimum staff-child ratio regulation is not statistically
significant. To get a sense of how sizeable this effect is, consider the marginal effect of
increasing the minimum staff-child ratio from its mean of 0.226 (see Table 6) to 0.292, which
amounts to reducing the average maximum number of infants per staff member in a child care
center by 1 infant. 27 Based on the estimates from Panel A, column 4 of Table 7, such an increase
in the stringency of the staff-child ratio for infants would reduce the number of child care centers
in the average market by between 9.2% and 10.8% depending on the year analyzed. Meanwhile,
the marginal effect of increasing the average required number of years of education of center
directors by 1 would reduce the number of child care centers in the average market by between
3.2% and 3.8% depending on the year analyzed. While not huge, the marginal effects are not
trivial reductions in the availability of child care centers.
The estimated effects of child care regulations on the availability of child care centers in
Table 7 are not uniform across different markets. In column 5 of Table 7, we provide estimates
of the interaction of the various regulations with the median household income in the local
markets. As one can see, the interactions of the staff-child ratios in both Panels A and B are
statistically significant. Furthermore, the positive coefficient on the interactions of these ratios
with the median income of households in the local markets are positive, indicating that the effect
of increases in the stringency of minimum staff-child ratios is larger in wealthier markets. At the

27

The average of the minimum staff-child ratio for infants is 0.226 (Table 6), which corresponds to a maximum
child-staff ratio of 4.425. Thus, reducing the number of infants per staff member by one implies that the associated
minimum staff-child ratio would be 0.292 (= 1/[4.425 – 1]). Thus, the minimum staff-child ratio would increase by
0.066 (= 0.292 – 0.226). Then the estimated reduction in the number of centers in an average local market would be
-0.371 (= -5.6170.066),) corresponding to 9.2% (= 0.371/4.023) of average number of child care centers in a zip
code in 1997, and 10.8% (= 0.371/3.440) in 1987. The following calculations all follow this procedure.

26

same time, the interactions of median income with minimum educational requirements in either
Panel A or B are not statistically significant and tend to be small, indicating that there is little
evidence that the effects of this latter set of regulations vary by the income of households in local
markets.
To provide a better sense of how the impacts of the marginal and average effects of
regulations vary by the median household income of local markets, we present, in column 1 of
Table 8, the implied estimates of both the marginal and average effect of regulations for local
markets with higher median income markets (evaluated at 2 standard deviations above the
sample median) and for lower income markets (evaluated at two standard deviations below the
sample median). With respect to these effects, the negative impacts of the imposition of
minimum staff-child ratios (“Ave. Eff.” column) and increasing their stringency (“Marg. Eff.”
column) are concentrated in poorer markets. In fact, based on our points of evaluation, the
imposition of minimum staff-ratios or increasing their stringency actually increase the number of
child care centers (establishments) in higher income markets. One possible explanation for this
difference is that wealthier households may respond to tighter standards by increasing their
demand for child care center services consistent with the dominance of the quality-assurance
effect suggested by some of the theoretical models discussed in Section I. In contrast, markets
with poorer households may be more affected by the increase costs that result from such
regulations, i.e., the cost-of-quality effects dominate any quality-assurance effects of the
imposition or tightening of minimum staff-child ratios in this sector. We will provide more
evidence below on the plausibility of this explanation when we look at the differential effects of
regulation by household income on our measure of quality (accreditation) and on the costs (labor
costs) of center-based care.

27

As we noted above, we estimated a number of alternative specifications of our baseline
model to determine the robustness of our findings concerning the marginal and average effects of
regulations on all of our outcomes. In Table 9 we present a few of these robustness checks for
the number of establishments per market. Comparing the estimates of the marginal and average
effects of regulation in Table 9 with those in Table 7, we see that across changes in our measures
of regulations, whether or not we control for other state regulations and using alternative
definitions of local markets, we consistently find negative and statistically significant effects of
more stringent staff-child ratios on the number of child care centers per market. With respect to
imposing minimum educational requirements for child care center staff or increasing their
stringency, while the estimated effects are less consistently statistically significant, the estimated
effects are almost always negative in sign.
Overall, we find consistent evidence that the imposition of and tightening of minimum
staff-child ratios lead to a reduction in the availability of child care centers in local markets. Our
findings with respect to the effects of minimum educational requirements on the supply of
centers to local markets are somewhat less consistent in that statistical significance varies by
which type of effect one considers and somewhat by household income. Nonetheless, we do find
rather consistent evidence that, on average, imposing minimum requirements on the educational
qualifications of center staff reduces the availability of centers in local markets. 28
B. Effects of Regulations on the Size of Centers

The previous section established that the imposition and increased stringency of child
care regulations reduce the number of child care centers available in local markets. However,
28

We also examined the effects of state child care regulations on the market rates of entry and exit to determine
whether the negative effects of such regulations on the number of establishments per market is the result of
regulations forestalling entry or increasing the rate at which incumbent centers leave the market. We find evidence
that imposing and increasing the stringency of these regulations do both.

28

these findings do not imply that the capacity of center services in these markets is necessarily
reduced, since the remaining providers could increase the labor they use, and thus the size of
their operations, in response to changing regulations and possibly completely offset the loss of
centers. More generally as noted by Blau (2007), child care centers may adjust their labor inputs
in response to changes in these regulations, regardless of whether such responses increase or
decrease the production of child care services. Accordingly, we directly examine the effects of
the stringency of state child regulations on the number of employees per child care establishment
using establishment-level data. The results of this analysis are presented in Table 10. While we
do find significant effects of regulations when we do not control for establishment fixed effects
(columns 1 and 2), none of these effects are statistically insignificant once these fixed effects are
included in the regressions (columns 3 and 4). The latter findings suggest that the centers that
remain in business do not fully comply with states’ minimum staff-child ratios or that these
centers end up reducing the number of children they cared for. Our data do not allow us to sort
out these alternatives, since we do not have information on the number of children enrolled in a
child care center. But, taken together with our evidence that the number of establishments
decline as a result of the imposition of and increased stringency of state regulations, these
findings do point to the conclusion that such changes in regulations reduce the supply of centerbased child care services in local markets.
C. Effects of Center Regulations on Family Day Care Homes

As we noted in Section I, the imposition and increased stringency of regulation of child
care centers may increase the demand for non-center-based child care services, including those
provided in family day care homes, to the extent that such regulations either increase the price of
center-based services and/or otherwise reduce their availability. We now examine the evidence

29

on whether this “crowding in” to family day care homes occurs and assess its likely
consequences for the well-being of children and their parents. Recall that we only have statelevel data on family day care homes. Thus, our analysis of the cross-sector effects of child care
center regulations is more restricted relative to that for child care centers. Nonetheless, we think
they are informative.
In Table 11 and column 2 of Table 8, we present estimates of the marginal and average
effects of state child care center regulations 29 on the number of family day care homes
(nonemployer establishments) per 1000 children under age 5 in a state to determine how child
care center regulations affect the supply of family day care homes. We also present estimates of
effects of regulations on the average annual revenues per family day care home. In addition to
being of direct interest, we argue below that any cross-sector effects of child care center
regulations on the revenues of family day care homes is likely to track changes in the number of
children (or child hours) in these homes. Finally, the data used to generate the estimates in Table
11 include the 1987 data, the year for which there appears to be an undercount of family day care
homes. However, our findings and inferences about the effects of regulations on either of the
family day care home outcomes are little affected by excluding the 1987 data.
With respect to the effects of state child care center regulations on the number of family
day care homes relative to the number of preschool age children (columns 1 and 2 in Table 11),
there is little evidence of any cross-regulation effects as almost all of the estimated coefficients
are statistically insignificant. Moreover, the average effects of imposing minimum staff-child
ratios and educational attainment on child care centers employees are negative in all but one
case, implying, if anything, that the imposition of child care center regulations reduced the
29

We also estimated versions of the regression models that also included measures of states’ regulations that apply
to family day care homes. Controlling for these additional variables has little impact on the estimates and
significance of the effects of state child care center regulations.

30

number of family day care homes in states. 30 However, we find positive and statistically
significant estimate of average and marginal effects of regulating center-based staff-child ratios
on the average annual revenue per family day care homes (Table 11, columns 3 and 4).
Furthermore, while the marginal effect of increasing the stringency of the educational
requirements of center directors is negative, the average effect of this regulation is positive,
consistent with those for center-based minimum staff-child ratios. Finally, we find that the
average effect of regulating the center-based staff-child ratios varies by a market’s median
household income (Table 11, column 4), with such regulations resulting in higher revenues per
establishment in higher income markets relative to poorer ones. In fact, our estimates imply that
revenues actually fall in very poor markets as a result of tighter regulation of center-based care
(Table 9, column 2).
What do these results for the cross-effects of regulations imply for the well-being of
children and their parents? Although the number of family day care homes does not increase in
response to tighter regulation of the center-based sector, it does appear that there is an increase
the number of children per home. The latter is an implication of the cross-regulation effects on
family day care home revenues. While more stringent center-based regulations may result in an
increase in the prices charged by family day care homes, some or all of the estimated increase in
the revenues in these homes is the result of an increase in the number of children that they serve
and/or children-hours they provide. 31 In principle, this accommodation of children by family day
care homes that are crowded out of center-based care due to the regulation-induced reduction of

30

Given this lack of statistical significance, we do not present how the estimated regulation effects differ by
household income in Table 8.

31

In fact, one would expect the increase in the quantity of care provided to be greater than an increase in its price,
since the relatively low costs of establishing a family day care home are likely to keep this sector of the child care
market relatively competitive.

31

capacity in the latter sector should help meet the child care demands of parents, especially
employed mothers.
At the same time, there are several reasons to conclude that crowding children out of
center-based care and into family day care homes may have adverse consequences for their
development. First, a number of recent studies (NICHD Early Child Care Research Network and
Duncan, 2003; Loeb, Bridges, Bassok, Fuller and Rumberger, 2007; Bernal and Keane, 2010) 32
have found that children in center-based care, especially between the ages of 3 and 4, have
higher levels of cognitive and language skill development and school readiness by the age of 5
than do children who spend an equivalent amount of time in family day care homes of
comparable quality. In fact, these studies consistently find positive differential effects of child
care centers relative to other child care arrangements, including that provided by babysitters,
nannies and relatives. Furthermore, several of these studies find that the developmental benefits
of center-based care are typically greater for children in poor and/or minority families. Second,
as noted above, our estimated cross-effects of regulation on family day care home revenues
imply that additional children cared for in these homes are cared for by the same number of staff,
which also could adversely affect the development and school readiness of young children.
Unfortunately, there does not appear to be any evidence on the effects of differences in the
number of children per provider within family day care homes on measured outcomes of
children.

32

Blau and Currie (2006) and Duncan and Christina Gibson-Davis (2006) argue that many, if not most, studies of
the effects of alternative types of child care and their quality on children’s cognitive development, school readiness
and related outcomes are not based on random assignment of these arrangements, and, as such are potentially subject
to selection bias. While there are no studies, to our knowledge, that have used random assignment to identify the
differential effects of alternative child chare arrangements on children‘s outcomes, the studies cited above do
attempt to use one or more non-experimental methods to try to alleviate this source of bias.

32

D. Effects of Regulations on Quality of Child Care Centers

We next examine whether child care regulations achieve their goal of increasing the
quality of child care services. Existing theories of regulation suggest that whether regulation
promotes the quality of child care services depends on whether the quality-assurance effects of
such regulations outweigh the greater costs of producing higher quality services. Furthermore, as
noted by Blau (2003), the fact that child care regulations affect the inputs used in the production
of quality, and not quality itself, implies that imposing or tightening regulations could induce the
substitution of other inputs and have little or no effect on quality. Finally, the models of Ronnen
(1991) and others suggest that imposing or tightening minimum standards on quality can induce
quality competition in markets that are less than perfectly competitive. In the analysis that
follows, we are unable to explicitly test the validity of these alternative avenues through which
child care regulations affect the quality of center-based care. Rather, we focus on the average and
marginal effects of regulation on the quality of center-based care in local markets.
We present, in Table 12, estimates of the average and marginal effects of child care
regulations on the percentage of child care centers in local markets that are accredited by
NAEYC, i.e., market accreditation rates. As we noted in Section II, it appears that the rates of
accreditation based on establishment-level data are understated due to the difficulties of
matching child care centers in the NAEYC accreditation database with establishments in the
Census of Services data. We argued that market-based accreditation rates were less susceptible to
this understatement, given that such matches only required matching on zip codes and not full
addresses. While only reported in the on-line appendix, we also estimated the effects of
regulation on the probability of child care centers accredited using establishment-level data. In
most cases, the signs and statistical significance of the average and marginal effects were the

33

same as those presented in Table 12. 33
We find that the imposition of and increased stringency of minimum staff-child ratio
requirements significantly increase the rates of accreditation in local markets. We also find that
the marginal effects for both of our measures of minimum educational requirements for child
care center staff in Panels A and B are negative, although the marginal effect of our average
measure of these requirements (Panel B) are not statistically significant. Furthermore, our
estimates of the average effects of these regulations are either positive or negative but are not
statistically significant. Thus, our evidence indicates that the imposition of either type of
regulation increases the quality of center-based care available in local markets. This is consistent
with the quality-assurance effect dominating the cost-of-quality effect among typical consumers
and with the regulation of these inputs actually improving the quality of child care. It is also
consistent with Ronnen’s prediction that imposing minimum quality standards will not only
reduce the provision of low-quality services, but also will generate strategic increases in the
quality provided by already high-quality centers. Recall that attaining NAEYC accreditation
requires a center to meet a set of minimum standards for its operation that are well above the
minimum standards imposed by any state.
Finally, based on the estimates of coefficients on the interactions of the regulations with
the median household income in Table 12, we find that any increases in the quality of centerbased care that result from the imposition of these regulations only accrue to high income
markets (Table 8, column 3), although the interactions with income are only statistically
significant for the average minimum educational requirements measure in Panel B of Table 12.
In fact, the effect of imposing these standards on quality is consistently negative in very poor
33

The only notable differences between the latter results and those reported in Table 12 are for the coefficients on
the minimum educational requirements variables, where there were differences in levels of statistical significance
although virtually no differences in the signs and magnitudes of the estimates themselves.

34

local markets. The latter findings suggest that any quality-assurance effects of imposing
regulations are swamped by the effects of the higher costs of quality among the poor.
V.

Conclusions

Imposing regulations on quality of inputs or directly on quality has an extensive history
in a number of sectors of the economy, 34 including the market for child care services. However,
the imposition of minimum quality standards on inputs used in production of child care services
is only one of many regulatory responses to such market failure. 35 In the face of these alternative
responses, policy makers need to be fully informed of the consequences – intended or unintended
– of such regulations.
Based on our findings, these consequences for the well-being of children and their
parents appear to be both positive and negative. On the negative side, we find that the imposition
of input regulations in the center-based sector of the child care market significantly reduces the
number of operating child care centers, especially in lower-income markets. Furthermore, this
loss of capacity in the center-based sector due to regulation is not offset by child care centers
hiring more workers or by expanding the number of home day care providers. Rather, our
evidence suggests that regulating child care centers leads to more children going into the same
number of family day care homes, where these arrangements are thought to be less
developmentally enriching. But, on the positive side, the imposition and increased stringency of

34

For example, the government subjects automobile manufacturers to fuel-economy standards, and older cars to
smog checks to ensure that they meet certain emission standards. Health care professionals, and apropos of this
study, child care providers, must pass detailed licensing requirements in order to practice their occupations. Several
rationales are often used to justify such governmental regulations, including informational asymmetries between
sellers and consumers (George Akerlof, 1970) or negative externalities that the consumption of low-quality products
or services may impose on society. The latter two situations can lead to market failure, i.e., insufficient quantities of
higher quality products or services are produced and consumed relative to what is socially optimal.
35

For example, another regulatory response could be to require sellers to disclose the quality of their products or
services (Ginger Jin and Philip Leslie, 2003).

35

such standards, especially on the labor intensiveness of child care centers, do increase the quality
services available in the centers that remain. Unfortunately, this increased quality is not shared
equally by all children and parents, since the gains appear to accrue primarily to those living in
higher income areas. Taken together, our results suggest that a simple characterization of
whether the well-being of children (and their parents) is improved or reduced by regulations is
not possible and would be misleading. Rather, there are positive and negative consequences of
regulating the child care market, with some children and parents being better off and some being
worse off.

36

References

Akerlof, George. 1970. “The Market for Lemons: Quality Uncertainty and the Market
Mechanism.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3): 488-500.
Bernal, Raquel and Michael Keane. 2010. “Quasi-structural Estimation of a Model of Childcare
Choices and Child Cognitive Ability Production.” Journal of Econometrics, 156: 164189.
Besley, Timothy and Anne Case. 2000. “Unnatural Experiments? Estimating the Incidence of
Endogenous Policies.” Economic Journal, 110(467): F672-F694.
Blau, David. 2000. “The Production of Quality in Child Care Centers: Another Look.” Applied
Developmental Science, 4(3): 136-148.
Blau, David. 2003. “Do Child Care Regulations Affect the Child Care and Labor Markets?”
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 22(3): 443-465.
Blau, David. 2007. “Unintended Consequences of Child Care Regulations.” Labour Economics,
14(3): 513-38.
Blau, David and Janet Currie. 2006. “Preschool, Day Care and After-School Care: Who’s
Minding the Kids.” In Handbook of the Economics of Education, Vol. 2, ed. Eric A.
Hanushek and Finis Welch, 1163-1278. New York: Elsevier.
Blundell, Richard and Monica Casta Dias. 2009. “Alternative Approaches to Evaluation in
Empirical Microeconomics.” Journal of Human Resources, 44(3): 565-640.
Chipty, Tasheem and Anne Witte. 1997. “An Empirical Investigation of Firms’ Responses to
Minimum Quality Standards Regulation.” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 6104.
Chipty, Tasneem. 1995. “Economic Effects of Quality Regulations in the Daycare Industry.”
American Economic Review, 85(2): 419-424.
Cost, Quality and Outcomes Team. 1995. “Cost, Quality, and Child Outcomes in Child Care
Centers, Executive Summary.” Economics Department, University of Colorado at
Denver.
Crampes, Claude and Abraham Hollander. 1995. “Duopoly and Quality Standards.” European
Economic Review, 39(1): 91-82.
Currie, Janet and V. Joseph Hotz. 2004. “Accidents Will Happen? Unintentional Childhood
Injuries and the Effects of Child Care Regulations.” Journal of Health Economics, 23(1):
25-59.
Duncan, Greg J. and Christina Gibson-Davis. 2006. “Connecting Child Care Quality to Child

37

Outcomes: Drawing Policy Lessons from Nonexperimental Data.” Evaluation Review,
30(5): 611-630.
Dunne, Timothy, Mark J. Roberts, and Larry Samuelson. 1988. “Patterns of Firm Entry and Exit
in U.S. Manufacturing Industries.” The RAND Journal of Economics, 19(4): 495-515.
Garella, Paolo and Emmanuel Petrakis. 2008. “Minimum Quality Standards and Consumers’
Information.” Economic Theory, 36(20: 283-302.
Gormley, William. 1991. “State Regulations and the Availability of Child Care Services.”
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 10(1): 78-95.
Hayes, Cheryl, John Palmer and Martha Zaslow. 1990. Who Cares for America’s Children?
Child Care Policy for the 1990s. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Heckman, James J. and Edward Vytlacil. 2005. “Structural Equations, Treatment Effects, and
Econometric Policy Evaluation.” Econometrica, 73(3), 669–738.
Hofferth, Sandra L., April Brayfield, Sharon Deich, and Pamela Holcomb. 1991. National Child
care Survey, 1990. Urban Institute Press, Washington, D.C.
Jin, Ginger and Philip Leslie. 2003. “The Effects of Information on Product Quality: Evidence
from Restaurant Hygiene Grade Cards.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(2), 40951.
Klein, Benjamin and Keith Leffer. 1981. “The Role of Market Forces in Assuring Contractual
Performance.” Journal of Political Economy, 89(4): 615-641.
Lazear, Edward. 2001. “Educational Production.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(2): 777803.
Leland, Hayne. 1979. “Quacks, Lemons, and Licensing: A Theory of Minimum Standards.”
Journal of Political Economy, 87(6): 1328-1346.
Loeb, Susanna, Margaret Bridges, Daphna Bassok, Bruce Fuller and Russell Rumberger. 2007.
“How Much is Too Much? The Influence of Preschool Centers on Children’s Social and
Cognitive Development.” Economics of Education Review, 26(1): 52-66.
Lowenberg, Anton D. and Thomas D. Tinnin. 1992. “Professional versus Consumer Interests in
Regulation: the Case of the U.S. Child Care Industry.” Applied Economics, 24(6): 571580.
Mocan, Naci. 2007. “Can Consumers Detect Lemons? An Empirical Analysis of Information
Asymmetry in the Market for Child Care.” Journal of Population Economics, 20(4): 50731.
Mocan, Naci, Margaret Burchinal, John Morris, and Suzanne Helburn. 1995. “Models of Quality
in Center Child Care.” In Cost, Quality and Child Outcomes, ed. S. Helburn, Center for

38

Research on Economic and Social Policy, University of Colorado at Denver.
Moulton, Brent R. 1986. “Random Group Effects and the Precision of Regression Estimates.”
Journal of Econometrics, 32(3): 385-397.
NICHD Early Child Care Research Network, and Greg J. Duncan. 2003. “Modeling the Impacts
of Child Care Quality on Children’s Preschool Cognitive Development.” Child
Development, 74(5): 1454-1475.
O’Neill, Grace E. and Martin O’Connell. 2001. “State Estimates of Child Care Establishments:
1977-1997.” Working Paper Series No. 55, Population Division, U. S. Bureau of the
Census.
Ronnen, Uri. 1991. “Minimum Quality Standards, Fixed Costs, and Competition.” Rand Journal
of Economics, 22(4): 490-504.
Ruopp, Richard, Jeffrey Travers, Frederic Glantz and Craig Coelen. 1979. Children at the
Center: Summary Findings and their Implications. Cambridge, MA: Abt Books.
Shapiro, Carl. 1986. “Investment, Moral Hazard, and Occupational Licensing.” Review of
Economic Studies, 53(5): 843-862.
Whitebook, Marcy, Carollee Howes, and Deborah Philips. 1989. Who Cares? Child Care
Teachers and the Quality of Care in America: National Child Care Staffing Study.
Oakland, CA: Child Care Employee Project.
Smith, Kristin. 2002. “Who’s Minding the Kids? Child-Care Arrangement: Spring 1997.”
Current Population Reports, P70-86, Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau.
Xiao, Mo. Forthcoming. “Is Quality Certification Effective? Evidence from the Childcare
Market.” International Journal of Industrial Organization.

39

Table 1: Characteristics of Child Care Center Establishments
Variable

Definition

1987
Mean

1992
Mean

1997
Mean

Percentage
Change,
1987-97

Corporation

Whether the establishment is owned by a
corporation: = 1 if yes; = 0 otherwise.

0.492
(0.500)

0.514
(0.500)

0.536
(0.499)

8.9%

Individual

Whether the establishment is owned as a sole
proprietorship: = 1 if yes; = 0 otherwise.

0.307
(0.461)

0.317
(0.465)

0.310
(0.463)

1.0%

Partnership

Whether the establishment is owned by a
partnership: = 1 if yes; = 0 otherwise.

0.040
(0.197)

0.028
(0.165)

0.034
(0.181)

-15.0%

Tax Exempt

Whether all or part of the income of the
establishment is exempt from federal income
taxes: = 1 if yes; = 0 otherwise

0.340
(0.474)

0.311
(0.463)

0.292
(0.455)

-16.4%

Chain

Whether the establishment belongs to a chain: = 1
if yes; = 0 otherwise.

0.185
(0.389)

0.209
(0.406)

0.215
(0.411)

14.1%

Part Year

Whether the establishment operates less than 6
months in a year: = 1 if yes; = 0 otherwise.

0.040
(0.197)

0.044
(0.206)

0.029
(0.454)

-27.5%

# of
Employees

Number of employees

8.739
(11.942)

9.122
(13.362)

10.143
(15.353)

16.1%

Revenue

Total annual revenue (in 1000s of 1997 $)

$180.040
(323.764)

$199.851
(448.398)

$228.799
(463.063)

27.1%

Payroll

Total annual payroll (in 1000s of 1997 $)

$88.547
(153.647)

$96.535
(195.269)

$112.417
(205.117)

27.0%

Payroll per
Employee

Payroll / # Employees

8.935
(4.480)
[37,743]

9.538
(6.222)
[47,150]

10.011
(6.189)
[56,478]

12.0%

$19.531
(11.632)
[37,743]

$22.819
(21.499)
[47,150]

$23.315
(18.332)
[56,478]

19.3%

40,628

51,299

61,882

52.3%

Revenue per Revenue / # Employees
Employee
N

Number of Establishments

Notes: Unless otherwise noted, in Tables 2 through 6, standard deviations are reported in parentheses and sample sizes are reported in brackets for variables with
missing values.

40

Table 2: Market-Level Characteristics of Center-based Child Care
(Markets Defined as Zip Codes)
Variable

Definition

No. of Establishments

Number of child care establishments in a zip code

Establishment Density

No. of Establishments / No. of Children under 5

No. of Child Care Employees

Number of child care employees in a zip code

No. of Entrants

Number of establishments which do not exist at t - 5

Entry Rate1

No. of Entrants at t / No. of Establishments at t – 5

No. of Exits

Number of establishments which do not exist at t + 5

Exit Rate1

No. of Entrants at t / No. of Establishments at t

N

Number of Zip Codes

1

1987
Mean

1992
Mean

1997
Mean

3.440
(3.320)
0.007
(0.049)
30.152
(40.914)
n.a.

3.734
(3.522)
0.008
(0.075)
34.207
(46.062)
1.942
(2.108)
0.691
(0.802)
1.423
(1.695)
0.378
(0.356)
13,304

4.023
(3.864)
0.009
(0.047)
40.705
(55.873)
1.942
(2.144)
0.661
(0.744)
n.a.

n.a.
1.330
(1.617)
0.383
(0.364)
11,404

We follow Timothy Dunne, Mark Roberts, and Larry Samuelson (1988) to construct aggregate measures of entry and exit rates.

41

n.a.
14,966

Table 3: Demographic Characteristics of Child Care Markets
Variables

Definition

Population under 5

Population under age 5 (in thousands)

% Black

% Population that are African American

% Hispanic

% Population that are Hispanics

Household Size

Average household size

Median Income

Household median income (in 1000s of 1997$)

% College

% Population over age 25 with some college education

% Female Head with Child

% Female-headed households with children.

% Female Not Working

% Female over age 16 not working

% Unemployed

% Labor force that are unemployed

% Work at Home

% Working population over age 16 working at home

% Long Commute
% Rural

% Working population over age 16 spending more than 40
minutes commuting
% Population living in rural areas

N

Number of Zip Codes

42

1990
Mean
1.191
(1.199)
0.096
(0.176)
0.059
(0.126)
2.731
(0.406)
31.060
(12.656)
0.307
(0.109)
0.058
(0.037)
0.379
(0.092)
0.062
(0.037)
0.036
(0.035)
0.282
(0.138)
0.405
(0.414)
13,304

2000
Mean
1.136
(1.197)
0.101
(0.180)
0.082
(0.147)
2.585
(0.345)
43.674
(17.259)
0.352
(0.104)
0.066
(0.036)
0.370
(0.085)
0.057
(0.042)
0.037
(0.027)
0.322
(0.141)
0.381
(0.403)
14,966

Table 4: Accreditation of Child Care Center Establishments
Variable
Establishments:
Accredit1

N

Definition

1987
Mean

1992
Mean

1997
Mean

Whether the establishment is NAEYC accredited:
= 1 if yes; = 0 otherwise

0.003
(0.057)

0.017
(0.128)

0.038
(0.191)

Number of Establishments

40,628

Zip Code Markets:
No. of Accredited
Number of establishments which are NAEYC
accredited in the market
No. of Accredited / No. of Establishments
Accreditation Rate

N

Number of Zip Codes

0.028
(0.186)
0.008
(0.071)
11,404

1

51,299

0.151
(0.506)
0.038
(0.162)
13,304

61,882

0.375
(0.911)
0.094
(0.275)
14,966

The low accreditation averages reported in this table reflect imperfect matching. We set unmatched establishments’ accreditation status to
zero.

43

Table 5: Characteristics of Family Day Care Home (Nonemployer) Establishments at the State Level
Definition

Number of Family Home Establishments (1000s) per State
Number of Family Home Establishments per 1,000 Children under Age 5
Annual Revenue (in 1000s of 1997$) per Family Home Establishment
N (States plus District of Columbia)

44

1987
Mean
4.351
(4.281)
16.595
(12.011)
$8.240
(1.567)
51

1992
Mean
9.589
(8.956)
34.927
(19.811)
$7.753
(1.689)
51

1997
Mean
9.583
(9.354)
33.259
(18.759)
$9.382
(1.921)
51

Table 6: Summary Statistics for State Child Care Center Regulations by Year
1987
1992
1997
Number of
Number of
Number of
States with
States with
States with
Mean
Mean
Mean
No
No
No
Regulation
Regulation
Regulation
Regulations on Labor Intensiveness: Minimum Staff-child Ratio by Age of Children
0 - 11 months
0.225
5
0.226
0
0.229
0
11 - 23 months
0.192
5
0.190
0
0.192
0
24 - 35 months
0.138
4
0.137
0
0.138
0
36 - 47 months
0.096
4
0.095
0
0.095
0
48 - 59 months
0.082
4
0.081
0
0.082
0
60+months
0.072
4
0.068
0
0.068
0

All Years
Number of
States that
Mean
changed
Regulation

0.226
0.192
0.137
0.095
0.082
0.069

9
10
11
8
6
9

Average
0.133
4
0.133
0
0.134
0
0.133
18
Regulations on Staff Qualifications: Min. Educational Requirement (in years of schooling) by Type of Staff
For Directors
13.625
15
13.644
6
13.739
5
13.673
15
For Teachers
12.464
23
12.600
16
12.595
14
12.560
12
Average

11.660

15

11.467

5

11.681

Note: Descriptive statistics are calculated over observations with nonmissing values of variables.

45

4

11.599

19

Table 7: Estimated Marginal and Average Effects of State Regulations on the Number of Child Care Center Establishments
per Market1
(1)

(2)

Panel A: The Effects of Single Measures of Child Care Center Regulations
Min. Staff-Child Ratio, Infants
-3.519***
-3.297***
No Standard Imposed3
-1.024**
-0.690*
Min. Staff-Child Ratio, Infants × Median Income
No Standard Imposed × Median Income
Ave. Effect of Regulation, Min. Staff-Child Ratio1
0.229
-0.055
Min. Educ. Requirement, Directors
-0.055
-0.051
No Standard Imposed3
-0.113
0.044
Min. Educ. Require., Directors × Median Income
No Standard Imposed × Median Income
-0.639
-0.741
Ave. Effect of Regulation, Min. Educ. Requirement1
2
R
0.44
0.44
Panel B: The Effects of Averaged Measures of Child Care Center Regulations
Ave. Min. Staff-Child Ratio
-8.017***
-7.059***
3
No Standards Imposed
-0.764**
-0.433
Ave. Min. Staff-Child Ratio × Median Income
No Standards Imposed × Median Income
Ave. Effect of Regulation, Min. Staff-Child Ratio1
-0.302
-0.506
Ave. Min. Educ. Requirement
-0.051**
-0.044**
3
No Standards Imposed
-0.348
-0.099
Ave. Min. Educ. Requirement × Median Income
No Standards Imposed × Median Income
Ave. Effect of Regulation, Min. Educ. Requirement1
-0.244
-0.411
2
R
0.44
0.44
Year Fixed Effects
No
Yes
State Fixed Effects
No
No
Number of Observations
Unit of Observations
1

(3)

(4)

-1.898
-0.629*

-5.617***
-1.202**

0.200
-0.210***
-3.069***

-0.067
-0.129***
-1.501**

0.198
0.45

-0.263
0.46

-5.226
-0.301

-6.771
-0.424

-0.394
-0.010
-0.515**

-0.477
-0.019
-0.119

0.399
0.45
No
Yes
39,674
Zip code

-0.101
0.46
Yes
Yes

(5)

-11.693***
-2.306***
0.276***
0.047**
-0.139
0.062
1.859
-0.002
-0.052**
-0.248
0.46
-19.992***
-2.217***
0.501***
0.053**
-0.020
-0.015
0.835
-0.0004
-0.030*
-0.230
0.46
Yes
Yes

The Ave. Effect of Regulation is the effect of imposing a regulation, at the mean value of the standard (see corresponding values in the “Mean”
column for “All Years”) relative to no standard at all. See Section III for a description of how these effects were calculated. Estimates in italics are
statistically significant, based on significance of coefficients on regulation  median household income interactions.
2
The dummy variable is equal to 1 if a state imposed no standard for any of the regulations used to form the average measure and equal to 0 otherwise.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

46

Table 8: Differences in Estimated Marginal and Average Effects of State Regulations by Median Income of Local Market
(1)
(2)
(3)
Number of
Annual Revenue
Market
Establishments per Nonemployer
Accreditation
per Market
Establishments
Rate
Marg.
Ave.
Marg.
Ave.
Marg.
Ave.
Effect
Eff.
Effect
Eff.
Effect
Eff.
Panel A: The Effects of Single Measures of Child Care Center Regulations
Min. Staff-Child Ratio, Infants
2 Std. Dev. above Median
0.610
0.018
3.829
0.528 29.356
5.672
2 Std. Dev. below Median
0.712
-0.009
-10.135
-0.250
2.374 -4.274
Min. Educ. Require.,
Directors
2 Std. Dev. above Median
-0.203 -0.059
-0.018
0.041
-0.050
0.375
2 Std. Dev. below Median
-0.456
0.125
-0.013 -0.0001
0.051
-0.872
Panel B: The Effects of Averaged Measures of Child Care Center Regulations
Ave. Min. Staff-Child Ratio
2 Std. Dev. above Median
1.698
0.058
8.185
0.325 47.266
9.653
2 Std. Dev. below Median
1.800
-0.021
-17.163
-0.365
-5.180 -6.789
Ave. Min. Educ. Requirement
2 Std. Dev. above Median
0.052
0.286
-0.038
0.407
-0.0003
0.001
2 Std. Dev. below Median
-0.050 -0.078
-0.017
-0.867
-0.005
-0.009
Based on Estimates in:
Table 7, Col. (5)
Table 11, Col. (4) Table 12, Col. (2)
Note: Estimates in italics are statistically significant, based on significance of coefficients on regulation 
median household income interactions.

47

Table 9: Estimated Effects of State Regulations on the Number of Child Care Center Establishments per Market: Robustness Checks
Alternative Variable Specifications
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A: The Effects of Single Measures of Child Care Center Regulations
Min. Staff-Child Ratio, Infants
-6.216***
No Standard Imposed
-0.921*
Min. Staff-Child Ratio, Infants × Median Income
No Standard Imposed × Median Income
Ave. Effect of Regulation, Min. Staff-Child Ratio
-0.484
Min. Educ. Requirement, Directors
-0.128***
No Standard Imposed
-1.485***
Min. Educ. Require., Directors × Median Income
No Standard Imposed × Median Income
Ave. Effect of Regulation, Min. Educ. Requirement
-0.265
2
0.46
0.46
R
Panel B: The Effects of Averaged Measures of Child Care Center Regulations
Ave. Min. Staff-Child Ratio
-8.750*
No Standards Imposed
-0.561
Ave. Min. Staff-Child Ratio × Median Income
No Standards Imposed × Median Income
Ave. Effect of Regulation, Min. Staff-Child Ratio
-0.603
Ave. Min. Educ. Requirement
-0.033
-0.123
No Standards Imposed
Ave. Min. Educ. Requirement × Median Income
No Standards Imposed × Median Income
-0.260
Ave. Effect of Regulation, Min. Educ. Requirement
2
0.46
0.46
R
Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
State Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Including Additional Regulations
No
No
Unit of Observations
Zip code
Number of Observations
39,674

48

-5.998***
-1.102**

-0.254
-0.193**
-2.123**

-0.516
0.46
-12.120*
-0.626

-0.986
-0.044
-0.249

-0.261
0.46
Yes
Yes
Yes

(4)
-37.945***
-6.221***

-2.355
-0.464
-6.403

0.059
0.68
-39.198
-1.803

Alternative Market Definitions
(5)
(6)
-44.980***
-9.435***
0.388*
0.148
-2.597
-0.566
-6.972
0.006
0.057
0.008
0.68

-41.049
-7.728**
0.332
0.247***
-3.410
-4.008
-0.338*
-0.438**
-3.636*
-1.706
0.002
-0.071
-0.284
-0.460
0.68
0.68
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Zip code bundle
38,286

-41.984**
-7.887**

-1.601
-1.447**
-18.521*

-1.264
0.87
-16.978
0.660

-2.918
-0.337
-2.488

-1.421
0.87
Yes
Yes
No

(7)
-153.375***
-14.943*
1.120
9.761
-2.746
3.717***
0.114
-0.063
-0.614
-2.103
0.87

-146.223***
-14.390**
-0.056
6.503
-0.932
5.198***
0.558*
-0.008
-0.350
-0.806
0.87
Yes
Yes
No
County
8,225

Table 10: Estimated Effects of State Regulations on Number of Employees per Child Care Center
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Panel A: The Effects of Single Measures of Child Care Center Regulations

Min. Staff-Child Ratio, Infants
-2.725
10.992***
1.842
No Standard Imposed
1.074
4.106**
0.069
Min. Staff-Child Ratio, Infants × Median Income
-0.395***
No Standard Imposed × Median Income
-0.103**
-1.690
0.347
Ave. Effect of Regulation, Min. Staff-Child Ratio
-1.183
Min. Educ. Requirement, Directors
0.219**
0.280*
0.172
No Standard Imposed
2.308*
4.032*
2.737
Min. Educ. Require., Directors × Median Income
-0.003
No Standard Imposed × Median Income
-0.073*
-0.385
Ave. Effect of Regulation, Min. Educ. Requirement
0.686
0.819
2
R
0.10
0.10
0.05
Panel B: The Effects of Averaged Measures of Child Care Center Regulations
Ave. Min. Staff-Child Ratio
-5.791
19.386**
-9.161
No Standards Imposed
0.290
3.891*
-1.506
Ave. Min. Staff-Child Ratio × Median Income
-0.736***
No Standards Imposed × Median Income
-0.126**
-1.060
0.288
Ave. Effect of Regulation, Min. Staff-Child Ratio
-0.414
Ave. Min. Educ. Requirement
0.022
0.037
-0.026
No Standards Imposed
-0.156
1.073
0.004
Ave. Min. Educ. Requirement × Median Income
-0.001
No Standards Imposed × Median Income
-0.046*
0.411
0.456
-0.306
Ave. Effect of Regulation, Min. Educ. Requirement
2
R
0.10
0.10
0.05
Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
State Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Establishment Fixed Effects
No
No
Yes
Unit of Observations
Establishment
Number of Observations
149,102
149,102
93,063

49

5.552
-0.680
-0.054
0.038
0.329
-0.064
0.117
0.006
0.064
-0.415
0.05
-5.068
-0.882
-0.136
-0.020
0.269
-0.075
-0.615
0.001
0.018
-0.460
0.05
Yes
Yes
Yes
93,063

Table 11: Estimated Effects of State Regulations on the Family Home Day Care (Nonemployer) Sector

Dependent Variables

Number of Nonemployer
Establishments
per 1,000 Children
under Age 5
(1)

(2)

Panel A: The Effects of Single Measures of Child Care Center Regulations
Min. Staff-Child Ratio, Infants
40.76
-36.717
No Standard Imposed
13.293
-10.940
Min. Staff-Child Ratio, Infants × Median Income
2.891*
No Standard Imposed × Median Income
0.887
-4.081
-4.615
Ave. Effect of Regulation, Min. Staff-Child Ratio
Min. Educ. Requirement, Directors
-1.976*
-4.144
No Standard Imposed
-27.476
-53.699
Min. Educ. Require., Directors × Median Income
0.072
No Standard Imposed × Median Income
0.894
-0.152
Ave. Effect of Regulation, Min. Educ. Requirement
0.458
R2
0.96
0.96
Panel B: The Effects of Averaged Measures of Child Care Center Regulations
Ave. Min. Staff-Child Ratio
38.847
-156.298
No Standards Imposed
5.842
14.897
Ave. Min. Staff-Child Ratio × Median Income
6.242**
No Standards Imposed × Median Income
-0.519
-0.675
Ave. Effect of Regulation, Min. Staff-Child Ratio
6.221
Ave. Min. Educ. Requirement
-0.224
-0.903
No Standards Imposed
0.327
-14.060
Ave. Min. Educ. Requirement × Median Income
0.017
No Standards Imposed × Median Income
0.423
-2.925
-3.428
Ave. Effect of Regulation, Min. Educ. Requirement
R2
0.96
0.96
Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
State Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes

Unit of Observations
Number of Observations

State
153
50

Annual Revenue
(in millions of 1997$)
per Nonemployer
Establishment
(3)

(4)

27.028***
5.894***

-0.690
5.247**
0.533**
-0.076
0.699
-0.485
-6.777
0.005
0.072
0.033
0.94

0.214
-0.445***
-6.006***

0.078
0.93
23.838***
3.637**

0.467
0.056
0.595

0.055
0.92
Yes
Yes

-11.135
7.175***
1.036**
-0.187***
1.432
-0.061
-0.588
0.002
0.016
0.104
0.94
Yes
Yes

State
153

Table 12: Estimated Effects of State Regulations on the Accreditation of Child Care
Centers
Dependent Variables

Market Accreditation Rate
(1)

(2)

Panel A: The Effects of Single Measures of Child Care Center Regulations
Min. Staff-Child Ratio, Infants
0.639***
0.723***
No Standard Imposed
0.139***
0.176***
Min. Staff-Child Ratio, Infants × Median Income
-0.002
No Standard Imposed × Median Income
-0.001
Ave. Effect of Regulation, Min. Staff-Child Ratio
0.005
0.004
Min. Educ. Requirement, Directors
-0.017**
-0.013
No Standard Imposed
-0.244***
-0.173
Min. Educ. Require., Directors × Median Income
-0.0001
No Standard Imposed × Median Income
-0.002
0.020
Ave. Effect of Regulation, Min. Educ. Requirement
0.012
2
R
0.09
0.09
Panel B: The Effects of Averaged Measures of Child Care Center Regulations
Ave. Min. Staff-Child Ratio
1.735***
1.811***
No Standards Imposed
0.208***
0.224***
Ave. Min. Staff-Child Ratio × Median Income
-0.002
No Standards Imposed × Median Income
-0.001
Ave. Effect of Regulation, Min. Staff-Child Ratio
0.023
0.040
Ave. Min. Educ. Requirement
-0.003
-0.006***
No Standards Imposed
-0.029
-0.060**
Ave. Min. Educ. Requirement × Median Income
0.0001***
No Standards Imposed × Median Income
0.001*
-0.006
Ave. Effect of Regulation, Min. Educ. Requirement
0.004
R2
0.09
0.09
Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
State Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes

Unit of Observations
Number of Observations

Zip Code
39,674
39,674

51

