NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TECHNOLOGICAL REVOLUTIONS AND STOCK PRICES
Lubos Pastor
Pietro Veronesi
Working Paper 11876
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11876

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2005
Revised February 2008

We thank Sreedhar Bharath, Markus Brunnermeier, Leonid Kogan, Lars Lochstoer, Lu Zhang, and
especially Judy Chevalier and two anonymous referees for very helpful comments. We also thank
Malcolm Baker, Robert Barro, Efraim Benmelech, Gene Fama, Bob Fogel, Boyan Jovanovic, John
Heaton, Ali Lazrak, Robert Novy-Marx, Rob Stambaugh, Dmitriy Stolyarov, and the audiences at
the 2008 AEA meeting, 2007 AFA meeting, 2006 EFA meeting, 2006 UBC Summer Conference,
Fall 2005 NBER Asset Pricing meeting, CERGE-EI Prague, Dartmouth College, Ente Einaudi, Harvard
University, Indiana University, London Business School, London School of Economics, New York
University, Stockholm Institute for Financial Re- search, Stockholm School of Economics, University
of Chicago, University of Pennsylvania, and University of Vienna. Shastri Sandy has provided valuable
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Lubos Pastor and Pietro Veronesi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Technological Revolutions and Stock Prices
Lubos Pastor and Pietro Veronesi
NBER Working Paper No. 11876
December 2005, Revised February 2008
JEL No. G1
ABSTRACT
We develop a general equilibrium model in which stock prices of innovative firms exhibit "bubbles"
during technological revolutions. In the model, the average productivity of a new technology is uncertain
and subject to learning. During technological revolutions, the nature of this uncertainty changes from
idiosyncratic to systematic. The resulting "bubbles" in stock prices are observable ex post but unpredictable
ex ante, and they are most pronounced for technologies characterized by high uncertainty and fast
adoption. We find empirical support for the model’s predictions in 1830-1861 and 1992-2005 when
the railroad and Internet technologies spread in the United States.

Lubos Pastor
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
lubos.pastor@chicagogsb.edu
Pietro Veronesi
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
pietro.veronesi@gsb.uchicago.edu

“Technological revolutions and financial bubbles seem to go hand in hand.” The Economist, Sep 21, 2000.

1.

Introduction

Technological revolutions tend to be accompanied by bubble-like patterns in the stock prices
of firms that employ the new technology. After an initial surge, stock prices of innovative
firms usually fall in the presence of high volatility. Recent examples of such price patterns
include the “Internet craze” of the late 1990s, the “biotech revolution” of the early 1980s, and
the “tronics boom” of the early 1960s, as characterized by Malkiel (1999).1 Other examples
include the 1920s and the turn of the 20th century; in both periods, technological innovation
spread rapidly while the stock market boomed and then faltered (e.g., Shiller, 2000).2
The bubble-like stock price behavior during technological revolutions is frequently attributed to market irrationality (e.g., Shiller, 2000, Perez, 2002). We propose another possible explanation that does not involve irrationality. We argue that new technologies are
characterized by high uncertainty about their future productivity, and that the time-varying
nature of this uncertainty can also produce the observed stock price patterns.
We build a general equilibrium model of a finite-horizon representative-agent economy
with two sectors: the “new economy” and the “old economy.” The old economy implements
the existing technologies in large-scale production whose output determines the representative agent’s wealth. The new economy, which is created when a new technology is invented,
implements the new technology in small-scale production that does not affect the agent’s
wealth. It is optimal for the new technology to be initially employed on a small scale because
its future productivity is uncertain. By observing the new economy, the representative agent
learns about the average productivity of the new technology before deciding whether to
adopt the technology on a large scale. We show that this irreversible adoption takes place if
the agent learns that the new technology is sufficiently productive. We define a technological
revolution as a period concluded by a large-scale adoption of a new technology.
We show that the nature of the risk associated with new technologies changes over time.
Initially, this risk is mostly idiosyncratic due to the small scale of production and a low
probability of a large-scale adoption. The risk remains idiosyncratic for those technologies
1

According to Malkiel (1999), “What electronics was to the 1960s, biotechnology became to the 1980s...
Valuation levels of biotechnology stocks reached levels previously unknown to investors... From the mid-1980s
to the late 1980s, most biotechnology stocks lost three-quarters of their market value.”
2
“Every previous technological revolution has created a speculative bubble... With each wave of technology, share prices soared and later fell... The inventions of the late 19th century drove p-e ratios to a peak
in 1901, the year of the first transatlantic radio transmission. By 1920 shares prices had dropped by 70%
in real terms. The roaring twenties were also seen as a “new era”: share prices soared as electricity boosted
efficiency and car ownership spread. After peaking in 1929, real share prices tumbled by 80% over the next
three years.” (The Economist, September 21, 2000, Bubble.com)

1

that are never adopted on a large scale. For the technologies that are ultimately adopted,
however, the risk must gradually change from idiosyncratic to systematic. As the probability
of adoption increases, the new technology becomes more likely to affect the old economy and
with it the representative agent’s wealth, so systematic risk in the economy increases.
This time-varying nature of risk has interesting implications for stock prices. Initially,
while uncertainty about the new technology is mostly idiosyncratic, the new economy stocks
command high market values. As the adoption probability increases, the resulting increase
in systematic risk pushes up the discount rates and thus depresses stock prices in both the
new and old economies. The new economy stock prices fall deeper because their discount
rates rise higher due to an increase in the new economy’s market beta.
Stock prices are affected not only by discount rates but also by expected cash flows. The
technologies that are ultimately adopted must turn out to be sufficiently productive before
the adoption. This positive cash flow news pushes stock prices up, countervailing the effect
of the higher discount rate. The cash flow effect prevails initially, pushing the new economy
stock prices up, but the discount rate effect prevails eventually, pushing the stock prices
down. The resulting pattern in the new economy stock prices looks like a bubble but it
obtains under rational expectations through a general equilibrium effect.
The bubble-like pattern in stock prices arises in part due to an ex post selection bias.
Researchers study technological revolutions with the ex post knowledge that the revolutions
took place, but investors living through those periods did not know whether the new technologies would eventually be adopted on a large scale. The representative agent in our model
never expects stock prices to fall; she always expects to earn positive stock returns commensurate to the stocks’ riskiness, and she subsequently earns those fair returns, on average.
However, in those rare periods that are recognized as technological revolutions ex post, the
agent’s realized returns tend to be initially positive due to good news about productivity
and eventually negative due to bad news about systematic risk.
Uncertainty about new technologies affects not only the level but also the volatility of
stock prices. Due to this uncertainty, the new economy stocks are more volatile than the
old economy stocks. After an initial decline, the new economy’s volatility rises sharply when
the stochastic discount factor becomes more volatile as a result of a higher probability of a
large-scale adoption. The same effect also pushes up the new economy’s market beta and
the old economy’s volatility, two different aspects of systematic risk in the economy.
Our model makes many empirical predictions for technological revolutions: The “bubble”
2

in stock prices should be much stronger in the new economy than in the old economy; stock
prices in both economies should reach the bottom at the end of the revolution; the new
economy’s market beta should increase sharply before the end of the revolution; the new
economy’s volatility should also rise sharply and it should exceed the old economy’s volatility;
the old economy’s volatility should rise but less than the new economy’s volatility; the new
economy’s beta and both volatilities should all peak at the end of the revolution; and the
old economy’s productivity should begin rising at the end of the revolution.
All of these predictions are supported by empirical evidence from the recent Internet
revolution. According to the model, this revolution ended (i.e., the probability of a large-scale
adoption of the Internet technology reached one) in 2002. The “bubble” pattern was much
stronger in the NASDAQ index (our proxy for the new economy) than in the NYSE/AMEX
index (the old economy); both stock price indexes reached the bottom in 2002; NASDAQ’s
beta doubled between 1997 and 2002; NYSE/AMEX’s return volatility also doubled and
NASDAQ’s volatility tripled over the same period; NASDAQ’s volatility always exceeded
NYSE/AMEX’s volatility; NASDAQ’s beta and both volatilities peaked in 2002; and the
productivity growth of the U.S. economy accelerated sharply after 2002.
We also examine stock prices during the first major technological revolution in the U.S.
since the opening of the U.S. stock market – the introduction of steam-powered railroads. In
the 1830s and 40s, there was substantial uncertainty about whether the railroad technology
would be adopted on a large scale. We analyze stock prices before the Civil War, and
find that they fell before and during year 1857, with railroad stocks falling more than nonrailroad stocks. The railroad stock volatility and price-dividend ratios consistently exceeded
their non-railroad counterparts. The volatility of all stocks rose in 1857. The railroad stock
beta increased sharply in the 1850s, before falling right after 1857. In the context of our
model, all of this evidence is consistent with a large-scale adoption of the railroad technology
around 1857, soon after railroads began expanding west of the Mississippi River.
Much of the literature on technological innovation analyzes issues different from those
addressed here. Unlike Romer (1990), Aghion and Howitt (1992), and others, we take technological inventions to be exogenous. We do not examine the links between technological
revolutions and human capital (e.g., Chari and Hopenhayn, 1991, Caselli, 1999, Manuelli,
2003). Different but related models of learning are presented in Jovanovic (1982), Jovanovic
and Nyarko (1996), and Atkeson and Kehoe (2007). We empirically examine the Internet
and railroad revolutions, while other technological revolutions are examined by Jovanovic
and Rousseau (2003, 2005), Mazzucato (2002), and others. Mokyr (1990) argues that tech3

nological progress is discontinuous, as assumed in our model, and that occasional seminal
inventions (“macroinventions”) are the key sources of economic growth.
A small but growing literature explores the links between technological innovation and
stock prices (e.g., Jovanovic and MacDonald, 1994, and Laitner and Stolyarov, 2003, 2004a,b).
According to Greenwood and Jovanovic (1999) and Hobijn and Jovanovic (2001), innovation
causes the stock market to drop because the incumbent firms are unable or unwilling to implement the new technology. Similar initial stock market drops are obtained in the models
of Laitner and Stolyarov (2003) and Manuelli (2003). In our model, the stock market value
of the old economy also drops after the new technology is invented, mostly because of the
costs and risks associated with a large-scale adoption of the new technology, but our focus
is on the subsequent bubble-like stock price pattern in the new economy.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model. Section 3 solves for stock
prices and analyzes their dynamics. Section 4 investigates the model’s empirical predictions
for stock prices during technological revolutions. Section 5 empirically examines the behavior
of stock prices in 1830–1861 and 1992–2005 when the railroad technology and the Internet
technologies, respectively, spread in the United States. Section 6 concludes.

2.

The Economy

We consider an economy with a finite horizon [0, T ]. A representative agent has preferences
defined by power utility over terminal wealth WT , with risk aversion γ > 1:
WT1−γ
.
(1)
1−γ
At time t = 0, the agent is endowed with capital B0 . Subsequently, capital is invested in
a linear technology producing output (net of depreciation) at the rate of Yt = ρt Bt . Since
u (WT ) =

there is no intermediate consumption, all output is reinvested, and capital Bt follows
dBt = Yt dt = ρt Bt dt.

(2)

Productivity ρt follows a mean-reverting process whose mean is determined by the available
technology. There are two technologies: “old” and “new.” Initially, only the old technology
is available, and the long-run mean of ρt is equal to ρ. At time t∗ , the new technology
becomes available. If the representative agent adopts the new technology at time t∗∗ ≥ t∗,
the long-run mean of ρt changes from ρ to ρ + ψ. Thus, the dynamics of ρt are given by
dρt = φ (ρ − ρt ) dt + σdZ0,t ,

0 < t < t∗∗

(3)

dρt = φ (ρ + ψ − ρt ) dt + σdZ0,t ,

t∗∗ ≤ t < T,

(4)

4

where φ is the speed of mean reversion, ρ is the mean productivity of the old technology,
ψ is the “productivity gain” brought by the new technology, and σ 2 is the variance of
productivity shocks, represented by the Brownian increments dZ0,t . That is, the adoption of
the new technology is equivalent to a shift in the economy’s average productivity.
The representative agent chooses whether and when to adopt the new technology to maximize utility in equation (1) under the market-clearing condition WT = BT . In equilibrium,
the agent’s final wealth must equal the amount of capital accumulated by time T .
Our key assumption is that the productivity gain ψ is unobservable. When the new
technology appears at time t∗, ψ is drawn from a normal distribution with known variance:

ψ ∼ N 0, σ
bt2∗ .

(5)

All other parameters are known. The adoption of the new technology is irreversible and
costly. Converting capital to the new technology incurs a proportional conversion cost κ ≥ 0.
The agent has three choices at time t∗ when the new technology becomes available:
(i) Adopt the new technology
(ii) Begin learning about the new technology (i.e., about ψ)
(iii) Discard the new technology
We show below that the agent optimally chooses option (ii), so he begins learning at time t∗.
The agent learns about ψ by “experimenting” with the new technology – i.e., by implementing it on a small scale. After time t∗, the economy consists of two sectors: the small-scale
“new economy,” which employs the new technology, and the large-scale “old economy,” whose
productivity ρt follows equation (3). The capital BtN used in the new economy is infinitely
smaller than Bt , so the agent’s wealth WT is affected by the new technology only if this technology is adopted on a large scale (i.e., by the old economy). Denoting the new economy’s
N
N
∗
productivity by ρN
t , the processes of Bt and ρt for t > t are given by
N
dBtN = ρN
t Bt dt

dρN
t


= φ ρ + ψ − ρN
dt + σN,0dZ0,t + σN,1dZ1,t ,
t

(6)
(7)

where Z1,t is a Brownian motion uncorrelated with Z0,t . The agent learns about ψ by
observing ρN
t and ρt . The learning process is characterized by Lemma A1 in the Appendix.

 ∗
The posterior distribution of ψ conditional on Ft = ρN
τ , ρτ : t ≤ τ ≤ t is normal,


ψ | Ft ∼ N ψbt , b
σt2 ,
5

where the posterior mean ψbt is a martingale (see equation (17)) and the posterior variance σ
bt2

declines deterministically over time due to learning (see equation (18)). If the new technology
is adopted at time t∗∗, the agent continues to learn about ψ by observing ρN
t and ρt , but the
old economy’s productivity follows equation (4) rather than equation (3).
We define a technological revolution as the period [t∗, t∗∗] concluded by a large-scale
adoption of the new technology. We treat the invention of the new technology as given, and
study the conditions under which the invention leads to a technological revolution.

2.1.

Optimal Adoption of the New Technology

The agent can adopt the new technology anytime between times t∗ and T (or never). We
solve for the optimal adoption time t∗∗ numerically in Section 4.2. Until then, we focus on a
simpler problem in which t∗∗ denotes an exogenously given time at which the agent decides
whether or not to adopt the new technology. This simpler problem admits a closed-form
solution for stock prices, which improves our understanding of the stock price dynamics. Our
numerical results in Section 4.2. show that the dynamics obtained when t∗∗ is endogenously
chosen are very similar to those obtained here with an exogenous t∗∗.
The sequence of events in the model is summarized in Figure 1. We assume that if a new
technology is not adopted at time t∗∗, it continues to operate on a small scale until time T .
Our history is full of examples of technologies that have not been adopted on a large scale
but still survive on a small scale (e.g., direct-current electric motors, airships, etc.)
Proposition 1: It is never optimal to adopt the new technology immediately at time t∗ .
Adopting the new technology is risky – it may increase or decrease average productivity,
depending on the sign of ψ. The prior for ψ in equation (5) is centered at zero, making the
increases and decreases in productivity equally likely as of time t∗.3 Since the agent is risk
averse, immediate adoption of the new technology is suboptimal. This intuition is formalized
in the Appendix, which shows that the adoption of the new technology at time t∗ yields lower
expected utility than no adoption. Proposition 1 holds for any κ, including κ = 0, as it is
driven by the increase in risk resulting from the adoption of the new technology.
Proposition 2: The new technology is adopted at time t∗∗ if and only if
log (1 − κ) 1
ψbt∗∗ ≥ ψ = −
+ (γ − 1) A2 (τ ∗∗) σ
bt2∗∗ ,
∗∗
A2 (τ )
2

(8)

3
If the prior is centered at ψbt∗ 6= 0, Proposition 1 is modified so that it is not optimal to adopt the new
technology at time t∗ unless ψbt∗ is sufficiently high. See Proposition 2 for an analogous relation.

6

where τ ∗∗ = T − t∗∗ and A2 (τ ) = τ − (1 − exp (−φτ )) /φ > 0.
The new technology is adopted at time t∗∗ if the expected productivity gain, ψbt∗∗ , is
positive and sufficiently large. The threshold ψ is always positive, and it increases in the
conversion cost κ, uncertainty σ
bt∗∗ , and risk aversion γ, which is intuitive. Note that the

agent makes the adoption decision without knowing the true value of ψ. Regardless of the
outcome of the adoption decision, learning about ψ continues after time t∗∗.

Proposition 3: It is optimal to begin experimenting with the new technology at time t∗.
This proposition, proved in the Appendix, shows that the agent chooses to set up the
new economy to begin learning about the new technology immediately after this technology
becomes available at time t∗. The intuition is simple. Experimenting allows the agent to
learn about the productivity gain ψ. If this learning leads the agent to believe at time t∗∗
that ψ is sufficiently high, then it becomes optimal to adopt the new technology (Proposition
2). Otherwise, the status quo will prevail. Since experimenting is costless and there is no
downside to it, it gives the agent a valuable option for free.4
Since option value generally increases with uncertainty, high uncertainty σ
bt∗ makes a

new technology desirable for experimentation. If it were costly to experiment with new
technologies, or if the agent had to choose from a subset of technologies at time t∗, then
the technologies with the highest σ
bt∗ would be selected for experimentation, ceteris paribus.
Uncertainty about productivity gains is thus a natural feature of innovative technologies.

3.

Stock Prices

The stocks of the old and new economies pay liquidating dividends BT and BTN , respectively,
at time T . There is also a riskless bond in zero net supply, whose yield we normalize to zero,
for simplicity. Since the two shocks in the model are spanned by the two stocks, markets are
complete. Standard arguments then imply that the state price density is uniquely given by

1 
πt = Et WT−γ ,
(9)
λ
where λ is the Lagrange multiplier from the utility maximization problem of the representative agent. The market values (shadow prices) of the old and new economy stocks, denoted
4

The problem we solve resembles the problem of making an irreversible marriage decision. It is generally
suboptimal to marry a new acquaintance immediately because of substantial uncertainty regarding the quality of the personality match (cf. Proposition 1). Instead, it seems advisable to first develop the relationship
on a small scale, by dating without any commitment (cf. Proposition 3), and then to marry if we learn that
the relationship is likely to work in the long run (cf. Proposition 2).

7

by Mt and MtN , respectively, are given by the standard pricing formulas




πT BT
πT BTN
N
Mt = Et
and Mt = Et
.
πt
πt

(10)

To normalize the market values, we form “market-to-book” (M/B) ratios Mt /Bt and MtN /BtN .
It seems reasonable to interpret capital as the book value of equity, and this interpretation
is exact for Bt and BtN in equations (2) and (6) if we also interpret output and productivity
as earnings and profitability, respectively (Pástor and Veronesi, 2003).
Let pt denote the probability at time t, t∗ ≤ t < t∗∗, that the new technology
will be


2
∗∗
adopted at time t . Lemma A3 in the Appendix shows that pt = 1 − N ψ; ψbt, σ
bt − σ
bt2∗∗ ,
where N (·; a, s2) denotes the c.d.f. of the normal distribution with mean a and variance s2.
Proposition 4: For any t ∈ [t∗, t∗∗), the state price density is given by
n
o
eno + pt G
eyes
πt = λ−1 Bt−γ (1 − pt ) G
,
t
t

(11)

eno
eyes are expectations of the marginal utility of wealth conditional on whether
where G
t and Gt

or not the new technology is adopted at time t∗∗. Both values are given in the Appendix.
Corollary 1. For any t ∈ [t∗, t∗∗), the dynamics of πt are given by
φ e
dπt
e0,t − Sπ,t σ
= −γA1(τ )σdZ
bt2
dZ1,t ,
πt
σN,1

(12)

where τ = T − t, A1(τ ) = (1 − e−φτ )/φ, Sπ,t is given in the Appendix, and so are the
e0,t, Ze1,t ), which capture the agent’s expectation errors.
orthogonalized Brownian motions (Z

This corollary illustrates the time-varying nature of risk during technological revolutions.

When a new technology arrives at time t∗, the adoption probability pt∗ is generally small,
which makes Sπ,t∗ small as well (pt = 0 implies Sπ,t = 0). The volatility of the stochastic
discount factor in equation (12) then depends only slightly on σ
bt2 , making uncertainty about

ψ mostly idiosyncratic. During a technological revolution, the adoption probability increases,
which makes Sπ,t larger.5 As a result, the volatility of the stochastic discount factor becomes
more closely tied to σ
bt2, making uncertainty about ψ increasingly systematic.
Proposition 5: For any t ∈ [t∗, t∗∗), the market-to-book ratios are given by
yes
Mt
(1 − pt )Gno
t + pt Gt
=
eno
eyes
Bt
(1 − pt ) G
t + pt Gt

and

MtN
(1 − pt )Ktno + pt Ktyes
,
=
eno
eyes
BtN
(1 − pt ) G
t + pt Gt

(13)

5
In a technological revolution, pt rises from pt∗ ≈ 0 to pt∗∗ = 1, and Sπ,t rises from Sπ,t∗ ≈ 0 to
Sπ,t∗∗ = γA2 (τ ∗∗ ) > 0. That is, as pt increases, Sπ,t increases from approximately zero to a positive number.

8

yes
yes
no
no
eno , G
eyes
where G
are given in the Appendix.
t , Gt , Gt , Kt , and Kt
t

In the special case pt = 0, the market-to-book ratio of the new economy simplifies into
MtN
N
2 2
b 1
= eC0 (τ )+A1 (τ )ρt +A2 (τ )ψt+ 2 A2 (τ ) σbt ,
N
Bt

(14)

where A1 (τ ) is defined in Corollary 1, A2 (τ ) in Proposition 2, and C0(τ ) is in the Appendix.
Note that M N /B N increases when uncertainty about ψ, σ
bt2, increases. This relation, first
pointed out by Pástor and Veronesi (2003) in a simpler framework, is due to the idiosyncratic

nature of uncertainty. When pt = 0, the state price density does not depend on uncertainty
about ψ, but when pt > 0, it does. When pt is sufficiently large, uncertainty is mostly
systematic, and the associated risk reverses the positive relation between M N /B N and σ
bt2.

The return processes for both stocks are given in Corollary A1 in the Appendix. Not

surprisingly, the expected stock returns are given by the return covariances with dπt /πt , and
the return volatilities of both stocks increase with uncertainty σ
bt2.

3.1.

The Dynamics of Prices during a Technological Revolution

In a technological revolution, the adoption probability pt rises from a small value at time t∗
to the value of one at time t∗∗. The effect of pt on stock prices is analyzed next.
Proposition 6: The new (old) economy’s M/B ratio is increasing in pt if and only if hnew > 0
(hold > 0), where hnew and hold are functions of ψbt given in the Appendix.
For plausible parameter values, hnew > 0 when ψbt is close to zero, but hnew < 0 when
ψbt approaches the threshold ψ. That is, the condition hnew > 0 holds shortly after time t∗,

but it becomes violated as the adoption at time t∗∗ becomes more likely. Proposition 6 then
implies that the new economy’s M/B is initially increasing but ultimately decreasing in pt

during a technological revolution. The condition hold > 0 is never satisfied for the baseline
parameter values, so the old economy’s M/B is always decreasing in pt .
While analyzing M/B as a function of pt seems informative, pt is driven primarily by
b
ψt . Stock prices depend on ψbt through two opposing effects. On one hand, an increase in
 
ψbt is good news for prices because it increases expected cash flows (Et [BT ] and Et BTN )
in both economies. This cash flow effect is stronger for the new economy whose perceived
productivity is immediately affected; the old economy’s productivity is not affected until
time t∗∗, if at all. On the other hand, an increase in ψbt is bad news for prices because the

higher adoption probability makes the risk embedded in the new technology increasingly
9

systematic, thereby raising the discount rate. This discount rate effect is also stronger for
N
the new economy because πt covaries more with ρN
t than with ρt (since both πt and ρt
correlate with revisions in ψbt but ρt does not). Moreover, the discount rate effect has a
growing impact on the new economy’s M/B because the dependence of πt on revisions in ψbt

increases as pt increases. For the old economy, the discount rate effect generally outweighs

the cash flow effect from the very beginning, leading to a gradual decline in M/B during a
revolution. For the new economy, the cash flow effect tends to dominate at first, but the
discount rate effect dominates in the end, producing a “bubble”.
Although the dependence of M N /B N on ψbt is complicated, its key features can be estab-

lished locally at times t∗ and t∗∗. We show below that M N /B N is increasing (decreasing) in
ψb around time t∗ (t∗∗), under certain assumptions.
Proposition 7: For any t ≥ t∗ there exists p̄ > 0 such that if pt < p̄ then

∂ (MtN /BtN )
bt
∂ψ

> 0.

In words, if the probability of adoption pt is sufficiently small, then M N /B N is increasing
in ψbt . When pt is close to zero, so is its sensitivity to changes in ψbt ; thus an increase in ψbt
does not produce a large discount rate effect.6 The cash flow effect is large, though, because
M N /B N in equation (14) is strongly increasing in ψbt . Proposition 7 follows.

When a new technology arrives at time t∗ , its probability of eventual adoption is typically
small because only a small fraction of new technologies are adopted by the whole economy.
Proposition 7 then implies that, for most new technologies, the cash flow effect initially
prevails over the discount rate effect and M N /B N is increasing in ψbt shortly after time t∗.

We also have some local results at time t∗∗. Below, we compare the M/B ratio of the
new economy under two scenarios: ψbt∗∗ = ψ ± ε, where ε > 0 is small.

Corollary 2:
(a) If ψbt∗∗ = ψ + ε, then the new technology is adopted at time t∗∗, and

MtN∗∗
1
∗∗
∗∗ N
∗∗ b
∗∗ 2
2
= eC 0 (τ )+A1 (τ )ρt∗∗ +A2 (τ )ψt∗∗ + 2 A2 (τ ) (1−2γ)bσt∗∗ .
N
Bt∗∗

(b) If ψbt∗∗ = ψ − ε, then the new technology is not adopted at time t∗∗, and
1
MtN∗∗
∗∗
∗∗ N
∗∗ b
∗∗ 2 2
= eC 0 (τ )+A1 (τ )ρt∗∗ +A2 (τ )ψt∗∗ + 2 A2 (τ ) σbt∗∗ .
N
Bt∗∗

(15)

(16)

6
Analogously, if a stock option is deep out of the money, a small increase in the stock price does not
change the option value by much since its delta is small and the option remains deep out of the money.

10

The new economy’s M/B is clearly lower when the technological revolution takes place.
The reason is the uncertainty term σ
bt2, whose coefficient is negative in part (a) and positive in
part (b). In part (a), σ
bt2 is systematic (it affects πt ), whereas in part (b), it is idiosyncratic (it
does not affect πt ). Since ψbt (expected cash flow) is essentially the same in both scenarios,
the difference between M/B in parts (a) and (b) is due to the discount rate effect. This
knife-edge case shows that M N /B N is likely decreasing in ψbt close to time t∗∗.

In summary, the cash flow effect usually dominates close to time t∗, leading to an initial
positive relation between M N /B N and ψbt , but the discount rate effect usually dominates
close to time t∗∗, leading to an eventual negative relation. During a technological revolution,
ψbt generally increases, leading to a bubble-like pattern in M N /B N .

3.2.

Discussion

Corollary 2 shows that the adoption reduces the new economy’s M/B, holding ψbt constant.

Intuitively, the adoption does not bring any benefit to the new economy, which already uses
the new technology. On the contrary, it increases systematic risk and thus reduces the new
economy’s market value. The model features only one shareholder, the representative agent,
who employs infinitely more capital in the old economy than in the new economy. This agent
wants the adoption to take place because the utility gain from making the old economy more
productive outweighs the negligible loss of market value in the new economy.

Analogous to Corollary 2, we can show that the old economy’s market value also decreases
at time t∗∗ if the adoption takes place when ψbt∗∗ is close to ψ. Interestingly, the representative

agent chooses to adopt the new technology even if doing so reduces the market value of her
stocks. There is a difference between maximizing utility and maximizing market value. The

adoption occurs only if it increases the agent’s expected utility. This adoption changes the
economic environment by installing (what the agent perceives to be) a more productive
technology and by increasing expected stock returns. In this new environment, stock prices
are lower (due to higher discount rates) but expected utility is higher (due to higher expected
wealth). Expected utility and stock prices need not move in the same direction because stock
prices are related to the agent’s marginal utility rather than to the level of utility.
We solve the social planner’s problem in which a utility-maximizing representative agent
owns all output by holding the stocks of the old and new economies. When a new technology
is invented, it becomes property of the social planner. The social planner finds it optimal to
set up a small-scale new economy to learn about the new technology before deciding whether

11

to adopt this technology in the large-scale old economy. Upon adoption, there is no transfer
from the old economy to the new economy because the new economy does not own the new
technology (the social planner does). As an example of a new economy firm, Amazon was
an early user of the Internet but it did not own the Internet technology.
As an alternative to the social planner’s problem, we analyze a competitive economy in
which firms independently decide whether to adopt the new technology while maximizing
their own market values. We present this alternative decentralized model in the Appendix,
and find that it produces the same stock price dynamics as the social planner’s problem.
The alternative model features “network externalities,” in that the average productivity of
a technology increases as the fraction of firms using this technology increases. Each firm
makes its own adoption decision independently, taking the decisions of all other firms as
given. Adopting the same technology as other firms has two opposing effects. On one hand,
it hurts the firm, because the technology adopted by all other firms carries more systematic
risk. On the other hand, it benefits the firm through network externality gains. We show
that it is possible to choose the magnitude of the network externality gains such that the
solution is identical to that in the social planner’s problem. Specifically, the Nash equilibrium
at time t∗∗ is such that all firms adopt the new technology if ψbt∗∗ ≥ ψ, but none of them do
if ψbt∗∗ < ψ, analogous to our Proposition 2. As a result, all pricing formulas are the same as

in the social planner’s problem, and the same “bubbles” in stock prices obtain.

The alternative model highlights the lack of coordination among firms in a competitive
economy. Although each firm maximizes its own market value, the aggregate effect of the
firms’ adoptions is to reduce market values. The reason is that firms adopting the new
technology do not fully internalize the resulting increases in the volatility of the stochastic
discount factor. Each adopting firm imposes a negative externality on the market values
of other firms by increasing systematic risk in the economy. We see that the stock price
patterns obtained in our simple model with a utility-maximizing social planner hold also in
a more complicated model featuring value-maximizing competitive firms.
Other ways of decentralizing the model could also lead to similar stock price dynamics.
For example, suppose that firms facing different conversion costs observe signals about ψ.
As ψbt rises during a technological revolution, the proportion of firms that adopt the new

technology also rises. This proportion might play the same role as the adoption probability
in our model: As the proportion rises from about zero to one, the volatility of the stochastic
discount factor also rises, making the uncertainty about ψ increasingly systematic.
In our simple model, all output represents firm profits, so productivity and profitability
12

coincide. In reality, technological advances lead to permanent increases in productivity
but only temporary increases in profitability. In the long run, new technology tends to
benefit workers and consumers, not producers. Therefore, we also analyze a richer model in
which labor income drives a wedge between productivity and profitability.7 In this model,
productivity gains from new technology last until time T , but profitability gains last only
until time t∗∗∗ < T , after which all productivity gains go to labor. Profitability affects the
cash flow to stocks, whereas productivity affects the discount rates. Systematic risk depends
on uncertainty about productivity because the agent’s total wealth depends on productivity.
As a result, our basic mechanism is unaffected by the shorter profitability horizon. Indeed,
we find that this richer model produces stock price dynamics very similar to those reported
here. For the same parameter values, the bubble pattern is somewhat less pronounced, but
more dramatic patterns can be easily obtained after plausible parameter changes.

4.

Empirical Implications

The purpose of this section is to analyze the model-implied paths of the key variables during
technological revolutions. We simulate 50,000 samples of shocks in our economy and compute
the paths of quantities such as the M/B ratios and volatilities in each simulated sample. We
split the 50,000 samples into two groups, depending on whether or not the new technology
is adopted at time t∗∗, and plot the average paths of prices and volatilities across all samples
within each group. Our objective is to understand how these paths differ depending on
whether or not the new technology leads to a technological revolution.
Table 1 shows the parameters used in our simulations. For the productivity processes,
we choose parameter values close to those estimated by Pástor and Veronesi (2006) for the
dynamics of profitability. The relation between productivity and profitability in our model
is explained in Section 3.2. The parameter values for the conversion cost, time horizon, risk
aversion, and prior beliefs about ψ are varied later in our sensitivity analysis.
Figure 2 plots the average paths of ψbt , pt , and σπ ≡ Std(dπt /πt ). Panel A shows that
the average drift in ψbt during technological revolutions is positive, due to conditioning on
the ex post event that ψbt∗∗ ≥ ψ (without such conditioning, ψbt is a martingale; see equation
(17)).8 Analogously, conditional on ψbt∗∗ < ψ, ψbt in Panel B (no revolution) drifts downward.
The drift is less pronounced in Panel B than in Panel A because ψbt∗ = 0 and ψ > 0. The
7

This model is presented in the Technical Appendix, which is downloadable from the authors’ websites.
Brown, Goetzmann and Ross (1995) provide a mathematical proof of a related statement in their analysis
of stock returns conditional on the stock’s survival through the end of the sample.
8

13

average probability of adoption, pt , drifts up in Panel C (revolution) and down in Panel D
(no revolution), as expected. The volatility of the stochastic discount factor, σπ , is almost
flat while pt is low, but it increases as pt increases (Panel E).
Figure 3 plots the average paths of M/B and volatility for the new economy (solid line)
and the old economy (dashed line). The panels on the left are based on the samples in which
pt∗∗ = 1 (revolution); the panels on the right condition on pt∗∗ = 0 (no revolution).9 The
dotted vertical lines mark the time when the new technology arrives, t∗ = 1, and the time
at which the agent decides whether to adopt the technology, t∗∗ = 9.
Panel A of Figure 3 plots the average paths of M/B across all technological revolutions.
The new economy’s M/B rises and then falls, as predicted in Section 3.1. Since we are
conditioning on the adoption of the new technology at time t∗∗, ψbt must go up between t∗
and t∗∗ (Figure 2). This increase in ψbt has two countervailing effects on prices. First, it

increases expected future cash flow from the new technology, pushing M/B up. Second, it
increases the adoption probability, which makes the risks embedded in the new technology
ever more systematic (affecting WT ), which then increases the discount rate applied to future
cash flow, pushing M/B down. For the old economy, the discount rate effect outweighs the
cash flow effect from the outset, leading to a slow decline in M/B. For the new economy, the
cash flow effect is stronger at first, but the discount rate effect prevails in the end, producing
a “bubble.” Since the path plotted in Panel A is an average across all revolutions, it shows

that apparent bubbles in high-tech stock prices are not merely possible in a rational world;
they should in fact be expected during technological revolutions.
Different technological revolutions produce different paths of M/B, depending on the
path of realized productivity. These individual paths look mostly like bubbles that peak
at different times, and they are less smooth than the average path plotted in Panel A of
Figure 3. On this average path, the peak-to-bottom drop in the new economy’s M/B lasts
5 years, but for some revolutions, the price drop is much more abrupt. For example, for
10% of all revolutions, the peak-to-bottom drop lasts less than 2.56 years, and for 5% of
all revolutions, it lasts less than 1.68 years. The magnitude of the price drop also exhibits
substantial dispersion across revolutions. On the average path, M/B falls by 2.9 from the
peak to the bottom, but for 5% of all revolutions, it falls by more than 7.8.
Panel B of Figure 3 plots the average paths of M/B across all samples in which pt∗∗ = 0
9

The fraction of the simulated samples in which pt∗∗ = 1 is approximately equal to the ex ante probability
of adoption implied by our parameter choices, pt∗ ≈ 2%, as expected. In principle, any product innovation
could potentially lead to a technological revolution, but very few do, both in reality and in our model.

14

(no revolution). In these samples, ψbt declines slightly between t∗ and t∗∗, nudging the M/Bs
down as well. The decline is larger in the new economy, for two reasons. One, the new
economy’s M/B is more sensitive to ψbt, as discussed earlier. Two, uncertainty about ψ

gradually declines due to learning, which reduces M/B for the new economy but not for
the old economy (see equation (14)). Thanks in part to this uncertainty, the level of M/B

is higher in the new economy than in the old economy, in both Panels A and B. Higher
productivity is another reason why the new economy’s M/B is higher in Panel A, even after
time t∗∗. Although the adoption makes the long-run means of productivity equal in both
economies, the productivity at time t∗∗ is higher in the new economy (ρN
t∗∗ is likely to be high
to make ψbt∗∗ > ψ), lifting the M/B of the new economy above that of the old economy.

Panel C of Figure 3 plots the average paths of stock return volatility across all techno-

logical revolutions. Volatility is higher in the new economy than in the old economy, partly
due to higher volatility of the fundamentals, but mostly due to uncertainty about ψ. To
understand the U-shape in the new economy’s volatility, recall that shocks to ψbt affect stock

prices via the discount rate and cash flow effects, which work in opposite directions. Around
time t∗ (t∗∗), the cash flow (discount rate) effect dominates, so the two effects do not offset

each other much and the volatility is high. The volatility is lowest when the two effects cancel
each other, which happens at some point between times t∗ and t∗∗; hence the U-shape. For
the old economy, the discount rate effect dominates from the outset, so the old economy’s
volatility slowly increases as the rising adoption probability makes the stochastic discount
factor more volatile. The spike in volatility at time t∗∗ is caused by those simulated paths for
which ψbt∗∗ is close to ψ because then pt swings a lot shortly before time t∗∗, making returns

highly volatile (Corollary 2). We show later that the volatility spike disappears (but all
other effects remain) when t∗∗ is chosen optimally instead of being fixed exogenously. Panel
D plots the average return volatility across all no-revolution samples. In these samples, the
discount rate effect is weak and volatility is roughly constant over time.
Panels A and B of Figure 4 plot the market beta of the new economy, β, defined as
the slope from the regression of the new economy stock returns on the old economy stock
returns. In Panel A, where we condition on pt∗∗ = 1 (revolution), β exhibits an asymmetric
U-shape pattern, for the following reason. Positive shocks to ψbt always reduce the market
value of the old economy stocks, but they increase the value of the new economy stocks
initially while the cash flow effect prevails over the discount rate effect, leading to an initial

decrease in β. Only after the discount rate effect overcomes the cash flow effect, shocks to
ψbt begin affecting the market values of both economies in the same direction, leading to an
increase in β. Since the effect of ψbt on the old economy stocks increases with the adoption
15

probability, the rise in β is more dramatic than the initial fall. After a mild decline in the
first half of the revolution, β doubles in the second half, from 0.75 to 1.5. The average beta
in the no-revolution samples, plotted in Panel B, is almost flat over time.
As explained above, two aspects of systematic risk increase during technological revolutions: the old economy’s volatility and the new economy’s beta. The increase in the old
economy’s volatility raises the discount rates for both economies, old and new, holding β constant. The increase in β gives an additional boost to the discount rate of the new economy,
which is why stock prices fall by more in the new economy than in the old economy.
The remaining panels of Figure 4 plot the average realized returns (solid line) and expected returns (dashed line).10 In technological revolutions, realized stock returns are first
positive and then negative for both economies, due to an ex post selection bias. Ex post,
we know that a technological revolution took place at time t∗∗, but ex ante, we only have a
probability assessment of this event. Before time t∗∗, stock prices are not expected to rise
and fall; expected returns are given simply by the covariances with the stochastic discount
factor. However, conditioning on a technological revolution means that the adoption probability pt must be revised upward between times t∗ and t∗∗, causing a bubble-like pattern in
prices through the cash flow and discount rate effects discussed earlier. The bias of realized
returns relative to expected returns is due solely to ex post conditioning on pt∗∗ = 1; when
this conditioning is removed, the bias disappears. (Across all 50,000 simulations, average
realized returns are equal to average expected returns.) The rise and fall in stock prices
during technological revolutions are observable ex post but not predictable ex ante.
The unexpected arrival of the new technology causes the old economy’s market value to
drop immediately at time t∗ (Panel E of Figure 4). This drop is driven by two forces. The
possibility of eventual adoption means that conversion costs might be paid at time t∗∗, and
it also increases systematic risk and so drives up the discount rate.

4.1.

Sensitivity Analysis

This section examines the sensitivity of the price dynamics to our parameter choices. Figure
5 is the counterpart of Panel A of Figure 3 (revolution), with various parameter changes.
In Panel A of Figure 5, risk aversion γ = 3, as opposed to γ = 4 in Figure 3. Lower risk
aversion increases M/B in both economies, as expected, but the pattern of M/B is otherwise
the same as that in Figure 3. A hump-shaped pattern in M N /B N obtains for any γ > 1.
10

All returns are annualized by multiplying each interval-dt return by 1/dt.

16

In Panel B of Figure 5, the conversion cost is κ = 0, as opposed to κ = 0.1 in Figure 3.
The main effect of the lower κ is to decrease M N /B N . The lower conversion cost makes it
more likely that the new technology will be adopted, which increases discount rates and thus
depresses prices. For the old economy, there is also a counterbalancing effect, as the lower
conversion cost increases the old economy’s post-conversion capital Bt∗∗
= Bt∗∗
(1 − κ). The
+
−
two effects approximately cancel out, so the old economy’s M/B is almost unaffected by the
change in κ. Most important, the price patterns look just like those in Figure 3.
In Panel C, prior uncertainty about ψ is σ
bt∗ = 8%, compared to σ
bt∗ = 4% in Figure 3.

The higher uncertainty increases M N /B N , especially close to time t∗ when pt is small (equation (14)). However, as pt increases during a revolution, uncertainty becomes increasingly
systematic, pushing M N /B N down, and this discount rate effect is stronger when systematic
uncertainty is higher. Therefore, in technological revolutions characterized by high uncertainty, the new economy firms tend to start out with high valuations that exhibit a large
decline. High uncertainty amplifies the bubble-like pattern in stock prices.
In Panel D of Figure 5, the time until the adoption decision is shortened to t∗∗ − t∗ = 6,
compared to t∗∗ − t∗ = 8 in Figure 3. Faster adoption increases M N /B N . To understand
this effect, we note two facts. First, faster adoption implies higher uncertainty about ψ at
time t∗∗ because there is less time to learn (equation (18)). Second, faster adoption implies
a higher adoption threshold ψ because t∗∗ is lower and σ
bt∗∗ is higher (equation (8)). Since ψbt

has less time to reach a higher threshold, the adoption probability pt∗ is lower, which implies
that systematic risk is initially lower and M N /B N starts higher than in Figure 3. M N /B N
then rises higher and falls deeper than in Figure 3, conditional on pt∗∗ = 1, because both the
cash flow effect and the discount rate effect are stronger when adoption is faster. The cash
flow effect is stronger because in order for ψbt to reach a higher threshold in shorter time,
the increase in ψbt must be sharper. The discount rate effect is stronger because uncertainty

at time t∗∗ is higher, and conditional on pt∗∗ = 1, this uncertainty is systematic. Since both

effects are stronger, the rise and fall in M N /B N are more striking than in Figure 3. Faster
adoption of the new technology magnifies the bubble-like pattern in stock prices.

4.2.

Optimal Adoption Time

In this section, we relax the assumption that t∗∗ is exogenously given. Without this assumption, no closed-form solutions are available, but we can solve the problem numerically. The
agent is choosing the optimal time t∗∗, t∗ ≤ t∗∗ ≤ T to adopt the new technology (no adoption is a possibility). This is essentially a problem of solving for the best time to exercise an
17

American real option. The details of our solution are in the Appendix.
Figure 6 plots the average paths of M/B and volatility when t∗∗ is chosen optimally.
Depending on the path of productivity, the adoption can occur anytime between t∗ and T ,
but averaging across very different t∗∗’s would not be meaningful. For comparison with Figure
3 in which t∗∗ = 9 years, the left panels of Figure 6 report averages across those simulations
in which the optimal t∗∗ is between years 8 and 10. Our main results are unaffected by
endogenizing t∗∗. During revolutions, the new economy’s M/B exhibits a rise and fall similar
to that in Figure 3, albeit slightly weaker (a stronger “bubble” pattern is obtained for γ = 3,
as we show in an earlier draft). The path of volatility in Panel C is also similar, except that
the volatility spike observed in Figure 3 disappears, as explained earlier.

5.

Empirical Evidence

In this section, we empirically examine the behavior of stock prices during two technological
revolutions, one recent and one distant. For both revolutions, we consider the key quantities
in our model, such as the new economy’s market beta and the level and volatility of stock
prices, and compare their empirical dynamics with their model-implied dynamics.

5.1.

The Internet Revolution

The Internet’s predecessor, Arpanet, was created in 1969 with funding from the U.S. Department of Defense. Arpanet ceased to exist in 1990, roughly when the team of Tim Berners-Lee
at CERN released the World Wide Web. The first Web site, info.cern.ch, appeared in 1991.
The first graphics-based web browser, Mosaic, was launched in 1993 by Marc Andreessen
at the National Center for Supercomputing Applications. In 1994, Andreessen co-founded
Netscape Communications, which went public in August 1995 in the first Internet IPO. The
first big pioneer of e-commerce was the online bookseller Amazon.com, which was launched
by Jeff Bezos in 1995 and went public in May 1997. The Internet gradually became mainstream. The number of web servers grew from about 23,000 in mid-1995 to about 30 million
in mid-2001 and 65 million in mid-2005 (see www.zakon.org/robert/internet/timeline/). A
prominent example of the Internet’s integration into traditional business models was the
creation of the first “clicks-and-mortar” company through the merger of AOL and Time
Warner.11 Today, the Internet technology is an indelible part of the economic landscape.
11

AOL announced its plan to acquire Time Warner (for some $182bn in stock) in January 2000, and the
FTC approved the deal in January 2001. “The merger, the largest deal in history, combines the nation’s top
internet service provider with the world’s top media conglomerate. The deal also validates the Internet’s

18

To provide a benchmark for our empirical analysis, we plot the model-implied dynamics of
some key variables in Figure 7. These are the expected dynamics during a revolution, in that
we average the model-implied paths across many simulations in which the new technology is
adopted at time t∗∗. We keep all parameters from the baseline case (Table 1) except that we
shorten the duration of the revolution from eight to six years because the Internet revolution
was relatively fast. Panel A of Figure 7 shows that the new economy’s market beta decreases
slightly (from 0.9 to 0.7) in the first half of the revolution, but then it increases sharply in
the second half, reaching 1.65 at time t∗∗ before falling to one. This increase in beta is even
steeper than in the baseline case (Panel A of Figure 4). Panel B shows that the increase in
stock return volatility is also steeper than in the baseline case (Panel C of Figure 3), with the
old economy’s volatility doubling to 38% and the new economy’s volatility rising to over 65%.
Panel C plots the market values of both economies. There is a clear “bubble” in the new
economy, whose market value quintuples and then falls by half. The old economy’s market
value also rises and falls, but this pattern is much weaker than in the new economy. Panel
D shows that the old economy’s productivity begins rising immediately after the adoption
of the new technology, when it begins mean-reverting toward a higher mean.
Figure 8 is an empirical counterpart of Figure 7 for the period 1992–2005. For simplicity,
we assume that the technology-loaded NASDAQ index represents the new economy and the
NYSE/AMEX index is the old economy. We obtain daily index returns from CRSP.
Panel A of Figure 8 plots the market beta of the NASDAQ index, along with its twostandard-error confidence bands. The beta is computed daily as the slope coefficient from the
regression of the NASDAQ returns on the NYSE/AMEX returns over the most recent 500
trading days (i.e., about two years). After a slight decrease from about 1.2, NASDAQ’s beta
doubles from 1.0 to 2.0 between 1997 and mid-2002, and this increase is highly statistically
significant. This empirical pattern is strikingly similar to the model-implied pattern in Panel
A of Figure 7, in which the beta also decreases by about 0.2 before rising 2.3-fold by the
end of the revolution. According to the model, the time when the beta peaks is the time
of the large-scale adoption; hence the evidence on NASDAQ’s beta is consistent with the
probability of the Internet’s large-scale adoption reaching one by mid-2002.
Panel B of Figure 8 plots the standard deviations of returns on the NASDAQ and
NYSE/AMEX indices, computed daily over the most recent 500 trading days. NASDAQ’s
volatility falls from 17% in 1992 to 11% in 1995, before rising to 47% at the beginning of
role as a leader in the new world economy, while redefining what the next generation of digital-based leaders
will look like.” (CNN Money, Jan 10, 2000).

19

2002. NYSE/AMEX’s volatility falls from 13% in 1992 to 8% in 1995, before rising to 21%
by the end of 2002. These patterns are similar to the model-implied patterns in Panel B of
Figure 7 in several ways: (i) the new economy’s volatility always exceeds the old economy’s
volatility; (ii) both volatilities generally rise over time, with a bit of a U-shape pattern; (iii)
the new economy’s volatility rises much faster; and (iv) both volatilities peak at about the
same time. In the model, both volatilities peak at the time of the adoption; the volatility
evidence is thus consistent with the Internet revolution ending sometime in 2002.
Panel C of Figure 8 plots the index levels for NASDAQ and NYSE/AMEX, namely,
the value of $1 invested in these indices in January 1992, with dividend reinvestment. The
NASDAQ index quadruples between 1996 and March 2000, but then it falls back to the
1996 level by October 2002, after which it rises again. In contrast, NYSE/AMEX exhibits a
much smaller rise and fall over the same period. This pattern is similar to the model-implied
pattern in Panel C of Figure 7, in which the new economy’s market value also exhibits a
“bubble” but the old economy’s rise and fall are much less pronounced.12 According to the
model, the time when both indices stop falling is the time of the large-scale adoption; hence
this evidence is consistent with the Internet’s adoption by October 2002.
Panel D of Figure 8 plots a three-year moving average of multifactor productivity growth
in the private business sector of the U.S. economy. (This is the most commonly used multifactor productivity measure, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, which is the source
of the data.) In year t, we plot the average annual productivity growth in years t − 2, t − 1,
and t. Multifactor productivity growth averaged about 1% per year in the 1990s, but it
increased sharply after year 2002: from 1% per year in 2002 to 1.5% in 2003 and 2.5% in
2004 and 2005. A similar pattern is observed for labor productivity.13 The observed productivity pattern is similar to the model-implied pattern in Panel D of Figure 7, except that
12

Pástor and Veronesi (2006) show that NASDAQ’s M/B dropped by 5.3 (from 8.5 to 3.2) from the peak
to the bottom in 2.7 years. Both the duration and the magnitude of this drop in M/B correspond closely
to their counterparts in our model. The corresponding model-implied average pattern in M/B is plotted in
Panel D of Figure 5 (in which the revolution lasts 6 years, as it does in Figure 7). This average M/B falls
by 4.5 from the peak to the bottom, also in 2.7 years, matching the observed values remarkably closely.
13
In his Remarks Before Leadership South Carolina on August 31, 2006, Ben Bernanke argued that “One
of the most important economic developments in the United States in the past decade or so has been
a sustained increase in the growth rate of labor productivity... From the early 1970s until about 1995,
productivity growth in the U.S. nonfarm business sector averaged about 1.5% per year... Between 1995 and
2000, however, the rate of productivity growth picked up significantly, to about 2.5% per year... Talk of the
“new economy” faded with the sharp declines in the stock valuations of high-tech firms at the turn of the
millennium. Yet, remarkably, productivity accelerated further in the early part of this decade. From the
end of 2000 to the end of 2003, productivity rose at a 3.5% annual rate and it is estimated to have increased
at an average annual rate of 2.25% since the end of 2003. These advances were achieved despite adverse
developments that included the 2001 recession, the terrorist attacks of September 11, [etc.].”

20

that figure plots the level of productivity as opposed to its growth rate.14 In the model,
the economy’s productivity begins rising at the time of the adoption; hence the productivity
evidence is consistent with a large-scale adoption of the Internet by 2002.
Overall, we find Figure 8 remarkably similar to Figure 7. The patterns of NASDAQ’s
beta and NYSE/AMEX’s volatility show that both sectors experienced large increases in
systematic risk in 1997–2002, supporting the key prediction of the model. To summarize,
the empirical evidence seems consistent with the joint hypothesis that our model holds and
that the Internet technology was adopted on a large scale by 2002.

5.2.

American Railroads Before the Civil War

Our paper is motivated by the technological revolutions, listed in the introduction, that were
accompanied by apparent bubbles in stock prices. In this section, we conduct an “out-ofsample” analysis of a revolution whose stock prices do not seem to have been analyzed before.
We analyze the first major technological revolution that took place in the U.S. since the New
York Stock Exchange was organized in 1792 – the introduction of steam-powered railroads
(RRs). In the early days of the RR, there was substantial uncertainty about whether the
RR technology would be ultimately adopted on a large scale. After examining the historical
milestones of American RRs in Section 5.2.1., we argue that the probability of a large-scale
adoption rose gradually, and that it approached one in the late 1850s after the RR expansion
west of the Mississippi River. We then empirically examine the behavior of the RR stock
prices in 1830–1861 in Section 5.2.2. In the context of our model, our evidence is consistent
with a large-scale adoption of the RR technology around year 1857.
5.2.1.

Brief History

The steam engine, an 18th-century invention, was first used for rail-based transportation
in the early 19th century in Britain. The United States followed shortly afterwards. The
first RR act in the U.S. was passed in 1815 when the New Jersey legislature awarded a
charter to Colonel John Stevens to build a RR between the Delaware and Raritan rivers.15
In 1825, Stevens operated the first locomotive in America – his 16-foot “Steam Waggon”
ran around a circular rail track in Hoboken at 12 miles per hour. The construction of the
first RR, the Baltimore & Ohio, began in July 1828. The Baltimore & Ohio initially used
14

Our comparison seems reasonable because in the model, average productivity can grow only via technological revolutions, whereas in reality, there are also many non-revolutionary improvements in productivity.
Therefore, in the data, it is the growth rate of productivity that sets a technological revolution apart.
15
The discussion in this section draws especially on Stover (1961), Fogel (1964), and Klein (1994).

21

horses to draw its cars, but it replaced them in 1830 by a steam locomotive, Peter Cooper’s
“Tom Thumb.” In 1830, both passenger and freight service commenced on the Baltimore &
Ohio. RRs spread quickly. On Christmas Day in 1830, the “Best Friend of Charleston,” the
first locomotive built for sale in the U.S., made the first scheduled steam-RR train run in
America. Between 1830 and 1840, the RR mileage in the U.S. grew from 23 to 2,808 miles.
In 1840, only four of the 26 states had not completed their first mile of track.
The new RR technology competed with the existing modes of transportation such as
wagons, stagecoaches, steamboats, and canals. Those were not without problems – wagons
were slow and expensive, stagecoaches were uncomfortable, steamboats were dangerous and
limited in scope, and canals froze over in winter. However, it was far from obvious in the
1830s and 1840s that the RRs would later come to dominate the transportation industry. For
example, waterways were much less expensive than RRs, and wagons were not restricted to
rails. While the RR mileage caught up with the canal mileage in the early 1840s, waterways
still carried the great bulk of the nation’s freight in the late 1840s. Writes Fogel (1964): “Far
from being viewed as essential to economic development, the first RRs were widely regarded
as having only limited commercial application. Extreme skeptics argued that RRs were too
crude to insure regular service, that the sparks thrown off by belching engines would set
fire to buildings and fields, and that speeds of 20 to 30 miles per hour could be “fatal to
wagons, road and loading, as well as to human life.” More sober critics questioned the ability
of RRs to provide low cost transportation, especially for heavy freight. [Some] placed “a RR
between a good turnpike and a canal” in transportation efficiency.”
Nearly all RRs organized as corporations funded by private investors. More than half of
the more than $300 million invested in American RRs in 1850 was represented by capital
stock, the remainder being in bonds. The freight business was economically more important
than passenger traffic, which typically produced around 30% of the total revenue.
While most early RRs were built with local capital to provide local transportation, RR
building became more ambitious in the 1850s. This decade “was one of the most dynamic
periods in the history of American RRs” (Stover, 1961). RR mileage expanded from 9,021
in 1850 to 30,626 in 1860, and total investment in the industry increased from about $300m
to about $1,150m over the same period. This growth was spurred by land grants to RRs
by the federal government. The first land-granting act was passed by the Congress in 1850,
aiding the Illinois Central and the Mobile & Ohio RRs. The RR growth in the 1850s was
also stimulated by the discovery of gold in California and the lure of the trans-Pacific trade.
In the 1850s, New York, Philadelphia, and Baltimore all achieved their rail connections with
22

the west. In 1853, an all-rail route opened from the East to Chicago, and Chicago quickly
became the rail capital of the nation. The RR technology also advanced in the 1850s –
telegraph was first used to dispatch trains, T-rails became the general rule, and so did the
standard track gauge, at least in the North.16 “Instead of merely serving as connectors
between navigable bodies of water as originally conceived, RRs were replacing them as the
preferred way of transport” (Klein, 1994).
The dramatic RR growth in the 1850s is also evident in Figure 9, which plots the total
rail consumption in the U.S., measured by the number of track-miles of rails laid each year
(Fogel, 1964). Rail consumption grew fast in the 1830s, but especially fast during the decade
leading up to 1856. After 1856, rail consumption slowed down and even declined in 1861
when the Civil War began, but it accelerated again after the war.
The diffusion of the RR technology made a leap in 1856 when two milestone RRs were
completed: the Illinois Central, the longest RR in the world (705 miles), and the Sacramento
Valley, the first RR in California. Also in 1856, the first RR bridge across the Mississippi was
built near Davenport, Iowa, heralding future westward expansion into the region then known
as the “Great American Desert.” This westward expansion was the defining feature of the
RR growth in the decades to come. The RRs shaped the economy of the West, creating new
national markets and fostering unprecedented economic specialization across the nation.
By the late 1850s, it seemed clear that the RR had become a dominant form of transportation. According to Stover (1961), “By 1860 the canal packets and river steamers had
lost much of their passenger traffic” to the RR. In 1860, every state save Minnesota and
Oregon had RR mileage, and 29 of the 33 states had more than 100 miles of line. Klein
(1994) argues that “By 1860... [the RR] had emerged not only as the preferred form of
transportation but also as the chief weapon of commercial rivalry.” This evidence suggests
that a large-scale adoption of the RR technology took place by the end of the 1850s.
5.2.2.

Railroad Stock Prices

To examine the behavior of RR stock prices in the early days of the RR (1830–1861), we use
the data compiled by Goetzmann, Ibbotson, and Peng (2001). These data contain monthly
individual stock prices for NYSE stocks from 1815 to 1925, as well as annual dividends for a
16
The Northern RRs were using 11 different track gauges in the 1850s, but the standard gauge, 4’8.5”,
became by far the most common by 1860, according to Stover (1961). The South was still mostly on the
5’ gauge. Benmelech (2007) exploits the diversity of track gauges in 19th century American railroads to
examine the effect of asset liquidation value on capital structure.

23

subset of stocks from 1825 to 1870. The data are provided at http://icf.som.yale.edu/nyse/.
To focus on common stocks, we exclude stocks classified as “preferred” or “scrip” in
the database. (Scrips are certificates convertible into shares when fully paid-in.) If such
classification is not provided, we examine the stock name and exclude stocks whose name
contains an indication of non-common status such as “pref,” “pr.,” “pf,” or “scrip.” Among
the 671 stocks in the database, we identify and exclude 85 preferred stocks and 29 scrips.
We identify 284 RR stocks (42.32% of the whole sample) by examining the stock names.
The first RRs that appear in our price index (discussed below) in 1831 are Camden & Amboy,
Canajoharie & Catskill, Harlem, and Ithaca & Oswego. All RRs that have at least one valid
monthly common stock return between 1830 and 1861 are listed in Table 2.
We clean the monthly price file to remove apparent data errors. To proceed in a systematic fashion, we exclude all prices that imply implausibly large return reversals. Specifically,
we exclude prices that more than tripled compared to the most recent available price and
then fell to less than a third at the nearest future observation, as well as prices that experienced the same reversals in reverse order (first down, then up). We eliminate 34 such prices
in our 1830–1861 sample. We also examine all price sequences in which the price increased or
decreased at least tenfold without reversal, and eliminate six suspicious price entries between
1830 and 1861. We retain the price entries that imply returns below -90% at the very end
of a stock’s price series because these could be stocks heading for bankruptcy. Altogether,
we delete 40 of the 15,276 price entries between 1830 and 1861, or 0.26% of the sample.
Before the price coverage in the database improves in 1848, uninterrupted price sequences
for RR stocks are rare. In no month before 1848 are there more than five RR stocks with
valid monthly returns, and there are months with zero RR returns. An important part of the
problem are gaps in the price series, in which one or several missing values are sandwiched
between two valid prices for a given stock. To alleviate the data shortage, we fill in such
gaps by linear interpolation, but only for gaps that are no more than three months long.
This procedure substantially increases the price coverage early in the sample. For example,
without interpolating, the RR year-end price-dividend ratio discussed below would have only
three valid observations prior to 1847; with interpolation, the number of valid observations
increases to eight. Without interpolating, our results would be noisier, with more missing
values, but they would lead to the same basic conclusions.
We compute monthly RR (non-RR) index returns as price-weighted averages of monthly

24

capital gains across all RR (non-RR) stocks.17 We use capital gains rather than total returns
because the dividend data available to us are annual, not monthly, and because these data are
spotty, especially early in the sample (Goetzmann et al. (2001) suggest that their dividend
sample is incomplete). The resulting return series can be viewed as approximations to the
actual returns earned by investors.
Panel A of Figure 10 plots the beta of the RR index, with a two-standard-error confidence
band. The beta in month t is the slope coefficient from the regression of the most recent 36
monthly RR returns (in months t−35 through t) on the non-RR returns. Not surprisingly, the
beta estimates computed from only 36 observations have wide confidence bands. Nonetheless,
it appears that the largest increase in beta took place in the 1850s: The beta estimate rose
from about 0.2 in 1850 to about 1.8 in 1856, before falling to about 1.0 right after 1857.
This empirical pattern is quite similar to the model-implied pattern in Panel A of Figure 4
if we assume that the RR technology was adopted on a large scale in 1857.
Panel B plots the volatility of returns in the RR and non-RR industries, computed
annually as the standard deviation of monthly industry returns within the year. Two facts
seem noteworthy. First, the RR volatility exceeds the non-RR volatility in every year except
1841, consistent with the presence of uncertainty about the RR technology. The volatility
difference is also due in part to the fact that the RR portfolio is less diversified than the nonRR portfolio, but it persists also after the number of RRs with valid monthly stock returns
increases sharply (from 6 in December 1847 to 15 in January 1848, to 25 in July 1850). The
second interesting fact in Panel B is that return volatility increases sharply in 1857, to 33.5%
per year for RRs and to 23.1% for non-RRs. Comparison with Panel C of Figure 3 shows
that both facts are consistent with a large-scale adoption of the RR technology in 1857.
Panel C plots the stock price index levels for the RR and non-RR industries, obtained
by cumulating monthly returns in each industry. The general downward trend in the price
indexes is partly due to the absence of dividends and partly due to the absence of inflation
in the economy. The biggest price declines occur in the mid-1850s. For example, between
June 1853 and October 1857, the RR price index falls by 58.3%, whereas the non-RR index
falls by 33.9%. Both the sharp price decline for RRs and the milder decline for non-RRs
are consistent with the RR technology being adopted on a large scale around 1857. Recall
that our model predicts that the new economy (RR) stock prices fall by more than the old
economy (non-RR) stock prices shortly before the adoption of the new technology.
17

Goetzmann et al. (2001) argue that price-weighting best approximates the return on a buy-and-hold
portfolio, given the absence of information about market capitalization and book value in their database.

25

Various events played a role in the stock price decline in 1857. Investor confidence was
shaken by embezzlement at the Ohio Life Insurance and Trust Company in August, as well
as by the government’s loss of a large amount of gold at sea in September. Other commonly
cited negative influences include falling grain prices, British withdrawals of capital from U.S.
banks, and manufacturing surpluses. The stock market bottomed in October 1857 amidst
a number of bank failures. However, the stock price decline cannot be fully attributed to
the banking panic. According to Mishkin (1991), “Rather than starting with the banking
panic in October 1857, the disturbance to the financial markets seems to arise several months
earlier with the rise in interest rates, the stock market decline... and the widening of the
interest rate spread.” Mishkin’s last observation is particularly interesting. He shows that
the spread between the yields of low- and high-quality corporate bonds was unusually high
in 1857–1859, higher than at any future time before the 1930s. These high yield spreads
indicate that the risk premia in the late 1850s were high, consistent with our story. Mishkin
also opines that the decline in stock prices in the late 1850s “might be linked to the general
rise in interest rates which lowers the present discounted value of future income streams.”
This is precisely our story - stock prices fall shortly before the adoption of the new technology
because discount rates increase due to an increase in systematic risk.
In Panel D of Figure 10, we do not plot productivity as we did in Figure 8 because, to
our knowledge, productivity in this period has been computed only at a ten-year frequency
from census data. We note, however, that the evidence points to a large increase in productivity after the late 1850s. For example, Cochrane (1979) argues that productivity advanced
sharply just before the Civil War, and Craig and Weiss (1993) conclude that “the 1860s saw
the greatest increase in output per farm worker of any decade in the 19th century.” This
evidence on productivity further strengthens the case for a large-scale adoption of the RR
technology in the late 1850s in the context of our model (cf. Panel D of Figure 7).
Panel D plots the aggregate price-to-dividend ratio (P/D) for the RR and non-RR industries. Each year, we compute P/D as the sum of year-end prices divided by the sum of
dividends paid in that year, summing across all RR (or non-RR) stocks with valid price and
dividend data. Note three main results. First, the P/D of RRs almost invariably exceeds
the P/D of non-RRs before the mid-1850s. Second, the RR P/D falls from 24.9 in 1846 to
15.8 in 1852, to 6.5 in 1857. Third, the non-RR P/D falls as well, but less dramatically:
from 14.0 to 12.8 to 9.1 over the same period. While interpreting the noisy data requires
caution, all three results in Panel D are consistent with the joint hypothesis that our model
is true and that the new RR technology was widely adopted around 1857.

26

5.3.

Other Evidence

Three recent papers explicitly test some predictions of our model. Bharath and Viswanathan
(2006) empirically analyze the model’s risk implications at the firm level. They examine
252 brick-and-mortar firms that launched commercial websites (i.e., adopted the Internet
technology as a way of doing business) in 1995–2004. The authors find that adopting the
new technology is associated with an increase in firm risk, with differences between the
early and late adopters: Firms that adopted the Internet before March 2000 (while stock
prices were rising) experienced significant increases in idiosyncratic risk, whereas firms that
adopted after March 2000 had significant increases in systematic risk. The authors conclude
that their evidence provides strong support for our model.
Mazzucato and Tancioni (2006) analyze stock prices and patent-related measures of innovation in a sample of firms in the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries between 1975
and 1999. They find that the firms’ price-earnings ratios are positively related to innovation
as well as to idiosyncratic risk, and argue that this evidence supports our model.
Hoberg and Phillips (2006) empirically examine the real and financial outcomes following
industry booms in 1972–2004. They test the risk predictions of our model at the industry
level. They find that market betas increase and idiosyncratic risk declines after booms,
consistent with our model. The authors find strong support for our model in competitive
industries but not in concentrated industries. It would be useful to extend our simple model
to analyze the effect of product market competition theoretically.
In earlier work, Mazzucato (2002) studies the early phases of the life-cycles of the automobile and PC industries in the U.S. She finds that in both industries, stock prices were the
most volatile when technological change was the most radical. She also finds idiosyncratic
risk to be higher in the early stage of industry evolution, consistent with our model.

6.

Conclusions

We develop a general equilibrium model that produces stock price “bubbles” during technological revolutions. The model features Bayesian learning about the average productivity of
the new technology. Stock prices of innovative firms initially rise due to good news about
this productivity, but they ultimately fall as the risk of the technology changes from idiosyncratic to systematic. The rise and fall in stock prices are observable only in hindsight – this
pattern is unexpected by investors in real time but we observe it ex post when we focus on

27

technologies that eventually led to technological revolutions. The “bubbles” should be most
pronounced in revolutions characterized by high uncertainty and fast adoption.
The model makes many empirical predictions. We find support for these predictions
in the evidence from 1830–1861 and 1992–2005 when the railroad and Internet technologies
spread in the United States. In the context of our model, the empirical evidence is consistent
with large-scale adoptions of railroads by the late 1850s and the Internet by 2002.
We focus on stock prices but our model also has implications for productivity. The
new technology does not bring productivity gains immediately upon arrival because the
agent finds it optimal to learn about a new technology before adopting it. Since the agent
chooses the adoption time optimally depending on what she learns, the time it takes for
the productivity gains to begin emerging is endogenous in the model. The implication that
productivity gains arrive with a lag seems reasonable; for example, although electric power
first appeared around 1880, it was not until the 1920s that the productivity of the U.S.
economy increased as a result of a large-scale adoption of electricity (David, 1991).
Our model has no implications for investment because the agent invests only a negligible
amount in the new technology for learning purposes. As a result, the model fails to predict the
large amount of investment that often accompanies technological revolutions. For example,
it seems clear ex post that the 1990s witnessed significant overinvestment in the Internet
infrastructure.18 Billions of dollars worth of optical fibers laid in the 1990s remain unused
to this day as the market appears to have overestimated the extent to which the Internet
would revolutionize the delivery of bandwidth-intensive content. It is possible that market
irrationality, which is absent from our model, contributes to the overinvestment and stock
price “bubbles” observed during technological revolutions. Future research can test our
model against alternatives that involve behavioral biases. Some predictions of our model,
such as those involving market beta, are unlikely to follow from behavioral models, in which
there is typically no role for systematic risk. Since we find empirically that systematic risk
increased sharply during two prominent revolutions, it seems unlikely that behavioral biases
can fully explain the observed stock price patterns. Such biases could certainly be a part of
the story, though, and quantifying their relative importance would be interesting.

18
Johnson (2007) and DeMarzo, Kaniel, and Kremer (2007) develop models that can generate overinvestment in new technologies. These models have a different focus and they rely on different mechanisms –
learning about the curvature of the production function and relative wealth concerns, respectively.

28

Table 1
Parameters used in Simulations.

ρ
0.1217

ψbt∗
0

σ
bt∗
0.04

φ
0.3551

σ
0.07

σN,0
0.07

σN,1
0.07

κ
0.1

t∗∗ − t∗
8

T
30

γ
4

Table 2
Railroads Appearing in our Price Index.
This table lists all railroads in our sample that have at least one valid monthly common stock return between
1830 and 1861. The railroads are sorted by the year of appearance of their first valid monthly return.
Year

Railroad

1831

Camden & Amboy; Canajoharie & Catskill; Harlem; Ithaca & Oswego

1832

Boston & Providence

1833

Boston & Worcester; Brooklyn & Jamaica

1835

Hudson & Berkshire; Long Island

1839

Auburn & Syracuse

1841

Auburn & Rochester

1844

Housatonic

1847

Hudson River; Macon & West

1848

Hartford & New Haven; New York & Erie

1849

Erie

1850

Albany & Schenectady; Baltimore & Ohio; Michigan Central; New York & Harlem

1851

Chemung

1852

Michigan & Southern

1853

Cincinnati, Hamilton & Dayton; Cleveland, Columbus & Cincinnati; Cleveland & Pittsburg;
Cleveland & Toledo; Galena & Chicago; Illinois Central; Little Miami

1854

Chicago & Rock Island

1855

Michigan Southern & Northern Indiana

1856

Eighth Avenue; Lacrosse & Milwaukee; Macon & Western

1857

Chicago, Burlington & Quincy; Delaware, Lackawanna & Western; Indianapolis & Cincinnati

1858

Brooklyn City; Buffalo & State Line; Cleveland, Painesville & Ashtabula

29

New technology adopted by old economy
Mean productivity increases by ψ
Technological revolution
New technology arrives
New economy formed
Learning begins

T
Agent decides whether to
adopt the new technology

0

t*

Old technology
Old economy

Agent consumes W = B
T

t**

T

Agent learns about ψ
No adoption
Mean productivity unchanged
No technological revolution

T

Figure 1. The Sequence of Events. In this chart, t∗∗ , the time when the agent decides whether to adopt
the new technology, is taken as given. We initially take t∗∗ as given for the purpose of obtaining closed-form
solutions for prices, but later we solve for the optimal time t∗∗ to adopt the new technology.

30

(B) No Revolution: ψ t

6

6

4

4

ψ t (%)

t

ψ (%)

(A) Revolution: ψ t

2
0

0
0

2

4

6

8

(C) Revolution: p

10

0

6

8

10

8

10

8

10

t

t

1

0.5

0

2

4

6

8

0.5

0

10

0

2

(E) Revolution: σ

4

6

(F) No Revolution: σ

π

π

120
σπ (%)

120
σπ (%)

4

(D) No Revolution: p

p

t

p

2

t

1

0

2

100
80

100
80

0

2

4

6

8

10

0

Years

2

4

6
Years

Figure 2. Average ψbt , pt , σπ,t in Simulations. The left panels plot the perceived productivity gain ψbt
(Panel A), the adoption probability pt (Panel C), and the volatility of the stochastic discount factor σπ,t
(Panel E), averaged across all simulations in which the new technology was adopted at time t∗∗ (pt∗∗ = 1).
The right panels (B, D, and F) plot the same quantities but the average is taken across all simulations in
which the new technology was not adopted at time t∗∗ (pt∗∗ = 0). In each panel, the first vertical line denotes
t∗ = 1, the time when the new technology becomes available, and the second vertical line denotes t∗∗ = 9,
the time at which the agent decides whether to adopt the technology on a large scale. All parameters are
given in Table 1.

31

(A) Revolution: Market to Book Ratio

(B) No Revolution: Market to Book Ratio

5

5

4

4

3

3

M/B

M/B

New

2

2

1

1

0

0
0

2

4

6

8

10

Old

0

2

4

8

10

(D) No Revolution: Stock Return Volatility
60

50

50
Volatility (%)

Volatility (%)

(C) Revolution: Stock Return Volatility
60

40
30
20
10

6
Years

Years

40
30
20

0

2

4

6

8

10

10

Years

0

2

4

6

8

10

Years

Figure 3. Average M/B and Volatility in Simulations. Panel A plots the path of the market-to-book
ratio of the new economy (solid line) and old economy (dashed line) averaged across all simulations in which
the new technology was adopted at time t∗∗ (pt∗∗ = 1). Panel B is an equivalent of Panel A, except that
the averages are computed across all simulations in which the new technology was not adopted at time t∗∗
(pt∗∗ = 0). Panels C and D are equivalents of Panels A and B, respectively, with M/B replaced by the
volatility of stock returns. In each panel, the first vertical line denotes t∗ = 1, the time when the new
technology becomes available, and the second vertical line denotes t∗∗ = 9, the time at which the agent
decides whether to adopt the technology on a large scale. All parameters are given in Table 1.

32

(A) Revolution: New Economy Beta

(B) No Revolution: New Economy Beta

1.4

1.4

1.2

1.2

1

1

0.8

0.8
0

2

4

6

8

10

0

Years
(C) Revolution: New Economy Return
Return (%)

Return (%)

20
0
−20

Expected

8

10

−40

Realized
0

2

4

6

8

0

−50

10

0

Years

2

4

6

8

10

Years
(F) No Revolution: Old Economy Return

(E) Revolution: Old Economy Return
60

50

40

Return (%)

Return (%)

6

50

40

20
0
−20

Expected

−40

Realized

−60

4

Years
(D) No Revolution: New Economy Return

60

−60

2

0

2

4

0

−50
6

8

0

10

2

4

6

8

10

Years

Years

Figure 4. Beta and Average Stock Return in Simulations. The left panels plot the beta of the new
economy (Panel A), the realized stock return (solid line) and the expected stock return (dashed line) for
the new economy (Panel C) and the old economy (Panel E), averaged across all simulations in which the
new technology was adopted at time t∗∗ (pt∗∗ = 1). The right panels (B, D and F) plot the same quantities
but the average is taken across all simulations in which the new technology was not adopted at time t∗∗
(pt∗∗ = 0). In each panel, the first vertical line denotes t∗ = 1, the time when the new technology becomes
available, and the second vertical line denotes t∗∗ = 9, the time at which the agent decides whether to adopt
the technology on a large scale. All parameters are given in Table 1.

33

(A) Lower Risk Aversion

(B) Zero Conversion Cost

10

4

8

3
M/B

M/B

6
2

4
1

2
0

0

2

4

6

8

0

10

0

2

4

Years

8

10

(D) Faster Adoption
8

6

6
M/B

M/B

(C) Higher Uncertainty
8

4

2

0

6
Years

4

2

0

2

4

6

8

0

10

Years

0

2

4
Years

6

8

Figure 5. Average M/B in Simulated Revolutions: Sensitivity Analysis. All four panels plot the
paths of the market-to-book ratio of the new economy (solid line) and old economy (dashed line) averaged
across all simulations in which the new technology was adopted at time t∗∗ (pt∗∗ = 1). All parameters are
given in Table 1, except for one change that varies across the panels. In Panel A, the risk aversion γ = 3
instead of the benchmark case γ = 4. In Panel B, the conversion cost κ = 0 instead of the benchmark case
κ = 0.1. In Panel C, the uncertainty σt∗ = 0.08 instead of the benchmark case σt∗ = 0.04. In Panel D, the
time until the adoption t∗∗ − t∗ = 6 instead of the benchmark case t∗∗ − t∗ = 8 years. In each panel, the
first vertical line denotes t∗ , the time when the new technology becomes available, and the second vertical
line denotes t∗∗ , the time at which the agent decides whether to adopt the technology on a large scale.

34

(B) No Revolution: Market to Book Ratio
4

3.5

3.5

3

3
M/B

M/B

(A) Revolution: Market to Book Ratio
4

2.5

2.5

2

2

1.5

1.5

1

1
0

2

4

6
Years

8

New
Old

10

0

40

35

35

30
25
20
15

4

6
Years

8

10

(D) No Revolution: Stock Return Volatility

40

Volatility (%)

Volatility (%)

(C) Revolution: Stock Return Volatility

2

30
25
20

0

2

4

6
Years

8

15

10

0

2

4

6
Years

8

10

Figure 6. Average M/B and Volatility in Simulations with Optimal Adoption Time. Panel A
plots the path of the market-to-book ratio of the new economy (solid line) and old economy (dashed line)
averaged across all simulations in which the new technology was adopted at an optimally chosen time t∗∗
between years 8 and 10. Panel B is an equivalent of Panel A, except that the averages are computed across
all simulations in which the new technology was never adopted. Panels C and D are equivalents of Panels A
and B, respectively, with M/B replaced by the volatility of stock returns. All parameters are in Table 1.

35

(A) New Economy Beta

(B) Stock Return Volatility
70

1.6

New
60

Old

Volatility (%)

1.4
1.2
1

50
40

0.8

30

0.6

20
0

2

4
Years

6

0

(C) Market Value

4
Years

6

(D) Old Economy Productivity

20

15
14

percent

15

10

5

0

2

13
12
11

0

2

4
Years

10

6

0

2

4
Years

6

8

Figure 7. The Internet Revolution: Theory. This figure plots the model-implied dynamics of selected
quantities in a revolution characterized by fast adoption of the new technology (such as the internet revolution). All quantities are averages computed across all simulations that led to a revolution (i.e., adoption at
time t∗∗ = 6. Panel A reports the market beta of the new economy. Panel B plots the market volatility of
the new economy (solid) and old economy (dashed). Panel C plots the market values of the new economy
(solid) and old economy (dashed). Panel D plots the productivity of the old economy.

36

(B) Stock Return Volatility

(A) Beta of NASDAQ
50

2.2

NASDAQ
NYSE/AMEX
Std deviation (% per year)

2
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2

40

30

20

10

1
0

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005
Year−end

(C) Stock Price Index Level

(D) Productivity Growth

10

2.5
NASDAQ
NYSE/AMEX

8

2

% per year

Value of $1 invested in Jan 1992

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005
Year−end

6

4

2

0

1.5

1

0.5

0

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005
Year−end

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005
Year−end

Figure 8. The Internet Revolution: Data. Panel A plots the market beta of the NASDAQ
index, with a two-standard-error confidence band. The beta in day t is the slope coefficient from
the regression of daily NASDAQ returns on NYSE/AMEX returns over the 500 trading days (i.e.,
about two years) immediately preceding day t (i.e., days t − 499 through t). Panel B plots the
standard deviations of returns on the NASDAQ and NYSE/AMEX indices, also computed from
daily data over the 500 trading days immediately preceding day t. Panel C plots the value of $1
invested in January 1992 in the NASDAQ and NYSE/AMEX indices, with dividend reinvestment.
Panel D plots a three-year moving average of multifactor productivity growth in the private business
sector (in year t, we plot the average annual productivity growth in years t − 2, t − 1, and t). The
vertical dotted line marks October 2002.

37

Rail Consumption in the U.S.
4500

4000

3500

Track−miles

3000

2500

2000

1500

1000

500

0

1830

1835

1840

1845
Year

1850

1855

1860

Figure 9. Total Rail Consumption in the United States. The figure plots the number of track-miles
of rails laid each year in the U.S., as estimated by Fogel (1964, p.174). A track-mile of rails is defined as one
half of the length of the rails in a mile of single track. The total includes rails used in the construction of
new track as well as in the replacement of worn-out rails.

38

(A) Railroad Beta

(B) Stock Return Volatility
35

Beta
Confidence bands

30

Std deviation (% per year)

2

1.5

1

0.5

Railroads
Non−railroads

25
20
15
10
5

0
1830 1835 1840 1845 1850 1855 1860
Year

0
1830 1835 1840 1845 1850 1855 1860
Year

(C) Stock Price Index Level

(D) Aggregate P/D Ratio

1.4

40
Railroads
Non−railroads

35

Railroads
Non−railroads

30

1.2

P/D

Value of $1 invested in Jan 1831

1.6

1

25
20

0.8

15

0.6

10

0.4
1830 1835 1840 1845 1850 1855 1860
Year

5
1830 1835 1840 1845 1850 1855 1860
Year

Figure 10. The Railroad Revolution: Data. Panel A plots the beta of the railroad index, with a
two-standard-error confidence band. The beta in month t is the slope coefficient from the regression of
the most recent 36 monthly railroad returns (in months t − 35 through t) on non-railroad returns. The
monthly railroad (non-railroad) index returns are computed as price-weighted averages of monthly capital
gains across all railroad (non-railroad) stocks. Panel B plots the standard deviation of returns in the railroad
and non-railroad industries. Each year, this standard deviation is computed across all monthly price-weighted
average industry returns in the given year. Panel C plots the stock price index level, obtained by cumulating
monthly capital gains to $1 invested in January 1831 in the railroad and non-railroad indices. Panel D plots
the aggregate price-to-dividend ratio for the railroad and non-railroad industries. Each year, this ratio is
computed as the sum of year-end prices divided by the sum of dividends paid in that year, summing across
all railroad (non-railroad) stocks with valid price and dividend data. The vertical dotted line marks 1857.

39

Appendix.
The Appendix contains technical material omitted from the text. The proofs of all results
are available in the Technical Appendix, which is downloadable from the authors’ websites.
Lemma A1: Suppose the prior distribution of ψ at time t∗ is normal, ψ ∼ N(0,σ
bt2∗ ). Then
∗
the posterior distribution of ψ at time t, t∗ < t < t∗∗, conditional on Ft = ρN
τ , ρτ : t ≤ τ ≤ t
is also normal, ψ|Ft ∼ N(ψbt , σ
bt2), where the posterior mean ψbt follows the process
dψbt = σ
bt2

and the posterior variance σ
bt2 is given by
σ
bt2 =

(b
σ )
t∗

−2

+

φ

σN,1



dZe1,t ,

1
φ
σN,1

2

(17)

.
(t −

(18)

t∗ )

Moreover, the productivity processes can be rewritten as
e0,t
dρt = φ (ρ − ρt ) dt + σdZ


dt + σN,0dZe0,t + σN,1dZe1,t ,
dρN
= φ ρ + ψbt − ρN
t
t

(19)
(20)

e0,t, Ze1,t ), which capture the agent’s expectation errors, follow
where the Brownian motions (Z

 
−1 


dZ̃0,t
σ
0
dρt
dρt
=
− Et
.
(21)
σN,0 σN,1
dρN
dρN
dZ̃1,t
t
t
Lemma A1 follows from Theorem 10.3 in Liptser and Shiryayev (1977).
Re Proposition 1: Define the value function at time t as
 1−γ 


WT
b
V Bt , ρt , ψt, σ
bt, t; T = Et
,
1−γ

(22)

Since γ > 1, V (.) is negative, decreasing in σ
bt2, and increasing in Bt . As a result,

V Bt∗ (1 − κ) , ρt∗ , 0, σ
bt2∗ , t∗; T < V (Bt∗ , ρt∗ , 0, 0, t∗ ; T ) .

(24)

where ρt follows the process in equation (4). Lemma A2 in the Technical Appendix shows:
 1−γ 


BT
Bt1−γ A0 (τ )+(1−γ)A1 (τ )ρt +(1−γ)A2 (τ )ψbt + 1 (1−γ)2 A2 (τ )2 σbt2
2
b
2
V Bt , ρt, ψt , σ
bt , t; T = Et
=
e
,
1−γ
1−γ
(23)
where τ = T − t, A1(τ ) and A2(τ ) are given in the text, and


σ 2 (1 − γ)2
1 − e−2φτ
1 − e−φτ
A0 (τ ) = (1 − γ) ρ (τ − A1 (τ )) +
τ+
−2
.
2
φ2
2φ
φ

40

Proposition 1 follows immediately from equation (24). The left-hand side is the expected
utility conditional on adopting the technology at time t∗, and the right-hand side is the expected utility conditional on not adopting the technology at time t∗ or any time afterwards.19
The expected utility from no adoption at time t∗ exceeds the right-hand side (and hence also
the left-hand side) because it includes the value of the option to adopt after time t∗.
Re Proposition 2: Using (23), equation (8) follows from the optimality condition


2
∗∗
b
V Bt∗∗ (1 − κ) , ρt∗∗ , ψt∗∗ , b
σt∗∗ , t ; T ≥ V (Bt∗∗ , ρt∗∗ , 0, 0, t∗∗; T ) .

(25)

Lemma A3: The distribution of ψbt∗∗ conditional on ψbt is normal:


2
2
b
b
ψt∗∗ |ψbt ∼ N ψt, σ
bt − σ
bt∗∗ .





bt2 − σ
bt2∗∗ , where N (x; a, s2) ≡
In addition, pt ≡ Prob ψbt∗∗ > ψ|ψbt = 1 − N ψ; ψbt , σ
Rx
(2πs2 )−1/2 exp(y − a)2 /(2s2 )dy is the c.d.f. of a normal distribution, N(a, s2 ).
−∞
Re Proposition 3: Define the value function at time t, t∗ ≤ t < t∗∗, as

 1−γ 


WT
2
b
V Bt , ρt, ψt , σ
bt , t; T = Et max Et∗∗
,
{yes, no}
1−γ

(26)

where the maximization involves choosing whether or not to adopt the new technology at
time t∗∗, following Proposition 2.20 Lemma A4 in the Technical Appendix shows:

where


 B 1−γ
yes
V Bt, ρt , ψbt , b
σt2, t; T = t {(1 − pt ) Gno
t + pt Gt } ,
1−γ

Gno
= eA0 (τ )+(1−γ)A1 (τ )ρt
t

bt + 1 (1−γ)2 A2 (τ ∗∗ )2 σ
(1−γ)A2 (τ ∗∗ )ψ
bt2
2

1−γ
Gyes
= Gno
Rt e
t
t (1 − κ)


σt2 − σ
bt2∗∗ ) , σ
bt2 − σ
bt2∗∗
1 − N ψ; ψbt + (1 − γ) A2 (τ ∗∗) (b


Rt =
< 1.
2
2
b
1 − N ψ; ψt, σ
bt − σ
bt∗∗

(27)

(28)
(29)
(30)

Using (23) and (27), we prove Proposition 3 in the Technical Appendix by showing that
expected utility is higher when experimentation takes place:

V Bt∗ , ρt∗ , 0, σ
bt2∗ , t∗; T > V (Bt∗ , ρt∗ , 0, 0, t∗; T ) .
(31)

On the right hand side, V is evaluated at ψbt∗ = σ
bt2∗ = 0. If the agent decides not to adopt the new
technology, ρt follows the process in equation (3), which is equivalent to equation (4) when ψ = 0.
20
Note the difference between the value functions V in equation (26) and V in equation (23). Whereas V
includes the value of the option to adopt the new technology at the future time t∗∗ , V does not include such
option value because it applies to settings in which the adoption decision has already been made.
19

41

eno and G
eyes
Re Proposition 4: The functions G
are given by
t
t
" 
#
−γ
B
T
eno = Et
G
|ψbt∗∗ < ψ = eA0 (τ )−γA1 (τ )ρt
t
Bt
" 
#
−γ
B
T
eyes
eno (1 − κ)−γ R
et e−γA2 (τ ∗∗)ψbt + 12 γ 2 A2 (τ ∗∗ )2 σbt2 ,
G
= E
|ψbt∗∗ ≥ ψ = G
t
t
Bt

where



1 − N ψ; ψbt − γA2 (τ ∗∗) (b
σt2 − σ
bt2∗∗ ) , b
σt2 − b
σt2∗∗
et =


R
<1
1 − N ψ; ψbt, σ
bt2 − σ
bt2∗∗


1 − e−2φτ
1 − e−φτ
σ2 γ2
A0 (τ ) = −γρ (τ − A1 (τ )) +
τ+
−2
.
2 φ2
2φ
φ


(32)
(33)

(34)

(35)


∗∗
2
2
2
2
b
σt − σ
bt∗∗ ) , b
σt − σ
bt∗∗ . Then
Re Corollary 1: Let pet = 1 − N ψ; ψt − γA2 (τ ) (b

γA2 (τ ∗∗) −

Sπ,t =

1 ∂ pet
bt
pet ∂ ψ



eyes
G
+
t

eno
eyes
(1 − pt ) G
t + pt Gt

∂pt e no
bt Gt
∂ψ

.

(36)

no
eno , G
eyes
Re Proposition 5: The functions G
and Gyes
are presented above. The
t , Gt
t
t
yes
no
functions Kt , and Kt are given by
" 
#
−γ
N
B
B
T
T b
|ψt∗∗ < ψ = Kt RN
Ktno ≡ Et
L,t
Bt
BtN
" 
#
−γ
BT
BTN b
−γ
yes
|ψt∗∗ ≥ ψ = (1 − κ) KtN RN
Kt
≡ Et
H,t ,
N
Bt
Bt

where

N +A (τ )ψ
bt + 1 A2 (τ )b
σt2
2
2 2

Kt = eC0 (τ )−γA1 (τ )ρt +A1 (τ )ρt
∗∗

b

1

∗∗

∗∗

2

KtN = Kt e−γA2 (τ )ψt + 2 γA2 (τ )(γA2 (τ )−2A2 (τ ))bσt


N ψ; ψbt + σyLψb, σ
bt2 − σ
bt2∗∗


RN
with σyLψb = A2 (τ ) σ
bt2 − A2 (τ ∗∗) σ
bt2∗∗
L,t =
2
2
b
N ψ; ψt, σ
bt − σ
bt∗∗


1 − N ψ; ψbt + σyHψb, b
σt2 − σ
bt2∗∗

H
L


RN
with σyψ
= σyψ
− γA2 (τ ∗∗) σ
bt2 − σ
bt2∗∗
H,t =
1 − N ψ; ψbt, σ
bt2 − σ
bt2∗∗

C0 (τ ) = (1 − γ) ρ (τ − A1 (τ ))



1
1 − e−2φτ
1 − e−φτ
2
2
+ 2 τ+
−2
γ 2 σ 2 − 2γσN,0σ + σN,0
+ σN,1
.
2φ
2φ
φ
42

Corollary A1: For any t ∈ [t∗, t∗∗), the stock return processes are given by
dMt
0
1
= µM,tdt + σM,t
dZet0 + σM,t
dZet1
Mt

and

dMtN
N,0 e0
N,1 e1
= µN
M,t dt + σM,t dZt + σM,t dZt ,
N
Mt

where expected returns are equal to the return covariances with dπt /πt ,

N,0 0
N,1 1
µN
M,t = −σM,t σπ,t − σM,t σπ,t ,

0
0
1
1
µM,t = −σM,t
σπ,t
− σM,t
σπ,t
;

(37)

and the components of the return volatilities are
0
σM,t
= A1 (τ ) σ;
N,0
σM,t
= A1 (τ ) σN,0;
N
with SM,t and SM,t
given by

SM,t =
N
SM,t

pt
pN
L,t
pN
H,t

=

1
σM,t
= (SM,t + Sπ,t ) σ
bt2

(38)

σN,1

 2 φ
N,1
N
σM,t
= A1 (τ ) σN,1 + SM,t
+ Sπ,t σ
bt
,
σN,1


− ∂∂pψbt Gno
+
(1 − γ) A2 (τ ∗∗) +
t

1 ∂pt
bt
pt ∂ ψ
yes
pt Gt

t

φ



Gyes
t

(1 − pt ) Gno
t +


N 
∂p
no
A2 (τ ) + pN1 ∂L,t
K
+
(A2 (τ ) − γA2 (τ ∗∗)) +
t
b
ψ
L,t

(39)

(40)
1
pN
H,t

(1 − pt )Ktno + pt Ktyes


 2
∗∗
2
2
2
b
= 1 − N ψ; ψt + (1 − γ) A2 (τ ) σ
bt − σ
bt∗∗ , σ
bt − σ
bt∗∗


= N ψ; ψbt + σyLψb, σ
bt2 − σ
bt2∗∗


σt2 − σ
bt2∗∗ .
= 1 − N ψ; ψbt + σyHψb, b

∂pN
H,t
b
∂ψ



Ktyes

(41)
(42)
(43)
(44)

Re Proposition 6:. The functions hold and hnew are given by

1
2 2
hold = −e
κ + A2 (τ ∗∗) ψbt + (1 − 2γ) A2 (τ ∗∗) σ
bt
2

 

1 − N ψ; ψbt − γA2 (τ ∗∗) (b
σt2 − σ
bt2∗∗ ) , σ
bt2 − σ
bt2∗∗


− log 
2
2
2
2
∗∗
b
1 − N ψ; ψt + (1 − γ) A2 (τ ) (b
σt − σ
bt∗∗ ) , σ
bt − σ
bt∗∗




σt2 − σ
bt2∗∗
N ψ; ψbt + σyLψb, b

 
hnew = −γA2 (τ ∗∗) A2 (τ ) σ
bt2 − log 
2
2
b
N ψ; ψt, σ
bt − σ
bt∗∗

 

1 − N ψ; ψbt − γA2 (τ ∗∗) (b
σt2 − σ
bt2∗∗ ) , σ
bt2 − σ
bt2∗∗

 .
− log 
L
1 − N ψ; ψbt − γA2 (τ ∗∗) (b
σt2 − σ
bt2∗∗ ) + σyψ
,σ
bt2 − σ
bt2∗∗

Re Corollary 2: In the corollary, C 0 (τ ∗∗) = C0 (τ ∗∗) − A0 (τ ∗∗).
43

(45)
(46)

(47)

(48)

Re Optimal Adoption Time: The value function is

 1−γ 




WT
1−γ (1−γ)A1 (T −t)ρt
2
b
b
∗∗
V Bt , ρt , ψt, σ
bt , t; T = Et max
Et
= Bt e
V2 ψt , t; T , (49)
t∗∗
1−γ


b
where V2 ψt , t; T satisfies the partial differential equation


2

1 ∂ 2 V2
∂V2
1
2
2 2
2 φ
+ (1 − γ) A1 (T − t)φρ + (1 − γ) A1 (T − t) σ V2 +
,
0=
σ
bt
∂t
2
2 ∂ ψb2
σN,1


1
with the boundary conditions V2 ψbT , T = 1−γ
if t∗∗ > T and


(1 − κ)1−γ A0 (τ )+(1−γ)A2 (τ )ψbt + 1 (1−γ)2 A2 (τ )2 σbt2
2
,
V2 ψbt, t; T
≥
e
1−γ

with an equality at t = t∗∗. We solve the PDE by using the finite difference method.
Alternative Decentralized Model.
Below, we develop a model of a competitive economy in which firms independently decide
whether to adopt the new technology while maximizing their own market values. We show
that, in equilibrium, this decentralized economy produces the same adoption rules and same
stock price dynamics (including “bubbles”) as the social planner’s problem in Section 2.
Consider a finite-horizon economy with a continuum of identical firms and investors. All
investors maximize utility as in Section 2. Before time t∗, all firms employ the same “old
technology.” The productivity ρi,t of any firm i that uses the old technology follows


dρi,t = φ g sO
− ρi,t dt + σdZ0,t ,
(50)
t

0
where sO
t ∈ [0, 1] is the fraction of firms using the old technology at time t, and g (s) > 0.
The function g(s) captures “network externalities”: the average productivity of a technology
increases as the fraction of firms using this technology increases. Denote g (1) = ρ and
∗
g(0) = ρ0 . We refer to ρ − ρ0 > 0 as the network externality gain. Since sO
t = 1 for t ≤ t ,
the productivity of all firms before time t∗ is identical to equation (3) in Section 2.

At time t∗ a new unique firm N appears, equipped with a new technology. The productivity process of firm N is given by
dρN,t = φ (ρ + ψ − ρN,t ) dt + σN,0dZ0,t + σN,1dZ1,t ,

(51)

where ψ is an unobservable productivity gain from using the new technology, as in Section
2. The prior distribution for ψ at time t∗ is given in equation (5). After time t∗ , all firms
learn about ψ by observing ρN,t and ρi,t for all i.
Firms using the old technology can adopt the new technology either immediately at
time t∗ , or at a given later time t∗∗, or never. When they adopt, they incur a proportional
44

O
conversion cost κ. If the fraction sN
t = 1 − st of all firms use the new technology at time t,
the productivity of each firm i that uses the new technology is given by


dρi,t = φ g sN
+ ψ − ρi,t dt + σdZ0,t .
(52)
t

If all firms adopt the new technology (sN
t = 1), then the process (52) is identical to equation
(4). Aggregate productivity (obtained by aggregating across identical firms i) therefore
follows the same process (4) as it does in the social planner’s problem. If no firm adopts the
new technology (sN
t = 0), then the aggregate economy uses the old technology. Aggregate
productivity is then given by the process (50) with sO
t = 1, which is identical to equation (3).
Once again, aggregate productivity follows the same process as in the planner’s problem. We
N
show below in Proposition D2 that, in equilibrium at time t∗∗, either sN
t∗∗ = 1 or st∗∗ = 0.
∗∗
Therefore, the pricing kernel for t ≥ t is the same as in the planner’s problem, and it
N
depends on whether sN
t∗∗ = 1 or st∗∗ = 0.
The market value of each firm at time t∗∗ depends not only on whether the firm adopts the
new technology, but also on the adoption decisions of all other firms, because those decisions
sN =1,yes
affect the pricing kernel. We denote the market value of firm i at time t∗∗ as Mi,t∗∗
,
sN =0,yes
sN =1,no
sN =0,no
M
,M
, or M
, where “yes” or “no” indicates whether firm i adopts or
i,t∗∗

i,t∗∗

i,t∗∗

not, and “sN = 0” or “sN = 1” indicates whether other firms adopt or not. Closed-form
expressions for these four values are given in the Technical Appendix. Taking the choice of
other firms as given (sN = 1 or sN = 0), each firm adopts the new technology if doing so
maximizes its market value. That is, firm i adopts if and only if
sN =1,yes

s =1,no
> Mi,t
∗∗
N
N
s =0,yes
M
> M s =0,no

Mi,t∗∗

i,t∗∗

N

i,t∗∗

if everybody else adopts

(53)

if nobody else adopts

(54)

The following proposition characterizes the value-maximizing adoption decision of any individual firm, conditional on the decisions of all other firms at time t∗∗.
∗∗
Proposition D1: (a) If sN
t∗∗ = 1 (i.e., all firms adopt the new technology at time t ),
then firm i adopts the new technology at time t∗∗ if and only if

log (1 − κ) 1
N
ψbt∗∗ ≥ ψ s =1 = −
+ (2γ − 1) A2 (τ ∗∗) σ
bt2∗∗ − (ρ − ρ0 )
A2 (τ ∗∗)
2

(55)

∗∗
(b) If sN
t∗∗ = 0 (i.e., no firm adopts the new technology at time t ), then firm i adopts the
new technology at time t∗∗ if and only if

N

log (1 − κ) 1
N
ψbt∗∗ ≥ ψ s =0 = −
− A2 (τ ∗∗) σ
bt2∗∗ + (ρ − ρ0 )
∗∗
A2 (τ )
2
N

(56)

In general, ψ s =1 6= ψ s =0 . Both thresholds consist of three terms. The first term, which
reflects the conversion cost κ, is the same in both cases. The second term, which reflects
uncertainty σ
bt∗∗ , is positive in (55) but negative in (56). This difference is due to systematic
risk. In case (a), all firms adopt the new technology, so the equilibrium stochastic discount
45

factor is heavily affected by the risk of the new technology. Hence, the new technology carries
higher systematic risk than the old technology. If a firm adopts the new technology, its beta
increases, pushing its discount rate up and market value down. This undesirable feature of
the new technology increases the adoption threshold. In case (b), the new technology carries
less systematic risk, so the b
σt∗∗ term reduces the adoption threshold.

The third term reflects the network externality gain, ρ − ρ0 > 0. In case (a), all other
firms have already adopted the new technology, so its average productivity is higher and, as
a result, the adoption threshold is lower. In case (b), the new technology is less productive
because no other firm has adopted it, so the adoption threshold is higher.
Intuitively, adopting the same technology as other firms has two effects. On one hand,
it hurts the firm, because the technology adopted by all other firms carries more systematic
risk. On the other hand, it benefits the firm through network externality gains.

We are interested in setting up a competitive environment that supports the social planner’s solution. This can be done by a judicious choice of the magnitude of the network
externality gains, ρ − ρ0 . When we choose ρ0 as
1
ρ0 = ρ − γA2 (τ ∗∗) σ
bt2∗∗ ,
2
the thresholds in Proposition D1 become equal to each other:
N =1

ψs

N =0

= ψs

=ψ=−

(57)

log (1 − κ) 1
+ (γ − 1) A2 (τ ∗∗) σ
bt2∗∗ .
∗∗
A2 (τ )
2

Moreover, both thresholds are now equal to the threshold ψ in equation (8). In other words,
the adoption thresholds in the competitive problem and the social planner’s problem are
identical. Still operating under condition (57), we obtain the following proposition.
b
Proposition D2: If ψbt∗∗ ≥ ψ, then sN
t∗∗ = 1 is a Nash equilibrium. If ψt∗∗ < ψ, then
N
st∗∗ = 0 is a Nash equilibrium.

Proposition D2 shows that, in equilibrium, either all firms adopt the new technology
at time t∗∗ or none of them do.21 Moreover, the adoption decision is analogous to that in
Proposition 2, with an identical threshold. As a result, the equilibrium stochastic discount
factor is the same, and all pricing formulas are identical to those in the planner’s problem.
Note that when all firms choose to adopt the new technology at time t∗∗, they increase
the equilibrium discount rates and thus decrease their market values. Although each firm
maximizes its own market value, the aggregate effect of the firms’ adoptions is to depress
market values at time t∗∗. The reason is that firms that adopt the new technology do not
fully internalize the resulting increases in systematic risk. To summarize, this decentralized
model with value-maximizing competitive firms produces the same stock price dynamics as
our simpler model with a utility-maximizing social planner.
21
N
We can also prove a related result for time t∗ : sN
t∗ = 1 is not a Nash equilibrium but st∗ = 0 is, under
plausible parametric conditions (see Technical Appendix). That is, in equilibrium, no firm adopts the new
technology at time t∗ , analogous to our Proposition 1 in the social planner’s problem.

46

REFERENCES
Aghion, Philippe, and Peter Howitt, 1992, A model of growth through creative destruction,
Econometrica 60, 323–351.
Atkeson, Andrew, and Patrick J. Kehoe, 2007, Modeling the Transition to a New Economy:
Lessons from Two Technological Revolutions, American Economic Review 97, 64–88.
Benmelech, Efraim, 2007, Asset salability and debt maturity: Evidence from 19th century
American railroads, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming .
Bharath, Sreedhar T., and Siva Viswanathan, 2006, Is the Internet bubble consistent with
rationality?, Working paper, University of Michigan.
Brown, Stephen J., William N. Goetzmann, and Stephen A. Ross, 1995, Survival, Journal
of Finance 50, 853–873.
Caselli, Francesco, 1999, Technological revolutions, American Economic Review 89, 78–102.
Chari, V.V., and Hugo Hopenhayn, 1991, Vintage human capital, growth, and the diffusion
of new technology, Journal of Political Economy 99, 1142–1165.
Cochrane, W., 1979, The Development of American Agriculture, Minneapolis.
Craig, Lee A., and Thomas Weiss, 1993, Agricultural Productivity Growth During the
Decade of the Civil War, Journal of Economic History 53, 527548.
David, Paul A., 1991, Computer and dynamo: The modern productivity paradox in a nottoo-distant mirror, In Technology and Productivity: The Challenge for Economic Policy
(OECD, Paris), 315–347.
DeMarzo, Peter, Ron Kaniel, and Ilan Kremer, 2007, Technological Innovation and Real
Investment Booms and Busts, Journal of Financial Economics 85, 735–754.
Fogel, Robert W., 1964, Railroads and American Economic Growth: Essays in Econometric
History, Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, MD.
Goetzmann, William N., Roger G. Ibbotson, and Liang Peng, 2001, A new historical database
for the NYSE 1815 to 1925, Journal of Financial Markets 4, 1–32.
Greenwood, Jeremy, and Boyan Jovanovic, 1999, The information-technology revolution and
the stock market, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 89, 116–122.
Hoberg, Gerard, and Gordon Phillips, 2006, Real and financial industry booms and busts,
Working paper, University of Maryland.
Hobijn, Bart, and Boyan Jovanovic, 2001, The Information-technology revolution and the
stock market: Evidence, American Economic Review 91, 1203–1220.
Johnson, Timothy C., 2007, Optimal learning and new technology bubbles, Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 2486–2511.
Jovanovic, Boyan, 1982, Selection and the evolution of industry, Econometrica 50, 649–670.
Jovanovic, Boyan, and Glenn M. MacDonald, 1994, The life cycle of a competitive industry,
Journal of Political Economy 102, 322–347.

47

Jovanovic, Boyan, and Yaw Nyarko, 1996, Learning by doing and the choice of technology,
Econometrica 64, 1299-1310.
Jovanovic, Boyan, and Peter L. Rousseau, 2003, Two technological revolutions, Journal of
European Economic Association 1, 419–428.
Jovanovic, Boyan, and Peter L. Rousseau, 2005, General purpose technologies, NBER Working paper #11093.
Klein, Maury, 1994, Unfinished Business: The Railroad in American Life, University Press
of New England.
Laitner, John, and Dmitriy Stolyarov, 2003, Technological change and the stock market,
American Economic Review 93, 1240–1267.
Laitner, John, and Dmitriy Stolyarov, 2004a, Aggregate returns to scale and embodied
technical change: Theory and measurement using stock market data, Journal of Monetary
Economics 51, 191–233.
Laitner, John, and Dmitriy Stolyarov, 2004b, The role of owned ideas in stock market runups, Working paper, University of Michigan.
Malkiel, Burton G., 1999, A Random Walk Down Wall Street, W. W. Norton & Co., NY.
Manuelli, Rodolfo E., 2003, Technological change, the labor market and the stock market,
Working paper, University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Mazzucato, Mariana, 2002, The PC industry: New economy or early life-cycle?, Review of
Economic Dynamics 5, 318–345.
Mazzucato, Mariana, and Massimiliano Tancioni, 2006, Stock price volatility and patent
citation dynamics, Working paper, Open University.
Mishkin, Frederic S., 1991, Asymmetric information and financial crises: A historical perspective, In Financial Markets and Financial Crises, edited by R. Glenn Hubbard, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 69–108.
Mokyr, Joel, 1990, The Level of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic Progress,
Oxford University Press, New York.
Pástor, Ľuboš, and Pietro Veronesi, 2003, “Stock valuation and learning about profitability,”
Journal of Finance 58, 1749–1789.
Pástor, Ľuboš, and Pietro Veronesi, 2006, “Was there a Nasdaq bubble in the late 1990s?”
Journal of Financial Economics 81, 61–100.
Perez, Carlota, 2002, Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital: The Dynamics of
Bubbles and Golden Ages, Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK.
Romer, Paul, 1990, Endogenous technological change, Journal of Political Economy 98, S71–
S102.
Shiller, Robert, 2000, Irrational Exuberance, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Stover, John F., 1961, American Railroads, University of Chicago Press.

48

