NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF AIDS TREATMENT:
LABOR SUPPLY IN WESTERN KENYA
Harsha Thirumurthy
Joshua Graff Zivin
Markus Goldstein
Working Paper 11871
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11871
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2005
This project would not have been possible without the support of the Academic Model for Prevention and
Treatment of HIV/AIDS (AMPATH) and members of the IU-Kenya partnership. We are grateful to Michael
Boozer, T. Paul Schultz, and Christopher Udry for many comments and suggestions. We have also benefited
from discussions with Richard Akresh, Joseph Altonji, Amit Khandelwal, Germano Mwabu, Tavneet Suri,
and participants in seminars at University of Central Florida, University of Maryland, The World Bank, Yale
University and the Center for Interdisciplinary Research on AIDS. We thank Kara Wools-Kaloustian and
especially, Beverly Musick, for guidance in using the AMPATH medical records. Many individuals
contributed to the implementation of the household survey under the direction of the authors and Mabel
Nangami. Giovanna d’Adda assisted in managing the second round of the survey and the data collection was
facilitated by the excellent field supervision of Irene Muhunzu. We also acknowledge the tremendous
contributions of Andrew Anyembe, Caroline Amuyunzu, Jayne Chaina, Norbert Ketter, James Mungai, June
Ochanda, and Jacklyne Tetee for administering questionnaires; and Chelimo Cherono, David Marende,
Maurice Mungai, Florence Oduor, and Martha Simiyu for computer entry of questionnaires. Financial
support for this project was received from the Economic and Social Research Council (UK), Pfizer, Inc., The
World Bank, Yale University'
s Center for Interdisciplinary Research on AIDS (CIRA) through a grant from
the National Institute of Mental Health to Michael Merson, M.D. (No. P30 MH 62294), the Social Science
Research Council, and the Calderone Program at Columbia University. All errors and opinions are our
own.The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Harsha Thirumurthy, Joshua Graff Zivin, and Markus Goldstein. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Economic Impact of AIDS Treatment: Labor Supply in Western Kenya
Harsha Thirumurthy, Joshua Graff Zivin, and Markus Goldstein
NBER Working Paper No. 11871
December 2005
JEL No. I1, I3, O1, J2
ABSTRACT
Using longitudinal survey data collected in collaboration with a treatment program, this paper is the
first to estimate the economic impacts of antiretroviral treatment in Africa. The responses in two
important outcomes are studied: (1) labor supply of adult AIDS patients receiving treatment; and (2)
labor supply of children and adults living in the patients'households. We find that within six months
after the initiation of treatment, there is a 20 percent increase in the likelihood of the patient
participating in the labor force and a 35 percent increase in weekly hours worked. Since patient
health would continue to decline without treatment, these labor supply responses are underestimates
of the impact of treatment on the treated. The upper bound of the treatment impact, which is based
on plausible assumptions about the counterfactual, is considerably larger and also implies that the
wage benefit from treatment is roughly equal to the costs of treatment provision. The responses in
the labor supply of patients'household members are heterogeneous. Young boys and women work
considerably less after initiation of treatment, while girls and men do not change their labor supply.
The effects on child labor are particularly important since they suggest potential schooling impacts
from treatment.
Harsha Thirumurthy
Department of Economics
Yale University
P.O. Box 208268
New Haven, CT 06520-8268
harsha.thirumurthy@yale.edu
Joshua Graff Zivin
Department of Health Policy and Management
Columbia University
600 West 168th Street, Room 608
New York, NY 10032
and NBER
jz126@columbia.edu

Markus Goldstein
Poverty Reduction Group
The World Bank
MSN MC4-415
1818 H Street, NW
mgoldstein@worldbank.org
Washington, DC 20433

1. Introduction
Sub-Saharan Africa is home to 25 million of the nearly 40 million people living with HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS, 2004). In the next decade, AIDS-related mortality will continue to increase the
number of orphans in the region (currently 12 million) and reduce life expectancy (already at 35
years in some countries). Following increases in donor support and substantial reductions in the
prices of medicines, antiretroviral (ARV) therapy has recently become an important part of the
policy response to combat AIDS.1 As of June 2005, roughly one-half million HIV-positive
individuals were receiving ARV therapy in sub-Saharan Africa (WHO, 2005).

Since this

represents only 11 percent of the number of people needing treatment, scaling-up of treatment
programs poses a major challenge in many countries.2 At the same time, however, some have
questioned the investment in ARV therapy since most low-income countries have limited
resources and many competing needs (Marseille, Hofmann, and Kahn, 2002; Kremer, 2002).3
Numerous studies have shown that ARV therapy dramatically reduces morbidity and
mortality among HIV-infected individuals, in both industrialized countries (Hammer et al., 1997,
Hogg et al., 1998; Palella et al., 1998) and developing countries (Laurent et al., 2002; Marins et
al., 2003; Koenig, Leandre, and Farmer, 2004; Wools-Kaloustian et al., 2005). These health
benefits have the potential to significantly improve economic well-being, as suggested by a
growing literature that shows linkages between health and income in developing countries.4
While this literature examines the economic impacts of several dimensions of health such as
nutritional status and morbidity, it provides little guidance when it comes to a highly debilitating
and chronic disease like HIV/AIDS. One exception is the recent study by Fox et al. (2004), who
analyze retrospective data from a Kenyan tea estate and find significant declines in the labor
productivity of HIV-positive workers prior to their death or medical retirement. However, the
extent to which treatment can reverse such declines in labor productivity remains to be
determined. Little is known about the impact of this important intervention on a broad range of
other socio-economic outcomes as well, both at the individual and household level.
1

For example, in 2003 the World Health Organization (WHO) launched the prominent “3 by 5” campaign, with the
goal of treating three million people by 2005 (WHO, 2003).
2
As explained below, not all HIV-positive individuals are currently in need of ARV therapy.
3
Furthermore, advocates of treatment have also noted that questions concerning economic effectiveness have served
as obstacles to obtaining greater donor support (Binswanger, 2003; Clinton, 2003).
4
See Strauss and Thomas (1998), Ruger, Jamison, and Bloom (2001), and Thomas and Frankenberg (2002) for
reviews and discussions of the micro-economic literature on linkages between health and income.

In this paper, we use survey data from Kenya to present the first estimates of how quickly
and to what degree ARV therapy affects the labor supply of treated patients and their household
members. These estimates are a preliminary step in understanding the socio-economic impacts
of ARV therapy, which in turn is critical for properly evaluating treatment programs and
efficiently allocating resources. For example, if ARV therapy for adult AIDS patients increases
the likelihood that their children attend school, then such impacts belong in any cost-benefit
analysis. Estimates of these impacts can also contribute to the growing literature on the longterm micro- and macro-economic consequences of AIDS (Bell, Devarajan, and Gersbach (2003)
and Young (2005).
Labor is the central productive asset of the poor in most developing countries. Indeed,
labor supply and related outcomes like income have been the focus of many studies that examine
the impacts of nutrition, morbidity, and AIDS-related mortality.5 Because it is an important
outcome, changes in the labor supply of adult AIDS patients can also generate intrahousehold
spillover effects on time allocation patterns and influence other measures of household welfare.
Our analysis is based on data from a household survey we conducted in collaboration
with a rural treatment program in western Kenya. Over the course of one year, longitudinal
socio-economic data were collected from AIDS patients who receive treatment. These data have
been linked to longitudinal medical data containing clinical and laboratory measures of the
patients’ health status. The presence of individuals whose HIV status is known, the ARV
treatment program, and the linked medical data combine to offer us a unique opportunity to
measure the effects of treatment.
To identify the response to treatment, we examine changes over time in the labor supply
of treated patients and their household members. Using data collected simultaneously from a
large random sample of non-patient households, we control for time-varying factors (such as
seasonality) that could bias the estimates. The analysis is strengthened by variation in the length
of time that patients had been exposed to treatment prior to the survey. As we show with the
linked medical data, health has a non-linear temporal response to treatment—it improves
dramatically in the first months of treatment but more gradually thereafter. We exploit this
nonlinearity to test for heterogeneous treatment responses in the labor supply of patients.
5

Yamano and Jayne (2004) examine the impacts of working-age adult mortality on a range of household outcomes
including crop and non-farm income. Beegle (2005) examines the impacts of adult mortality on the labor supply of
household members.

2

We find that the provision of ARV therapy leads to a large and significant increase in the
labor supply of AIDS patients. This increase occurs very soon after the initiation of ARV
therapy: within six months, there is a 20 percent increase in the likelihood of participating in the
labor force and a 35 percent increase in hours worked during the past week. Since AIDS patients
left untreated will experience continued declines in health and possibly death within six months,
our estimated labor supply responses are underestimates of the impact of treatment on the
treated. It is important to note that due to the clinical effectiveness and life-saving nature of
ARV therapy, randomized evaluations of treatment interventions are not feasible on ethical
grounds. Thus, the results here represent the best available method of studying the impact of
treatment. However, we also calculate an upper bound of the impact of treatment on the treated
by assuming that patients would be too sick to work (or even dead) without treatment. Clinical
evidence on the evolution of untreated HIV disease suggests that this may be a reasonable
assumption, and that the upper bound estimate is close to the ‘true’ impact of treatment on the
treated. The upper bound impact of treatment is very large: labor force participation for those
initiating therapy in Round 1 increases by 85 percentage points and hours worked increases by
26 hours per week relative to what would have happened if AIDS had progressed untreated.
Given this effect on patients’ labor supply, treatment can have spillover benefits within
the household. However, an analysis of how ARV therapy influences the labor supply of treated
patients’ household members is complicated, as the effects are theoretically ambiguous. On the
one hand, the increase in a patient’s labor supply has an income effect that allows other
household members to work less. On the other hand, the improvement in the patient’s health
reduces the care-taking and housework burden on family members, thereby having a time
endowment effect that allows for more work and leisure. We find that the labor supply of
younger boys and women in patients’ households declines after the initiation of ARV therapy.
This suggests that intrahousehold decisions about time allocation are influenced by the provision
of treatment, and that the welfare of some household members beyond the patient may increase
considerably as a result. The effects on child labor are particularly important since they suggest
potential schooling impacts from treatment.
This paper is organized as follows: in Section 2, we provide a brief overview of the key
stages of HIV infection and the role of ARV therapy in treating infected individuals. We then
discuss our survey data in Section 3. Section 4 uses medical data from the HIV clinic where this

3

study was conducted to show that measurable dimensions of patient health improve after
initiation of treatment. We discuss our strategy for estimating the response in treated patients’
labor supply in Section 5 and present the results in Section 6. In Section 7, we examine the labor
supply of children and adults living with ARV recipients. Section 8 concludes and discusses the
policy implications of this research.

2. Background on HIV/AIDS and Antiretroviral Therapy
The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) affects the health of individuals and eventually
causes acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) because it destroys white blood cells that
are essential to the immune system. In sub-Saharan Africa, which is home to 25 million of the
nearly 40 million people living with HIV/AIDS, most HIV transmission among adults occurs
through sexual intercourse between men and women (UNAIDS, 2004). Soon after transmission,
infected individuals enter a clinical latent period of many years during which health status
declines gradually and few symptoms are experienced. Median time from seroconversion to
AIDS in east Africa is estimated to be 9.4 years (Morgan et al., 2002).6 During this latency
period, most HIV-positive individuals are unaware of their status and physically capable of
performing all normal activities.
Over time, almost all HIV-infected individuals will experience a weakening of the
immune system and progress to developing AIDS. This later stage is very often associated with
substantial weight loss (wasting) and opportunistic infections such as P. carinii pneumonia,
Kaposi’s sarcoma, and tuberculosis. In resource-poor settings, absent treatment with ARV
therapy, death usually occurs within one year after progression to AIDS. One study in Uganda
reports a median survival time of 9.2 months (Morgan et al., 2002) and another study in Brazil
reports a median survival time of 5.1 months (Chequer et al., 1992). Opportunistic infections are
generally the cause of death in AIDS cases.

6

Conversion to HIV-positive serology normally occurs 4-10 weeks after transmission. The duration of the clinical
latent period has been found to vary considerably, depending upon the mode of transmission and age at transmission
(Collaborative Group on AIDS Incubation and HIV Survival including the CASCADE EU Concerted Action, 2000).
In developing countries, limited access to health care and greater burden of other infectious diseases may expedite
the progression of HIV.

4

Highly active antiretroviral therapy7 has been proven to reduce the likelihood of
opportunistic infections and prolong the life of HIV-infected individuals. As we discuss in
Section 4, individuals are considered eligible for ARV therapy just before they progress to AIDS
or if they already show symptoms of AIDS. Numerous studies in various countries and patient
populations have reported positive results. Since placebo-controlled randomized trials of ARV
therapy are ethically infeasible, these studies are either observational cohort studies or
randomized trials which compare among regimens composed of different antiretroviral
medications. In Haiti, patients had weight gain and improved functional capacity within one
year after the initiation of ARVs (Koenig, Leandre, and Farmer, 2004). In Brazil, median
survival time after developing AIDS rose to 58 months with ARV therapy (Marins et al., 2003).
Section 4 summarizes the results obtained by Wools-Kaloustian et al. (2004) for the treatment
program we collaborated with in Kenya and documents similar health impacts for patients in our
sample.
The price of ARV therapy in developing countries is an important issue in discussions
about treatment provision. First-line ARV regimens used to cost more than $10,000 per patient
per year. However, since 2000 widespread generic production of medicines has reduced these
prices significantly, to as low as $140 (negotiated by the Clinton Foundation for treatment in
selected countries) in 2004 (Gutierrez et al., 2004; Campaign for Access to Essential Medicines,
2005). Further declines may be possible with greater generic competition and bulk purchasing
agreements.

3. Sampling Strategy and Survey Data
The socio-economic data used in this paper come from a household survey we conducted in
Kosirai Division, a rural region near the town of Eldoret, in western Kenya (see Figure 1).8 The
Division has an area of 76 square miles and a population of 35,383 individuals living in 6,643
households (Central Bureau of Statistics, 1999). Households are scattered across more than 100
villages where crop farming and animal husbandry are the primary economic activities and
maize is the major crop.
7

In this paper, we use the terms “ARV therapy” and “ARV treatment” to refer to highly active antiretroviral therapy
(HAART), which was introduced in 1996. HAART always consists of three antiretroviral medications, with a
common first-line regimen of nevirapine, stavudine, and lamivudine. Generic medications that combine 3
medications in 1 pill (such as Triomune) have recently become available.
8
Kenya has an estimated 1.5 million HIV-infected adults and a prevalence rate of 6.7 percent (UNAIDS 2004).

5

The largest health care provider in the survey area is the Mosoriot Rural Health Training
Center, a government health center that offers primary care services. The health center also
contains a clinic that provides free medical care (including ARV therapy) to HIV-positive
patients. This rural HIV clinic (one of the first in sub-Saharan Africa) was opened in November
2001 by the Academic Model for the Prevention and Treatment of HIV/AIDS (AMPATH).9
Following increased funding since late-2003, the Mosoriot HIV clinic has experienced rapid
growth: the number of patients has risen from about 150 in early-2003 to 2,149 in September
2005 (communication with AMPATH), with many patients coming from outside Kosirai
Division.10 During this period, adequate funding has been available to treat all patients who are
eligible for ARV therapy.11,12
We implemented two rounds of a comprehensive socio-economic survey between March
2004 and March 2005, with an interval of roughly six months between rounds.13 The survey
sample contains two different groups of households: 503 households chosen randomly from a
census of households in Kosirai Division without an AMPATH patient (random sample
households) and 266 households with at least one AMPATH patient (HIV households).14 The
HIV sample includes all non-pregnant patients who entered the Mosoriot HIV clinic before April
2004 and resided in Kosirai Division. To obtain a larger sample size, we also conducted in-clinic
interviews with non-pregnant patients who entered the clinic before April but resided outside
Kosirai Division and too far away from the clinic to be visited at home. In total, 81 percent of all
survey households were visited at home. Refusal rates for in-clinic interviews with AMPATH
patients were less than 1 percent.

9

AMPATH is a collaboration between the Indiana University School of Medicine and the Moi University Faculty of
Health Sciences (Kenya). Descriptions of AMPATH’s work in western Kenya can be found in Mamlin, Kimaiyo,
Nyandiko, and Tierney (2004) and Cohen et al. (2005).
10
For reasons including limited funding, AMPATH’s clinic had very few patients during its first two years of
operation. Early entrants to the HIV clinic had often progressed to AIDS at the time of their first visit. In contrast,
later entrants are often in early stages of the disease and do not require ARV therapy.
11
The availability of funding and criteria for treating patients has evolved over time. Before 2003, funding for
purchasing ARVs was limited and treatment could only be provided to the sickest few patients.
12
As of June 2005, ARV therapy was being provided to an estimated 38,000 out of 250,000 Kenyans needing
treatment (WHO 2005). About 17 percent of the Kenyans receiving ARV therapy are patients at one of AMPATH’s
eight urban and rural clinics (based on figure of 6,375 patients receiving ARV therapy as of June 2005).
13
Round 1 was between March and August 2004. Round 2 was between September 2004 and March 2005.
14
In the random sample, the HIV status of respondents is usually unknown, unless the respondent gives a self-report
of having gone for an HIV test and testing HIV-positive or HIV-negative.

6

Within the 266 HIV households, there are 320 individuals (including children) who are
HIV-positive and known to be receiving care at the Mosoriot HIV clinic.15 Using the AMPATH
identification numbers obtained from patients, we have established with the AMPATH Medical
Records System (AMRS) that 224 of the 320 patients (from 206 households) began receiving
ARV therapy sometime prior to the round 2 interview (we report the distribution of treatment
start dates in Section 4).16 The remaining HIV-positive patients in our sample were not eligible
for ARV therapy before round 2. Attrition of households and individuals between rounds is
minimal in the random sample, either due to refusal/relocation (7 out of 503 households) or
mortality (7 out of 3,009 individuals). In the HIV sample, a total of 26 patients attrite from the
sample between rounds (14 due to mortality and 12 due to loss to follow-up). In the analysis
below, we attempt to correct for bias that may be introduced by this attrition.
The survey focused on various issues and included questions about demographic
characteristics, health, agriculture, income and employment.17 Height and weight measurements
were made for children under the age of 5 years. Relevant outcomes such as asset sales and
purchases, child anthropometrics, school enrollment and attendance, income, employment, and
food consumption were recorded in each round to obtain longitudinal data.
Table 1 summarizes the main demographic characteristics of households in the random
sample and HIV sample during round 1. On average, households in the survey area have 6
members. HIV households tend to be smaller, with 5.4 members on average. There is a
significant difference in the sex and marital status of household heads and the orphan status of
children: HIV households are more likely to be headed by a woman who has lost her husband,
whereas random sample households are generally headed by a married man. HIV households

15

274 of these 320 HIV-positive individuals were interviewed; HIV-positive children of adult patients and HIVpositive spouses of in-clinic respondents were not interviewed. Included among these individuals are household
members of respondents who were reported to be HIV-positive. The figure of 320 HIV-positive individuals
excludes 15 household members who were reported to be HIV-positive by the respondent but for whom no
AMPATH identification number was made available.
16
In this paper, we refer to the sample of ARV patients as the “ARV sample” and their households as “ARV
households.” There are 7 HIV-positive individuals whose AMPATH identification number cannot be found in the
AMRS. The ARV status of these patients is therefore unknown.
17
In the household visits, teams of male and female enumerators interviewed the household head and spouse as well
as a youth in the household. For in-clinic interviews, all information was obtained from the AMPATH patient.

7

also own significantly less land and livestock, which is one of several indications from the
survey that they are worse off than other households in the community.18

4. ARV Therapy and Patient Health
The AMRS contains longitudinal information on the health status of patients at AMPATH’s
eight HIV clinics in western Kenya. Before estimating how labor supply responds to ARV
therapy, we discuss evidence from the AMRS on the health response to treatment. We also
summarize relevant medical data for patients in our sample.
Since HIV enters and destroys T cells with the protein CD4 on their surface, the CD4+ T
cell count is an important indicator of disease progression among HIV-infected individuals.19
According to definitions of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), individuals
develop AIDS when they have one of several opportunistic infections or a CD4 count below
200/mm3. It is at this stage when functional capacity deteriorates and patients should begin ARV
therapy—according to WHO guidelines (WHO, 2002), ARV therapy should be administered for
all patients who have a CD4 count below 200/mm3 or an AIDS-indicating condition.20
Although most AMPATH patients receiving treatment come to the HIV clinics every
month, their CD4 count is monitored at intervals of roughly six months.21 However, since the
weight and height of patients are recorded at almost every clinic visit, the AMRS contains more
frequent measures of the body mass index (weight/height2, BMI), a well-known indicator of
short-term health and nutritional status (WHO, 1995). Wools-Kaloustian et al. (2005) have
recently analyzed the CD4 counts and weights of all non-pregnant adult patients treated with
ARV therapy at AMPATH’s HIV clinics (including Mosoriot).

They find significant

improvements in both outcomes, including a rapid increase in CD4 count during the first six
weeks of ARV therapy followed by slower increases thereafter.22 In addition, the CD4 count at
the time of treatment initiation (baseline) is found to be a significant predictor of subsequent

18

For further details on the household survey and the first round data, see Goldstein, Graff Zivin, Nangami, and
Thirumurthy (2005).
19
Most uninfected individuals have a CD4+ T cell count of 800 to 1000 per mm3 of blood.
20
These guidelines have been followed by many treatment programs in developing countries, including AMPATH.
See Grubb, Perriens, and Schwartlander (2003) and Mamlin et al. (2004).
21
The CD4 count was obtained less frequently and at unspecified intervals prior to 2004, when funding was more
limited.
22
The reported gains in CD4 count are similar to those found by studies in Senegal and South Africa (Laurent et al.
2002; Coetzee et al. 2004).

8

survival: the risk of death for patients with baseline CD4 count below 100/mm3 is three times
higher than for patients with baseline CD4 count above 100/mm3.
Using AMRS data for adult ARV recipients at only the Mosoriot HIV clinic, Figure 2
shows the dramatic improvement in health status experienced by patients. We plot the median
CD4 count in cells of ten weeks before and after initiation of treatment.23 The response of CD4
count is highly non-linear: at 10-20 weeks, the median CD4 count has risen to levels at which
patients are not considered to have AIDS. Subsequent changes are smaller and less consistent.
Figure 3 shows a similar non-linear relationship for the BMI.
These figures do not correct for mortality bias, which will lead to an overestimate of
trends in CD4 count and BMI. Since mortality rates are low in the period immediately following
treatment, the short-term trends should be relatively accurate. But mortality is more of a concern
for long-term trends. Since patients who die are generally those who presented with advanced
disease and very low baseline CD4 counts, the long-term trends displayed here will be more
applicable to patients who begin treatment before becoming very sick.
Since patients do not have a CD4 count or BMI in every cell of Figures 2 and 3, the
cross-sectional relationship shown may differ from the average experience of individual patients.
Thus, restricting the analysis to all post-treatment outcomes for the 191 adult ARV recipients
who appear in both rounds of our survey, the following equation is estimated using patient fixed
effects:
H it = α i + β 1 ARVi ,t −3 + β 2 ARVi ,t −6 + β 3 ARVi ,t −9 + β 4 ARVi ,t −12 + ε it .
i

(1)

is a patient fixed effect, Hit is a measure of patient i’s health status (CD4 count or BMI) during

the appointment at time t, and ARVi,t- indicates whether or not patient i was receiving ARV
therapy months prior to the appointment when health status is measured.24,25 The omitted time
period is the span of three months after initiation of treatment. Table 2 reports results from
estimating equation 1 with CD4 and BMI as the dependent variables (columns 1 and 2,
23

Due to the low frequency at which CD4 count is measured, we chose a group size that is large enough to produce
a relatively smooth curve. When median CD4 counts are calculated for intervals of less than 10 weeks, the figure
looks similar. Likewise, a similar pattern is evident when mean CD4 count is calculated in each time interval.
24
Since there are very few patients with multiple measurements of CD4 counts during the pre-treatment period, it is
not possible to estimate the trajectory of CD4 count in this period with patient fixed effects. In cross-sectional
regressions of CD4 count on weeks before initiation of ARV therapy, however, there is a significant overall negative
trend in CD4 count prior to initiation (as shown in Figure 2).
25
Following Wools-Kaloustian et al. (2005) and other studies, if a CD4 count is not available at the time ARV
therapy is initiated, the baseline CD4 count is taken to be nearest available CD4 count in the 3 months before or 15
days after the time of initiation.

9

respectively). The increase in CD4 count during the first three to six months of ARV therapy is
substantial (127/mm3) and statistically significant. After six months of treatment, marginal
increases are smaller. For BMI (which is measured more frequently), we are able to estimate a
more continuous version of equation 1 with additional time intervals. Here again, the largest
increase occurs soon after initiation of treatment, but there are also significant increases in
subsequent months.26
Finally, for ARV recipients in our sample, in Table 3 we summarize the CD4 count and
BMI linked to three different points in time: baseline, round 1, and round 2.27 We also report the
number of days that patients in our sample had been receiving ARV therapy at the time of the
round 1 interview. While the average number of days is 172, we find substantial variation here:
19 percent had not yet initiated ARVs at the time of the round 1 interview, and 26 percent had
been on ARVs for fewer than 100 days. This means that due to the non-linear temporal response
of health status to ARV therapy, treated patients in our sample experienced varying amounts of
health improvement between the survey rounds. In the next section, we exploit this variation to
test for heterogeneous treatment responses in labor supply.

5. Estimation Strategy for Patients’ Labor Supply Response
We study three outcomes that measure an individual’s labor supply: an indicator of participation
in any economic activities during the past week, total hours worked in the past week, and total
income earned in the past month. For all household members older than 8 years, the survey
recorded this information in each round for three types of activities: wage and salaried jobs,
farming on the household’s owned or rented land, and non-farm self-employed work.
The first indication that ARV therapy influences labor supply is provided by Figures 4
and 5, which combines data from the two survey rounds and plots the relationship between adult
ARV recipients’ labor supply outcomes and time on treatment. The temporal pattern of labor
force participation rates (Figure 4) and weekly hours worked (Figure 5) closely resembles the
non-linear response of medical outcomes.

In this section, we discuss the main estimation

strategies used to test the hypothesis that ARV therapy results in increased labor supply.
26

The results are similar when equation 1 is estimated for the entire sample of adult ARV recipients in the Mosoriot
HIV clinic.
27
In constructing the CD4 and BMI for round 1 and round 2, we again use the nearest available measure within 3
months before and 15 days after the round 1 and round 2 interview date. This still results in several patients for
whom we cannot link a CD4 count and BMI to the interview date.

10

The motivation for our empirical work comes from the following reduced form equation,
which describes the temporal relationship between health and labor supply for ARV recipients:

Lit = α i + β 1 H it +

11

γ MONTH tτ +ε it ,

(2)

τ =1 τ

where Lit represents the labor supply of individual i at time t and

i

is a fixed effect for individual

i that captures the effects of time-invariant variables like demographic characteristics, schooling,
family background, as well as unobservables such as tastes. Hit is the health status of individual i
at time t, and a set of eleven month indicators serve as proxies for seasonality and other timevarying factors which influence labor supply. Estimation of equation 2 alone will produced
biased estimates of

1

since health is endogenous and likely to be measured with error. We

follow two strategies to examine the behavioral response to health that is suggested by equation
2. First, because ARV therapy generates a large improvement in health status, we estimate
reduced form equations that measure the response of labor supply to treatment. Second, we
estimate equation 2 by using the length of time on treatment as an instrumental variable for
health.
5.1 Reduced Form Estimation of the Response to Treatment
We identify the response to ARV therapy by examining changes in the treatment group’s labor
supply between rounds. Since labor supply is also influenced by several time-varying factors
such as seasonality in agriculture and aggregate health shocks (greater malaria burden in specific
months, for example), we include data from the random sample of adults to control for secular
trends in the survey area.

This strategy is similar to a difference-in-difference estimation

strategy in which the “comparison group” is the sample of adults from the random sample.28 We
thus estimate individual fixed effects regressions in which a time interaction for ARV recipients
measures the change in their labor supply. The first equation estimated is the following:

Lit = α i + β1 ( ARVi * ROUND 2t ) + β 2 ROUND 2t +

10

γ MONTH tτ +ε it .

(3)

τ =1 τ

Lit is the labor supply outcome of interest for individual i in time t (round 1 or 2),

i

is a fixed

effect for individual i, ARVi is an indicator variable equal to 1 if individual i is an ARV recipient,

28

This also resembles the estimation strategy used by Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan (1993). The authors use a
longitudinal dataset to estimate the temporal pattern in earnings losses of displaced workers. In their estimation
strategy, one reason why nondisplaced workers are used as a comparison group to displaced workers is that it is
important to control for macroeconomic factors that can cause changes in workers’ earnings.

11

and ROUND2t indicates whether the observation is from round 2.29 The round 2 indicator and
ten month-of-interview indicator variables (with one month from each round omitted to avoid
singularity) together control for monthly fluctuations in labor supply in the entire community.
The coefficient of interest,

1,

measures the change in labor supply (between rounds) due to

ARV therapy, after controlling for time-varying factors.
Equation 3 assumes that the response to treatment will be identical for all ARV recipients
in the sample. However, as noted earlier, patients have been on treatment for varying lengths of
time during round 1 and the largest health improvement occurs for those just beginning
treatment. Thus, we also estimate an equation in which ARV recipients who had been on ARVs
for less than 100 days in round 1 (represented by ARV<100,i) can experience a different change in
labor supply than ARV recipients who had been on ARVs for more than 100 days in round 1
(ARV>100,i). This distinction divides the ARV sample into two roughly equal samples, and
distinguishes between patients experiencing large and small health improvements.

The

following modified version of equation 3 is thus estimated:
Lit = α i + β1 ( ARV <100,i * ROUND 2t ) + β 2 ( ARV>100,i * ROUND 2t )

+ β 3 ROUND 2 t +

10

τ =1

γ τ MONTH tτ +ε it .

(4)

While the division of ARV recipients into two samples will indicate whether there are
heterogeneous responses during the post-treatment period, the use of 100 days as a cutoff for
determining long and short duration of ARV therapy can be seen as arbitrary. To trace the
response of labor supply more carefully, we construct indicators of whether or not the patient has
been receiving ARVs for incremental durations of three months. The random sample is again
used as a “comparison” group in this analysis to control for seasonality. Specifically, the
following equation is estimated:
Lit = α i + β1 ARVi ,t − 3 + β 2 ARVi ,t − 6 + β3 ARVi ,t −9 + β 4 ARVi ,t −12 + β 5 ARVi ,t −15

+ β 6 ROUND 2 t +

10

γ MONTH tτ +ε it .

τ =1 τ

(5)

ARVi,t- indicates whether or not individual i was receiving ARVs months prior to the interview
at time t (round 1 or round 2). In this specification, the outcomes of patients are compared at
different times in the post-treatment period, with the baseline period of three months before and
29

This equation could also be approximated without individual fixed effects as:

Lit = α + β1 ARVi + β 2 ( ARVi * ROUND 2t ) + β 3 ROUND 2t +

10

γ MONTH tτ +ε it ,

τ =1 τ

in which the individual fixed effect is assumed to vary systematically by ARV status.

12

(3'
)

after treatment serving as the omitted time period.30 Data from adults in the random sample
again control for monthly fluctuations in labor supply.
The individual fixed effects in all of the equations estimated will allow for ARV
recipients to have different levels of labor supply than other adults in the sample. While time
varying factors such as seasonality are dealt with using the time indicators, the key assumption in
identifying the treatment response is that the ARV recipients in the sample do not have
characteristics that influence the change in labor supply between rounds. The only form of
heterogeneity in the treatment response allowed by the equations above is in the temporal pattern
of the response. In the analysis below, however, we also test for heterogeneity in the treatment
response according to the gender of the ARV recipient.
5.2 Instrumental Variables Estimation

The equations above provide reduced form estimates of the labor supply response to treatment
and suggest a strong linkage between health and labor supply. To show that treatment influences
labor supply through the mechanism of improvements in health status and to further establish the
link between health and labor supply, we take advantage of AMRS data on patients’ medical
outcomes. Restricting the analysis to only ARV recipients, we estimate a slightly modified
version of equation 2:
Lit = α i + β 1 H it + β 2 ROUND2 t +
where

i

10

γ MONTH tτ +ε it ,

(6a)

τ =1 τ

is a fixed effect for patient i and Hit is the health status (CD4 count or BMI) of patient i

at time t (round 1 or round 2).31
The endogeneity of health can result in biased estimates of the coefficient

1,

even with

individual fixed effects. Moreover, random measurement error in the health status variables will
cause attenuation bias in the coefficient

1.

To overcome these estimation problems, we employ

an instrumental variables (IV) strategy to estimate the effect of health status, based only on
variation generated by the availability of ARV therapy. In particular, we instrument for health
status using indicator variables of treatment duration (similar to equation 1):
H it = α i + β 1 ARVi ,t −3 + β 2 ARVi ,t −6 + β 3 ARVi ,t −9 + β 4 ARVi ,t −12 + ε it
30

Note that the definition of the indicator variables implies that the coefficients are marginal effects of completing
additional months of ARV therapy. That is, patients who have completed 6-9 months of ARV therapy will
experience an average increase in labor supply (relative to baseline) that is equal to 1+ 2.
31
A drawback of this strategy is that it does not use information from the random sample to fully control for timevarying factors that determine labor supply.

13

+ β 5 ROUND2 t +

10

γ MONTH tτ +ε it .

τ =1 τ

(6b)

One shortcoming of this IV approach is that the number of observations is limited by the
availability of CD4 counts and BMI measures at the time of the round 1 and round 2
interviews.32 To overcome this problem, we use the point estimates of the coefficients in
equation 6b to construct predicted values of the CD4 count and BMI for all patients in the ARV
sample. These predicted values are based solely on the relationship between health outcomes
and treatment duration. Using these predicted values, we then estimate equation 6a for a larger
sample than is possible under the IV strategy.

6. Results for Adult Patients’ Labor Supply Response
We restrict the analysis of labor supply to individuals between the ages of 18 and 65 who appear
in both rounds.33 Table 4 presents summary statistics from the first round for 191 adult ARV
recipients and 1,286 adults in the random sample.34 Crop farming is the primary economic
activity of households in the survey area, as 84 percent of the random sample adults and 60
percent of the HIV sample reported having worked on their farm in the past 7 days. A nontrivial fraction of adults also report working off-farm for a wage (17-18%) or in a household
enterprise (16-17%).
Table 4 shows that in the first round, ARV recipients are significantly more likely to not
have done any work in the past week (24 percent of ARV recipients compared to 11 percent of
adults in the random sample). ARV recipients also work significantly fewer hours than other
adults, unconditional on participating in the labor force (24 hours compared to 35 hours) and
conditional on participating (32 hours compared to 40 hours).

Table 5 summarizes the

respondents’ reported reasons for not having worked in the past week. Only 8 percent of
unemployed adults in the random sample report being sick as the reason for not having worked.
In contrast, being sick is the reported reason for 85 percent of unemployed adult ARV recipients.

32

As noted earlier, measurements of CD4 counts at the HIV clinic are not done with enough frequency for us to
obtain measures near the round 1 and round 2 interview for all patients in our sample.
33
Adults who move into the household between rounds are thus excluded, as are adults who move out permanently.
A small number of observations are dropped because the respondent did not know how many hours a specific
household member worked in the past week. The role of attrition due to mortality is discussed in Section 6.4.
34
Household members of the ARV recipients are not included in any of this analysis. To the extent that labor
supply of these adult household members is affected by the changing health status of the ARV recipient, pooling
them with adults in the random sample may produce biased results.

14

The data also show it is important that our analysis control for seasonal variations in
labor supply. Figure 6 plots the median of weekly hours worked in each month of the survey.
There is a peak during the maize planting and harvesting seasons—the months of April and May
(in round 1) and November through January (in round 2), respectively.35

Because of the

seasonality in agriculture and the reliance of most people on self-employed farming, we do not
focus on outcomes such as income or wages. Instead, much of our analysis below examines
individuals’ labor force participation and hours worked.
To contrast adults from the HIV clinic and random sample over time, we estimate labor
supply regressions in each round separately. Table 6 reports the results for the indicator of labor
force participation and Table 7 reports results for hours worked in the past week. Both tables
show that age has a non-linear effect on labor supply and women have significantly lower levels
of labor supply. We find that ARV recipients have significantly lower labor force participation
rates than adults in the random sample (column 1). Also noteworthy, however, is that ARV
recipients in early stages of ARV treatment are the worst off group in round 1 (column 2). Their
labor force participation rate is 28 percentage points lower than comparable adults in the random
sample, whereas the participation rate of ARV recipients in later stages of treatment (more than
100 days) is only 7.9 percentage points lower. In the second round, while ARV recipients are
still significantly less likely to be economically active, the differences are smaller than in the first
round. This is particularly true for ARV recipients who had just initiated treatment prior to
round 1.
6.1 Individual Fixed Effects Results

In the regression results just presented, omitted characteristics of ARV patients could influence
labor supply and thereby produce biased estimates of the ARV coefficient. To mitigate such
identification problems, we estimate labor supply regressions with individuals fixed effects, as
discussed in Section 5.1. Table 8 reports results from estimating equations 3 and 4. We find that
ARV therapy leads to a large and statistically significant increase in labor supply. Adults
receiving treatment are 8.2 percentage points more likely to participate in the labor force in
35

Due to the seasonality of agriculture, income tends to be concentrated after harvest periods. We find that
household income shows a sharp peak during December and January, when most households sell maize after the
annual harvest (not reported). It is therefore not very meaningful to compare changes in income between rounds.
Furthermore, since agricultural income is generally reported for only the household head and spouse, it is not
surprising that income differences in Table 4 between ARV recipients and all other adults are not statistically
significant.

15

round 2 than in round 1 (column 1), controlling for time-varying factors that are evident in both
the ARV sample and the random sample. Hours worked in the past week also increases by 3.7
hours (column 2). Relative to the levels in round 1, this implies a large increase in labor supply
for the entire sample of ARV patients: labor force participation rates rise by almost 11 percent,
and weekly hours worked rise by 15 percent.
Columns 3 and 4 of Table 8 show an even stronger result. The individuals with the
largest increase in labor supply between the two rounds are patients who began receiving ARVs
less than 100 days prior to the round 1 interview.

The magnitude of these increases is

substantial: over the course of six months, patients who have just initiated ARV therapy show a
16.7 percentage point increase in labor force participation rates and an 6.9 hour increase in hours
worked. Given round 1 levels of 65.1 percent and 20.3 hours for this group, the estimates imply
a 26 percent increase in participation rates and a 34 percent increase in hours worked. In
contrast, the other ARV recipients in our sample show no statistically significant improvement in
outcomes between rounds.36
Since the regressions of hours worked includes individuals not participating in the labor
force during round 1, the results do not clearly establish whether the labor supply response is
also applicable to patients already working in round 1. In column 5 of Table 8, we present
results for a restricted sample that includes only those adults who were participating in the labor
force during round 1. Since we do not find a statistically significant effect on hours worked, the
results suggest that the main treatment response occurs by allowing patients who were previously
too sick and incapable of working to enter the labor force.
The results for ARV patients who have just initiated treatment are noteworthy since these
patients are particularly sick before starting treatment and at the time of the round 1 interview.
As discussed earlier, in the absence of treatment these patients have a small probability of living
for another six months, until the round 2 interview date. In this sense, the estimated labor supply
responses are likely to be underestimates of the impact of treatment on the treated.37

36

Comparisons of socio-economic characteristics of the two groups of ARV recipients show that there are no
statistically significant differences in the gender, education, and household characteristics such as household size
and ownership of land and livestock (results not reported). This implies that such characteristics cannot explain the
large difference in the labor supply changes of the two groups.
37
Because HIV/AIDS is a chronic disease, the typical problem of mean reversion in the outcome variable
(Ashenfelter and Card, 1985) does not apply here and therefore does not bias the estimates.

16

Table 9 reports the results from estimating equation 5, with a more complete set of
indicators to identify the temporal response to treatment. As columns 1 and 2 show, the increase
in labor supply is largest during the first three to six months of ARV therapy, with subsequent
increases being smaller and statistically insignificant. The point estimates show that after three
to six months on treatment, there is a 12.3 percentage point increase in labor force participation
rates and a 6.9 hour increase in weekly hours worked. Compared to levels of labor supply for
patients who are within three months before or after initiation of ARV therapy (the omitted
group), this implies a 20 percent increase in the labor force participation rate and a 35 percent
increase in hours worked.38
6.2 Effects of Health Status on Labor Supply

To estimate the impact of health improvements (as measured by the CD4 count and BMI) on
labor supply in the context of AIDS, we estimate equation 6a using the instrumental variables
strategy outlined in Section 5.2. We restrict the analysis to only ARV recipients since measures
of CD4 count and BMI are obtained from the AMRS and therefore not available for adults in the
random sample. Table 10a reports results from the first stage regression (equation 6b) in which
indicators of treatment duration are used as instruments for CD4 count and BMI at the time of
the two rounds of the survey. As earlier, we find that there is a large and statistically significant
increase in both measures of health status after three months of treatment.

However, the

inclusion of a round 2 indicator and month-of-measurement indicators (as well as the restriction
to health measures obtained only at the time of round 1 and round 2) makes the point estimates
different from those in Table 2.
Table 10b shows that both CD4 count and BMI have a positive impact on the labor force
participation rate. In column 1, we report the results from an individual fixed effects regression
without instrumenting for CD4 count. Random measurement error in CD4 count most likely
explains why we find a small and insignificant point estimate. After instrumenting for CD4
count (column 2), the point estimate increases considerably but remains insignificant, probably
due to the limited number of patients with a CD4 count measure in both round 1 and round 2. In
fact, expanding our sample size by using CD4 count predictions for the entire sample of ARV
recipients (column 3) yields significant estimates that are similar in magnitude to the IV
38

For adult ARV recipients in our sample who have been on ARV therapy for fewer than three months, the labor
force participation rate is 61.56 percent and the average weekly hours worked is 19.68.

17

estimates with individual fixed effects. A 100 point increase in CD4 count is associated with an
increase in labor force participation rates of 22 percentage points. These estimates are consistent
with the reduced form estimates of the labor supply response, which show that patients
experience a 20 percent increase in labor force participation in the first three to six months of
treatment. The results for BMI (columns 4-6) are broadly consistent with those reported for the
CD4 count.
6.3 Decomposition of the Impact of ARV Therapy

The composition of adults’ economic activities exhibits considerable variation according to
gender and seasons of the year. Moreover, households with ARV patients are less likely to be
engaged in farming for reasons that may have to do with their past health history and lower
landholdings. In light of such differences, this section examines changes in labor supply more
carefully, focusing on the composition of economic activities and differences between men and
women.
Composition of Activities
Instead of using an aggregate measure of labor supply, we estimate equation 4 separately for
each of the three different types of labor supply that were recorded in the survey: wage labor,
farm labor, non-farm business labor. Data from adults in the random sample are used to control
for seasonal patterns in each of the labor activities. The results in columns 1-3 of Table 11
indicate that much of the increase in labor supply occurs in non-farm business work. Patients are
more likely to begin doing wage labor and farm labor as well, but these increases are not
statistically significant.
The results for monthly income from each of the three labor activities (columns 4-6 in
Table 11) underscore the significance of seasonality in interpreting income patterns. While farm
income is known to be highly seasonal, non-farm business income is less variable during the
year. As a result, business income should be more responsive to short-term changes in health
status. Indeed, we find there is a statistically significant increase in non-farm business income
for ARV recipients in the early stages of treatment (column 6 in Table 11).
Labor Supply Impacts by Gender
The survey data from each round show that men are more likely to be engaged in income-earning
activities in the past week than women. In results not reported, we also find gender differences
for some components of labor supply: women are much less likely to work for a wage, but

18

equally likely to work in a non-farm business. Thus it is possible that the impacts of ARV
therapy on labor supply will differ according to the gender of the patient. To test for such
differences, we estimate equation 4 separately for men and women.
As columns 1 and 2 of Table 12 show, for male patients there is no significant increase in
labor force participation rates but a large and significant increase in weekly hours worked. This
suggests that patients already working prior to initiation of treatment are the ones who increase
their labor supply after treatment. For women, there is a large and significant increase of 20.8
percentage points in the labor force participation rate, but no significant increase in weekly hours
worked. Combining these results with baseline observations provides an intuitive explanation
for this pattern. Since men have high levels of baseline participation to begin with, most of their
response to improved health takes the form of additional hours worked. For women, baseline
participation is low, so labor supply is the natural margin for change.
6.4 Controlling for Attrition in the HIV Sample

Since our analysis so far has excluded ARV recipients who do not appear in our sample for both
rounds, the estimated labor supply responses apply only to those ARV patients who survived and
continued to come to the clinic until round 2. The average response to ARV therapy for all
treated patients is therefore likely to be smaller.
In the HIV sample, mortality of patients and loss to follow-up are the main reasons for
attrition of individuals (and households) between the two rounds of the survey. For patients who
were interviewed at the HIV clinic in round 1 but subsequently died or were lost to follow-up,
we were unable to obtain any household information in round 2. Patients who are lost to followup can be assumed to have either stopped seeking HIV care altogether, transferred to another
clinic, or died. Of the 320 HIV-positive AMPATH patients in our sample from round 1, 14
patients are known to have died before round 2, and another 12 patients were not found in round
2 (nearly all were lost to follow-up by AMPATH).
A conservative approach to estimating the average labor supply response to ARV therapy
is to analyze the panel data while treating all attrited patients as individuals with zero labor
supply in round 2.39 Since it is unlikely that all missing patients are dead, this strategy provides

39

This strategy will also give us a lower bound on the labor supply impact because some of attrited patients may still
be alive and getting treatment at some other AMPATH clinic, or they might have missed several appointments and
therefore not have been in the round 2 sample.

19

us with a lower bound on the labor supply response.40 As Table 13 shows, we find that even
with the inclusion of zero labor supply for patients who are deceased or lost to follow-up, there is
a statistically significant increase in labor supply. All patients who had been on ARVs for fewer
than 100 days in round 1 experienced an 11.7 percentage point increase in labor force
participation rates and a 5.9 hour increase in weekly hours worked (compare to 16.7 percentage
points and 6.9 hours in Table 9, for the analysis without attrited patients).
The reduced effectiveness of ARV therapy when it is initiated in very sick patients has
been widely reported in the literature (Hogg et al., 2001; Wools-Kaloustian et al., 2005). Rates
of progression to death are considerably higher when baseline CD4 counts are below 100/mm3,
thus compromising the short-term effectiveness of ARV therapy. In fact, for the 9 patients in our
sample who died between round 1 and 2 and for whom a baseline CD4 count can be obtained in
the AMRS, the average baseline CD4 count was 35.5/mm3 (and the average round 1 CD4 count
was 67/mm3). This influences how to interpret the role of mortality in our analysis. While our
earlier results should be recognized as being valid only for patients who survive, the broader
relevance of these results is heightened if HIV-positive patients begin receiving treatment before
having advanced to late stages of the disease (as will be the case when ARV treatment programs
are scaled-up and become more established).
6.5 Estimating the Impact of Treatment on the Treated

As noted earlier, there is strong evidence that the health of individuals who have developed
AIDS will decline rapidly without treatment, generally leading to death in less than one year
(Morgan et al., 2002; Chequer et al., 1992). Since the baseline CD4 counts of patients in our
sample are well below 200/mm3 (the level associated with developing AIDS), very few of the
patients would be working (or even alive) in round 2 without treatment.

While this

counterfactual case is not observed by us, we can provide an upper bound of the impact of
treatment on the treated by assuming that without treatment, all patients in the sample would not
be participating in the labor force in round 2.

While the ‘true’ impact of treatment lies

somewhere between our earlier estimates and the upper bound figures presented in this section,
the clinical evidence on disease progression suggests that the true impact will be only slightly
below the upper bound. Comparing the observed treated group to this constructed control group,
40

Attrited patients who have not died may be receiving care at other clinics. Alternatively, patients from far away
may have missed several appointments and therefore not been included in the round 2 sample.

20

we can obtain difference-in-difference estimates of the treatment impact. For patients who are
just beginning treatment in round 1, the impact of ARV therapy on labor supply is very large: an
increase in the labor force participation rate of 85.4 percentage points, and an increase in hours
worked of 26 hours (not reported). This represents a 5-fold increase in participation and a 4-fold
increase in hours worked relative to our earlier estimates of the labor supply response to
treatment (in Table 8).

Moreover, this suggests that our earlier results are considerable

underestimates of the true impact of treatment on the treated. While our earlier results are useful
in understanding how labor supply responds to health improvements among previously sick
AIDS patients, the fact that they are underestimates of the treatment impact should be borne in
mind when evaluating treatment interventions. In the concluding section of the paper, we use
this estimated impact of treatment on the treated to provide a rough comparison of the costs and
benefits of ARV therapy.

7. Response of Family Labor Supply to ARV Therapy
Intrahousehold reallocation of time is known to be an important consumption smoothing
mechanism of households in low-income countries. In settings with imperfect financial markets,
households often adjust the time spent by children and adults in activities such as schooling,
housework, and employment in response to sudden changes in income and health. These
adjustments can have differential effects according to the age and gender of household members.
For example, Jacoby and Skoufias (1997) find that children’s school attendance in rural India is
responsive to seasonal fluctuations in income.

Others have examined time allocation to

household activities and labor market activities in response to income and health shocks, finding
that responses depend on the gender of household members (Pitt and Rosenzweig, 1990; Kochar,
1995). Such intrahousehold decisions about time allocation suggest that ARV therapy can also
influence the labor supply of patients’ family members. Having estimated a large increase in
patients’ labor supply due to ARV therapy (own-effect of health), this section examines the labor
supply of children and adults in the patients’ households (cross-effects of health).
There is a large theoretical and empirical literature on the role of income and substitution
effects in individual time allocation decisions (beginning with Becker, 1965) and family labor
supply (beginning with Ashenfelter and Heckman, 1974). A simple model of family labor
supply can be used to illustrate the role of ARV therapy in influencing labor supply within the

21

family. Two effects are likely to be especially relevant. First, as the treated patient begins to
work, there is an income effect for the family, which allows other household members to work
less. Second, as the treated patient’s health improves, the time demanded for taking care of the
patient or performing additional housework is diminished, thereby expanding other household
members’ time endowment for work and leisure. The net effect on labor supply of household
members is therefore theoretically ambiguous.
To estimate the net effect of treatment on child and adult labor in ARV households, we
examine longitudinal data on the labor supply of non-patient individuals in these households and
use data from random sample households to control for monthly fluctuations in labor supply.
Specifically, the following equation is estimated with longitudinal data for non-patient
individuals in ARV households and others in the random sample:
Liht = α i + β1 ( ARV HH <100, h * ROUND 2t ) + β 2 ( ARVHH >100, h * ROUND 2t )

+ β 3 ROUND2 t +

10

γ MONTH tτ +ε iht .

τ =1 τ

(7)

Liht is the labor supply measure of interest for individual i in household h at time t (round 1 or 2),
i

is a fixed effect for individual i, ROUND2t indicates whether the observation is from round 2,

and ARVHH<100,h and ARVHH>100,h are indicator variables equal to 1 if household h has an adult
who was receiving ARV therapy for less than or more than 100 days, respectively, at the time of
the round 1 interview. We estimate equation 7 separately for men, women, and young and old
boys and girls.
Table 14 presents summary statistics from the first round for children and adults in ARV
households and random sample households (excluding HIV-positive patients at the Mosoriot
HIV clinic). A large fraction of boys and girls in the random sample had engaged in some
income-generating activities during the past week (78 percent and 74 percent, respectively),
although the mean number of hours is considerably lower than for adults.41

In general,

household members of ARV patients are equally or less likely to be working than others in the
random sample, although the cross-sectional comparisons can be misleading given differences in
wealth, education, and other characteristics between the two groups of households.
Table 15 contains results from estimating equation 7. Panel A reports results for the
labor supply of men and women. As column 1 shows, soon after initiation of ARV treatment for
41

The mean hours worked by children are low enough to be consistent with regular school attendance, which will be
examined in subsequent work.

22

adult patients, there is a negative but insignificant change in the labor force participation rates of
adults in the patients’ households. For women in these households, the decline in labor supply is
greater—14.6 percentage points—and almost significant at the 10 percent level (column 3). This
suggests that, at the margin, women are more likely to compensate for changes in the AIDS
patients’ labor supply by entering and exiting the labor force. As men are generally more likely
to remain in the labor force at all times, we do not observe any significant adjustment of their
labor force participation decisions (column 2).
Panels B and C of Table 15 contain results for the labor supply of boys and girls,
respectively. We examine responses among young and old children (8-12 years and 12-18 years)
separately to capture potentially heterogeneous responses among them. The results indicate that
there is a large decline in the labor supply of young boys after an adult household member begins
to receive ARV therapy, but no significant change for older boys. Girls do not significantly
change their labor supply, regardless of age. Column 2 of the Panel B shows that the decline in
labor supply for younger boys in ARV households occurs gradually. In households with an adult
who began receiving treatment shortly before round 1, the change is labor force participation
rates of young boys is -15.9 percentage points but not statistically significant. However, in
households with adults who began receiving treatment more than 100 days before round 1, labor
force participation rates decline by 22.7 percentage points and this coefficient is statistically
significant. Hours worked also declines significantly for younger boys, with a reduction of 8.6
hours in households exposed to treatment for more than 100 days at the time of round 1. Given
that boys in ARV households have an average labor force participation rate of 74 percent and
average weekly hours worked of 12.3 hours in round 1, the estimates in Table 14 imply
extremely large declines in labor supply between round 1 and round 2.
All else equal, young children in Kenya are less likely to be engaged in economic
activities since there are no official school fees for primary school and the productivity of young
children is likely to be low. Older boys, on the other hand, are considerably more likely to be
engaged in economic activities and less likely to be enrolled in school. This may explain why, at
the margin, young boys are more likely to be pulled into the labor force when adults become
very sick and then pulled out of the labor force when the adults become healthy.42 Given that
42

Future research will examine whether there are corresponding changes in school enrollment or attendance for
boys.

23

girls allocate fewer hours to income-generating activities, ARV therapy is more likely to exert its
influence on their time allocation in the domain of housework (not measured in labor supply),
especially since adult women in the household appear to be adjusting their labor supply in
response to disease and treatment.
Another way of examining the influence of ARV therapy on household members’ labor
supply is to take advantage of variation in the number of treated adults in ARV households. In
nine percent of the ARV households, there are two adult patients receiving ARV therapy. These
households are much more heavily burdened by AIDS in the months prior to round 1 and
experience larger health improvements between rounds than households with only one ARV
patient. Thus, we examine whether there are larger changes in labor supply in these ARV
household by estimating the following equation:
Liht = α i + β1 ( ARV HH 2 patient , h * ROUND 2t ) + β 2 ( ARVHH1 patient , h * ROUND 2t )

+ β 3 ROUND2 t +

10

γ MONTH tτ +ε iht .

τ =1 τ

(8)

The indicator variable ARVHH2patient,h equals 1 if household h has more than one adult ARV
recipients and 0 otherwise. Likewise, ARVHH1patient,h equals 1 if household h has only one adult
ARV recipient.
The results from estimating equation 8 are presented in Table 16. In panel A, we find
that in double-patient households there is a significant decline over time in the number of hours
worked by both men and women. In single-patient households, however, hours worked by adults
do not change significantly. Panel B shows that for boys of all ages, there is a much larger
decline in labor supply in the double-patient households than the single-patient households
(columns 1 and 2). For young boys in double-patient households, the decline in labor force
participation is 79.2 percentage points, as compared to 14.3 percentage points in single-patient
households (column 2). Hours worked by young boys in all ARV households also declines
significantly, but the responses are again larger in double-patient households (column 5). For
older boys in double-patient households, there is a significant decline in both labor force
participation and hours worked (columns 3 and 6). Older boys in single-patient households,
however, do not experience any significant change in labor supply. Finally, Panel C shows that
the labor supply of girls does not change significantly in both types of households.
These results suggest that in households with multiple adults who have developed AIDS,
other household members (particularly boys and adults) are forced to do considerably more
24

market work before treatment is initiated, possibly in the place of the patient. Upon initiation of
treatment, these household members are able to work less. More generally, in contrast to the
large positive changes in the labor supply of treated patients, the results in this section always
show zero or negative changes in the labor supply of patients’ household members. These
results suggest that the income effect from the higher labor supply of treated patients is larger
than the time release effect that comes from the treated patient no longer being sick, thus
allowing some household members to decrease their labor supply. An important implication of
these results is that ARV therapy influences outcomes of not just the treated patient but also
individuals living with the patient.

8. Conclusion
This paper provides the first evidence on how ARV therapy affects the labor supply of AIDS
patients and their household members. Using data from our household survey, we find that
patients have significantly higher labor supply within six months after the initiation of treatment.
This response is also large, with patients showing a 20 percent increase in labor force
participation rates and a 35 percent increase in hours worked. Importantly, these results suggest
that with treatment, the labor supply of AIDS patients can recover rapidly from periods of severe
illness. We also find evidence that the labor supply of patients’ family members (particularly
young boys and women) declines after initiation of treatment.

This suggests that family

members may have been compensating for previously sick patients’ diminished labor supply and
that they too experience some of the benefits from treatment. Taken together, the results
providence evidence that ARV therapy has significant non-health benefits and influences a range
of intrahousehold decisions.
In the absence of data from a randomly chosen sample of AIDS patients who do not
receive ARV therapy, it will be difficult to estimate the full impact of treatment on the treated.
Given ethical constraints to implementing such an evaluation, our strategy represents the best
available method of estimating the response to treatment while controlling for important
confounding factors (such as seasonality in labor supply). Moreover, especially for the case of
patients’ labor supply, we argue that our results are underestimates of the treatment effect
because there is considerable medical evidence that untreated AIDS patients will die very

25

quickly. Our conclusion that treatment results in significantly higher labor supply would only be
strengthened if the analysis were based on comparison to a true counterfactual group.
Although the number of HIV-positive individuals requiring ARV therapy will continue to
grow during the next decade, treatment programs have yet to be scaled up in many countries.
The results presented in this paper are therefore highly relevant for evaluating such interventions.
In fact, the labor supply response we have estimated can provide an important first step in
analyzing the costs and benefits of ARV therapy. Median daily wage rates for all adults doing
casual wage labor in our sample are 100 Kenya shillings, or about $1.50. Since this daily wage
is associated with six hours of work, the hourly wage is about 17 Kenya shillings, or $0.25.
Using our base case estimates of a 6.9 hour average increase in weekly hours worked, treatment
can thus be expected to yield an average private benefit of $86 per year (assuming individual
work 50 weeks per year). This estimate is based on the labor supply impact relative to pretreatment labor supply. However, for the purpose of a cost-benefit evaluation, it is essential to
calculate benefits using the impact of treatment on the treated—based on a comparison to
counterfactual outcomes rather than pre-treatment outcomes. Using our upper bound of the
treatment impact (calculated by assuming that patients would have zero labor supply within six
months if treatment were not provided), the average increase in weekly hours worked is 26
hours.

In this case the average private benefit of treatment is $325 per year, which is

considerably larger than the $150 annual per-patient cost of first-line ARV drugs. In addition to
ARV drug expenditure, however, there are several additional costs associated with providing
treatment, such as the costs of lab tests, treatment for opportunistic infections, clinic space, and
medical personnel. AMPATH estimates these costs to be approximately $200 per-patient. Thus,
the total private benefit from providing treatment is roughly equal to the total cost of drugs and
other associated expenses.
However, these are only the simple private wage gains for the patients. If we assume
parents are altruistic, the fact that children reduce their labor supply suggests that the benefit of
treatment is larger than the income from the parent’s increased labor supply. In line with the
severity of HIV/AIDS, these results underscore the importance of maintaining a broad
perspective when analyzing the costs and benefits of ARV treatment. The social benefits from
treatment are likely to exceed the private benefits, but valuing them is a non-trivial challenge.
As a result, one purpose of the rough cost-benefit calculations presented above is to show that

26

the private benefits from treatment alone can cover the costs of treatment. Indeed, the large labor
supply responses we find here are not the only socio-economic outcomes likely to be affected by
ARV therapy. Both HIV/AIDS and treatment can be expected to influence many other aspects
of life within patients’ households. Additional analysis of our data suggests important effects on
the nutritional status of children living with ARV recipients. Schooling and other forms of
investment may also be affected, especially since we find that the incidence of child labor
decreases due to treatment. All of these responses will contribute to an understanding of the
ultimate welfare consequences of ARV therapy. A detailed analysis of these other non-health
outcomes is part of our future research agenda.

27

References

Ashenfelter, Orley and James Heckman. 1974. “The Estimation of Income and Substitution
Effects in a Model of Family Labor Supply.” Econometrica 42:73-86.
Ashenfelter, Orley and David Card. 1985. “Using the Longitudinal Structure of Earnings to
Estimate the Effect of Training Programs.” Review of Economics and Statistics 67:648-660.
Becker, Gary. 1965. “A Theory of the Allocation of Time.” Economic Journal 75:493-517.
Beegle, Kathleen. 2005. “Labor Effects of Adult Mortality in Tanzanian Households.”
Economic Development and Cultural Change 53.
Bell, Clive S., Shanta Devarajan, and Hans Gersbach. 2003. “Long Run Economic Costs of
AIDS: Theory and Application to South Africa.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
Series No. 3152.
Binswanger, Hans P. 2003. “Willingness to Pay for AIDS Treatment: Myths and Realities.”
Lancet 362:1152-1153.
Campaign for Access to Essential Medicines. 2005. Untangling the Web of Price Reductions: A
Pricing Guide for the Purchase of ARVs for Developing Countries. 8th edition (June 2005).
Geneva: Medecins Sans Frontieres. Available at http://www.accessmed-msf.org
Central Bureau of Statistics. 1999. Kenya 1999 Population and Housing Census. Nairobi:
Central Bureau of Statistics.
Chequer, P. et al. 1992. “Determinants of Survival in Adult Brazilian AIDS Patients, 19821989.” AIDS 6:483-487.
Clinton, William J. 2003. “Turning the Tide on the AIDS Pandemic.” New England Journal of
Medicine 348:1800:1802.
Coetzee, David et al. 2004. “Outcomes After Two Years of Providing Antiretroviral Treatment
in Khayelitsha, South Africa.” AIDS 18:887-895.
Cohen, Jonathan et al. 2004. “Addressing the Educational Void During the Antiretroviral
Therapy Rollout,” AIDS 18:2105-2106.
Collaborative Group on AIDS Incubation and HIV Survival including the CASCADE EU
Concerted Action. 2000. “Time from HIV-1 seroconversion to AIDS and death before
widespread use of highly-active antiretroviral therapy: a collaborative re-analysis.” Lancet
355:1131-1137.
Fox, Matthew P. et al. 2004. “The impact of HIV/AIDS on Labour Productivity in Kenya.”
Tropical Medicine and International Health 9:318-324.

28

Goldstein, Markus, Joshua Graff Zivin, Mabel Nangami, and Harsha Thirumurthy. 2005.
“HIV/AIDS and Socio-economic Status: Preliminary Evidence from Western Kenya.” Mimeo,
Yale University.
Grubb, Ian, Jos Perriens, and Bernhard Schwartlander. 2003. A Public Health Approach to
Antiretroviral Treatment: Overcoming Constraints. Geneva: World Health Organization.
Gutierrez, Juan Pablo et al. 2004. “Achieving the WHO/UNAIDS Antiretroviral Treatment 3 by
5 Goal: What Will it Cost?” Lancet 364:63-64.
Hammer, Scott M. et al. 1997. “A Controlled Trial of Two Nucleoside Analogues plus
Indinavir in Persons with Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection and CD4 Cell Counts of
200 per Cubic Millimeter or Less.” New England Journal of Medicine 337:725-733.
Hogg, Robert S. et al. 1998. “Improved Survival Among HIV-Infected Individuals Following
Initiation of Antiretroviral Therapy.” Journal of the American Medical Association 279:450-454
Hogg, Robert S. et al. 2001. “Rates of Disease Progression by Baseline CD4 Cell Count and
Viral Load After Initiating Triple-drug Therapy.” Journal of the American Medical Association
286:2568-2577.
Jacoby, Hanan G. and Emmanuel Skoufias. 1997. “Risk, Financial Markets, and Human
Capital in a Developing Country.” Review of Economic Studies 64:311-335.
Jacobson, Louis S., Robert J. LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan. 1993. “Earnings Losses of
Displaced Workers.” American Economic Review 83:685-709.
Kochar, Anjini. 1995. “Explaining Household Vulnerability to Idiosyncratic Income Shocks.”
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 85:159-164.
Koenig, Serena P., Fernet Leandre, and Paul E. Farmer. 2004. “Scaling-up HIV Treatment
Programmes in Resource-limited Settings: The Rural Haiti Experience.” AIDS 18:S21-S25.
Kremer, Michael. 2002. “Pharmaceuticals in the Developing World.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 16:67-90.
Laurent, Christian et al. 2002. “The Senegalese Government’s Highly Active Antiretroviral
Therapy Initiative: An 18-month Follow-up Study.” AIDS 16:1363-1370.
Mamlin, Joe, Sylvester Kimaiyo, Winstone Nyandiko, and William Tierney. 2004. Academic
Institutions Linking Access to Treatment and Prevention: Case Study. Geneva: World Health
Organization.
Marins, Jose Ricardo P. et al. 2003. “Dramatic Improvement in Survival Among Adult
Brazilian AIDS patients.” AIDS 17:1675-1682.

29

Marseille, Elliot, Paul B. Hofmann, and James G. Kahn. 2002. “HIV Prevention Before
HAART in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Lancet 359:1851-1856.
Morgan, Dilys et al. 2002. “HIV-1 Infection in Rural Africa: Is There a Difference in Median
Time to AIDS and Survival Compared With That in Industrialized Countries?” AIDS 16:597603.
Pitt, Mark and Mark Rosenzweig. 1990. “Estimating the Intrahousehold Incidence of Illness:
Child Health and Gender-Inequality in the Allocation of Time.” International Economic Review
31:969-989.
Palella, Frank J. et al. 1998. “Declining Morbidity and Mortality Among Patients with
Advanced Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection.” New England Journal of Medicine
338:853-860.
Ruger, Jennifer Prah, Dean Jamison, and David Bloom. 2001. “Health and the Economy.” In
Michael Merson, Robert Black, and Anne Mills (eds.), International Public Health: Diseases,
Programs, Systems and Policies. Gaithersburg, Maryland: Aspen Publishers, Inc.
Strauss, John and Duncan Thomas. 1998. “Health, Nutrition, and Economic Development.”
Journal of Economic Literature 36:766-817.
Thomas, Duncan and Elizabeth Frankenberg. 2002. “Health, Nutrition and Prosperity: A
Microeconomic Perspective.” Bulletin of the World Health Organization 80:106-113.
UNAIDS. 2004. Report on the Global AIDS Epidemic.
Programme on the HIV/AIDS.

Geneva: Joint United Nations

Wools-Kaloustian, Kara, et al. 2005. “Viability and Effectiveness of Large-scale HIV
Treatment Initiatives in Sub-Saharan Africa: Experience from Western Kenya.” AIDS
forthcoming.
World Health Organization. 1995. “Physical status: the use and interpretation of anthropometry.
Report of a WHO Expert Committee.” World Health Organization Technical Report Series
854:1-452.
World Health Organization. 2002. Scaling Up Antiretroviral Therapy in Resource-Limited
Settings: Guidelines for a Public Health Approach. Geneva: World Health Organization.
World Health Organization. 2003. Treating 3 Million by 2005: Making it Happen: The WHO
Strategy. Geneva: World Health Organization.
World Health Organization. 2005. Progress on Global Access to HIV Antiretroviral Therapy:
An Update on “3 by 5.” Geneva: World Health Organization.

30

Yamano, Takashi and T.S. Jayne. 2004. “Measuring the impacts of working-age adult mortality
on small-scale farm households in Kenya.” World Development 32:91-119.
Young, Alwyn. 2005. “The gift of the dying: the tragedy of AIDS and the Wealth of Future
African Generations.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120:423-466.

31

Table 1. Comparison of Random Sample and HIV Sample
Random Sample
Mean Std. Error
Number of households

503

HIV Sample
Mean Std. Dev.
266

Household Structure (includes members entering between round 1 and round 2)
Household size
6.04
0.13
5.45
Average age of household members
24.93
0.57
23.78
Number of under-18 children
3.32
0.10
3.02
Percent of under-18 children who are orphans
6.9%
29.4%
Number of extended family members in household 0.92
0.06
1.14
Number of children living outside household
1.92
0.12
1.58
Household Head Characteristics
Male household head
Single household head
Age of household head

81%
22%
47.94

0.69

54%
50%
44.84

0.15
0.56
0.11
0.09
0.15

0.0038
0.1794
0.0597
0.0000
0.0432
0.0949

0.850

0.0000
0.0000
0.0062

Asset Ownership (round 1)
Quantity of land owned (acres)
6.82
0.47
4.72
0.55
Percent landless
13.2%
27.2%
Value of land owned (shillings)
650,237
44,416
571,555
73,285
Value of livestock owned (shillings)
61,401
4,194
36,571
4,148
Notes: P-value from t-test for equality of means for Random sample and HIV sample.

32

P-value

0.0054
0.0000
0.3316
0.0001

Table 2. Impact of ARV therapy on CD4 count and BMI
Dependent variable:

(1)
CD4
F.E.

(2)
BMI
F.E.

On ARVs at least 1 month

0.38
(2.65)***
On ARVs at least 2 months
0.18
(1.18)
On ARVs at least 3 months
126.72
-0.10
(10.60)***
(0.61)
On ARVs at least 4 months
0.21
(1.29)
On ARVs at least 5 months
0.06
(0.43)
On ARVs at least 6 months
-9.11
0.45
(0.55)
(3.25)***
On ARVs at least 7 months
0.29
(2.46)**
On ARVs at least 8 months
0.30
(2.14)**
On ARVs at least 9 months
41.34
0.53
(2.31)**
(3.71)***
On ARVs at least 10 months
0.14
(0.93)
On ARVs at least 11 months
0.22
(1.45)
On ARVs at least 12 months
7.45
0.27
(0.37)
(1.79)*
On ARVs at least 15 months
38.71
0.08
(1.31)
(0.50)
On ARVs at least 18 months
0.42
0.09
(0.01)
(0.52)
Constant
87.48
19.53
(12.56)*** (275.93)***
Observations
458
2678
Number of patients
183
164
R-squared
0.52
0.34
Individual fixed effects (F.E.) regressions for ARV patients in our sample.
CD4 is the CD4+ T-cell count
BMI is the body mass index
Data Source: AMPATH Medical Records System
Notes: Absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses (* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%). Dependent variables are the CD4+ T cell count (column 1) and body mass index (column 2). Regressions
include patient fixed effects (F.E.).

33

Table 3. CD4 and BMI Data for Patients in ARV Sample
CD4+ T-cell count
Body mass index (BMI)

CD4 count at ARV initiation

Days on ARVs

Round 1
Mean Median Std. Dev.
N=132
174.0
147.5
137.6
N=161
20.5
20.1
3.4

Mean Median
N=144
95.1
67

N=191
171.5

Std. Dev.

126

Mean
N=93
244.6
N=161
21.7

Round 2
Median Std. Dev.
217

148.0

0.0003

21.3

3.4

0.0015

5 %-tile 95 %-tile

110.7

6

206

207.7

-51

707

Number of days patients were on ARVs at Round 1 interview
True baseline (<=0 days)
36
19%
0-100 days
50
26%
>100 days
105
54%
Notes: P-value from t-test for equality of means for random sample and HIV sample.

Table 4. Summary Statistics for Adult Labor Supply in Round 1
Adults (ages 18-65 years)
(appearing in both rounds)

Age
Female
Years of School Completed
Completed Primary

Random sample
Mean Std Dev
N=1286
33.1
49%
8.1
57%

ARV Recipients
Mean Std Dev
N=191
36.8
76%
7.8
49%

12.8
3.3

8.7
3.2

P-value

0.00
0.00
0.21
0.05

Activities in past 7 days
Worked for a wage
17%
18%
0.56
Worked on own farm
84%
60%
0.00
Worked in own business
16%
17%
0.56
No work done in the past week
11%
24%
0.00
Total hours worked in past 7 days
Unconditional on working
35.3
26.2
24.3
23.0
0.00
Conditional on working
39.6
24.6
32.0
21.2
0.00
Total income in past month
1996
4547
1761
4265
0.51
Notes: P-value from t-test for equality of means for random sample and ARV recipients.

34

P-value

Table 5. Reported Reasons for Not Working in the Past Week (Round 1 only)
Random sample

ARV patients

1286
10.8%

191
24.1%

(N=138)
8%
54%
12%
7%
18%

(N=46)
85%
0%
0%
7%
9%

Sample size (adults 18-65 years)
Did no work in past week
Reported reason for not working in past week
Sick
Student
Housework
No work available
Other

Table 6. Labor Force Participation in Round 1 and 2
Dependent variable:

Age
Age-squared / 100
Female
Completed Primary School
HIV+ patients not on ARVs
Patients on ARVs

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Labor Force Participation in Past Week
Round 1
Round 2
0.033
(7.44)***
-0.040
(6.86)***
-0.066
(3.88)***
-0.039
(2.22)**
-0.132
(2.90)***
-0.170
(5.81)***

0.033
(7.59)***
-0.040
(7.02)***
-0.067
(3.96)***
-0.041
(2.34)**
-0.133
(2.94)***

0.035
(8.35)***
-0.040
(7.37)***
-0.041
(2.58)**
-0.056
(3.37)***
-0.095
(2.24)**
-0.096
(3.74)***

0.035
(8.38)***
-0.040
(7.41)***
-0.042
(2.59)***
-0.057
(3.40)***
-0.096
(2.26)**

-0.282
-0.128
(7.26)***
(3.61)***
Patients on ARVs > 100 days in Round 1
-0.079
-0.071
(2.21)**
(2.18)**
Constant
0.364
0.359
0.274
0.273
(4.70)*** (4.66)*** (3.54)*** (3.53)***
Observations
1535
1535
1535
1535
R-squared
0.08
0.09
0.09
0.09
Notes: Absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses (* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%). Dependent variable indicates whether the individual was engaged in any income-generating activity in the past
week. OLS regression results are reported and month-of-interview indicator variables are included.
Patients on ARVs < 100 days in Round 1

35

Table 7. Hours Worked in Past week, in Round 1 and 2
Dependent variable:

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Total Hours worked in past week
Round 1
Round 2

Age

3.431
3.450
3.427
3.431
(10.55)*** (10.62)*** (11.68)*** (11.69)***
Age-squared / 100
-4.056
-4.082
-4.020
-4.026
(9.54)*** (9.61)*** (10.62)*** (10.62)***
Female
-13.672
-13.712
-11.586
-11.594
(10.90)*** (10.94)*** (10.35)*** (10.36)***
Completed Primary School
-0.579
-0.646
1.137
1.121
(0.44)
(0.49)
(0.97)
(0.96)
HIV+ patients not on ARVs
-10.246
-10.284
-7.830
-7.846
(3.05)*** (3.07)***
(2.65)*** (2.66)***
Patients on ARVs
-11.596
-8.928
(5.36)***
(4.98)***
Patients on ARVs < 100 days in Round 1
-15.785
-9.916
(5.47)***
(4.00)***
Patients on ARVs > 100 days in Round 1
-8.200
-8.133
(3.08)***
(3.60)***
Constant
-19.579
-19.782
-31.448
-31.487
(3.42)*** (3.46)***
(5.84)*** (5.85)***
Observations
1535
1535
1535
1535
R-squared
0.18
0.18
0.16
0.17
Notes: Absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses (* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%). Dependent variable is total number of hours devoted to income-generating activities in the past week. OLS
regression results are reported and month-of-interview indicator variables are included.

36

Table 8. Impact of ARV Therapy on Labor Supply, with Individual Fixed Effects
Dependent Variable:

Round 2 * Patient on ARVs

(1)
LFP

0.082
(2.58)***
Round 2 * Patient on ARVs < 100 days in Round 1

(2)
(3)
Hours
LFP
Individual F.E.

(4)
Hours

(5)
Hours
F.E.

3.651
(1.65)*

0.167
6.934
3.328
(3.89)*** (2.31)**
(0.93)
Round 2 * Patient on ARVs > 100 days in Round 1
0.013
0.992
-0.025
(0.33)
(0.36)
(0.01)
Constant
0.878
35.863
0.878
35.871
41.971
(35.90)*** (21.05)*** (36.00)*** (21.07)***
(23.25)***
Observations
3070
3070
3070
3070
2668
Number of adults
1535
1535
1535
1535
1334
R-squared
0.03
0.05
0.03
0.06
0.10
Notes: Absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses (* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%). Dependent variable LFP indicates whether the individual was engaged in any income-generating activity in
the past week and Hours is total number of hours devoted to income-generating activities in the past week.
Regressions include individual fixed effects (F.E.), round 2 indicator variable, and month-of-interview indicator
variables. Sample includes observations for 70 HIV-positive patients not receiving ARV therapy. There is a
separate explanatory variable for this group (interacted with round 2).

37

Table 9. Estimating the Timepath of Labor Supply after Initiation of ARVs
Dependent Variable:

(1)
(2)
LFP
Hours
Individual F.E.

3 months prior to ARV initiation

0.082
-1.746
(0.45)
(0.14)
On ARVs at least 3 mths ago
0.123
6.867
(2.16)**
(1.72)*
On ARVs at least 6 mths ago
0.087
0.047
(1.34)
(0.01)
On ARVs at least 9 mths ago
-0.022
-0.630
(0.30)
(0.13)
On ARVs at least 12 mths ago
-0.078
-3.411
(0.92)
(0.58)
On ARVs at least 15 mths ago
0.107
3.820
(1.16)
(0.59)
Constant
0.870
35.574
(35.07)*** (20.52)***
Observations
3070
3070
Number of adults
1535
1535
R-squared
0.04
0.06
Notes: Absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses (* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%). Dependent variable LFP indicates whether the individual was engaged in any income-generating activity in
the past week and Hours is total number of hours devoted to income-generating activities in the past week.
Regressions include individual fixed effects (F.E.), round 2 indicator variable, and month-of-interview indicator
variables. Sample includes observations for 70 HIV-positive patients not receiving ARV therapy. There is a
separate explanatory variable for this group (interacted with round 2).

38

Table 10a. First stage regression: effect of ARVs on health status
(1)
CD4

Dependent variable:

(2)
BMI
F.E.

On ARVs at least 3 mths ago

71.4
2.085
(1.96)* (4.72)***
On ARVs at least 6 mths ago
17.8
0.611
(0.56)
(1.43)
On ARVs at least 9 mths ago
-61.0
0.306
(1.36)
(0.62)
On ARVs at least 12 mths ago
47.3
0.174
(0.94)
(0.31)
On ARVs at least 15 mths ago
33.7
0.252
(0.70)
(0.38)
Constant
193.8
18.873
(2.28)** (14.61)***
Observations
225
323
Number of patients
156
164
R-squared
0.63
0.42
Notes: Absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses (* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%). Dependent variables are the CD4 count and body mass index (BMI). All regressions include patient fixed
effects (F.E.), round 2 indicator variable and month-of-interview indicator variables. Sample is restricted to ARV
recipients in the sample for whom a CD4 count or BMI is available in the AMRS at the time of the round 1 or round
2 interview.

Table 10b. Effect of CD4 and BMI on labor force participation for ARV Recipients
(1)
Dependent variable:
F.E.
CD4/100

0.002
(0.03)

(2)

(3)
(4)
(5)
Labor force participation in past week
IV, F.E. Pred, F.E.
F.E.
IV, F.E.
0.225
(1.57)

(6)
Pred, F.E.

0.220
(2.59)**

BMI

0.062
0.097
0.157
(3.75)*** (2.61)*** (2.79)***
Constant
0.871
0.463
0.426
-0.384
-1.074
-2.373
(1.84)*
(0.82)
(1.55)
(0.89)
(1.36)
(2.04)**
Observations
225
225
382
323
323
382
Number of patients
156
156
191
164
164
191
R-squared
0.16
.05
0.12
0.18
.05
0.12
Notes: Absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses (* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%). Dependent variable indicates whether the individual was engaged in any income-generating activity in the past
week. CD4 represents the CD4 count and BMI is the body mass index. All regressions include round 2 indicator
variable and month-of-interview indicator variables. Columns 1 and 4 include individual fixed effects (F.E.).
Columns 2 and 4 estimate instrumental variables specification with individual fixed effects (IV, FE) in which first
stage regression estimates impact of ARV therapy on CD4 and BMI (Table 10a) for patients with available CD4 and
BMI. Columns 3 and 4 based on CD4 and BMI that is constructed for all ARV recipients in the sample using the
coefficients from estimating first stage regression (Pred, FE).

39

Table 11. Impact of ARV Therapy on Components of Labor Supply
Dependent variable:

(1)
(2)
(3)
Labor force participation (past wk.)
Wage
Farm
Business
Individual F.E.

(1)
(2)
(3)
Income earned (past mth.)
Wage
Farm
Business
Individual F.E.

Round 2 * Patient on ARVs < 100 days in Round 1

0.050
0.061
0.178
-137.520 -1,249.349
(1.24)
(1.14)
(3.88)***
(0.32)
(0.68)
Round 2 * Patient on ARVs > 100 days in Round 1
0.006
-0.004
-0.007
-145.807
82.836
(0.15)
(0.07)
(0.17)
(0.37)
(0.05)
Constant
0.161
0.833
0.189
906.534 -1,085.488
(6.94)*** (26.76)*** (7.14)***
(3.69)***
(1.03)
Observations
2959
2959
2959
2959
2959
Number of adults
1528
1528
1528
1528
1528
R-squared
0.02
0.02
0.03
0.01
0.01
Notes: Absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses (* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%). Dependent variable Labor force participation indicates whether the individual was engaged in specific
income-generating activity (wage, farm, or business) in the past week and Income earned is total income earned
from specific income income-generating activity (wage, farm, or business) in the past month. Regressions include
individual fixed effects (F.E.), round 2 indicator variable, and month-of-interview indicator variables. Sample
includes observations for 70 HIV-positive patients not receiving ARV therapy. There is a separate explanatory
variable for this group (interacted with round 2)

Table 12. Impact of ARV Therapy for Men and Women
(1)
LFP

Dependent variable:

(2)
Hours

(3)
LFP

Men

(4)
Hours
Women

Individual F.E.
Round 2 * Patient on ARVs < 100 days in Round 1

0.049
12.795
0.208
3.927
(0.69)
(2.11)**
(3.66)***
(1.15)
Round 2 * Patient on ARVs > 100 days in Round 1
0.030
3.978
0.010
-1.378
(0.42)
(0.66)
(0.20)
(0.45)
Constant
0.901
44.109
0.851
29.338
(27.56)*** (16.04)*** (23.08)*** (13.30)***
Observations
1430
1430
1640
1640
820
820
Number of adults
715
715
R-squared
0.02
0.08
0.06
0.04
Notes: Absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses (* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%). Dependent variable LFP indicates whether the individual was engaged in any income-generating activity in
the past week and Hours is total number of hours devoted to income-generating activities in the past week.
Regressions include individual fixed effects (F.E.), round 2 indicator variable, and month-of-interview indicator
variables. Sample includes observations for 70 HIV-positive patients not receiving ARV therapy. There is a
separate explanatory variable for this group (interacted with round 2).

40

663.071
(2.00)**
166.732
(0.53)
583.004
(3.04)***
2959
1528
0.02

Table 13. Impact of ARV Therapy With Attritors in the ARV Sample
(1)
LFP

(2)
(3)
(4)
Hours
LFP
Hours
Individual F.E.
deceased
deceased & lost to FUP

Dependent variable:
Sample includes:
Round 2 * Patient on ARVs < 100 days in Round 1

0.146
6.487
0.117
5.891
(3.38)*** (2.20)**
(2.76)*** (2.05)**
Round 2 * Patient on ARVs > 100 days in Round 1
-0.007
0.687
-0.005
0.759
(0.19)
(0.25)
(0.12)
(0.28)
Constant
0.875
35.675
0.871
35.489
(35.01)*** (20.87)*** (34.26)*** (20.69)***
Observations
3096
3096
3120
3120
Number of adults
1548
1548
1560
1560
R-squared
0.03
0.05
0.02
0.05
Notes: Absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses (* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%). Dependent variable LFP indicates whether the individual was engaged in any income-generating activity in
the past week and Hours is total number of hours devoted to income-generating activities in the past week.
Regressions include individual fixed effects (F.E.), round 2 indicator variable, and month-of-interview indicator
variables. Sample includes observations for 70 HIV-positive patients not receiving ARV therapy. There is a
separate explanatory variable for this group (interacted with round 2).

Table 14. Summary Statistics for Labor Supply of Non-Patient Children and Adults
Random
Sample
Mean Std Dev

ARV
households
Mean Std Dev

Boys (8-18 years)
Worked in past week
Total hours worked in past 7 days

433
78%
14.8

15.9

152
74%
12.3

13.1

0.24
0.09

Girls (8-18 years)
Worked in past week
Total hours worked in past 7 days

347
74%
11.5

11.7

143
63%
9.0

13.1

0.02
0.04

Men (18-65 years)
Worked in past week
Total hours worked in past 7 days

649
92%
41.9

27.7

108
85%
26.8

27.1

0.01
0.00

P-value

Women (18-65 years)
622
125
Worked in past week
86%
82%
0.17
Total hours worked in past 7 days
29.0
22.9
20.7
18.5
0.00
Notes: P-value from t-test for equality of means for random sample and ARV recipients. Statistics for ARV
households exclude ARV recipients and other HIV-positive patients at the Mosoriot HIV clinic.

41

Table 15. Impact of ARV Therapy on Family Labor Supply
(1)

Dependent variable:
ARV hh (<100 days) * Rd. 2
ARV hh (>100 days) * Rd. 2
Constant
Observations
R-squared

Dependent variable:
ARV hh (<100 days) * Rd. 2
ARV hh (>100 days) * Rd. 2
Constant
Observations
R-squared

(2)
(3)
Panel A. Adults
LFP
All adults
Men
Women
-0.087
-0.030
-0.146
(1.25)
(0.34)
(1.59)
0.013
-0.082
0.085
(0.25)
(1.27)
(1.07)
0.924
0.990
0.855
(31.21)*** (25.83)*** (22.31)***
3107
1589
1518
0.67
0.69
0.67

(4)

Hours
All adults
Men
Women
2.020
5.498
-1.117
(0.57)
(1.09)
(0.26)
2.405
0.708
3.584
(0.70)
(0.13)
(0.91)
37.234
43.530
30.653
(16.57)*** (14.12)*** (11.94)***
3107
1589
1518
0.75
0.75
0.71

Panel B. Boys
LFP
All boys 8-12 years 12-18 years
-0.142
-0.159
-0.167
(1.46)
(1.13)
(1.40)
-0.108
-0.227
-0.056
(1.22)
(2.08)**
(0.49)
0.852
0.819
0.877
(14.99)*** (8.11)*** (15.44)***
1226
488
738
0.65
0.67
0.65

Hours
8-12 years 12-18 years
-3.785
-4.066
(1.36)
(1.05)
-8.644
-0.484
(3.16)***
(0.16)
16.705
22.301
(5.09)*** (9.17)***
488
738
0.70
0.69

All boys
-3.762
(1.41)
-3.458
(1.47)
20.080
(9.59)***
1226
0.69

(5)

(6)

Panel C. Girls
Dependent variable:
LFP
Hours
All girls 8-12 years 12-18 years
All girls 8-12 years 12-18 years
ARV hh (<100 days) * Rd. 2
0.005
0.103
-0.019
-0.988
0.105
-1.737
(0.05)
(0.75)
(0.17)
(0.39)
(0.03)
(0.54)
1.466
1.701
1.342
ARV hh (>100 days) * Rd. 2
0.020
-0.091
0.074
(0.18)
(0.53)
(0.61)
(0.59)
(0.58)
(0.43)
Constant
0.829
0.711
0.883
17.448
14.738
19.353
(10.96)*** (6.33)*** (10.12)***
(9.16)*** (4.51)*** (8.89)***
Observations
1068
386
682
1068
386
682
0.63
0.62
0.64
R-squared
0.64
0.70
0.64
Notes: Errors clustered at the household level for each round and robust t-statistics in parentheses (* significant at
10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%). Dependent variable LFP indicates whether the individual was
engaged in any income-generating activity in the past week and Hours is total number of hours devoted to incomegenerating activities in the past week. Regressions include individual fixed effects (F.E.), round 2 indicator variable,
and month-of-interview indicator variables. ARV recipients are excluded from analysis. ARV household indicators
equal 1 if there is an adult ARV recipient who received ARV therapy for <100 days or >100 in round 1.

42

Table 16. Impact of ARV Therapy on Family Labor Supply According to Disease Burden
(1)

Dependent variable:
HH with 2 ARV patients * Rd. 2
HH with 1 ARV patient * Rd. 2
Constant
Observations
R-squared

Dependent variable:
HH with 2 ARV patients * Rd. 2
HH with 1 ARV patient * Rd. 2
Constant
Observations
R-squared

(2)
(3)
Panel A. Adults
LFP
All adults
Men
Women
-0.037
-0.006
-0.092
(1.30)
(0.21)
(1.63)
-0.020
-0.064
0.007
(0.42)
(1.12)
(0.10)
0.923
0.990
0.848
(30.60)*** (25.99)*** (21.85)***
3107
1589
1518
0.67
0.69
0.66

(4)

Hours
All adults
Men
Women
-21.090
-20.140
-22.999
(2.86)***
(1.88)*
(5.45)***
2.869
3.969
1.760
(1.01)
(0.93)
(0.53)
37.122
43.383
30.474
(16.48)*** (14.05)*** (11.84)***
3107
1589
1518
0.75
0.75
0.71

Panel B. Boys
LFP
All boys 8-12 years 12-18 years
-0.404
-0.792
-0.267
(2.77)*** (3.44)***
(1.82)*
-0.082
-0.143
-0.075
(1.10)
(1.54)
(0.78)
0.850
0.833
0.877
(15.04)*** (8.36)*** (15.21)***
1226
488
738
0.65
0.68
0.65

Hours
8-12 years 12-18 years
-12.448
-16.717
(2.84)*** (3.19)***
-6.573
0.128
(2.71)***
(0.05)
16.989
22.136
(5.08)*** (9.32)***
488
738
0.70
0.70

All boys
-15.488
(3.55)***
-2.481
(1.24)
20.092
(9.65)***
1226
0.70

(5)

(6)

Panel C. Girls
Dependent variable:
LFP
Hours
All girls 8-12 years 12-18 years
All girls 8-12 years 12-18 years
HH with 2 ARV patients * Rd. 2
0.000
0.338
-0.085
-3.405
5.255
-5.393
(0.00)
(0.72)
(0.57)
(0.69)
(0.68)
(1.03)
0.622
0.660
0.591
HH with 1 ARV patient * Rd. 2
0.060
0.027
0.096
(0.75)
(0.21)
(1.09)
(0.29)
(0.25)
(0.22)
Constant
0.822
0.714
0.877
17.422
14.714
19.400
(10.88)*** (6.25)*** (10.02)***
(9.09)*** (4.49)*** (8.79)***
Observations
1068
386
682
1068
386
682
0.63
0.62
0.65
R-squared
0.64
0.70
0.64
Notes: Errors clustered at the household level for each round and robust t-statistics in parentheses (* significant at
10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%). Dependent variable LFP indicates whether the individual was
engaged in any income-generating activity in the past week and Hours is total number of hours devoted to incomegenerating activities in the past week. Regressions include individual fixed effects (F.E.), round 2 indicator variable,
and month-of-interview indicator variables. ARV recipients are excluded from analysis.

43

Figure 1. Map of Kenya

44

50

100

Median CD4 count
150
200

250

300

Figure 2. CD4 Count Before and After Initiation of ARV Therapy

-40

-30

-20

-10

0

10
20
30
40
50
Weeks Before/After ARV Initiation

60

70

80

90

80

90

Source: AMPATH Medical Records System for Mosoriot HIV Clinic.

19

20

Median BMI

21

22

Figure 3. BMI Before and After Initiation of ARV Therapy

-40

-30

-20

-10

0

10
20
30
40
50
Weeks Before/After ARV Initiation

60

70

Source: AMPATH Medical Records System for Mosoriot HIV Clinic.
45

.6

Fraction participating in labor force
.7
.8

.9

Figure 4. Labor Force Participation Rates Before and After ARV Therapy

-20

0

20
Weeks on ARVs

40

60

5

Median hours worked in past week
10
15
20
25

30

Figure 5. Weekly Hours Worked Before and After ARV Therapy

-20

0

20
Weeks on ARVs

46

40

60

Figure 6. Hours Worked in Past Week by Month of Interview (Men and Women)
1

40
30
20
10
0

Mean hours worked in past week

50

0

0

1

2 3

4

5 6

7

8 9 10 11 12

0

1 2

Month of interview
Graphs by Female indicator

47

3

4 5

6

7 8

9 10 11 12

