                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE SPATIAL MISMATCH HYPOTHESIS:
          ARE THERE TEENAGE JOBS MISSING IN THE GHETTO?




                         David T. Eliwood




                      Working Paper No. 1188




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            August 1983




The author is extremely grateful to Eric Seller for many very help-
ful suggestions and for his help in the preliminary analysis. Eric
Schlaikjer provided outstanding research assistance. I would also
like to thank Richard Freeman and John Kain. This research project
was funded in part by the Rockfeller Foundation and by the U.S.
Department of Labor to the National Bureau of Economic Research.
The research reported here is part of the NBER1s research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                            NBER Working Paper 11 1188
                                                             August 1983




                     The Spatial Mismatch Hypothesis:

               Are There Teenage Jobs Missing in the Ghetto?




                                   ABSTRACT


      This paper examines the hypothesis that the
                                                        extraordinarily high
 rates of unemployment among black youth can be linked to a geographic

mismatch between the residences of black
                                              youth and the jobs they might

occupy. Chicago's labor market is examined in detail. The
                                                                   paper reports
that black youth do in fact seem to live further from jobs than white

youth do. However, the differences are not great enough to generate

large differences in employment rates unless geographic search costs are

very high. To explore the possible impact the differences
                                                                  really do have,
a wide variety of models are examined and estimated.
                                                            These models uniformly
reject the hypothesis that a geographic mismatch is
                                                          a major cause for
black-white differences. Blacks who live near large concentrations

of jobs seem to fair only slightly better than those who live far from

such concentrations. And in areas where whites and blacks live in close

geographic proximity, the racial employment differences
                                                             remain very large.




                                      David T. Ellwood
                                      National Bureau of Economic Research
                                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                      Cambridge, MA 02138
 Introduction

      Urfmployment among black teenagers has reached astounding pro-

 portions. Half of all black teenagers who are out of school report

 themselves as looking for work but unable to find it. Another group

 of almost equal size say that they are neither working nor looking

 for work. Just 40 percent of the out—of--school black youth in this

 country have a job —— any job. To many observers, the ghetto is the

 first place to look for an explanation. Even the most casual glance

at the poorer sections of the nation's central cities reveals their

weak economic condition. It seems quite plausible that black teenagers

are trapped in blighted neighborhoods where the blue collar, retailing

and service jobs that teenagers can perform have largely vanished.

The result may be unemployment, frustration, alienation.

    This paper explores the so—called spatial mismatch hypothesis

as an explanation for the poor labor market experiences of young

blacks. At the core of the mismatch story is the spatial expansion

of hte American industrial cities. Wealthy families seeking less

congestion, better services, safer neighborhoods and a wide array

of other amenities have fled the central cities leaving behind the

poor, the old, the minorities. Industry, particularly manufacturing

and retail trade, has been drawn outward by related desires:   cheap

land, better transportation networks, superior environments,
                                       -2—




wealthy customers, and to some extent, skilled workers.         What

remains in the city are      hih-skill    white collar jobs and low—skill

blue collar workers. The fear is that the movement of people and

firms   has   left those least able to find and commute to employment

trapped far away from the areas where new jobs are opening up.          The

young black poor struggle in a weak secondary labor market.

        There are many formulations of the mismatch hypothesis.        Often

the   formulation     is affected by the author's desired policy prescrip-

tion. In      this   paper I hope to test whether spatially rearranging

jobs in one metropolitan area would significantly improve the pros-

ects of black        teenagers.   Logically, the question could be asked

in reverse: would        rearranging   the residences of black teenagers in

the metropolitan area improve their prospects? The problem with

the latter formulation is that it involves a large number of

changes. Ghetto dispersal would not only change Black employment

acessibi1ity, it would alter the social and educational environ-

ment of teenagers. Job rearrangement would have some of these

effects, but nothing like massive desegregation.

        It is also important to realize that the story being tested

here takes aggregate demand in the metropolitan area as fixed.

 The idealized experiment is not one where new jobs are created in

 the ghetto. That policy has two components. Aggregate demand in

 the city is increased and the spatial distribution of employment

 is altered. I want to test only the effects of the latter. The

 idealized experiment is one where jobs are taken from one neighbor

 hood and placed into another. It should be clear that whether or
                                — 3—




not the mismatch hypothesis proves to be valid, aggregate demand

 could influence teenage labor market performance.


     The paper begins by summarizing a theoretical model which explores

the necessary and sufficient conditions for labor market outcomes of

otherwise identical individuals to differ depending on their residential

location within a metropolitan area. The methodological insight offered

here is that by observing the behavior of existing workers, along with

general movement of population and industry, we can determine which

groups and neighborhoods are spatially disadvantaged. Then the labor

market and job patterns in one metropolitan area —— Chicago ——   are
explored in detail.

     The paper shows that:

     • Low skilled jobs have been leaving the city faster
        than low skilled workers. As a result there are now
        more low skilled city residents who work In the
        suburbs than vice versa.

    • Young and low skilled blacks in Chicago spend far
       more time getting to work on the average than com-
       parable whites.

    • Most workers, even young workers, work far outside
       any area that might reasonably be classified as a
       neighborhood.


 Blacks are being gradually disadvantaged by job movements in Chicago.

 At the same time the fact tha most workers labor far away from

 home hints at a more fluid labor market than might be envisioned by

a r..ismatch theory.

     Then to explore possible labor market impacts of differences

in local job accessibility, the relationship between job proximity

and labor market outcomes in Chicago's neighborhoods are examined

in detail. The findings include:
       • No measure of accessibility proves to have any predictive
          power in employment equations for young people. Black!
          white differences are wholly unaffected by their inclusion.

      .     When we allow for fixed neighborhood effects of any type,
            we still have no impact on this racial differential. Indeed,
            the data does not reject the hypothesis of their being no
            spatial neighborhood effects for employment at all:


       • Labor market outcomes for young blacks on the West Side ghetto
          are remarkeably similar to outcomes for those on the South
          Side, in spite of the dramatic differences in proximity to jobs.

          • Black and white teenagers who live in the same neighborhood
             fare just as differently as blacks and whitwho live across
             tO%T   from   each other!

          Thus we simultaneously understand the appeal of the mismatch

model and its failure.. Blacks really are being gradually disadvantaged

by   jc'5 movements.        However, the labor market is wide enough geographi—

caliv and fluid enough that at least by 1970, neighborhood job move-

ments could not be blamed for much of the poor performance of minori-

ties in Chicago. Most teenagers, black and white, don't work in

their neighborhoods, And in black areas where there are many jobs

for youth, white youngsters tend to fill them.

          This wrk does show that poverty and education have a very strong
                                                                they do for
influence on black teenage unemployment rates, just as

whites. Efforts should continue to focus on these problems. Large

differences remain, however, in the outcomes of measurably simular
                                                        does not seem to
 blacks and whites. Neighborhood job proximity

account for much of these differences, at least in Chicago. Race

not space remains the key explanatory variable.
                                   —5—




      In 1968, John Kain published a very influential paper where he

 advanced and sought to test a 'mismatch hypothesis."1   Kain argued

 that housing market segregation "(1) affects the distribution of

 Negro employment, and (2) reduces Negro job opportunities, and (3)

 postwar suburbanization has seriously aggravated the problem." He

 conjectured numerous links between the housing market and the labor

market. The links included not only the direct effects of accessi-

bility, but also the influence that neighborhood characteristics

might have on an employer's willingness to hire blacks    Employees
with more contact and experience with blacks are presumably more

disposed toward hiring them.

     Kain performs empirical work with which he argues that there

would be substantially more employment for blacks in Chicago and

Detroit if neighborhoods were desegregated. Kain's work has since

come under close scrutiny. His work clearly demonstrates that the

spatial distribution of black employment and black residences are

similar, confirming his first proposition. However, his conclusion

that black employment opportunities are reduced seems to hinge

critically on his functional form assuniptions.2 Indeed, there is

something troubling about a model which predicts more employment

for slack workers when the number of workers used in generating the

prediction is unchanged. Thus, while Kain's pathfinding work
                                 —6—




surfaced a variety of tantalizing hypotheses, It left their valid-

ity largely unresolved.

     Many other authors have attempted to test the hypothesis.

Mooney found that non—white unemployment rates in different SMSAs

were correlated with the percent of employment in the city and the

extent of reverse commuting.3 The percent of all employment In the

city will be as much affected by where the boundaries of the city

are drawn as by economic forces so it is difficult to understand

why these variables should have any predictive power.   On the other

side, Masters found that segregation indices do not help predict

black unemployment rates in cities.4 While intriguing, the result

fails to test the mismatch hypothesis. A combination of segrega-

tion and job movement is what causes a problem, not the degree of

segregation.
     Most vehement in his attacks on the mismatch hypothesis has

been Bennet Harrison.5 He has collected a variety of data which he

believes shows that suburbanization of employment has not increased

 recently. He suggests that flight of whites from the cities could

even have left blacks in a stronger position for the central city

 jobs. Moreover, he notes that blacks living outside the central

 city have incomes no higher than blacks living outside the poverty

 areas within the city. This latter result is difficult to interpret

 since he has explicitly selected non—poor city blacks to compare

 with their suburban counterparts.

      Kalachic6 and Weinstein7 found little evidence of a wage

 differential for ghetto and non—ghetto jobs in several cities.
                                    —7—




  Recently, Strazheim has found large differentials in another.8
                                                                    Many
 other authors have looked at one or another aspect of the issues.

      With this patchwork of evidence often derived without a strong

 theoretical base it remains difficult to assess the validity of the

 mismatch hypothesis. Comparison between cities is dangerous with

 history and jurisdictional boundaries largely arbitrary. The hypo-

 thesis is distinctly neighborhood based. It implies differences in

 labor market outcomes depending on the neighborhood a potential

 worker lives in. The strategy of this paper is to take that dis-

 tinctly neighborhood approach in one city: Chicago. I seek to

 explore in detail the spatial character of the labor market with a

particular focus on teenagers. I am interested in the location of

jobs and workers and changes in both over time. The complexity of

even one city is almost sufficient to frustrate a comprehensive

treatment of the labor market. Residential and industrial loca-

tions often reflect accidents of history as much as the workings of

narrow economic forces.



Summary of a Theoretical Formulation of the Mismatch Hypothesis

     In a previous paper I have explored a model of the spatial mis-

match between workers and jobs.9 Actually, the mismatch story turns

most urban models on their heads. Normally in these models mobile

workers choose their residences with an eye toward the location of

their jobs which are typically fixed in space. In the current story,

some potential workers cannot move while the jobs they might fill

shift away. There simply isn't space to detail the theoretical model
                                  —8—




in this paper, thus I shall only present the key results. The results
                                     international trade type model with
described here are generated by an
                               between zones at a cost. We divide
a twist: people can commute

urban space into a series of neighborhoods.     Within each neighborhood

housing prices and factor costs (and rewards) are identical.

     Workers' utility is influenced by the housing prices in the

neighborhood in which they live, the wage rate in the neighborhood

where they work, and a measure of the transportation (or search) cost

associated with the workers commute.

     In the simplest form of the model, we assume there are two out-

                          of each good is uniform across all neighbor-
put sectors. The price
                                        land, and captial. Capital costs
hoods. Each sector employs labor,

are assumed uniform and constant across zones, just like output prices.
                                                                       Fin-
Wages and industrial land rents are free to vary between zones.
                                         of production. (Crime or distri-
ally zones may differ in efficiency
                                     be higher in certain neighborhoods.)
bution costs or parking costs may

      Unemployment is not explicitly modeled in this general equili-
                                                                labor
 brium treatment, but the model easily captures the notion that

 market outcomes may be influenced by place of residence. The mismatch

                            market opportunities will differ for persons
 story implies that labor
                                We might just as well model this implica-
 in different neighborhoods.
                                     net of transport costs) in some
 tion as very low wages (or wages

 zones relative to others.     And if we impose some wage rigidities in

                                  are low we could instead have high wages
 areas where equilibrium wages

 and high unemployment.
                                  model three forces will tend to equalize
       In the context of such a
                                   —9—



 labor market opportunities across neighborhoods: the movement of people

 to new residences; the movement of capital or firms between neighborhoods;

 and the commuting of workers between zones. Thus, three conditions must

 be metfor a mismatch story to have force:

      • Residential location decisions must be constrained. Free
        mobility of residences would equalize utility of identical
        workers

      • Conditions for business must be unfavorable either due to
        excessive costs of production or a "shortage of land in the
        same areas where residences are constrained. As a result,
       wage rates are low or else business leaves (or never enters) and
        few jobs are found in the neighborhood

     • Commuting or search costs must be non—trivial for jobs outside
       the neighborhood. Otherwise, workers forced to live in
       undesirable areas would simply commute to jobs in other
       neighborhoods.

     The results are largely self evident, so they receive only passing

discussion here.

     One confusion that easily arises in the mismatch hypothesis is

the difference between labor market outcomes and utilities. The mismatch

story could be construed to indicate that labor market outcomes will

differ depending on residential location, whether or not utilities differ.

Variables other than labor market outcomes enter the utility function.

Areas with weak labor market opportunities may offer offsetting

advantages, as in our model where low housing costs may compensate for

poor accessibility. If all persons are freely mobile so they may

select any homesite, then all persons will achieve identical utilities

by definition. If one area were more attractive as a home or worksite,

new workers would try to move there, raising housing costs and/or

lowering wage rates.
                               —10-



     Indeed if we took job locations and wage rates as exogenous

this model largely mimics the traditional Alonso/Kain models where

land rëits decline with distance from employment centers)0 Clearly

mismatch theorists have in mind labor market problems serious enough

that there are insufficinet compensating advantages in housing markets.

If so, then, the mobility of the disadvantaged workers must be limited.

Note, however, that a result showing differing labor market opportunities

by neighborhood need not indicate any market failures. We should naturally

expect some differences. But, if people voluntarily choose to live in

such a neighborhood, we can be sure there are offsetting benefits. It

might still be interesting to explore the differences in labor market

opportunities even if no limits were imposed on mobility. But utility

variations can occur only when such limits exist.

     Thus, at the very heart of the mismatch story are constraints

on residential (and possibly worksite) location. Proponents argue that

residential choices of blacks are particularly constrained because of

discrimination in urban housing markets. And this point arouses little

dispute. I know of no author who has argued that residential'choices

for blacks in Chicago are unconstrained, though considerable disagreement

persists about whether these constraints lead to unusually high housing

costs.11 For teenagers, the problem of mobility leading to identical

utilities even If labor market opportunities differ by location may not

be serious anyway. Over 90 percent of all teenagers live at home.

They have little option about their homesites. Whatever the advantages

or disadvantages of the particular homesite the parents have found,

they surey will not exactly offset any accessibility differences faced

by teenagers.
                                    —11—




       Regardless our attention will be on the narrow question of

 whether identical individuals achieve "vastly" different labor

 market outcomes because of their residential location.    We cannot

 pretend to completely ferret out any offsetting features in other

 markets. If large differences in labor market outcomes are found,

 it will be important to consider the possibility of a utility

 difference separately.

      Assuming residences are counstrained, we must then consider

 under what conditions we ought to see very different labor market

 outcomes by neighborhood of residence. It is still quite plausible

 that mobility of firms will cause equalization of opportunity.

 There will naturally be pressure for the production sector to move

 in such a way so as to equalize access to labor and wages. The

geographic labor market which fails to achieve such equality must

suffer from at least two other important distortions.     First, the

conditions for factor price equalization must not be met. Second,

commuting and/or search costs must be non—trivial.

     The most famous theorem in international trade states quite

simply that if certain conditions are met, factor prices in all

countries will be identical. Thus, if these assumptions are met

wage rates (and thus opportunities) will not differ accross neigh-

borhoods. For a two sector model the most important assumptions

are that all neighborhoods allow for equally efficient production,
                                                12
and that both goods be produced in each zone.

     In our model there are two particularly pertinent cases where

the theorem may break down. If efficiency does differ depending
                                  —12—




on location the theorem fails. Or if one or another zone has a

superabundance of labor relative to land or vice versa equalization

will again be thwarted. The first condition is obvious. If it is

more expensive to produce one or another product In certain locations,

either factor prices must fall or production simply will not occur

there. There is no reason a priori to believe that higher produc-

tion costs will lead to falls only in wage rates or only in land

prices. Indeed, there are unusual cases where one factor price

actually rises. In general though we can predict downward

pressure on both land prices and wages. The lower limit on both

prices naturally depends on opportunity costs of the factors. If

laborers have strong opportunities in nearby neighborhoods, the

wage cannot fall below the net wage received by the commuters.     If

land has other uses such as housing or speculation, the fall in

rents also will be limited. Quite plainly it is possible that

production inefficiencies and opportunity costs of factors may be

such that no production will occur in some areas.

     Yet even if all areas allow for equally efficient production,

where labor is very abundant in some neighborhoods relative to

land or vice versa, the theorem may again f all. We noted earlier

that the factor price theorem works only when production occurs in

both sectors In a neighborhood. At the equalized factor prices

each sector will use a particular combination of land and labor.

Equilibrium requires that all factors be exhausted. Thus, some

combination of production of good X and good Y must allow for full

use of resources. So long as the overall land—labor ratio in
                                   —13—




 the zone falls between that implied by the equalized wage—land

 rental ratio for production of good X and Y, we have no problem.

 That is if our zone has three workers per acre of industrial land

 and good X uses four workers per acre while good Y requires two

workers per acre, then by using half our land for the production

of X and half for Y we will absorb all of the workers. But should

a zone have a land—labor ratio outside the bounds of production for

X and Y, there is a problem. A zone with five workers per acre

cannot produce both X and Y. When labor is too abundant, wages

must fall and production (if it occurs at all) will be confined

to the labor intensive sector. There is nothing mystical here.

When land is very scarce relative to labor, it is quickly used up.

Prices for land rise and wage rates must fall or local employers

cannot compete. Once again opportunity costs place a floor on

the fall in factor prices. Wage rates thus may not fall suffi-

ciently in neighborhoods with large concentrations of labor to

accommodate all nearby workers and many residents may   be   forced to

commute to other neighborhoods for work. Equilibrium is achieved

when the net wage of all residents is identical. Those who work

nearby command less gross pay but local employers must pay more

for land so they make no excess profit. Those workers who commute

get larger paychecks but bear search and commuting costs. Either

way, if efficiency differs by neighborhood or if there are very

large differences in the ratio of land to labor across zones,

factor prices and thus opportunities are likely to differ.
                                  —14—




    The final condition for differential labor market outcomes

for identical residents of several neighborhoods was non-travel

commuting or search costs. We explicitly allow workers to search

for and commute to jobs in neighborhoods outside their town.   If

the costs of doing so are small relative to the wage, then the

net effect of neighborhood differences will also be small. These

search and commuting costs limit the differences in opportunity

across neighborhoods. In the extreme when such costs are trivial,

all persons face equal labor market opportunities. Everyone in

the entire metropolitan area would be attracted to any job paying

a little extra. Ultimately it is this condition which we must

explore most closely. Proximity to work does vary dramatically

by neighborhood. But if such variations are important to consider

when exploring the labor market outcomes of young people, search

and commuting costs must be very high.

     Let me summarize the conditions which must be met for a

plausible mismatch theory. First, there must be constraints on

the residential location decisions of workers. This condition is

not essential for labor market opportunities to differ by neighbor-

hood, but it is critical for there being differing utility levels

by neighborhood. Second, either neighborhoods must vary in their

productive efficiency or some zones must have an overabundance of

labor or land or both. Otherwise, wages will be everywhere identi-

cal. Finally, commuting costs must be non—trivial.
                                                   first two conditions
      It can be argued very effectively that the

 are met for ghetto youth. Residential choices of these youths'
                                      —15—




 parents are obviously constrained. Moreover, the young people

 themselves are essentially constrained to live at home.    It also

 appears- that production is less efficient in the ghetto and even

 that usable land for industry is relatively scarce.

      Production costs might be higher in the ghetto for many

 reasons. Theft and vandalism are unusually high. Noll argues

 that expansion is difficult because the acquisition of space is

 complicated by the need to buy land from several owners, each of

 whom potentially occupy a monopolistic position.13 Hamer reports

 that demolition costs are high relative to acquisition costs of

 unfettered land in the suburbs. 14   Kain points to a reluctance of

skilled workers, who tend to be white, to work in undesirable

areas.15 Parking is always a problem. A congested and outmoded

transportation network often hampers movement of goods to national

markets.

     There is also good reason to suppose that usable land may be

hard to find in the ghetto. The arguments of Noll and Hamer noted

above not only suggest that production is costly, they also itply

that usable land is limited. Population densities in urban ghettos

are typically the highest of any area in the SMSA. The labor—land

ratio in the ghetto is obviously manifoldly greater than that in
               16
the suburbs.

     The key question issue then, is likely to be whether search

and commuting costs for young people are costly. And certainly

such a scenario is plausible. Transportation costs may be very

high. Cars are rarely available for poor young blacks and the
                                   —16—




                                 not serve them well. Youth may
mass transportation system may

value their leisure time very highly, implying a greater cost

                                       than   adults. Perhaps an even
(relatve to wage) of commuting time
                                       the high cost of initial job
more plausible story would emphasize
                                                     be unfamiliar with
search outside the neighborhood. Youngsters may
                                       need to use to locate a job
the transportation system which they
                                              fear for their personal
in the first place. Others may genuinely
                             familiar areas near home. It is widely
safety once they leave the
                                   will not set foot in some alien
claimed that young blacks simply

neighborhoods. Finally, the job search process for teenagers may
                                                            with
rely heavily on informal networks which could decay rapidly
                                     issues in some detail later in
 distance. We shall explore these

 this paper. Suffice it to say, however, it is quite plausible that

 commuting may impose a serious burden for many youngsters.
                                          model are met in the ghetto,
      If the three conditions for our

 then we can make three very important predictions:

          • There will be downward pressure on wage rates in
             the ghetto.
                                            efficient or usable land is
      Whether ghetto production is less
                                                               land
 simply scarce, there will be downward pressure on wages. (For
                             downward if the area Is less efficient and
 prices, pressure will be

 upward when land is scarce.)     But wages may be constrained by the

                                          institutions. The minimum
  standard litany of rigidity Inducing
                             payment rules all serve to prop up wages.
 wage, unions, government
                                 the region are rarely willing to offer
  Firms with several plants in
                                            Discrimination laws may also
  lower wages at one or another plant.
                                                                   As a
  deter a company from offering lower wages in ghetto plants.
                                    —17—




  result wages may not adjust downward sufficiently to provide jobs

 to all who seek them. Unemployment would be the inevitable result.

          • Ghetto firms will tend to be labor intensive.

      The plentiful resource in a neighborhood with a depressed

 market would be labor. The firms most likely to offset added costs

 of business in the ghetto are ones which can exploit this resource.

 The conclusion is more than just the obvious result that firms

 needing low—skilled labor will be drawn to the ghetto. The result

 follows from the surplus of labor in the ghetto and not from their

 low skills. Even if all workers in the metropolitan area were

 identical, ghetto production——if it exists——is likely to be labor

 inive.
          • The ghetto will tend to export labor to other
             neighborhoods. Workers living in the ghetto will
             tend to travel farther to work.

     If opportunities are more limited in the ghetto, workers will

try to commute to jobs elsewhere. The greater the differential in

wage rates or opportunities the greater the incentive to commute.

Thus, the weaker the opportunities are in one area, the farther the

marginal worker will be traveling for work. This result is obvious,

but very important methodologically. It suggests a way of measuring

accessibility by observing the journey—to—work patterns of workers.

Neighborhoods with low accessibility will tend to "export" workers.

These workers will travel farther to work than their counterparts

in other areas.

     The model illustrates the appeal of a simple mismatch story.

It can generate lower wages and skewed occupational distributions
                                 —18—




without resorting to models of discrimination or heterogeneity

of workers. Unlike discrimination models, this formulation of

the mimatch story requires no non—competitive behavior. No

large profits are foregone. The cost of operation is higher

in the ghetto or land is scarce and ghetto residents suffer.

Indeed, the two—sector formulation of the model used here is in

most important respects similar to Becker's use of a one—sector
                                                17
model in his landmark book on discrimination.        That similar

results are generated should be no surprise.

     Of course, discrimination is not ruled out in this model.

Indeed, housing market discrimination is crucial to its formula-

tion. Discrimination in the labor market could serve to exacerbate

the mismatch problems. Reluctance of capital to flow into the

ghetto could reflect ill feelings towards blacks rather than high

real costs. If firms in or out of the ghetto refuse to hire

blacks "search costs" may be high indeed.

     The appeal of the model, however, is part of the reason It is

so hard to test. Low wages, skewed occupational distributions,

and high unemployment can be generated by mismatch, by discrimina-

tion and by differences among workers. The difficult task is to

separate these.

     What is unique about the mismatch model is its emphasis on

 employment location. In theory, ghetto firms will pay less than

 non—ghetto firms. Those willing to commute out can command higher

wages. The occupation mix of ghetto and non—ghetto firms will be

 different. But heterogeneity of firms and workers bedevils easy
                                   —19—




empirical tests. The strongest result is perhaps the most obvious:

Persons living in neighborhoods with weak local employment

opportunities will tend to commute to other neighborhoods. If

that commuting imposes heavy costs——either in initial job search

or daily commutes, persons living in these areas will fare worse

in the labor market.

     The basic insight, then, is to observe the behavior of exist-

ing workers to determine the neighborhood's proximity to jobs.

The methodology used here is to relate neighborhood employment

rates to various measures of job proximity based on the behavior

of existing workers. Even here we must be very careful. Worker

commuting patterns differ for many reasons. We must be careful to

understand them.

     In the next section we explore the changing pattern of

residential and industrial location in the Chicago SMSA and the

impacts these patterns have on commuting behavior of workers.

In the final section we look to see whether these patterns are

related to labor market outcomes of youth.



An Overview of Worksites, Homesites, and Commuting in Chicago

     Our theoretical models suggest that we ought to look at the

differential locations of workers and workplaces and the commuting

behavior these imply in our search for evidence for or against the

mismatch hypothesis. We shall ultimately need to define a variety of

proximity measures and to relate these to labor market outcomes in

neighborhoods in and around Chicago. Before embarking on that task,

it is extremely enlightening to briefly consider the broad employment,
                                 —20—




residence, and commuting patterns observed in Chicago.

    During the l960s, the central city of Chicago experienced declines

relative to the surrounding suburbs in both the number of jobs located

there and in the number of workers living there.    The city actually lost

more jobs than working residents. In 1960 the city housed 59% of all workers
                                                   ARea (SMSA) and it held
in the Chicago Standard Metropolitan Statistical

nearly 69% of all jobs. By 1970, the figures had fallen to 48% and 53%

respectively. Thus by 1970, the image of a central city which held the jobs
                                                     Jobs and workers had
for bedroom suburbs no longer applied to Chicago.

achieved rough parity.

     Of course overall parity did not translate into identical patterns

of work and home locations for all occupations.     Table 1, drawn from Census

data, reveals the changing workplace and residence patterns by occupation

for 1960 and 1970. The table records both the percentage of all those

employed in each occupation who live in the city (rather than the suburbs)

and the percentage who work there. It also reports the ratio of these,

labeled the import ratio. In effect the import ratio gives the ratio of

jobs to workers in the city. If equal numbers of persons lived and worked

there the ratio would equal 1. An import ratio of 1 does not of course

indicate that there is no coinmuniting, only that as many workers commute out

of the city each day as commute into it.    Since there are more professional

 jobs located in the city than there are professionals living there, on net

                                           suburbs each day and the import ratio
 the city imports professionals from the

 for that occupation exceeds one. By contrast there are actually fewer city

 jobs for laborers than there are resident laborers, so each day the city

 is a net exporter of these workers and the ratio falls below 1.

      As we would expect the city is a major net importer of professional,
                                      —21--




                                   TABLE 1

           WORKSITES AND RESIDENCES AND CENTRAL CITY IMPORT RATIOS
             FOR ALL EMPLOYED PERSONS BY OCCUPATION, 1960, 1970


                                              1960

                     % of All Persons       % of All Persons
                  Employed in Occupation Employed in Occupation Import
                    Living in the City    Working in the City   Ratio
 Occupation                 (1)                        (2)        (2)÷(l)
 Managerial                44.9                       68.8         1.53
 Professional              48.7                       64.6         1.33
 Sales                     51.8                       68.2         1.32
 Clerical                  63.9                       74.6         1.17
 Craftsmen                 54.1                      64.3          1.19
 Operatives                66.3                      69.9          1.06
Laborers                   67.6                      67.9          1.01
Service Workers            66.3                      66.5          1.01

Total                      58.7                      68.7          1.17


                                          1970
                                                                  Import
                     % Livinji City            %Working in City    Ratio

Occupation
Managerial                 31.8                      53.1          1.67
Professional               40.8                      51.6         1.27
Sales                      37.5                      49.3         1.32
Clerical                  52.7                       58.3
Craftsmen                 44.5                       48.9         1.10
Operatives                58.1                       56.2          .96
Laborers                  57.9                       52.0          .90
Service_Workers           57.1                       53.9          .94

Total                     47.9                       52.6         1.10


Source: 1960 and 1970 Census data.
                                   —22—




managerial, and sales personnel. What is somewhat surprising is the fact

that the city is actually a net exporter of all of lower skilled occupations.
                                                                               -


More oerativeS, laborers, and service workers actually live in the city
                                                     the deterioration
than work there. Even more striking is the fact that
in these import ratios was greatest in these occupations between 1960 and

1970. So while declines came in all workplace and residence categories, it

does appear the city's biggest losses were in the residences of high skill,

well paid workers and in jobs for its low skilled residents.

     One portion of the mismatch hypothesis does appear to be verified

then in Chicago. Low skill jobs are leaving faster than low skilled workers

and those remaining in the city could be disadvantaged.   This is particularly

plausible for blacks since roughly 90% of such persons do in fact live in
                                                     low skilled, And indeed
the city and since the group is disproportionately
                                                   rather different for blacks
other data does show that commuting patterns are

and whites. And low skill blacks do indeed travel further to work than

low skill whites.

      Table 2 is based on a special survey conducted by the Chicago Area

Transportation Study (CATS) in 1970.* In general urban theofists hypothesize

 that desires for land and other environmental amenities lead more wealthier

 persons to live further from the city (and their jobs) than those with

 more modest incomes. Thus we should expect to see higher paid professionals

 and managers commuting further than lower paid operatives and laborers.

 Interestingly enough that is exactly the pattern we do observe for whites

 in Chicago. White managers and professionals are slightly more likely to



 *The sample of some 20,000 workers in the metro area is unique in that it
 contains detailed information on residence and workplace location for individuals
 included in their sample. When we calculate import ratios for the city by
                                             those found on Table 1 which is
 profession, we find results very similar to
 based on census data.
                                     —23—



                                  TABLE 2

               RESIDENCE AND WORKPLACE LOCATION PATTERNS,
                IMPORT RATIOS AND TRAVEL TIMES FOR WHITE
                 AND BLACK WORKERS BY OCCUPATION, 1970


                                   WHITES

                                                               Ave rage
                    % Living in        % Working in   Import    Travel
Occupation          Central City       Central City   Ratio      Time

Managerial                 31.9             54.5       1.71      34.3
Professional               34.J             53.2       1.55      33.3
Sales                      34.9             53.8       1.54      32.1
Clerical                   45.7             57.6       1.26      31.1
Craftsmen                  38.0             48.0       1.26      29.4
Ooeratives                 47.9             49.3       1.03      26.6
Laborers                   51.6             50.0        .97      26.2
Service Workers            50.6             52.9       1.05      25.0


                                   BLACKS


                                                               Average
                    % Living in       % Working in    Import   Travel
Occupation          Central City      Central City     Ratio    Time

Managerial                 93.8             86.9       .93      32.0
Professional               86.9             82.5       .95      33.7
Sales                      86.7             86.7      1.00      31.3
Clerical                   91.9             90.2       .98      31.9
Craftsmen                  87.3             65.8       .75      36.2
Operatives                 86.0             73.7       .86      34.0
Laborers               .   79.7             64.6       .81      33.5
Service Workers            85.9             80.2       .93      34.2


Source: Calculated from Chicago Area Transportation Survey, 1970.
                                   —24—




work in the city than are whites working in lesser skilled occupations.

But they are much more likely to live in the suburbs.   As a result they

average 35 minute commutes whereas white laborers and service workers

travel just 25 minutes on average. The bulk of the variation in travel

times seems to be caused by differences in where the members of particular

occupations live, rather than where they work.

     By contrast most of the variation in journey to work times of blacks

is almost entirely the result of differences in where they work. Roughly

90% of the workers in each occupation live in the city.    But in the lower

skill categories a sizable fraction work outside the city.    As a result

commuting times are actually slightly larger for these lower skill blacks.

And they are considerably longer than the times for comparable whites. Low

skill blacks spend as much time commuting as professional whites.

     These findings are supported by yet another source:     the 1975 Annual

Housing Survey for Chicago. This survey is richer in demographic detail
                                                             Table 3 is drawn
than CATS, but it is weaker on occupational information.

 from that data. Once again we see that lower skilled whites travel shorter

distances and have lower commuting times than higher skill whites. Perhaps

most relevant for this study is the finding that white teenagers have

very short commutes, averaging only 15 minutes. Once again the pattern for

blacks is quite different. In the lowest skill categories, travel times

 and distances are much greater for blacks. Most dramatically black

 teenagers travel much further to work and spend much longer travelling

 according to this survey. Indeed black males have commutes which are

 more than double those of their white counterparts on average.
                                —25—




                              TABLE 3

 JOURNEY-TO-WO1 TRAVEL TINES AND DISTANCES FOR WHITES
                                                      IN CHICAGO 1975



 pployed Males                        Average Time    Average Distance
                              Whites     Non—whites   Whites   Non—whites
 All Ages                      27.4                    10.8


 Household heads,
 Aged 30—39 with education:
     — less than 12 years
                               25.1        33.0        9.9
     — 12 years                                                 12.3
                               27.3        27.4       11.8       9.7
     — over 12 years
                               31.8        33.1       13.5      12.8
Teenagers 16—19
    — living at home
                               15.1        36.2        4.5       9.3



ppoyed Females
All   Ages                    22.4         32.8        7.2       9.2


Household Heads               25.3        36.1         7.3      9.5

Wives                         21.0        33.0         7.1      9.4

Teenagers 16—19
    —
      living at home          16.2        28.7        4.7       6.5




Source: Annual Housing Survey 1975
                                        —26--




        We should also keep in mind that these are average and not marginal

                                                            of those who got
travel times. They represent the average experience

jobs. This is not necessarily reflective of the commuting which would

be required of the next potential worker. If nearby jobs are easier to
                                                   times for the marginal black
find and are filled first, excess commuting

teenager could in fact be much greater. Even the average figures reported

in the AHS imply that in a five day week, black teens spend 2 1/2 hours more

in transit,
                                                        illustrate why the mismatch
         This glimpse at the general patterns helps

hypothesis holds real appeal to those interested in the problems of

minorities. In Chicago at least, low skill jobs really are moving out

faster than low skill workers. Blacks do spend longer getting to work than

comparable whites. And the differences are most extreme just for the groups

                            limited mobility and haphazard job search methods—--
we might expect to have
                                                  the hypothesis merits closer
the low skilled and the young. Obviously

 examination.
 •       Nonetheless although black teens spend more than twice as long as

                                                need not have a sizable impact
whites getting to work, the differences
                                                                  fraction
 on labor market outcomes nor do they necessarily explain a large
                                         market outcomes. The extra travel time
 of the racial differences in labor

 amounts to just 5% extra work time on an 8 hour day. Typically transportation
                                        time is valued at roughly half the wage.19
 economists report that commuting
                                                supply elasticity of say 2 would
     If so then even an absurdly high labor
                                        in employment rates of black and white
     explain just 5 of 50% difference

     teens.
                                   —27—



      Thus we need a model that suggests youth who live farther from

jobs suffer greater disadvantages than those imposed by higher commuting

 costs. We need a model whereby initial job search or job acquisition is

severely hampered by geographic separation from jobs. If job search

costs rose say exponentially with distance because of initial transportation

costs, more limited information, or fear and uncertainty about neighborhoods

further from home, and if youth did not expect to stay in any particular

job for an extended period much more significant negative impacts could

result.

     A slight modification of this notion derives from the work of Rees

and Schultz in the early sixties.20They found that low skilled workers

tended to find jobs primarily through the use of informal networks.21 It

does seem plausible that such networks would decay rapidly with distance

from home. Thus these low skilled black workers might be disadvantaged

in initial job search.

     There is a second aspect of these results which cast doubt on the

plausbility of the mismatch hypothesis. The mean distances and the

variances around them are very large. A five mile journey brings any

teenager well outside almost any conception of neighborhood. Typical

walking speed is roughly 3 MPH, thus jobs even for white youth are over

1 hour's walk from home. It seems unlikely that youths would know most

of the area within a five mile radius well. And the variances in travel

times and distances are very large for all groups. It is not at all

uncommon for the standard deviations to be 2/3s the size of the mean.

Such a wide variance indicates a far more dynamic and wide ranging

labor market than some mismatch models might suggest.
                                    —28—




      Nonetheless it remains plausible that accessibility differences

are important. Thus we turn then to the question of whether or not the
                                                                                 -



observed differences in accessibility to jobs do in fact explain difference

in   labor market outcomes of whites and blacks and of residents of different

neighborhoods in Chicago.



Method o

       We are interested in two related issues. Does proximity to jobs

seem to influence labor market outcomes? And if so, can differences

inproximity explain an important part of the racial differential in the
                                                  The natural methodological
outcomes for youth——particularlY employment?

approach is to define one or several measures of accessibility and to

                                            and earnings of blacks and
examine their relationship to employment

whites in different areas of the city.     Yet serious methodological problems

arise when one seeks to estimate such models. The most serious problems

surround the development of appropriate measures of accessibility- Even

in simple models where workers and jobs are all identical the fact that
                                                         detemined
wage rates, labor supply, and commuting patterns are all

simultaneously makes it difficult to select a meaningful definition of

accessibility ex post, particularly if we allow for rigidity in wages and

 for unemployment. When the theoretical problems are combined with a rather

 serious shortage of individual data that gives both detailed geographic

 information and provides the socio—economiC data, the prospects for

 appropriate estimation are discouraging.
                                                  taken in this paper is to
        Faced with these problems, the approach

 use three different methods to examine the potential relationship between

 employment and proximity:
                                      —29—



       • Estimate census tract employment
                                          rate equations which include
         one of a many different measures of
                                             neighborhood job proximity
       • Estimate census tract employment
                                          rate equations which allow for
         fixed neighborhood effects designed to capture the impact of all
         unobserved neighborhood differences including variations in job
         proximity

       • Exploit natural experiments within the city by comparing the
         labor market outcomes of blacks who live in neighborhoods with
         vastly different accessibility to jobs and by comparing outcomes
         of blacks and whites who live in the same neighborhoods.

       The first is simply an attempt to operationalize the difficult model

 described previously. We define a large number of neighborhood proximity

 measures drawn from several different data sources and use them as

 independent variables in regression models which use the youth employment

 rate in a very small area of the city of Chicago as the dependent variable.

      The second uses the same dependent variable but allows instead for

 separate intercepts for each of over 100 neighborhoods.    In essence this
 method controls for all neighborhood differences
                                                    regardless of their
 origin. Thus the fixed effects capture the impact not only of proximity

 differences, but also of differences in local schools, in the attitudes

and tastes of local residents, and
                                     anything else which varies over space.

      The final approach is quite different. There are two ghettos in

Chicago. One is on the city's South Side; the other is on the West Side.

By every conceivable measure, blacks living on the West Side live much

closer to jobs than those on the South. Just after the 1970 Census was

completed, the Census Bureau conducted a series of Census Employment

Surveys(CES) in low income areas across the U.S. in which they collected

detailed labor information on relatively large samples of individuals. And

quite fortuitously, two surveys were conducted in Chicago——one in each of

the ghettos. Thus we can exploit the natural experiment and compare

persons in these two areas in some detail and thus explore the effects
                                 —30—




of job proximity on young blacks.

    And we can also use these same CES data for another natural experiment.
                                                                               -

The West Side is actually a collection of several low income neighborhoods,
                                                   labor market outcomes
some black and some white. Thus we can compare the

of blacks and whites living very close to each other. This second

natural experiment thus allows us to examine the extent to which differential

black/white outcomes can be explained by differences in proximity. If

they can, blacks and whites will fare much more similarly in areas where

they live close to each other.

     The results of all these tests are remarkably strong and consistent.

At best proximity has a marginal impact on labor market outcomes——about as
                                           real wage which results from
much as we might expect from the reduced

commuting slightly farther to jobs. There is little evidence that spatial

differences in job accessibility are a major explanation of the poor labor

market outcomes of young blacks.

     We begin then with a discussion of the methods used to examine the

impact of various job proximity measures on employment rates.



 Proximity and Employment

      We might have considered the impact of accessibility on a wide variety

 of labor market outcomes. These include employment status, wage rates,

 occupational attainment, and school enrollment.   Ideally, we might like

 to use individual data using accessibility and other neighborhood variables

 in labor supply, unemployment, wages, or schooling equations. Unfortunately,

 individual data with both detailed spatial identification and high quality

 labor market performance measures do not exist. But using 1970 Census Tract

 Data, it is feasible to relate employment rates for out of school youth

 in each tract to our measures of accessibility.
                               —31—



      There are some 1600 census tracts in Chicago. A series of weighted OLS

 regressions were estimated. In all of the models the employment rate

 for out of school youth aged 16 to 21 living in the tract——labeled ENRATE——

 served as the dependent variable. This variable along with the bulk of

 the independent variables was culled from 1970 census tract data. The

youth employment rate is available for both males and females. Regression

results reported here are for both sexes to reduce measurement error of

 the dependent variable. All have also been run separately by sex with

essentially similar results by sex except where noted in the text.

     The most critical independent variables were those designed to

capture the proximity of jobs to the tract and the measure of racial

composition there. We are looking for two types of results. First a

strong performance of accessibility measures would offer support for the

mismatch hypothesis. And if the inclusion of proximity measures reduces

the measured coefficient on race, we will have explained a portion of

the racial differential.

     The proximity measures are drawn from several different sources

and are discussed below. The remaining independent variables were

derived from Census data. PBLACK indicates the percent of the population

which is black. PSPANISH Provides the comparable figure for those who are

Spanish speaking. In additiai to the racial composition variables, a

variety of human capital and soclo—economic variables were included.

PSCHOOL is the proportion of persons aged 16—21 who are in school and

thus is a measure of the schooling level of the out of school group. The

greater the value PSCHOOL, the later people leave school, then the out

of school persons are older and better educated. Two measures of economic

well—being in the tract are included. FANINC, average family income,
                                  32—




and PPOOR, the proportion of families below the federal poverty level.

The inclusion of two Income measures obviously complicates the interpretation

of each one separately. PUNDER25 indicates the percentage of the tract's

residents who are under 25 and is designed to capture any demographic

impacts. PSING is the percentage of children living in single parent

families.

     Sample sizes do vary by tract. As a result, heteroskedasticitY is

created in the data. Ordinary least squares estimates are unbiased by

inefficient. Thus, all regressions were run weighted (by the square root

of the sample size) and unweighted. Both procedures yielded virtually

identical results, though weighting often did improve precision. Weighted

results are presented here. All statistical test (including the Fischer

test described below) have been appropriately adjusted to account for

the weighting.

     We turn now to the problem of specifying the various accessibility

measures.



Measurlng Job Proximity

     Even the most casual local observer would recognize that there is

enormous variability in job accessibility across the city and SNSA. We

shall see for example that by every conceivable measure there is a

concentration of jobs in and around the city's West Side and there is a

comparable void on the South Side. Yet finding meaningful ways to

quantify those differences is a mean task.

     Both practical and theoretical reasons suggest that accessibility

ought not to be measured separately for each census tract. Tracts are

just too small to serve as reasonable representations of neighborhood job
                                —33--




 markets. And our limited data make it impossible to create different

measuresfor each tract anyway. Instead accessibility will be defined over

 "neighborhoods"——the geographic concept that everyone understands but

no one can define. In the l940s, Chicago planners nonetheless accepted

 the task of defining zones which corresponded roughly to existing neighborhoods

and they created 76 "community areas" (or community zones). Since that

time these have been used as a basic geographic unit for collecting and

reporting data (and delivering services). Chicago census tracts have

been chose to be simple subdivisions of these community areas; thus

tracts can be easily aggregated to the larger zones.

     These community zones seemed the logical and easiest definition of

neighborhoods within the city. In the remainder of the SMSA no such

convenient zones have been designated. Still census tracts or groups

of tracts often conform to municipal boundaries which often have real

significance. In the areas outside the city, census tracts were combined

in such a way as to create another 40 zones. The 116 zones in and out of

the city were used as neighborhoods.

     Obviously no one measure of accessibility can capture all notions

of proximity. Thus a variety are developed and considered here. Each

captures a slightly different conception of accessibility. And each

offers peculiar advantages and disadvantages. The three primary measures

considered here are:

     • The number of jobs within a 30 minute public transit commute from
       the neighborhood——either for all jobs or for particular types
       of jobs

    • The neighborhood import ratio, that is the ratio of jobs to
      workers in the neighborhood——either for all occupations or for a
      selected subset
                                 —34—



     • Average journey to work travel for workers living in the
       neighborhood——again either for all workers or for a particular
       subset.
                                                                            -

All of these rely heavily on the CATS data. That survey provides detailed

geographical   information on where each worker surveyed lives and works

and the mode of transit he or she uses. In addition the CATS group

developed a "SKIMTREEt' which indicates the length of time a commuter can

expect to spend in getting between any two points in the SHSA if an

automobile isused or if public transit is used. We now consider each

measure in turn.



Number of Nearby Jobs

     An obvious measure of accessibility is simply the number of jobs

nearby. Zones closer to more jobs would be more accessible. The time

it takes to traverse a particular distance varies widely between any two

points in the city. So a count of jobs within 30 or 45 minutes commute

seems most appropriate. With SKINTREE data on travel times for mass

transit or automobile between any two points in the SMSA it is feasible

to combine the tree with data on workplace location to genera'te measures

of the number of jobs within say a 30 minute rapid transit commute of any

neighborhood.
     One serious problem with this sort of measure is that it counts only

jobs and takes no account of the number of people who may be competing

for them. If jobs are plentiful nearby, but people are also, these jobs

are not so available. Suburban areas fare poorly in this measure. Low

job densities and weak mass transit place suburban residents far from

 most jobs. If we allow auto transit in our measure, we do no better.
                                  —35—



Suburban residents still live close to fewer jobs. The low population

densities in suburban areas mean that even though there are fewer jobs
                                                                              -   -
nearby; they may be more readily available. Thus, an import ratio which

compares jobs to workers in an area seems like a more appealing measure.



Neighborhood Import Ratio

     In a previous section we compared the number of jobs in the central

city to the number of workers living there for various occupations.

The ratio of jobs to working residents was labeled the import ratio.

We found ratios far in excess of one for white collar occupations indicating

that these workers descend en masse on the city from the suburbs each

day. By contrast, the import ratio for blue collar and service workers

fell below one. These workers were commuting out of the city for work.

It seems logical to use the same concept on a smaller scale to measure

neighborhood accessibility. We can calculate import ratios for various

types of jobs for each community area using the CATS data. Neighborhoods

with more jobs than workers will import labor and show up with an import

ratio greater than one. Those with fewer jobs than workers will be the

reverse.

     Since our focus is on teenagers, we ought to concentrate on the

relative proximity of jobs most likely to be available to them. In

principle with sufficient data, we could calculate import ratios for

each neighborhood based only on teenage jobs and workers. In practice,

CATS data is too limited to allow such disaggregation with much precision.

Import ratios have also been calculated for two   other   types of jobs and

workers. First for all occupations, then just for blue collar and service.
                                  36—




     The problem with the import ratio is that it compares two stocks——

workers and jobs——in a neighborhood. Yet nearby jobs need not be available

to local workers. If jobs in an area are not growing it might be argued

that existing matches between employees and employers might have been

established in the past and that teenagers cannot get the local jobs.

High turnover rates in manufacturing make this scenario very unlikely,

but it deserves attention. We can (and do) use job growth as a measure

of accessibility as we shall discuss in a moment. But an even more

appealing measure examines the journey to work behavior of existing

workers' average travel time.



Ave ra e Travel Time

     Ultimately, we seek information on the "distance" the marginal

worker in any area must travel to find a particular job. We can't calculate

it for the marginal worker, but we can for the average one. And if

turnover is high, the distinction between average and marginal may not

be too serious.

     The travel time measure is particularly appealing because it reflects

actual worker behavior. If jobs are found nearby, journey to work travel

will be short. If jobs for particular workers can't be found in the

neighborhood, travel will be long. The biggest problems reflect the

heterogeneity of the labor force. Permanently attached workers from some

firms may move far from their jobs in a search for neighborhood amenities.

Their long travel times will be included in the average, even though

alternate jobs could be found close by. Their travel behavior may not say

much about marginal accessibility. If we confine our attention to blue
                                 —37—




collar and service occupations or even to youth, where turnover is common,

averages are likely to be more accurate measures of accessibility.



Other Measures

     There are a plethora of other accessibility measures. Probably the

strongest candidates capture job growth or decline. I believe emphasizing

job growth alone as a measure of job avilability is inappropriate. Most

jobs for teenagers are not "new" jobs. Turnover and promotion create

most openings. There is also a more serious concern about simultaneity with

a job growth/decline measure. The disanienities associated with ghettos may

slowly induce firms to leave. Job declines may be associated with poverty

ratherthan vice versa. Even when substantial employment remains, ghettos

will likely perform most on these measures.

     Nonetheless a variety of job change variables was also tested. None

performed well at all. Thus the actual measures used and the results are not

reported here. The measures we did use are shown below. All of them are

defined for community zones and are derived using 1970 CATS data on journey

to work origins and distributions, in combination with a SKIMTREE indicating

travel time by transit mode between all points in the area. In our

regressions these are labeled:

     JOBSNEAR (All) — The proportion of all jobs in the SMSA which
                      can be found within 30 minutes public transit
                      from the zone

     JOBSNEAR (BCS) — The proportion of all blue collar and service
                      jobs which can be found within 30 minutes public
                      transit from the zone

    IMPORTR.ATIO (ALL) — The ratio of all jobs to all workers residing
                      in the zone

    IMPORTRATIO (BCS) — The ratio of blue collar and service jobs to
                     blue collar and service workers residing in the zone.
                                  —38—



      AVTIME (All) — The average journey to work travel time for all
                     workers living in the zone

      AVTIME (BCS) — The average journey to work travel time for blue
                     collar and service workers living in the zone

      AVTIME (Teen) - The average journey to work travel time for teenage
                     workers living in the zone.

The measures based on teenagers are included in spite of the fact that

the limited sample sizes make them subject to considerable measurement

error.

      We turn now to the empirical results.



The Empirical Results——Tract Einp1otnerit

      Table 5 displays weighted regression results first without any

accessibility measure, and then with several entered individually. These

particular measures are based strictly on blue collar and service workers.

Generally, the coefficients on other independent variables are quite

sensible. In Equation (1) no proximity control appears. Every variable

performs exactly as we would expect. The big three, schooling, race and

income show very strongly If we increase the proportion of youngsters

in school   in an area from 30%   to 60% holding fixed all other variables,

the   employment rate for out of school youth will rise four to five percentage
points because on average they will have more education. Poverty also

shows a powerful effect. A tract where half of the families are poor

suffers employment rates almost ten points lower than one where no poverty

is found. If such tracts also have $10,000 lower average family income,

the difference rises to nearly 15 points. Yet even controlling for schooling,

income, family composition, age composition, race is the key variable.

Tracts that are entirely black suffer employment rates 18 percent lower
                                    —39—



                                  TABLE 4

                 MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS FOR
                   VARIABLES USED IN REGfJSSIONS


Varia1e                             Mean         Standard Deviation

1970 Census Tract Data

     E.ATE                       0.650                  0.157
     FANINC                  12082                   3704
     PBLACK                      0.222                  0.380
     PPOOR                       0.126                  0.169
     PSC}iOOL                    0.557                  0.141
     PSING                       0.166                  0.131
                              -
     PSPANISH                      0.065                0.125
     PUNDER25                      0.542                0.089

1970 Cats Data

     AVTIME(ALL)                  31.12                5.78
     AVTIME(BCS)                  29.58                6.3
     AVTINE(TEEN)                 30.60               13.9
     IMPORTRATIO(ALL)              0.886               0.924
     INPORTRATIO(BCS)              1.024               1.26
     IMPORTRATIO(TEEN)             0.959               1.25
     JOBSNEAR(ALL)                 0.048               0.043
     JOBSNEAR(BCS)                 0.050               0.056

1960, 1970 Where Workers Work

    IMPORTRATIO(ALL)               0.639               0.56
    AIMPORTRATIO                   0.054               0.166
    &OBS/WORKER                   —0,004               0.146
    %óJOBS                         0.213               1.45
                                      —40—




                                    TABLE 5

              REGRESSION RESULTS FROM 1970 CENSUS TRACT DATA


                                   Dependent Variable: EMRATE
Independent
 Variable               (1)             (2)            (3)          (4)


PSCFIOOL               .14              .13            .13          • 14

                       (.03)           (.03)          (.03)        (.03)


FAM INC             .OO3xlO          .OO3xlO        .OO1x1O      003x10
                    (.OOlxlO   )    (.OOlxlO   )   (.DOlxlO     (.OOlxlO

PPOOR                 —.16            —.16           —.17         —.16
                       (.04)           (.04)          (.04)        (.04)


PUNDER2 5               .09             .10            .10          .10
                       (.05)           (.05)          (.05)        (.05)

PSING                 —.14            —.14           —.14         —.14
                       (.06)           (.06)          (.06)        (.06)

PBL.CK                —.18             —.18          —.18         —.18
                       (.01)           (.01)          (.01)        (.01)

PSPANISH              —.13             —.12          —.13         —.13
                       (.03)           (.03)          (.03)        (.03)


INTERCEPT               .58             .58            .58          •   61
                       (.03)           (.03)          (.03)        (.03)


JOSBNEAR(BCS)                          —.03
                                       (.07)


IMPORTRATIO (BCS)                                      • 0049
                                                      (.0024)

                                                                   — • 0011
AVTIME (BCS)
                                                                   (.0005)


N                       1132            1132           11.32            1132

SEE                     .094            .094           .094             .094

R2                      .642            .642           .644             .644
                               —41—




than ones which are all white, all else the same. The coefficient on

PBLACK is 18 times it standard error. Race remained a powerful predictor

of employment status in Chicago in 1970. The black/white differential

to be explained was sizable.

     In these results, neighborhoods with a large proportion of Spanish—

speaking residents also fare poorly. The coefficient reported here is 78%

of the black one. Quite interestingly this is one of two coefficients

which is very different in all male employment rate equation. (The results

in Table 5 are for both sexes.) The estimated coefficient drops from .13

in these regressions to .07 when we consider employment for males only. One

other value changes dramatically; that for PSING, the percentage of

children in single parent families. This coefficient also fades in

significance for males only. Presumably some women are not in the work

force because of marriage or family responsibilities or because it is

considered inappropriate for a young woman to work. It seems plausible

that on these two coefficients our equations for all young people are

capturing both differences in labor market opportunities in the tract and

differences in other factors influencing labor force participants.

     Table 5 also plots the performance of our accessibility variables.

Three variables are displayed. JOBSNEAR (BCS) is the first. If the

proportion of all blue collar and service jobs within 30 minutes commute

captures job proximity, the expected sign is positive. Instead we see a

negative one and the variable is completely insignificant. The failure of

this measure was not unexpected since it showed better proximity in the

city than outside it.

     IMPORTRATIO offers several appealing qualities as a measure of

neighborhood job availability. It compares jobs and workers. And it
                                 —42—



shows better accessibility for many suburban zones than most central city

ones. We would expect a positive sign. More jobs per worker should yield
                                                                                 -

higherlevels of employment. And    in   fact we do get a positive coefficient;

which is just significant at traditional levels. But the coefficient is
extremely small. If we could transform a neighborhood from having two

workers per job to one where there are two jobs per worker, the employment

ratio would rise just one percentage point according to these regressions

       The average travel time for blue collar residents of the neighborhood

also was correctly signed and significant. Zones where workers spend

longer getting to work have lower rates of employment of young people.

But here again the measured effects are very small. Reducing average

travel time by two standard deviations (12 minutes) boosts employment

just one point again.

       The small coefficients we do observe are consistent with a model

where extra commuting time lowers the real wage somewhat and that reduction

causes a fall in labor supply. Suppose the labor supply elasticity were

1.0 and travel time was valued at 1/2    the   wage. A 1 minute extra commute

each   way then would reduce the real wage by roughly 0.2% in an 8 hour day
(2/480 x 50%). A 0.2% reduction in EMRATE with a mean of .65 translates
into a fall of .0013. This is remarkably close to the coefficient estimate
                                                         Obviously the result
of   .0011 on the average blue collar time variable.

 is not consistent with a model where the likelihood of finding a job is

sharply reduced when jobs are not located very nearby.

       Perhaps even more important is the coefficient on PBLACK. With

 or without the inclusion of accessibility variables, the coefficient is

 .18. None of the measures affect it in the slightest.       These results

 show no evidence at all that black and white differences originate in

 job proximity.
                                 —43—



     Table 6 summarizes the results of all CATS based measures of

accessibility. The measures based on the number of jobs nearby fall flat.

But the import ratio and average travel time measures are always of

correct sign and often significant. The best single measure appears to

be the import ratio for all workers. Sadly though the coefficients are

all very small. Pushing up employment rates just one point requires massive

changes in the accessibility indices. These pale in comparison to the .18

point edge enjoyed by whites over blacks. Moreover, these proximity

measures are uniformly impotent with respect to the PBLACK coefficient.

None causes it to even flinch.

     Accessibility shows some minor effects here. But even these results

may overstate the power of our variables. These coefficients are highly

unstable. Many more are insignificant in the male only regressions.

Other regressions using job change data also failed to show any impact

of accessibility. And unweighted estimates are rarely significant. It

is simply impossible to find strong effects with these variables.

     It seems plausible that accessibility is a far more important factor

for black and white households, Informal jobs' networks may provide

whites with access to jobs over a large geographic area. Blacks are not

blessed with such extensive networks and may be more at the whims of the

neighborhood job situation.

     Table 7 provides results using tracts with greater than 50 percent

blacks only. Several intriguing results appear. The one of the most

immediate concern is the recurrent failure of proximity. Signs are often

reversed, none of the coefficients is significant. Average travel time

performs best here but once again there are only small effects. Our

entire arsenal of CATS based variables are meek. Proximity as we have
                                    —44—




                                   TABLE 6

                        REGRESSION RESULTS:
       SHOWING PERFORMANCE OF VARIOUS ACCESSIBILITY MEASURES
                    FOR 1970 CENSUS TRACT DATA

                                           Coefficient on              2
                      Coefficient on       Accessibility             R
Neighborhood
Accessibility          Percent Black           Measure          (Standard Error
   Measure            (Standard Error)       (Standard Error)     of Estimate)

NONE                       -.18                                      .642
                           (.01)                                    (.094)

% of All Jobs              — 18                  — 12                643
Within 30 Minutes                                 (:08)             (:094)
                           (:01)
Transit
% of Blue Collar           —.18                  —.03                .642
Service Jobs Within
30 Minutes Transit
                           (.l)
                             -
                                                  (.06)             (.094)




Import Ratio for           —.18                    .009              .645
All Workers                (.01)                  (.003)            (.094)

Import Ratio for           -.18                    .0049             .642
Blue Collar and            (.01)                  (.0024)           (.094)
Service Workers
Import Ratio for           -.18                    .008              .646
                           (.01)                  (.002)            (.094)
Teenagers


Average Travel             -.18                   —.0009             .643
Time for All               (.01)                  (.0005)           (.094)
Workers
Average Travel
                           -.18                   —.0011             .644
Time for Blue
Collar and                 (.01)                  (.0005)           (.094)
Service Workers
                           —.18                    .0000             .642
Average Travel
                           (.01)                  (.3002)           (.094)
Time for Teenagers

Source: 1970 Census Tract Data and 1970 Chicago Area Transportation
         Survey.

(Other variab1e include percent Spanish—speaking, percent high
school graduates,, percent of persons in tract over age 25, average
family income, percent of persons in poor families, percent of
children in single parent families.)
                                    —45—



                                   TABLE 7

                            REGRESSION RESULTS:
                     IN TRACTS WITH 50% OR MORE BLACKS

                                           Coefficient on
Neighborhood         Coefficient on        Accessibility            R2
Accessibility         Percent Black           Measure         (Standard Error
   Measure           (Standard Error)      (Standard Error)     of Estimate)

NONE                      —.15                                    .488
                           (.07)                                 (.100)
% of All Jobs
                          —.15                —.001               .488
Within 30 Minutes
                           (.07)               (.196)            (.100)
Transit
% of Blue Collar &
                          —.15                 .073               .489
Service Jobs Within
                           (.07)               (.146)            (.100)
30 Minutes Transit


Import Ratio   for        —.15                -.003               .488
All Workers                (.07)              (.008)             (.100)
Import Ratio for
                          —.15                —.0002              .488
Blue Collar and
                          (.07)               (.0044)            (.100)
Service Workers
Import Ratio for          —.15                 .0048              .49].
Teenagers                 (.07)               (.0040)            (.095)



Average Travel            —.14                -.0017              .492
Time for All
                          (.07)               (.0013)            (.099)
Workers
Average Travel
Time for Blue             —.13                —.0017              .492
Collar and                (.07)               (.0013)            (.099)
Service Workers
Averae Travel             -.15                -.0010              .496
Time for Teenagers        (.07)               (.0006)            (.099)


Source: 1970 Census Tract Data and 1970 Chicago Area Transportation
         Survey.

(Othervariables include percent Spanish, percent high school gradu-
ates, percent of persons in tract over age 25, average famfly incotie,
percent of persons ir poor households, percent of children in single
parent families.)
                              —46—



been able to capture It here explains little in predominantely black

tracts.

     flere is another perhaps even more telling finding, however.

PBLACK was included because a few of these tracts had small white

populations. Typically, these are tracts which span ghetto boundaries.

The intriguing feature of Table 7 is that the coefficient on PBLACK is

almost as large as it was for all tracts. The only whites in this sample

live in the ghettos or at its borders, yet tracts with more whites have

better employment rates. This could be an accident, but it raises the

possibility that black/white differentials within neighborhoods are almost

as high a differential for blacks and whites living across town after we

control for income, schooling and the like. If so, neighborhood differences

cannot really explain the relatively poor performances of young blacks.

We shall return to the issue momentarily.

     We have tried a wide array of accessibility variables. Most have

performed poorly. While they usually had the correct sign, magnitudes

were typically very small and many were insignificant. At best the

magnitude seems consistent with a model which suggests that xtra commuting

time reduces the real wage and thus reduces labor supply. Not a single

one of these explained anything of the black/white differences. Surely

this performance has offered little support for the hypotheses that a

major reason that blacks perform poorly in Chicago is their isolation in

neighborhoods with low proximity. We are always confronted with the

nagging problem, however, that we may simply have miseed the true differences

in accessibility across neighborhoods. It seems appropriate, therefore,

to turn our focus to a more fundamental level. We ought to explore just

how big neighborhood effects of whatever origin are, once we have controlled

for a few basic socio—economic variables.
                                —47—



Fixed Effects Models

     When employment rates by census tract are displayed on a map, we

observe sizable differences across neighborhoods. If we knew only a

youngster's neighborhood, it would help us greatly in making predictions

about his or her likely employment status. But it would also aid us in

predicting his race, his education and his family's income. We would

like to know whether significant neighborhood differences remain after

we control for our usual list of socio—economic variables. Indeed, we

really would like to know whether the strength of such socio—economic

variables such as race or income can actually be traced to neighborhood

effects which are correlated with these variables.

     We can explicitly allow for fixed neighborhood effects by providing

each community zone with its own intercept. These intercepts will control

for all the differences between zones, the only information which remains

comes from differences in outcomes within community zones. When we

examine the regression results for a fixed effects' model, we are exploring

only the effects of particular independent variables within neighborhoods.

     The results of this experiment really are astonishing. The coefficient

on PBLACK does not fall; it actually rises to .22. There is only one

possible inference: blacks and whites in the same community zone fare

as differently as blacks and whites across town from each other. Remember

we have 76 community zones in the city alone. In these small areas we

have a larger racial differential. No wonder proximity measures failed

to influence the PBLACK coefficient. Perhaps the result should not have

been a surprise. After all we saw that even where we looked at predominantly

black tracts, race seemed just as important as before as an explanatory
                              —48—




variable. We can infer that no measure of accessibility, however

conceived, which is defined by community area will account for black/white
                                                                             -


differences.
                                                            traditional
     Perhaps the most stunning result of all comes from the
Fischer Test for equality of coefficients. We can test whether the

hypothesis of no neighborhood effects (equality of intercepts) is rejected

by the data. The restriction of a uniform intercept is not rejected.

The result seems extraordinary. There are so many reasons to expect
                                           accessibility on the measured
neighborhoods to differ quite apart from

independent variable that we certainly would have expected to fail this test.

We find small neighborhood effects from whatever origin.

     It's important not to overrepresent the power of the finding. The
                                                        defined in the l940s——
definition of neighborhood used here——community areas

may not conform well to current realities. The fact that these neighborhoods

don't jointly yield significant effects does not mean some other configuration

would not. Nor does the result imply that none of the individual neighborhood
                                                            Still, the total
effects are significant——they are only jointly impotent.

lack of impact on PBLACK and the visual and statistical failure of

neighborhood effects using the city's own designations of neighborhoods

 casts serious doubts on the significance of the mismatch story.

     We can restate the findings in another way.    If we not know a

youngster's level of schooling, his family income or his race, then
                                             us predict how he will fare
 knowing his or her neighborhood will help

 in the job market. But if we do not know these basic soclo—ecoflOmic facts,

 knowing the location of his neighborhood will not tell us very much.
                                                 not at all supportive of
      The 1970 employment rate regressions are
                                   market performance of blacks on their
 a hypothesis blaming weak labor
                                  —49—



  segregation into neighborhoods with weak labor demand. No accessibility

measures work well. Even allowing for a great many fixed neighborhood

effects, we were unable to reduce the PBLACK coefficient once schooling

and income are controlled for. This tract data casts serious doubts in

the mismatch story. Individual data from the Census Employment Survey

 (CES) wounds it even more seriously.



Comparisons of South and West Side Labor Market Outcomes

     According to the Northeastern Illinois Planning Commission, in 1970

the 11 community areas within the city which lie south of the loop provided

less than 5% of the city's jobs. The three community areas in the West Side

ghetto had more than three times as many. And every single measure of

proximity we defined shows that the West Side has much better proximity

to jobs than the South Side does. Indeed the West Side typically offers

among the best accessibility and the South Side the worst in the entire SMSA.

     A drive through the West Side and South Side black ghettos Is just

as revealing. From almost any block In the West Side, large smoke stacks

can be seen. These inevitably are Industrial structures. (Not all are

still In operation.) Right In the center of the West Side, the

international headquarters of Sears could be found in 1970. The complex

occupied several city blocks. The company conducted both office and ware-

housing and sales functions right there. Sears moved Its headquarters to the

Sears Tower In 1972, but even today Sears maintains the area as a warehouse

and distribution center. On the eastern half of the ghetto is a large

complex of hospitals, which are traditionally a source of low skill jobs

for service workers (cleaning, food preparation and distribution, orderly
                                 —50—



services, etc.). On several borders and extending into the ghetto are

old industrial parks. Brocks Candy, Westinghouse, General Electric all

have manufacturing plants in and around the area. The only smoke stacks

on the South Side are from schools and churches. The South offers only two

sources of employment, small commercial establishments along a few streets

and the University of Chicago.

     In short, we have been blessed by a marvellous natural experiment. In

many ways, the Census Employment Survey is ideal for our purposes. It

was conducted right after the 1970 Census. Separate surveys were done on

the West and South Sides of Chicago. Blacks and whites sere surveyed in

low income neighborhoods and it was a survey particularly designed to

gain labor market information.

     We have already seen that measures of accessibility explained little

of the variation in employment rates for young people in entirely black

census tracts. Since much of the variation in accessibility is between

the West and South Sides, we have already implicitly exploited the natural

experiment and found little support. The CES data allow a much more

explicit test. They offer a marvelous window to view the effects of

economic history.

     West and South side data were drawn from low income census tracts.

Thus the sampling technique already corrects for the single biggest

explanatory variable besides race. Considerable mileage can be gotten by

making simple comparisons of the average labor market outcomes in each

area. Since we have excellent individual information, we can compare

not only employment rates, but unemployment patterns, school enrollment,

 occupational mix, wage rates, enen journey to work times betwen the two

 zones.
                                 —51—



      Table 8 shows unemployment rates, employment rates, educational

 attainment, and travel time for blacks in each ghetto area. The similarity
                                                                            -
 in oufiomes is remarkable. Half of the out of school youngsters in each

 ghetto   had jobs in 1970. Two—fifths of those without a high school degree

work in either zone. The West Sides does edge out the South ever so slightly.

But these figures are based on roughly 100 observations in each zone.

Standard errors for the employment and unemployment rates are roughly five

percentage points. In these figures, the employment and unemployment

rates never differ by more than three percentage points. And we would

expect the reduced real wage on the South Side to induce small differences

in labor supply.

     The picture here is one of equal depression on both sides of the loop.

Fully half of the out of school dropouts in both areas report themselves

as interested in work, but unable to find it. School attainment differs

slightly in the two areas (the differences are not statistically significant)

but roughly two—thirds of the out of school 16—21 year olds are droputs

in both places. (This does not imply the dropout rate is 67%). The

problems look severe, and they look equally severe in each area.

     Indeed, the only variable on Table 8 which shows a marked difference

is the two areas on travel time. Youngsters on the South Side spend

25% longer getting to work. The differences are especially pronounced

for dropouts. West Side dropouts spend 25 minutes getting to their jobs;

their South Side counterparts need 10 extra minutes to reach theirs.

The earlier description of job proximity is confirmed again here. South

Side residents must travel much farther to their jobs. They really do

live further away.
                             —52—


                            TABLE   8

COMPARISON OF EMPLOYMENT, UNEMPLOYMENT RATES, EDUCATIONAL ATTAIN-
MENT, AND TRAVEL TIMES FOR OUT-OF-SCHOOL BLACK MALES AGED 16-21
IN VERY LOW-INCOME NEIGHBORHOODS ON THE SOUTH AND WEST SIDES OF
                              CHI CAGO



                                                  Ghetto   Location

                                        South Side              West Side

Unernoloyment   Rate
   All                                      .38                       .35


   HicTh School Dropouts                    .50                       .48



Ernolovment   Rate
   All                                      .51                       .54


   High School Dropouts                     .38                       .41



Educational Attairunent

   Proportion High School                    61                        56
   Dropouts


Travel Time

   All                                  36 minutes             29 minutes

   High   School Dropouts               35 minutes             25 minutes


Source:   Census Employment Survey.
                                 —53—



      Occupational patterns in the two areas also look uncannily common.

 (See Table 9.) Even though sample sizes are quite small, nearly equal

 proportions of young people are found working as managerial and professional

 workers, as craftsmen, as operators, as transport workers, and as laborers.

 Only clerical and service occupations show some divergence. South Side

workers are more commonly found in clerical positions. A chi—squared test

 comes nowhere nearrejecting the hypothesis that the areas are identical.

Finally, there is the matter of wage rates. South Side residents look better

rather than worse jobs by this yardstick.

     The differences in labor market outcomes are very small. Whether you

travel south or west from the loop, you will find similar employment

problems. Considering the fact that simple journey to work costs vary

between the areas, it's all the more surprising that we don't find at least

some differences. Actually, we do see small effects. If we accept the point

estimates, South Side residents do work a bit less (3 percentage points or

6%), go to school a little longer, and demand or command a slightly higher

wage. The differences in proximity are slightly higher than what we would

have expected based on the real wage effect of a 10 minute longer commute

for South Side residents. However, the results do not suggest a massive

impact of proximity on employment about the modest effect of transportation

costs on the real wage.

     We can perform more sophisticated comparisons. I have specified human

capital type wage equations, traditional schooling equations, labor

supply and unemployment models and run them separately for each area.

Sample sizes are small, so coefficients tend to be somewhat unstable, but

Fischer tests are rarely failed. When pooled regressions are run but a
                                —54-.




                               TABLE 9


            COARISON OF OCCUPATIONAL MIX     AND WAGE RATES
            FOR PERSONS 16-21 IN LOW-INCOME NEIGHBORHOODS
               ON THE SOUTH AND WEST SIDES OF CHICAGO


                                                   Ghetto Location

                                         South Side           West Side
Occupation

Managerial and Professional                 3.9%                      3.5%

Craftsmen                                   9.8%                      8.6%


Operatives                 -
                                           33.3%                     35.3%

                                            5.9%                      4.3%
Transport    Workers

Laborer                                    15.7%                     17.2%

Clerical                                   17.6%                     11.2%


Service Workers                            13.7%                     18.1%

                                            0.0%                      1.8%
Other



                                           $2.92                     $2.75
Average Wage Rate:



Source: Census Employment Survey, 1970.
                                  —55--




West Side dummy is used, it is almost always insignificant, though it

occasionally shows a slight edge for the West Side. After controlling for

the traditional labor market variables, outcomes remain remarkably similar.   --




     We   have once again turned up virtually no evidence in support of the

mismatch story. We had what appeared to be the purest of natural experiments;

measurably identical populations in measurably different job settings.

The labor market results were not measurably different.



pspns of Labor Market Outcomes for Black and Whites
Living in the Samejborhood

     There is one natural experiment which offers even more compelling

evidence. Fundamentally, the mismatch story is an attempt to explain

racial patterns of employment by their residential locations. The cleanest

experiment of all then is to compare employment patterns for different

racial groups who live in the same location. The CES once again provides

the opportunity.

     Poor neighborhoods in the South Side are almost entirely black.

But in the West and Near—Northwest, we find both blacks and whites.

The West Side survey captured both whites and blacks living in close

proximity.

     Table 10 shows employment and unemployment rates for out of school

males living in the surveyed low income area. Once again, the data are

quite startling. In each age group, considerably more whites have found

work than the blacks. For young people the differences are particularly

extreme. Nearly 80% of the out of school whites are working; just over 50%

of comparable blacks are. In this area of the city we see black youth

unemployment rates of 35%, while whites suffer only 11% unemployment.
                                   —56—


                                TABLE   10


      UNEMPLOYMENT AND EMPLOYMENT RATES FOR WHITE AND BLACK
           OUT-CF-SCHOOL MALES LIVING IN POOR NEIGHBORHOODS
                    ON CHICAGO'S WEST SIDE BY AGE




Unemployment   Rates               16—21     22-29   30—39    40—65

  White                            11.0%      7.6%    3.9%     4.3%

   Black                           35.1%     21.3%   11.5%     6.7%


Employment Rates
  White                            79.4%     88.8%   91.2%    77.1%

   Black                           54.3%     73.3%   78.9%    72.3%


Percent High School Graduates

  White                            29.4%     42.1%   33.3%    29.9%

   Black                           33.7%     57.0%   3L3%     20.9%




Source: 1970 Census Employment Survey
                                    —57—



     The table also reveals that differences cannot be attributed to level

of education. In the younger cohorts, there are a greater proportion of

black high   school   graduates than whites. This result may reflect greater

Out migration by better educated whites. If so, the results are all the

more compelling. Those whites who remain behind are likely the ones least

effect in job search.

     I have run regressions comparable to the census tract employment rate

equations for individuals in the CES. A simple OLS regression was run on

a dichotomous employment status variable (1 =    employed).   The coefficient On

race (1 =   black)   was —.20. Controlling for everything we can, being black

dampened employment prospects by 20 percentage points over whites in the

same area. The —.20 coefficient is virtually identical to the 0.18 we found

for black compared to white tracts across the SMSA. The problem isn't

space. It's race.

     And this result is verified by yet another source. A very recent

survey conducted by Jon D. Miller for Chicago United, a socially—oriented

group of major businessmen. The survey was limited to a few low income

areas within the city. Teenagers, black or white, were surveyed in each

area. The results were quite startling. Using the BLS methodology, Miller

found astounding unemployment rates of 65% for black youth, 29% for

Hispanics, and 13% for whites all living in low income areas. While the

figures for blacks are surely higher than we would expect on a standard

ELS administered survey, the differences between low income black youth

and white youth in these neighborhoods is dramatic.
                               —58—



     Perhaps the single strongest bit of evidence that racial mix not

neighborhood location explains unemployment comes from turning to a map

of employment rates. Map 1 plots on a map of employment rates for out

of school males aged 16—21. Outlined on the map are all of the tracts

in the city where PBLACK exceeds 50 percent.

    Here at last we can see quite plainly why our statistical tests

fail. Areas with low teenage employment rates and those with predominantly

black residents are almost perfectly collinear. Look for example at the

West Side. The area to the north of the eastern half of the West Side

is poor white and Hispanic. Yet there are large areas along the northern

border where moving from a black tract across the street to white one

moves the employment rate from below 30% to over 60% across the street.

The same pattern appears at almost every border of the black areas. There

is a black ribbon running from the West Side to an area just south of the

loop, and there is an identical ribbon of low teenage employment. The

teenage employment rates are not based on very large samples, so we can

expect considerable variability. That the employment rates and racial

composition should be so closely matched is, therefore, all the more

surprising. Blacks and whites in similar economic circumstances in very

similar locations fare very differently.

     No wonder models with accessibility measures and even fixed effects

failed to budge the PBLACK coefficient. Where blacks live employment rates

are low. Across the street where whites reside, they are high.   No

variable, however clever, is going to make that result vanish.



Conclusion

     We have explored in detail the spatial dimensions of one labor market.

In Chicago low skill jobs are suburbanizing faster than low skill workers.
                                      —59—



                                     Map 1




                   • q 9.
 EMPLOYI€NT RATE FOR OUT—OF—SCHOOL YOUTH AGE 16—21 BY CENSUS TRACT, 1970:
         Window 1 and Tracts with More than 50% Blacks Outlined
           4.JW
           wo                    •

 -J
 C
 I
 C
 U
CU

z
F-
C
z
(\J



cn
uJ
a:
LU
F-
a:
El
F-
z
LU
z
0
z
LU
                                 —60—




Young blacks do spend longer getting to work than young whites do,

considerably more. Yet all of our attempts to find a substantial impact

of job accessibility on labor market outcomes lead to the same consistent

conclusion: accessibility matters only slightly——about as much as would

be expected from s slightly lower real wage due to extra commuting time.

We found no evidence that any important part of the black/white employment

rate differential could be traced to differential geographic proximity

to jobs. Black and white teenagers with comparable measured characteristics

do just as differently when they live next to each other as when they live

far apart.

     Based on these results it is possible to understand both the appeal

of the mismatch story and its failure. Blacks really are being gradually

disadvantaged by the movement of jobs——at least in Chicago. But the labor

market is large enough geographically and fluid enough that these outward

movements of jobs do not appear to cause substantial disadvantages to

those who remain behind——except that they must commute further to work

on average.

     The results here are only for one city of course, though preliminary

results from other cities suggest the results apply elsewhere. And

data from Chicago has been used by mismatch supporters in the past.

Chicago   has all the symptoms of the mismatch disease. The disease just
doesn't   seem to be the cause of the many labor market pains of teenagers.
                                  —61—




                             FOOTNOTES




     1. Kain (1968a).

     2. Offner and Saks (1971).

     3. Mooney (1969).

     4. Masters (1974), see also Offner and Saks (1971).

     5. See especially Harrison (1972) and Harrison (1974).

     6. Kalachic and Goering (1970).

     7. Danziger and Weinstein (1976)

     8. Strazheim (1980)

     9. Eliwood (1981)

    10. See Alonso (1964) and Kain (1962)

    11. See, for exa:nole. Kain (1980) and Berry (1976).

    12. The theorem also requires production functions be homo-
geneous of degree one and that the same sector will always be more
labor intensive than the other regardless of the wage-land rent
ratio. For more than two sectors, the conditions are considerably
more complicated.

    13. Noll (1970).

    14. Hamer (1972)

    15. Kain (1968a).

    16. There is considerable debate surrounding the issue of a
possible inner-city land shortage. For some discussion, see
Harrison (1974).

    17. Becker (1957).
                                   —62--




    18. Longer travel times for blacks have been found by many authors.
In every category where results for blacks are reported, Rees and
Schultz (1970) show far greater travel distances for black than for
white workers in Chicago. Theirs is a non—random sample of firms,
however: Deskins (1972) finds longer travel times for blacks in Detroit.
Meyer, Kain, and Wohi (1965) show racial differences in Chicago and
Detroit. Greytak (1974) argues that blacks and whites behave very
differently.

   19. See, for example, Beesley (1973) and Hensher (1976).

    20. Rees and Schultz (1970).

    21. See also Stevens (1978), Youthwork (1980), and Rosenfield (1977).
                                     —63—



                             BIBLIOGRAPHY



 Alonso,..William. Location and Land Use: Toward a General Theory
      of Land

 Becker, Gary. The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago: Univer-
      sity of Chicago Press, 1957.

 Beesley, Michael. Urban Transportation Studies in Economic Polic.
      London: Buttersworth and Company, 1973.

Berry, Brian. "Ghetto Expansion and Single Family Housing Prices:
     Chicago, 1968—1972." Journal of Urban Economics, October 1976.

Chicago Area Labor Market Analyses Unit. Where Workers Work. Bureau
     of Employment Security, Department of Labor, State of Illinois,
     1960, 1970, 1971, 1979.

Chicago Area Transporation Study. A Summary of Travel Characteristics.
     Chicago, August 1977.

Chicago Area Transporation Survey, Travel Characteristics. Chicago,
     1975.

Chicago Area Transporation Study. Volume II Data Projections.
     Chicago, July 1960.

Danziger, Sheldon and Michael Weinstein. "Employment Location and Wage
     Rates of Poverty Area Residents." Journal of Urban Economics,
     April 1976.

Deskins, Donald. "Race, Residence, and Workplace in Detroit, 1880
     to 1965." Economic Geography, January 1972.

Ellwood, David T. The Mismatch Hypothesis: Are There Teenage Jobs
     Missing in the Ghetto, unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard
     University, October 1981.

Greytak, David. "The Journey to Work: Racial Differentials and
     City Size." Traffic Quarterly, April 1974.

Hatner, Andrew. The Comparative Costs of Location of Manufacturing
     Firms in Urban Areas: A Boston Case Study. Unpublished Ph.D.
     dissertation, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass., 1972.

Harrison, Bennett. "Education and Underemployment in the Urban
     Ghetto." American Economic Review, 1972.
                                   —64—



 Harrison, Bennett. "The Intrametropolitan Distribution of Minority
      Economic Welfare." Journal of Regional Science, 1972.

 Harrison, Bennett. Urban Economic Development. Washington, D.C.:
      Tle Urban Institute, 1974.

 Hensher, David, "The Value of Travel Time Savings." Journal of
      Transport Economics and Policy, May 1976.

Kain, John. "Housing Segregation, Negro Employment, and Metropoli-
     tan Decentralization." Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     May 1968(a).
Rain, John. National Urban Policy Paper on the Impact of Housing
     Market Discrimination and Segregation in the Welfare of
     Minorities. Unpublished, April 1980.

Rain,    John. The Journey—to—Work as a Determinant of Residential
        Location." Papers and Proceedings of the Regional Science
        Association, Volume 9, 1962.

Kalachic, Edward and John Goering, editors. Transportation and
     Central City Unemployment. St. Louis: Institute for Urban
     and Regional Studies, Washington University, 1970.

 Masters,   Stanley. "A Note on John Kain's 'Housing Segregation, Negro
        Employment, and Metropolitan Decentralization'." Quarterly
        Journal of Economics, August 1974.

 Meyer, John, John Rain and M. Wohi. The Urban Transportation Prob—
      lern. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1965.

 Mooney, Joseph. "Housing Segregation, Negro Employment, and Metro-
      politan Decentralization: An Alternative Perspective."
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1969.

 Noll, Roger. "Metropolitan Employment and Population Distribution
      and the Conditions of the Urban Poor." In John Crecine, editor,
      Financing the Metropolis, Urban Affairs Annual Review, Volume 4,
      Sage PublicatIons, 1970.

 Offner, Paul and Daniel Saks. "A Note on John Rain's 'Housing
      Segregation, Negro Employment, and Metropolitan Decentralization'."
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1971.

 Rees, Albert and George Schultz. Workers and Wages in an Urban
      Labor Market. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970

Rosenfield, Carl. "The Extent of Job Search by Unemployed Workers."
      Monthly Labor Review, March 1977.
                                 —65—



Stevens, David. "A Re—examination of What Is Know About Job
     Seeking Behavior in the United States." In National Cotrmiission
     for Manpower Policy, Labor Market Intermediaries, March 1978.


Straszhm, Mahlon. "Discrimination and the Spatial Characteristics
     of the Urban Labor Market for Black Workers." Journal of
     Urban Economics, 1980.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. U.S. Census of Poulatjon: 1960.
     Selected Area Reports. Standard Metropolitan Statistical Areas.
     Washington: Government Printing Office, 1963.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. U.S. Census of Population: 1970.
     Volume I. Characteristics of the Population. Part 15 Illinois.
     Washington: Government Printing Office, 1973.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. U.S. Census of Population and Housing:
     1970. Census Tracts Chicago, Illinois SMSA. Washington:
     Government Printing Office, 1973.

Youthwork, Inc. "Learning About and Seeking Employment." In
     School—to—Work Transition: Reviews and Synthesis of the
     Literature. Youth Knowled&eDevelopmentReport 2.15 U.S.
     Department of Labor, May 1980.
