NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIRM EXPANSION AND CEO PAY
Lucian Bebchuk
Yaniv Grinstein
Working Paper 11886
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11886
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2005

We are grateful to Arturo Bris, John Core, Cliff Holderness, Lu Zhang, and participants in workshops at
Harvard University, University of Rochester, and the NBER for helpful comments and discussions. For
financial support, we would like to thank the Guggenheim Foundation, the Nathan Cummins Foundation,
the Lens Foundation for Corporate Excellence, and the Harvard John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics,
and Business. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Lucian Bebchuk and Yaniv Grinstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Firm Expansion and CEO Pay
Lucian Bebchuk and Yaniv Grinstein
NBER Working Paper No. 11886
December 2005
JEL No. D23, G32, G38, J33, J44, K22, M14
ABSTRACT
We study the extent to which decisions to expand firm size are associated with increases in
subsequent CEO compensation. Controlling for past stock performance, we find a positive
correlation between CEO compensation and the CEO's past decisions to increase firm size. This
correlation is economically meaningful; for example, other things being equal, CEOs who in the
preceding three years were in the top quartile in terms of expanding by increasing the number of
shares outstanding receive compensation that is higher by one-third than the compensation of CEOs
belonging to the bottom quartile. We also find that stock returns are correlated with subsequent CEO
pay only to the extent that they contribute to expanding firm size; only the component of past stock
returns not distributed as dividends is correlated with subsequent CEO pay. Finally, we find an
asymmetry between increases and decreases in size: while increases in firm size are followed by
higher CEO pay, decreases in firm size are not followed by reduction in such pay. The association
we find between CEOs' compensation and firm-expanding decisions undertaken earlier during their
service could provide CEOs with incentives to expand firm size.
Lucian Bebchuk
Harvard Law School
1557 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
bebchuk@law.harvard.edu
Yaniv Grinstein
Cornell University
yg33@cornell.edu

1. Introduction
A long-standing view in economics and finance holds that managers have an excessive
incentive to expand the size of their firm, (e.g., Baumol (1959), Jensen (1986), Morck,
Shleifer, and Vishny (1990)). On this view, managers could choose to make some valuedecreasing acquisitions, as well as to retain excessive cash flow instead of distributing it to
shareholders. Managers might act in this way because increasing firm size could serve their
private interests in various ways. Among other things, Jensen (1986) suggests that expanding
firm size might benefit managers by enabling them to obtain larger executive pay.
The view that firm expansion might be rewarded by higher executive pay relies in part on
the observation that pay and firm size appear to be correlated. As many studies document (see,
e.g., Core, Holthausen, and Larcker (1999), and Cyert, Kang, and Kumar (2002))—and as any
casual look at compensation tables published by the financial press suggests—larger firms tend
to provide their CEOs with larger pay packages. However, upon reflection, the correlation
between firm size and CEO pay does not establish that CEOs could increase the size of their
pay package by expanding firm size or that CEO pay is correlated with the CEO’s own choices
whether (and to what extent) to expand firm size.
For example, suppose that the compensation of continuing CEOs at any given year is a
function only of (i) the size of the firm when the executive started serving as a CEO (say,
because firms with a larger size seek to attract more talented executives), and (ii) the stock
performance of the company during the CEO’s service thus far. If boards act in this way,
expanding the size of the firm will by itself (i.e., putting aside any effect it might have on stock
returns) have no effect on the CEO’s subsequent compensation. In such a case, however, we
will still observe a correlation between CEOs’ current compensation and the size of their firms
because the size of a continuing CEO’s firm is likely to be correlated both with the firm’s size
when the CEO began serving and with the stock performance during the CEO’s service. Thus,
to identify whether the prospect of higher subsequent pay could provide CEOs with incentives
to expand firm size, we need to investigate whether past CEO decisions to expand are followed
by a compensation increase beyond the increase due to improved performance associated with
these expansions (if any). We pursue such an investigation in this study.
We find that a CEO’s compensation is correlated with the firm’s stock performance during
the preceding years of the CEO’s service. We also find, however, that, controlling for such past
performance, a CEO’s compensation, as well as the change in the CEO’s compensation from
1

earlier levels, is correlated with increases in the firm’s size — in terms of either assets or sales
— during the preceding years of the CEO’s service.
We further investigate the association between pay and size-expansion decisions by
decomposing changes in firm size into two components: increases in shares outstanding and
increases in size (whether measured by assets or sales) per share. We find that, other things
being equal, a CEO’s current pay is correlated with the rate of growth in the number of shares
outstanding during the CEO’s preceding service. This rate of share growth is the product of (i)
issuance of shares to finance acquisitions, (ii) issuance of shares to finance investments and
internal expansion, (iii) issuances of shares to finance compensation to employees (in lieu of
paying them in cash, which reduces firm size), and (iv) decisions whether to repurchase shares
(which operate to reduce firm size and share growth). By increasing the number of shares
outstanding, a CEO can increase firm size without necessarily increasing shareholder returns.
The identified correlation between CEO pay and preceding growth of shares outstanding is
economically meaningful: Holding all else constant, the average compensation in firms that
belong to the top quartile in terms of change in shares outstanding in the preceding three years
is higher by about one-third than the average compensation given to the bottom quartile.
We also find that, other things being equal (including past stock returns), a CEO’s pay is
correlated with the increase in assets per share and sales per share during the CEO’s preceding
service. This association is also economically meaningful. Holding all else constant, the
average compensation in firms that belong to the top quartile in terms of increasing per share
sales during the preceding three years is higher by about one-fifth than the average
compensation given to the bottom quartile. Similarly, holding all else constant, the average
compensation in firms that belong to the top quartile in terms of increasing per share assets
during the preceding three years is higher by about one-fourth than the average compensation
given to the bottom quartile. Because strategies that would maximize per share sales or per
share assets might differ from ones that would maximize stockholder returns, these finding are
also relevant for assessing executives’ incentives.
We also decompose past stock returns under a continuing CEO into the capital gain
component—that is, the part of the return not paid out as dividends—and the dividend
component. We find that a CEO’s compensation is correlated with the capital gain component
of the stock returns under the CEO’s preceding service, but we do not find such correlation for
the dividend component. Because the dividend component of total stock returns does not
contribute to firm size (even though it does contribute to shareholder wealth), this finding is
2

consistent with the general positive correlation we find between firm-expanding decisions and
higher subsequent pay.
Our analysis of the expansion-compensation correlation also identifies an asymmetry
between increases and decreases in firm size.1 The positive correlation between compensation
and size is driven by firms that increase firm size and not by firms that decrease firm size.
There is correlation between size changes and compensation among CEOs who increase firm
size but not among CEOs who decrease firm size.
We should stress that CEOs’ firm-expansion decisions are influenced not only by
expectations that expansion will be followed by higher subsequent pay but also by the
expected effect that expansion decisions will have on the value of options and shares given to
the CEOs earlier as part of their compensation packages. Other things being equal, such
holdings of shares and options operate to align CEOs’ incentives with those of the
shareholders. Indeed, there is evidence that CEOs with larger holdings of shares and options
are less likely to make value-decreasing acquisition decisions (see, e.g., Amihud and Lev
(1981), Lewellen and Loderer (1984)). However, as we shall discuss in the next section, for
any given level of managerial holdings of shares and options, CEOs’ decisions will be
distorted in the direction of excessive size expansion if expansion can be expected to produce
higher subsequent pay.
We should also emphasize that our findings of correlation between firm expansion and
subsequent pay does not indicate that current compensation practices are suboptimal. To be
sure, such correlation might be the result of boards’ use of benchmarking by size that
compensation consultants recommend (Hall and Murphy (2003), Bebchuk and Fried (2004)).
However, such correlation could also result from arm’s length contracting between boards and
managers. For example, a larger firm size might make it desirable to provide the CEO with
more powerful incentives (Baker and Hall (2004)), and it also might strengthen the manager’s
bargaining position by increasing the cost to the company of replacing the manager or by
providing the manager with experience that enhances the value of outside opportunities. Thus,
even though a connection between firm expansion and subsequent pay might distort managers’
ex ante choices, having such a connection might be necessary or optimal overall.
While our results do not necessarily indicate that current compensation patterns are
suboptimal, they validate the concern expressed by Jensen (1986) and others that compensation
1

Our analysis of this issue is in the spirit of Garvey and Milbourn (2005), who study whether pay
responds differently to positive and negative changes in stock returns.

3

practices provide managers with incentives to expand firm size. Recognition and study of these
incentives are important for understanding firms’ decisions to issue shares, make acquisitions
and investments, and distribute cash through cash dividends and repurchases.
Finally, it should be noted that managers’ expansion decisions might be influenced by
factors other than the effect of these decisions on the managers’ current holdings of shares and
options and their subsequent compensation. A distortion in favor of expansion produced by
compensation practices could be strengthened by expectations that expansion would increase
managers’ power and prestige or make a takeover less likely. A distortion in favor of
expansion, however, might also be mitigated by the presence of large block-holders and
vigilant boards (which might lead to the firing of underperforming CEOs), by career concerns,
by the market for corporate control, by the larger effort levels required to manage larger firms,
or by other factors that might operate to discourage managers from producing low returns for
shareholders (see, e.g., Benston (1985), Rosen (1992)). Thus, assessing whether and to what
extent firm-expansion decisions are rewarded by compensation practices – our aim in this
paper – is necessary but not sufficient for a full understanding of managers’ private incentives
with respect to firm expansion.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses the question we
seek to investigate and the prior empirical work on the subject. Section III presents our
empirical analysis. Section IV concludes.
2. Research questions and Prior work
2.1. Jensen’s conjecture
A good statement of the conjecture we seek to study can be found in Jensen (1986). Jensen
argues that “managers have incentive to cause their firms to grow beyond the optimal size.”
Some of these incentives, Jensen suggests, arise from the fact that growth is “associated with
increases in managers’ compensation.”
The concern about CEOs’ incentives arises from the plausible assumption that CEOs can
have considerable influence on changes in firm size. While some relevant decisions (e.g.,
decisions to make acquisitions or distributions) are made by the board, CEOs wield
considerable influence on whether the issue will reach the board and on the board’s decision.
CEOs are likely to have information that directors do not have, and they are often the ones that
4

initiate firm-expansion decisions and make proposals and recommendations to the board.
Which decisions concerning firm size would be value-maximizing is not observable and, thus
commonly, cannot be decided by the board (or directly by shareholders) without any input
from the firm’s top executives. As a result, CEOs can influence the firm-expansion decisions
that their firms make, and this influence in turn is shaped by their private incentives.
Compensation practices affect CEOs’ payoffs from decisions concerning firm size in two
ways. First, compensation arrangements provide CEOs with options and shares, and CEOs will
likely take into account the effect of their decisions on the value of the portfolio of shares and
options they hold as a result of prior compensation decisions. Second, CEOs might well take
into account how their decisions will affect the value of (both cash and equity-based)
compensation that they can expect to receive later on.
There are several reasons why CEOs might expect an increasing firm size to lead to
increased compensation in subsequent periods. Even assuming that the board is solely focused
on shareholder interests and engages in arm’s-length contracting with the CEO, a larger firm
size might lead the board to grant higher pay. An increased firm size might make it desirable to
provide the CEO with more powerful incentives; might provide the manager with experience,
visibility, and connections that could enhance the CEO’s outside options; and might strengthen
the CEO’s bargaining position also by raising the costs of replacing the CEO with a new one.
In addition, because a board might seek to maintain some parity with compensation in peer
companies to avoid morale and prestige issues, a larger firm size could lead to the CEO’s
compensation being compared to that in larger companies with higher pay.
From the shareholders’ perspective, the only relevant question is how a given firmexpansion decision will affect returns. From the manager’s private perspective, however, both
return and size matter, which means that the manager’s decision would be distorted in favor of
firm expansion. As long as the CEO can expect an increase in the firm size to increase the
CEO’s subsequent compensation, this expectation would introduce a distortion, on the margin,
in favor of such a size expansion. The CEO’s current holdings of shares and options could
mitigate the magnitude of this distortion but not eliminate it.
To illustrate, consider a CEO who serves for two periods and is expected to receive in the
beginning of each period 1% of the firm’s shares. And suppose that during the first period, the
CEO faces an opportunity to make a stock-financed acquisition that would double the
company’s number of shares and would change returns to existing shareholders by x%. In this
situation, if x is negative, the CEO will take into account both (i) that the acquisition will
5

reduce the value of the shares the CEO received in the beginning of the first period, and (ii)
that the acquisition will double the number of shares that the CEO will receive in the beginning
of the second period. Clearly, there is a range of negative values that x might take for which
the CEO will still be better off making the acquisition.
To see the point more generally, consider a CEO who holds a fraction α of a company’s
shares as a result of earlier compensation decisions. Suppose that, without any firm-expansion
decisions, the market value of the company’s shares at the end of the current period will be W0,
and the value of the CEO’s position will thus be αW0. The CEO now faces an opportunity to
take an action that would increase (some measure of) firm size by γ and will increase the return
to the existing shareholders by ρ.
Suppose also that the compensation to the CEO, C ( ρ , γ ) , is an increasing function of both

the return ρ and the size expansion γ.. In this case, the CEO will decide to expand size if and
only if: C(ρ, γ) + α W0 ρ >0. As long as ∂ C / ∂ γ > 0, the threshold ρ* over which the CEO
will make the acquisition will be negative. The intuition is that the CEO will be making a
positive profit even for a firm-expansion action that breaks even for the existing shareholders
(ρ=0). With ρ=0, the CEO will neither gain nor lose on the CEO’s existing shares but will gain
from obtaining a higher compensation in the next period. Thus, the threshold ρ* at which the
CEO breaks even from an expansion decision must be negative. Note that the larger α is, the
weaker the distortion. As long as the expansion will bring about a higher next-period pay (i.e.,
∂ C / ∂ γ > 0), however, there will be a distortion in favor of expansion. This association

makes it important to find out whether, under current pay practices, CEOs can expect that,
controlling for stock return performance, expansion will be followed by a pay increase.
The fact that an association between firm expansion and subsequent compensation might
distort firm-expansion decisions does in no way imply that such a connection, if it exists, is a
part of suboptimal pay practices. Ex post, i.e., after the expansion decision was made, it might
be efficient for pay setting to be characterized by ∂ C / ∂ γ > 0. Thus, optimal setting of pay
policy might involve a tradeoff between the ex post benefits of increasing pay when size
increases and the ex ante costs that such a connection might have in terms of distorting earlier
firm-expansion decisions. Thus, finding a correlation between compensation and earlier firmexpansion decisions under the CEO does not imply that existing compensation practices are
suboptimal. But it does indicate that these practices produce incentives to expand that boards

6

should recognize, and that researchers studying firm acquisition, investment, and distribution
decisions should take into account.
Finally, it should be noted that, while we focus on identifying whether compensation
practices provide incentives to expand firm size, such incentives may be reinforced or
countervailed by other factors. Expansion decisions might affect the CEO’s utility in ways
other than through their effect on the CEO’s compensation. A larger firm size might affect the
CEO’s utility directly both positively (by enhancing the CEO’s prestige, power, perquisites,
etc.) and negatively (by increasing the effort the CEO will have to exert or the pressures to
which the CEO will be subject). In addition, firm expansion, and the effect that it will have on
returns, will affect the likelihood that the CEO will be able to remain in office as well as the
subsequent career opportunities that the CEO will have.
2.2. Prior empirical work
There is a large body of empirical literature on CEO compensation (see Murphy (1999),
and Core, Guay, and Larcker (2003) for excellent surveys). In existing studies, researchers
seeking to explain current CEO compensation often include current firm size as well as past
stock return performance in their regressions. The general findings in the literature are that
CEO pay is correlated with current firm size and with the firm’s stock performance in
preceding years (see, e.g., Murphy (1985, 1986), Jensen and Murphy (1990), Hubbard and
Palia (1995), Core, Holthausen, and Larcker (1999), Cyert. Kang, and Kumar (2002)). Our
analysis also finds, unsurprisingly, that compensation is correlated with past stock returns. We
seek to contribute, however, by adding as independent variables other changes in the firm
during the preceding years of the CEO’s service, including the rate of growth of shares
outstanding, the growth in per share assets and per share sales, and dividend decisions.
There has also been some significant empirical work on the connection between
compensation and decisions to make acquisitions, which are an important type of firmexpansion decisions. Several papers study how acquisition decisions are influenced by
managers’ holdings of shares and options at the time of the acquisition decision (Agrawal and
Mendelker (1987), Bliss and Rosen (2001), Datta, Iskandar-Datta, and Raman (2001)). More
closely related to our work are several papers that focus on how acquisition decisions affect
subsequent executive pay. Bliss and Rosen (2001), Grinstein and Hribar (2004), and Harford
7

and Li (2005) find that acquisitions have a positive effect on subsequent pay, but Avery,
Chevalier, and Schaefer(1998) do not find such an effect.
We complement the above studies of the association between acquisitions and subsequent
pay by looking at a broader set of expansion decisions and strategies. While these studies focus
on firms that make large acquisitions, some firms grow substantially through a series of small
or medium acquisitions rather than one large acquisition. Furthermore, acquisition decisions
are not the only decisions made by CEOs that have an effect on firm size. Executives can also
increase firm size by raising equity to finance internal expansion, avoiding dividends and share
buybacks, making operating decisions that would increase sales or assets without necessarily
contributing to profits, and so on and so forth. Our strategy is to focus on the correlation
between a CEO’s compensation and the whole universe of the CEO’s expanding decisions
during a period of the past two to four years.
Finally, it is worth noting the significant literature that documents the tendency of
managers to make some size-increasing decisions that are not value-enhancing. For example,
there is a significant body of empirical work suggesting that managers sometimes elect to
make acquisition decisions that appear to be value-reducing, (see, e.g., Lang, Stulz, and
Walkling (1991), Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1990), Qui (2004), Moeller, Schlingemann,
and Stulz (2005), and Masulis, Wang, and Xie (2005)). Our work complements this line of
work by investigating the private benefits that might provide managers with incentives to make
such firm-expansion decisions.
3. Empirical analysis

3.1. The Data
Our primary data source is the Execucomp database. We use information about CEO
compensation in public U.S. companies from 1993 onwards. The database includes all of the
S&P 500, Mid-Cap 400 and Small-Cap 600 companies, as well as companies that once
belonged to these indexes. Together, these firms constitute more than 80% of the total market
capitalization of U.S. public firms. We obtain financial information about firms in our sample
from the Compustat database and the CRSP database.
Our strategy is to study the relation between the compensation of CEOs and their prior
performance and firm-expansion decisions. We therefore include in our analysis of
8

compensation in any given year only “continuing” CEOs who have been in the Execucomp
database and served in their position for a given period of time. We initially look at
performance and firm expansion in the preceding three years, and therefore focus on the set of
CEOs who already served for three or more years. For robustness, we later perform a similar
analysis for different time windows, looking at the past two-year record of CEOs with two or
more years of experience and the past four-year record of CEOs with four or more years of
experience, and we obtain similar results.
We focus on CEO compensation during the years 1997-2002. Throughout the study we
divide our sample into six subsets of data, one for every year, and perform the cross-sectional
analysis separately on each of these subsets. We do not use pooled regressions in order to
avoid the potential correlations in errors in panel-data studies with repeated observations. To
adjust for inflation, we translate throughout all monetary figures to 2002 dollars.
Table 1 displays summary statistics of the characteristics of the firms in which CEOs
served during the preceding three years.
We define throughout our analysis annual CEO compensation as the TDC1 variable in the
Execucomp database, which is the sum of salary, bonus, total value of restricted stock granted,
total value of stock options granted (using Black-Scholes), long-term incentive payouts, and
other compensation. Median annual compensation is $2.36 million in 1997 and $3.04 million
in 2002, and it peaks at $3.26 million in 2000.
Market capitalization is defined as the price per share multiplied by the number of shares
outstanding (in millions) at the end of the calendar year. Median market capitalization in our
annual subsets ranges between $1.83 billion in 1997 and $1.13 billion in 2002. Sales are the
net sales of the firm at the end of the year (Compustat item #12). Median sales in our annual
subsets range between $1.4 billion in 1997 and $1.13 billion in 2002.
The stock return variable is the total stock return, with dividend, net of inflation. The
returns are calculated from the end of calendar year t-3 to the end of calendar year t. The
median three-year return of firms in our sample is 66% in 1997, and drops to 4% in 2002.
The growth in shares outstanding variables is defined as the three-year net percentage
increase in shares outstanding, adjusted for stock splits. This variable captures changes in the
size of existing assets due to managerial decisions to make equity-financed acquisition or
investments, to pay employees with options and shares in lieu of cash compensation, and to
avoid share repurchases. The percentage of firms that had a positive growth of shares
outstanding in the preceding three years ranges between 52%-63% in our annual subsets.
9

Since the distribution of change-in-size variables is important to our analysis, we report the
bottom quartile, median, and top quartile values for these variables. The threshold of growth of
shares outstanding that defines the top quartile ranges between 14% and 20% in our annual
subsets. The threshold that defines the bottom quartile ranges from -6% to -2%. The three-year
growth in sales per share that defines the top quartile ranges between 14% and 39%, and the
growth that defines the bottom quartile ranges between -4% to -6%. There is also substantial
variability in growth in asset per share. The growth that defines the top quartile ranges between
39%-61%, and the growth that defines the bottom quartile ranges between -8% and -7%.
3.2. Pay and firm size
Our starting point is the correlation documented in the literature between CEO
compensation and firm size. We therefore start by establishing the relation between
compensation and firm size in our sample. To this end, we regress log (CEO compensation) on
the firm’s log market capitalization and log sales. (We will use log assets as another size
variable in the regressions of Section 3.7.)
We include in the regression, as well as in subsequent regressions, several control
variables. We include industry dummies, following the classification of 48 industries
introduced by Fama and French (1997). We also include a New Economy dummy, using the
classification of Murphy (2003), to account for growth opportunities specific to internet and
computer-related firms.
Smith and Watts (1992) show that growth opportunities are positively related to CEO
compensation. To control for growth opportunities, we include industry-adjusted Tobin’s Q as
an independent variable. We use industry adjustment here because our regressions already
include industry dummies. We define industry-adjusted Q as log(Q) of the firm at the end of
the compensation year minus the median log(Q) in the firm’s industry at that time. We define
Q as the market value of equity plus the book value of assets minus the book value of equity,
all divided by the book value of assets. To control for firms’ risk, we also include the standard
deviation of the firm’s return, which we estimate over the preceding four years. The regression
we run is as follows:

10

Log ( Compensationt ) = a0 + a1 Log ( MarketCapt ) + a 2 Log ( Salest ) + a 3 Industry _ Adjusted _ Q

(1)

+ a 4 Return _ variability + a 5 New _ Economy + Industry _ Dummies + ε

Table 2 shows the coefficient estimates of regression (1) for each of the years 1997-2002.
As Table 2 indicates, compensation is positively correlated with each of the two measures of
firm size we use in each and every year. The coefficient of Log (Market Capitalization) ranges
between 0.29 and 0.32 and is statistically significant at the 1% level in all years. The
coefficient of Log(Sales) is also positive, ranging between 0.18 and 0.30, and is significant in
all years (and at the 1% level in five out of the six years). Consistent with previous studies
(e.g., Cyert, Kang, and Kumar (2002), and Core, Guay, and Larcker (1999)), the return
variability coefficient is positive and significant at the 1% or 5% level throughout. The New
Economy dummy is positive and significant in most of the years.
3.3. Pay and changes in firm size under the CEO
Our first step in the analysis of the relation between compensation and firm size is to take
into account the fact that firm size is not an exogenous variable but rather is partly a product of
the CEO’s decisions during the preceding years. Recognizing this fact, we decompose market
capitalization and sales in year t as follows:
MarketCap(t)=MarketCap(t-3)*MarketCapGrowth(t-3 to t)
Sales(t)=Sales(t-3)*SalesGrowth(t-3 to t)
We apply this decomposition to regression (1) to get the following regression:

Log ( Compensationt ) = a0 + a1 Log(MarketCapG rowth t −3 to t ) + a2 Log ( SalesGrowth t −3 to t ) +

(2)

a3 Log (MarketCap t −3 ) + a4 Log ( Salest −3 ) + a5 Industry_Ad justed_Q+ a6 Return_variability +
a7 New_Economy + Industry_Dummies+ ε
Table 3 displays the results of regression (2). The results indicate that compensation levels
are correlated with past increases in market capitalization and sales. The coefficient of the
increase in market capitalization during the preceding three years is positive and statistically
significant at the 1% level in each of the annual regressions. The coefficient of the increase in
11

sales during the preceding three years is also positive in all six regressions, and it is significant
at the 1% level in four of them and at the 5% level in the other two.
3.4. Pay, past returns, and growth in shares outstanding
We saw in the preceding section that current compensation is correlated with past increases
in market capitalization and sales. This finding, however, could be fully driven by a correlation
between compensation and past stock returns. Past increases in market capitalization might be
fully driven by increases in the firm’s stock prices, and past increases in sales might be
correlated with past stock returns. Thus, the above results do not indicate that increases in firm
size are correlated with subsequent pay other than through their effects on stockholder returns.
In our next regression we therefore replace the growth of market cap from t-3 to t with two
variables: the stock market return from t-3 to t, and the rate of growth of shares outstanding
from t-3 to t. The stock return represents how much shareholder wealth has appreciated, and it
is the primary variable that the literature has used as a measure of past performance. Other than
by increasing stock returns, however, executives can increase the firm’s market capitalization
by increasing the number of shares outstanding. By issuing additional shares at the current
market price, executives can increase the firm’s capital and equity capitalization without
increasing the stock price.
As Fama and French (2005) document, firms change the number of shares outstanding in
connection with several main types of transactions/events. First, firms make stock-financed
acquisitions. Second, firms raise capital through secondary equity offerings, private placements
of equity, and rights offerings. Third, by paying employees (and sometimes creditors) with
equity rather than cash, firms are able to retain cash they would otherwise have to expend.
Finally, firms also sometimes take steps, such as share repurchases, that reduce the number of
shares outstanding.
Since we are interested in the aggregate effect of executives’ firm-expansion decisions, we
use in our regression the net growth in shares outstanding (from all sources). In our sample, the
number of firms with net share issuances in the previous three years ranges between 52% and
63%. As a comparison, Fama and French (2005), report that 66.5% of firms that are larger in
assets than the median New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) firm have a positive annual growth
in shares outstanding between the years 1993-2002.
12

Given the inclusion of the growth of shares outstanding in the regression, and the potential
correlation between increase in shares outstanding and increase in sales, we decomposed the
increase in sales into the growth in shares outstanding component and the growth in per share
sales, and we therefore include the latter in the regression alongside the former. With these
substitutions, we run the following regression:
Log ( Compensati on t ) = a0 + a1 Log(StockR eturn t − 3 to t )

(3)

+ a 2 Log (GrowthSha resOutstan ding t − 3 to t ) + a3 Log (GrowthSal esPerShare t − 3 to t )
+ a4 Log (M k tCap

t −3

) + a5 Log ( Sales t − 3 ) + a6 Industry_A djusted_Q

+ a7 Return_var iability + a8 New_Econom y + Industry_D ummies + ε

The results of the estimation of regression (3) appear in Table 4. Consistent with the results
in the literature, compensation is correlated with three-year stock returns. The result is
significant at the 5% level or better in each of the annual regressions. But the correlation of
current compensation with past changes goes beyond the relationship of current compensation
with past stock returns. The coefficient of the growth in shares outstanding is positive and
significant at the 1% level in each of the regressions. Clearly, transactions involving an
increase in the number of shares (e.g., making a stock-financed acquisition) are not necessarily
value-increasing. Thus, the association between increases in shares outstanding and higher
subsequent pay is of interest.
In addition, the coefficient of growth in sales per share is positive in all regressions,
significant at the 5% level or better, in four out of the six regressions. Note that firms can
expand per share sales without increasing stock returns (say, by increasing sales at prices that
do not contribute to increasing profits). Furthermore, when two strategies to increase per share
sales could both contribute to increasing stock returns, the strategy that increases per share
sales the most might not be the one that would increase returns the most. Thus, the finding that,
controlling for returns, increase in per share sales are correlated with higher subsequent pay is
of interest.
The log-log specification implies that the coefficients of the independent variables in Table
4 represent the elasticity of compensation to each of the variables—that is, the percentage
increase in CEO compensation for a 1% change in the independent variable. A one-percent
growth in shares outstanding is associated, controlling for past returns, with 0.56%-0.97%
increase in compensation (depending on the year examined). A one-percent growth in sales per
13

share is associated, controlling for past returns, with 0.16%-0.43% increase in compensation
(depending on the year examined).
Of course, how much economic significance these two size-expansion variables have
depends on their variability. To get a sense of this economic significance, we reran the
regression (3) replacing the growth in share outstanding variable with three dummy variables
for whether the firm is in the second, third, or fourth quartile in the yearly subsamples in terms
of their three-year net growth in shares. In this regression, the coefficient of the top quartile
represents the increase in compensation, controlling for past returns, associated with a CEO’s
being in the top quarter in terms of net share issuance rather than in the bottom quarter. The
estimated coefficient of the top quartile in these regressions ranges between 47% (in 1998) and
29% (in 2001), with an average of 38%. Thus, the association between compensation and net
share issuance is economically meaningful.
We similarly also reran regression (3) replacing the growth in per-share sales with three
dummy variables for whether the firm is in the second, third, or fourth quartile in the yearly
subsamples in terms of growth in sales-per-share. The estimated coefficient of the top quartile
in these regressions ranges between 7% (in 1997) and 35% (in 2001), with an average of 22%.
Therefore, controlling for past stock returns, increases in sales per share also have an
economically meaningful effect on compensation.
3.5. Changes in compensation
In the level regressions we have used thus far, we controlled for differences among firms in
past returns, initial size, industry classification, investment opportunities, and return variability.
However, there remains the possibility that our results concerning the correlation of
compensation with growth in shares outstanding and in sales per share are driven by an omitted
variable that is correlated with one or both of these variables. While such a possibility is
commonly difficult to rule out completely, we seek to explore it by comparing current
compensation in a given firm to earlier compensation level in that same firm rather than only
to current compensation levels in other firms.
In particular, we rerun regression 3, but use compensation growth over the past three
years—rather than the compensation level—as the dependent variable. We also decompose the
independent variables industry-adjusted Q and return variability into their levels three years
14

earlier and the changes in these variables over the following three years. We present the results
in Table 5.
As one can expect, the adjusted R-square in the change-in-compensation regressions
displayed in Table 5 is considerably smaller than the one in the compensation level
regressions. However, the association between compensation changes and our main variables
of interest is similar to the association that we found earlier between compensation levels and
these variables. The coefficient of the growth in shares outstanding is positive in all regressions
and significant at the 1% level in five out of the six regressions. The coefficient of the growth
in sales per share is positive and significant in four out of the six regressions. Thus, these
results reinforce the results of the preceding sections that firm-expansion decisions are
correlated with increases in subsequent compensation.
3.6. Different Windows
We have thus far focused on the correlation between compensation in a given year and
three-year changes in firm variables under the CEO’s management, and we have therefore
focused in each year on the set of CEOs who have served in this position in the preceding three
years. Since the choice of a three-year period is an ad hoc one, we reran our regressions once
focusing on changes in the preceding two years (and using the set of all CEOs who have served
in their position during this period) and once focusing on changes in the preceding four years
(and using here all CEOs with four or more years of preceding service in this position).
Table 6 shows the coefficients of the two main variables of interest—the growth in shares
outstanding and the growth in sales-per-share—for each one of the annual level regressions
and change-in-level regressions specified in sections D and E for the two-year and four-year
intervals. Table 6, panel A displays the coefficients of these variables for the two-year interval.
The coefficient of the growth in shares outstanding is positive in all the regressions and is
significant at the 5% level or better in all the compensation-level regressions and in four out of
the six change-in-compensation regressions. The coefficient of the growth in sales per share
variable is positive in all the regressions and is significant at the 5% level or better in a
substantial number of them.
Table 6, panel B displays the coefficients of growth in shares outstanding and growth in
sales-per-share for the four-year interval. The coefficient of the growth in shares outstanding is

15

positive and significant at the 5% level or better in all of them. The coefficient of the growth in
sales-per-share is positive in all the regressions and is significant in four of them.
These results are consistent with the results obtained earlier in the regressions focusing on
compensation levels and changes-in-levels in the preceding three years.
3.7. Growth in Assets
Jensen (1986) argues that compensation is correlated with firm size but does not specify
which measure of firm size should be correlated with managerial compensation. We have thus
far focused on two measures of size — market capitalization and sales. A third measure of firm
size that is used in the literature is firms’ book value of assets. We therefore run the regressions
in sections D, E, and F using the book value of assets instead of sales. Consistent with our
methodology, we decompose the growth in firm assets into growth in assets-per-share and
growth in shares outstanding and include the former in the regressions along with the latter.
Table 7 presents the coefficients of growth of assets per share and growth in shares
outstanding for all the regressions we performed. Panel A of this table presents the results of
the regressions using two-year intervals, Panel B presents the results for three-year intervals,
and Panel C presents the results for four-year intervals.
Consistent with our previous results, the coefficient of growth in shares outstanding
remains positive and significant in almost all the regressions. We also find that growth in
assets-per-share is positive in almost all the regressions and significant in the majority of them.
Thus, our finding of a correlation between compensation and increases in size per share is
robust to using assets rather than sales as the measure of firm size.
We also reran the level regressions, replacing the growth in per-share assets with three
dummy variables for whether the firm is in the second, third, or fourth quartile in terms of
growth in assets-per-share in the yearly sub-samples. The estimated coefficient of the top
quartile in these regressions ranges between 7% (in 1997) and 42% (in 1999), with an average
of 27%. Thus, controlling for past stock returns, increases in assets per share also have an
economically meaningful association with compensation.
Because a firm can add assets that would not add to profitability (and might even reduce
it), a strategy that would maximize growth of assets per share would, of course, not necessarily
maximize stockholders’ returns. Thus, as with our finding concerning the correlation between
16

compensation and growth in sales-per-share, the finding that compensation is correlated with
growth in assets per share during the CEO’s service is of interest.
3.8. Increases vs. Decreases in Firm Size
In our analysis of the correlation between compensation and changes in firm size, we have
thus far not distinguished between increases and decreases in firm size. The coefficient of an
increase in firm size variable captures the average association across both firms that increased
in size and firms that decreased in size. It is therefore possible that the correlation between
compensation and changes in size is different among firms that increase in size than among
firms that decrease in size.
To explore this issue, we repeat the regressions of sections D and E, but this time we
decompose the growth in shares outstanding and the growth in sales-per-share into positive
growth and negative growth. This decomposition permits the coefficient to differ across firms
that increase in size and firms that decrease in size. We present the results in Table 8.
Table 8 indicates that, for companies that increased shares outstanding, the coefficient of
changes in shares outstanding is positive and significant across all regressions. For firms that
reduced shares outstanding, however, the coefficient of changes in shares outstanding is not
significant in any of the regressions. This result suggests that the correlation between
compensation and changes in shares outstanding is driven by firms with CEOs who increased
firm size. There is an asymmetry in the response of current compensation to changes in firm
size under the CEO’s management: When firm size increases, there is an increase in
compensation; but when firm size decreases, there is no decrease in compensation.
We obtain similar results for the coefficient of sales-per-share. For firms that had a positive
change in sales-per-share, the coefficient of change in such sales is positive and significant in
all the level regressions and in three of the change-in-compensation regressions. In contrast, for
firms that had a negative change in sales-per-share, the coefficient of change in sales-per-share
is not significant in all of the level regressions and in five out of the six change-incompensation regressions.

17

3.9. Executive Pay and Dividend Decisions
We have thus far included in our regressions the standard stock return variable, which
measures total returns to shareholders, including dividends. The literature, seeking to explain
CEO compensation, uses total stockholder returns because it assumes that shareholders benefit
from total returns, including their dividend component, and therefore CEOs should be
rewarded for both the capital gains component and the dividend component of the total return.
However, given our finding that current compensation is correlated with past changes in
firm size, it is worth separating the stock return into the capital gain component and the
dividend component. The part of the total stock return that is in the form of capital gain does
contribute to increasing the firm’s market capitalization, but the part that is distributed as
dividend does not contribute to increasing the firm’s market capitalization.
Having seen that current compensation is correlated with past stock returns, we therefore
now wish to explore whether compensation is correlated to the same extent with the capital
gains component and the dividend component of stock returns. We therefore extend our
analysis by decomposing past stock returns into two components: (i) the return excluding
dividends (taken from CRSP), and (ii) the return from dividends, which is defined as the total
return with dividend reinvested (also from CRSP) minus return without dividends. We then rerun the basic regressions of sections D (where the dependent variable is the level of CEO
compensation) and of section E (where the dependent variable is the change in CEO
compensation), replacing the (total) stock return variable with a return excluding dividends
variable and a dividend return variable. For robustness, we also check whether our results
extend to two-year intervals and four-year intervals.
Table 9 presents the coefficients of the return excluding dividends and the dividend return
in all of these regressions. The results in Table 9 indicate that the coefficient of the return
excluding dividends variable is positive and significant in all the compensation level
regressions and in all the change-in-compensation regressions. It is also significant across the
two-year, three-year, and four-year intervals.
In contrast, the coefficient of the dividend return is, in general, not positively significant.
Out of the 34 annual regressions we run, the coefficient of the dividend return is not significant
in 28 of them, is negative and significant in 3 of them, and is positive and significant in 3 of
them. Thus, we find no evidence that a CEO’s current compensation is correlated with the
dividend component of past returns under the CEO in the same way that it is correlated with
18

the undistributed, capital gain component of past returns. This finding is consistent with the
concern of Jensen (1986) that CEOs might have insufficient incentives to pay dividends.
4. Conclusion

This paper has investigated empirically the validity of the concern expressed by Jensen
(1986) and others that executive compensation practices might, overall, provide executives
with incentives to expand firm size. We have found that increases in a firm’s size during a
CEO’s service are associated with higher subsequent pay—both relative to CEOs in other
companies and relative to the compensation the CEO had earlier. Decomposing changes in size
(as measured by either assets or sales) into changes in size per share and in the number of
shares outstanding, we find that changes in either component are associated with higher
subsequent pay for the CEO. We also find that compensation is correlated only with the
component of past stockholder returns that is not distributed as dividends.
The association we find between increases in firm size and higher subsequent CEO pay is
economically meaningful. As emphasized throughout, this association does not indicate that
compensation practices are suboptimal. But it does indicate that, overall, compensation
practices provide managers with excessive incentives to expand firm size. The effects of these
incentives might be mitigated in part or wholly by other factors affecting managers’ decisions.
But taking these incentives into account is necessary for a full understanding of the decisions
that public firms make with respect to acquisitions, share issuance, capital-raising, operating
strategy, share buybacks, and dividends.

19

References
Agrawal, A., Mandelker G.N., 1987. Managerial incentives and corporate investment and
financial decisions. Journal of Finance 42, 823-837.
Amihud, Y., Lev, B., 1981. Risk reduction as a managerial motive for conglomerate mergers.
Bell Journal of Economics 12, 605-617.
Avery, C., Chevalier, J.A., Schaefer, S., 1998. Why do managers undertake Acquisitions: An
analysis of internal and external rewards for acquisitiveness. Journal of Law, Economics, and
Organization 14, 24-43.
Baker, G.P., Hall, B.J., 2004. CEO Incentives and Firm Size. Journal of Labor Economics 22,
767-798.
Baumol, W.J., 1959, Business Behavior, Value and Growth (Macmillan, New York).
Bebchuk, L.A., Fried, J., 2004, Pay without Performance: The Unfulfilled Promise of
Executive Compensation (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA).
Benston, G., 1985. The self-serving management hypothesis. Journal of Accounting and
Economics 7, 67-84.
Bliss, R.T., Rosen, R.J., 2001. CEO compensation and bank mergers. Journal of Financial
Economics 61, 107-138.
Core, J.E., Guay, W.R., Larcker, D.F., 2003, Executive equity compensation and incentives: a
survey. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review 9, 27-50.
Core, J.E., Holthausen, R.W., Larcker, D.F., 1999, Corporate governance, chief executive
officer compensation, and firm performance. Journal of Financial Economics 51, 371-406.
Cyert, R., Kang, S., Kumar, P., 2002. Corporate governance, takeovers and top-management
compensation: theory and evidence. Management Science 48, 453-469.
Datta, S., Iskandar-Datta, M., Raman, K., 2001. Executive compensation and corporate
acquisition decisions. Journal of Finance 56, 2299-2336.
Fama, E., French, K., 1997. Industry costs of capital. Journal of Financial Economics 43, 153193.
20

Fama, E., French, K., 2005. Financing decisions: who issues stock?. Journal of Financial
Economics 76, 549-582.
Garvey, G., Milbourn, T., 2005. Asymmetric benchmarking in compensation: executives are
paid for good luck but not punished for bad. Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Grinstein, Y., Hribar, P., 2004. CEO compensation and incentives—evidence from M&A
bonuses. Journal of Financial Economics 73, 119-143.
Hall, B., Murphy, K.J., 2003. The problem with stock options, Journal of Economic
Perspective 17, 49-70.
Harford, J., Li, K., 2005. Decoupling CEO wealth and firm performance: Evidence from
acquisitions and capital expenditures. Journal of Finance, Forthcoming.
Hubbard, R.G., Palia, D., 1995. Executive pay and performance: Evidence from the U.S.
banking industry. Journal of Financial Economics 39, 305-360.
Jensen, M.C., 1986. Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers.
American Economic Review 76, 323-329.
Jensen, M.C., Murphy, K.J., 1990. Performance pay and top-management incentives. Journal
of Political Economy, 98, 225-264.
Lang, L., Stulz, R., Walkling, R., 1991. A test of the free cash flow hypothesis: The case of
bidder returns. Journal of Financial Economics 29, 315-336.
Lewellen, W., Loderer, C., 1984. Merger decisions and executive stock ownership in acquiring
firms. Journal of Accounting and Economics 7, 209-231.
Masulis, R., Wang C., Xie, F., 2005. Corporate Governance and Acquirer Returns. Working
Paper, Vanderbilt University-Owen Graduate School of Management.
Moeller, S.B., Schlingemann, F.P., Stulz, R., 2005. Wealth destruction on massive scale? A
study of acquiring-firm returns in the recent merger wave. Journal of Finance 60, 757-782.
Morck, R., Shleifer, A., Vishny R.W., 1990. Do managerial objectives drive bad acquisitions?
Journal of Finance 45, 31-48.

21

Murphy, K.J., 1985. Corporate performance and managerial remuneration: An empirical
analysis. Journal of Accounting and Finance 7, 11-42.
Murphy, K.J., 1986. Incentives, learning, and compensation: A theoretical and empirical
investigation of managerial labor contracts. Rand Journal of Economics, 17, 59-76.
Murphy, K.J., 1999. Executive compensation. in Ashenfelter, O., and D. Card, eds.: Handbook
of Labor Economics Vol. 3, (North-Holland, Amsterdam).
Murphy, K.J., Stock-based pay in new economy firms, 2003. Journal of Accounting and
Economics 34, 129-147.
Qui, L., 2004. Which institutional investors monitor?: Evidence from acquisition activity.
Working Paper, Brown University.
Smith, C.W., Watts, R.L., 1992. The investment opportunity set and corporate financing,
dividend and compensation policy. Journal of Financial Economics 32, 263-292.
Rosen, S., 1992. Contracts and the market for executives. in Murphy, K.J., Hallock K.F., eds.:
The Economics of Executive Compensation, Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham, UK.

22

TABLE 1: SUMMARY STATISTICS
The sample consists of firms that have CEO compensation data in the Execucomp database. In each year, we
consider firms whose CEOs were not replaced in the preceding three years. Financial information is from
Compustat and CRSP. Compensation in any given year is defined as the sum of salary, bonus, total value of
restricted stock granted, total value of stock options granted (using Black-Scholes), long-term incentive payouts,
and other compensation. Market cap is the number of shares outstanding multiplied by the stock price at the end
of the calendar year. Growth in shares outstanding is the number of shares in the end of year t minus the number
of shares in the end of year t-3 (adjusted for stock splits), divided by the number of shares at the end of year t-3.
Return variability is the monthly standard deviation of the stock return (with dividends), measured over the 48
months between year t-4 and year t.. New Economy firms is as defined in Murphy (2003).

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

Median Compensation ($K)

2359

2501

3034

3257

3161

3040

Median Market value ($M)
Median Assets ($M)

1829
1713

1475
1770

1671
2052

1517
1924

1453
1759

1130
1682

Median Sales ($M)

1416

1426

1540

1501

1359

1136

Three-year growth in compensation
– Median
Three-year stock return
– Median
Standard deviation of returns
– Median

37%

44%

46%

39%

31%

14%

66%

39%

14%

7%

12%

4%

7%

9%

10%

11%

12%

12%

-2%
2%
16%

-3%
2%
17%

-3%
2%
20%

-6%
1%
16%

-4%
2%
17%

-3%
3%
14%

25% Quartile
50% Quartile
75% Quartile

1%
20%
31%

0%
18%
31%

0%
17%
34%

6%
25%
39%

-4%
16%
29%

-14%
6%
14%

Three-year growth in assets-pershare
25% Quartile
50% Quartile
75% Quartile

0%
19%
46%

1%
22%
50%

6%
24%
57%

7%
25%
61%

0%
22%
54%

-8%
15%
39%

Three-year growth in shares
outstanding
25% Quartile
50% Quartile
75% Quartile
Three-year growth in sales-per-share

23

TABLE 2: PAY AND FIRM VARIABLES
The table shows regression results of CEO compensation on firm characteristics. The sample consists of firms that
have CEO compensation data in the Execucomp database. In each year, we consider firms whose CEOs were not
replaced in the preceding three years. The dependent variable is the log of CEO compensation. Compensation in
any given year is defined as the sum of salary, bonus, total value of restricted stock granted, total value of stock
options granted (using Black-Scholes), long-term incentive payouts, and other compensation. Financial
information is from Compustat and CRSP. Market cap is the log of the market value of equity at the end of the
calendar year, where the market value of equity is the price at the end of the calendar year, multiplied by the
shares outstanding at the end of the calendar year. Sales is the log of the sales (in $millions). Industry-adjusted Q
is the log of the firm’s Tobin’s Q in the end of the year minus the log of the median Q in the industry that the firm
belongs to. Tobin’s Q is defined as the market value of the equity plus the book value of assets, minus the book
value of equity, all divided by the book value of assets. Return variability is the monthly standard deviation of the
stock return, measured over the last 48 months. New Economy firm is as defined in Murphy (2003). Industry
dummies are as defined in Fama and French (1997). All variables are adjusted for inflation and are in 2002
dollars. The variables in parentheses are the estimated standard deviations of the coefficients. The symbols
*,**,*** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively.

Intercept
Market cap
Sales
Industry-adjusted Q
Return variability
New-economy dummy
Industry dummies
Observations
Adjusted R2

1997
3.66 ***

1998
5.12 ***

1999
3.70 ***

2000
3.90 ***

2001
3.29 ***

2002
3.24 ***

(0.48)

(0.37)

(0.47)

(0.43)

(0.47)

(0.60)

0.39 ***

0.31 ***

0.30 ***

0.21 ***

0.34 ***

0.33 ***

(0.07)

(0.06)

(0.05)

(0.04)

(0.05)

(0.05)

0.12 *

0.15 ***

0.29 ***

0.34 ***

0.23 ***

0.22 ***

(0.06)

(0.06)

(0.05)

(0.04)

(0.05)

(0.05)

-0.08

-0.04

0.10

0.21 **

0.00

-0.12

(0.12)

(0.11)

(0.10)

(0.09)

(0.09)

(0.11)

2.93 **

1.91 ***

5.19 ***

5.76 ***

5.09 ***

3.17 ***

(1.27)

(0.50)

(0.96)

(0.83)

(0.62)

(0.66)

0.42 **

0.24

0.48 **

0.55 ***

0.57 ***

0.56 ***

(0.19)

(0.20)

(0.19)

(0.19)

(0.15)

(0.16)

+

+

+

+

+

+

531
54%

509
52%

497
63%

482
63%

492
65%

545
51%

24

TABLE 3: PAY AND PAST CHANGES IN FIRM SIZE
The table shows regression results of CEO compensation on changes in firm characteristics. The sample consists
of firms that have CEO compensation data in the Execucomp database. In each year, we consider firms whose
CEOs were not replaced in the preceding three years. The dependent variable is log of CEO compensation.
Compensation in any given year is defined as the sum of salary, bonus, total value of restricted stock granted, total
value of stock options granted (using Black-Scholes), long-term incentive payouts, and other compensation.
Financial information is from Compustat and CRSP. Market cap growth is market cap in year (t) minus market
cap in year (t-3). Sales growth is sales in year (t) minus sales in year (t-3). The rest of the variables are as defined
in Table 2. All variables are adjusted for inflation and are in 2002 dollars. The variables in parentheses are the
estimated standard deviations of the coefficients. The symbols *,**,*** represent statistical significance at the
10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively. The intercept coefficient is omitted from the table.

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

0.55 ***

0.37 ***

0.25 ***

0.22 ***

0.37 ***

0.37 ***

(0.09)

(0.08)

(0.07)

(0.05)

(0.07)

(0.07)

0.09

0.34 ***

0.38 ***

0.28 ***

0.24 ***

0.13

(0.10)

(0.10)

(0.09)

(0.07)

(0.08)

(0.10)

0.36 ***

0.33 ***

0.32 ***

0.20 ***

0.32 ***

0.32 ***

(0.07)

(0.06)

(0.06)

(0.05)

(0.05)

(0.05)

0.13 **

0.14 **

0.27 ***

0.36 ***

0.24 ***

0.24 ***

(0.06)

(0.06)

(0.05)

(0.05)

(0.05)

(0.05)

-0.15

-0.12

0.09

0.24 **

0.00

-0.10

(0.12)

(0.11)

(0.10)

(0.10)

(0.10)

(0.11)

2.59 **

1.71 ***

5.05 ***

6.06 ***

5.11 ***

3.59 ***

(1.31)

Changes in firm variables
during the preceding
three years
Market cap growth (t-3 to t)
Sales growth (t-3 to t)
Initial firm variables
Market cap (t-3)
Sales (t-3)
Control variables
Industry-adjusted Q
Return variability
New-economy dummy
Industry dummies
Observations
2

Adjusted R

(0.50)

(0.98)

(0.87)

(0.65)

(0.73)

0.41 **

0.24

0.44 **

0.55 ***

0.56 ***

0.54 ***

(0.20)

(0.19)

(0.19)

(0.19)

(0.15)

(0.17)

+
527

+
507

+

+

+

+

495

482

488

543

54%

53%

63%

63%

65%

51%

25

TABLE 4: PAY AND PAST CHANGES IN SHARES OUTSTANDING
AND SALES PER SHARE
The table shows regression results of CEO compensation on corporate performance and expansion. The sample
consists of firms that have CEO compensation data in the Execucomp database. In each year, we consider firms
whose CEOs were not replaced in the preceding three years. Financial information is from Compustat and CRSP.
The dependent variable is log compensation in year t. Compensation in any given year is defined as the sum of
salary, bonus, total value of restricted stock granted, total value of stock options granted (using Black-Scholes),
long-term incentive payouts, and other compensation. Stock return is the log of the gross stock return (including
dividends, net of inflation) between the end of year t-3 and the end of year t. Growth in sales per share is the
difference between the log of sales per share in year t and the log of sales per share in year t-3. The rest of the
variables are as defined in Table 2. The variables in parentheses are the estimated standard deviations of the
coefficients. The symbols *,**,*** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively.
The intercept coefficient is omitted from the table.

1997
Changes in firm variables during
the preceding three years
Stock return (t-3 to t)
Growth in shares outstanding
(t-3 to t)
Growth in sales per share
(t-3 to t)
Initial firm variables
Market cap (t-3)
Sales (t-3)
Control variables
Industry-adjusted Q
Return variability
New-economy dummy
Industry dummies
Observations
Adjusted R2

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

0.48 ***

0.23 **

0.21 ***

0.25 ***

0.34 ***

0.31 ***

(0.10)

(0.09)

(0.07)

(0.07)

(0.07)

(0.07)

0.67 ***

0.97 ***

0.73 ***

0.71 ***

0.59 ***

0.56 ***

(0.17)

(0.14)

(0.13)

(0.15)

(0.14)

(0.17)

0.16

0.33 ***

0.43 ***

0.22 ***

0.32 ***

0.19 *

(0.10)

(0.10)

(0.09)

(0.07)

(0.08)

(0.10)

0.32 ***

0.27 ***

0.32 ***

0.24 ***

0.31 ***

0.28 ***

(0.07)

(0.06)

(0.06)

(0.06)

(0.05)

(0.05)

0.18 ***

0.19 ***

0.28 ***

0.33 ***

0.26 ***

0.27 ***

(0.06)

(0.06)

(0.05)

(0.06)

(0.05)

(0.05)

-0.08

0.01

0.12

0.17

0.01

-0.04

(0.13)

(0.12)

(0.11)

(0.11)

(0.11)

(0.12)

3.16 **

1.63 ***

4.73 ***

5.77 ***

5.20 ***

3.50 ***

(1.35)

(0.52)

(1.00)

(0.93)

(0.68)

(0.78)

0.45 **

0.31

0.46 **

0.61 ***

0.58 ***

0.58 ***

(0.20)

(0.20)

(0.19)

(0.19)

(0.15)

(0.17)

+
519
53%

+
506
53%

+

+

+

+

494
64%

474
64%

483
64%

539
50%

26

TABLE 5: CHANGES IN COMPENSATION LEVELS
The table shows regression results of changes in CEO compensation on firm performance and growth in size. The
sample consists of firms that have CEO compensation data in the Execucomp database and whose CEO served in
this position in the preceding three years. Financial information is from Compustat and CRSP. The dependent
variable is the difference between log CEO compensation in year t and log of CEO compensation in year t-3.
Compensation in any given year is defined as the sum of salary, bonus, total value of restricted stock granted, total
value of stock options granted (using Black-Scholes), long-term incentive payouts, and other compensation.
Growth in Q is the difference between industry-adjusted Q in year t and industry-adjusted Q in year t-3. Growth in
return variability is the difference between return variability in year t and return variability in year t-3. Stock
return is the log of the gross stock return (including dividends, net of inflation) between the end of year t-3 and the
end of year t. Growth in sales per share is the difference between the log of sales per share in year t and the log of
sales per share in year t-3. The rest of the variables are as defined in Table 2. The variables in parentheses are the
estimated standard deviations of the coefficients. The symbols *,**,*** represent statistical significance at the
10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively. The intercept coefficient is omitted from the table.

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

Changes in firm variables
during the preceding
three years
Stock return (t-3 to t)

0.59

Control variables
Industry-adjusted Q (t-3)
Growth in Q
(t-3 to t)
Return variability (t-3)
Growth in return variability
(t-3 to t)
New-economy dummy
Industry dummies
Observations
Adjusted R2

0.28

***

0.25

***

0.21

***

0.35

***

0.37

(0.11)

(0.09)

(0.08)

(0.07)

(0.08)

(0.07)

0.65 ***

0.47 ***

0.37 ***

0.69 ***

0.41 ***

0.12

(0.13)

(0.12)

(0.14)

(0.14)

(0.15)

0.26 ***

0.37 ***

0.23 ***

0.24 ***

0.10

(0.09)

(0.09)

(0.07)

(0.08)

(0.09)

Growth in shares outstanding
(0.15)
(t-3 to t)
Growth in sales-per-share
-0.08
(0.09)
(t-3 to t)
Initial firm variables
Market cap (t-3)
0.04
Sales (t-3)

***

-0.13 **

-0.09

-0.11 *

-0.07

-0.03

(0.06)

(0.06)

(0.06)

(0.06)

(0.06)

(0.05)

0.03

0.13 **

0.19 ***

0.15 ***

0.10 *

0.02

(0.06)

(0.06)

(0.05)

(0.06)

(0.05)

(0.05)

0.28 **

0.15

0.18

0.19 *

(0.12)

(0.12)

(0.12)

(0.11)

(0.11)

-0.24

0.12

0.18

0.33 **

(0.18)

(0.14)

(0.13)

(0.13)

(0.15)

(0.14)

-0.13

-0.09

-0.09
(0.11)

-0.25 *

-0.27

0.36

0.36

2.26 *

1.28

-0.04

(0.92)

(1.02)

(1.25)

(1.18)

(0.95)

(0.94)

0.29 *

0.13

0.19

0.12

0.42 ***

(0.15)

(0.13)

(0.15)

(0.16)

(0.15)

(0.15)

0.15

0.29 *

0.29 *

0.30 *

0.23

-0.05

(0.18)

(0.18)

(0.18)

(0.18)

(0.15)

(0.15)

+

+
506
18%

+

+

+

+

491
21%

474
31%

482
24%

538
16%

-0.07

518
21%

27

***

TABLE 6: TWO-YEAR AND FOUR-YEAR INTERVALS
The table shows regression results of CEO compensation (Table 4) and changes in CEO compensation regressions
(Table 5), where the performance and growth variables are measured on two-year and four-year intervals. Only
the coefficients of interest appear in the table. The sample consists of firms that have CEO compensation data in
the Execucomp database. In panel A, only firms whose CEOs were not replaced in the preceding two years are
considered. In panel B, we consider firms whose CEOs were not replaced in the preceding four years. The
variables in parentheses are the estimated standard deviations of the coefficients. The symbols *,**,*** represent
statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively.

PANEL A: TWO-YEAR INTERVAL
1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

0.87 ***

0.53 ***

0.70 ***

0.53 *** 0.45 **

(0.14)

(0.13)

(0.15)

(0.17)

(0.21)

0.43 ***

0.27 ***

0.25 ***

0.25 ***

0.30 ***

(0.09)

(0.08)

(0.07)

(0.09)

(0.10)

0.46 ***

0.28 **

0.45 ***

0.51 ***

0.22

0.03

(0.16)

(0.13)

(0.14)

(0.14)

(0.16)

(0.19)

0.06

0.26 ***

0.23 ***

0.18 **

0.08

0.08

(0.10)

(0.09)

(0.09)

(0.07)

(0.08)

(0.09)

Compensation level regressions
Growth in shares outstanding
0.92 ***
(0.18)
(t-2 to t)
Growth in sales-per-share
0.09
(0.11)
(t-2 to t)
Change-in-compensation regressions
Growth in shares outstanding
(t-2 to t)
Growth in sales-per-share
(t-2 to t)

PANEL B: FOUR-YEAR INTERVAL
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

Growth in shares outstanding
0.79 ***
(0.16)
(t-4 to t)
Growth in sales-per-share
0.29 ***
(0.11)
(t-4 to t)
Change-in-compensation regressions

0.87 ***

0.67 ***

0.57 ***

0.71 ***

(0.13)

(0.14)

(0.14)

(0.15)

0.45 ***

0.51 ***

0.24 ***

0.20 **

(0.10)

(0.10)

(0.09)

(0.10)

0.70 ***

0.59 ***

0.32 **

0.36 **

0.43 ***

(0.14)

(0.12)

(0.14)

(0.16)

(0.15)

0.19 *

0.46 ***

0.45 ***

0.25 ***

0.15

(0.10)

(0.10)

(0.10)

(0.10)

(0.11)

Compensation level regressions

Growth in shares outstanding
(t-4 to t)
Growth in sales-per-share
(t-4 to t)

28

TABLE 7: PAY AND CHANGES IN ASSETS PER SHARE
The table shows regression results of CEO compensation (Table 4) and changes in CEO compensation regressions
(Table 5), where instead of growth in sales-per-share and sales coefficients, we use the growth in asset-per-share
and asset coefficients. The performance and growth variables are measured over two-year, three-year, and fouryear intervals. Only the coefficients of interest appear in the table. The sample consists of firms that have CEO
compensation data in the Execucomp database. In panel A, only firms whose CEOs were not replaced in the
preceding two years are considered. In panel B, we consider firms whose CEOs were not replaced in the
preceding three years. In panel C, we consider firms whose CEOs were not replaced in the preceding four years.
The variables in parentheses are the estimated standard deviations of the coefficients. The symbols *,**,***
represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively.

PANEL A: TWO-YEAR INTERVAL
1997
Compensation level regressions
Growth in shares outstanding
0.87 ***
(0.18)
(t-2 to t)
Growth in assets-per-share
0.13
(0.13)
(t-2 to t)
Change-in-compensation regressions
Growth in shares outstanding
0.40 **
(0.16)
(t-2 to t)
Growth in assets-per-share
-0.05
(0.15)
(t-2 to t)

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

0.80 ***

0.49 ***

0.70 ***

0.50 *** 0.36 *

(0.14)

(0.13)

(0.15)

(0.17)

0.49 ***

0.55 ***

0.46 ***

0.52 *** 0.31 ***

(0.10)

(0.10)

(0.10)

(0.11)

(0.12)

0.22 *

0.40 ***

0.51 ***

0.21

0.02

(0.13)

(0.14)

(0.14)

(0.16)

(0.19)

0.26 **

0.53 ***

0.37 ***

0.24 **

0.04

(0.11)

(0.11)

(0.10)

(0.12)

(0.12)

2002

(0.21)

PANEL B: THREE-YEAR INTERVAL
1997
Compensation level regressions
Growth in shares outstanding
0.64 ***
(0.17)
(t-3 to t)
Growth in assets-per-share
0.16
(0.14)
(t-3 to t)
Change-in-compensation regressions
Growth in shares outstanding
0.64 ***
(0.15)
(t-3 to t)
Growth in assets-per-share
-0.16
(0.15)
(t-3 to t)

1998

1999

2000

2001

0.88 ***

0.67 ***

0.67 ***

0.53 *** 0.52 ***

(0.14)

(0.13)

(0.15)

(0.14)

0.37 ***

0.53 ***

0.55 ***

0.49 *** 0.27 **

(0.12)

(0.10)

(0.10)

(0.10)

0.39 ***

0.32 ***

0.67 ***

0.40 *** 0.13

(0.13)

(0.12)

(0.14)

(0.13)

(0.15)

0.26 **

0.49 ***

0.50 ***

0.51 ***

0.20 *

(0.12)

(0.11)

(0.10)

(0.11)

(0.10)

(0.17)

(0.11)

PANEL C: FOUR-YEAR INTERVAL
1997
Compensation level regressions
Growth in shares outstanding
(t-4 to t)
Growth in assets-per-share
(t-4 to t)
Change-in-compensation regressions
Growth in shares outstanding
(t-4 to t)
Growth in assets-per-share
(t-4 to t)

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

0.74 ***

0.72 ***

0.64 ***

0.53 ***

0.65 ***

(0.15)

(0.13)

(0.15)

(0.14)

(0.15)

0.19

0.45 ***

0.57 ***

0.50 ***

0.11

(0.14)

(0.12)

(0.11)

(0.12)

(0.10)

0.66 ***

0.45 ***

0.32 **

0.35 **

0.36 **

(0.14)

(0.12)

(0.14)

(0.16)

(0.15)

0.07

0.36 ***

0.59 ***

0.44 ***

0.17

(0.13)

(0.12)

(0.12)

(0.15)

(0.12)

29

TABLE 8: POSITIVE VS. NEGATIVE CHANGES IN FIRM SIZE
The table shows regression results of CEO compensation (Table 4) and changes in CEO compensation regressions
(Table 5), where we decompose the growth in shares outstanding and the growth in sales-per-share into negative
and positive growth. The performance and growth variables are measured over two-year, three-year, and four-year
intervals. Only the coefficients of interest appear in the table. The sample consists of firms that have CEO
compensation data in the Execucomp database. Only firms whose CEOs were not replaced in the preceding three
years are considered. The variables in parentheses are the estimated standard deviations of the coefficients. The
symbols *,**,*** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively.

Variable

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

0.89 ***

1.07 ***

0.71 ***

0.89 ***

0.66 ***

0.59 ***

(0.19)

(0.16)

(0.15)

(0.17)

(0.16)

(0.19)

-1.15 *

0.20

0.32

-0.11

-0.06

0.14

(0.66)

(0.53)

(0.44)

(0.41)

(0.52)

(0.66)

0.22 *

0.33 **

0.64 ***

0.45 ***

0.64 ***

0.26 *

(0.13)

(0.14)

(0.13)

(0.13)

(0.13)

(0.16)

-0.04

0.34

0.04

0.04

0.09

0.10

(0.25)

(0.22)

(0.19)

(0.11)

(0.11)

(0.17)

Compensation level regressions
Positive changes in
shares outstanding (t-3 to t)
Negative changes in
shares outstanding (t-3 to t)
Positive changes in
sales-per-share (t-3 to t)
Negative changes in
sales-per-share (t-3 to t)

Change-in-compensation regressions
Positive changes in
shares outstanding (t-3 to t)

0.70 ***

0.49 ***

0.39 ***

0.71 ***

0.49 ***

0.08

(0.16)

(0.14)

(0.14)

(0.16)

(0.15)

(0.18)

Negative changes in
shares outstanding (t-3 to t)

0.15

0.78

0.13

0.61

-0.32

0.27

(0.59)

(0.47)

(0.42)

(0.39)

(0.51)

(0.60)

Positive changes in
sales-per-share (t-3 to t)

-0.04

0.08

0.42 ***

0.41 ***

0.60 ***

0.17

(0.11)

(0.13)

(0.12)

(0.13)

(0.13)

(0.15)

Negative changes in
sales- per-share (t-3 to t)

-0.22

0.62 ***

0.27

0.09

-0.03

0.02

(0.19)

(0.19)

(0.10)

(0.11)

(0.16)

(0.22)

30

TABLE 9: DIVIDEND VS. CAPITAL GAIN COMPONENTNS OF STOCK RETURNS
The table shows regression results of CEO compensation (Table 4) and changes in CEO compensation regressions
(Table 5), where the return is decomposed into return without dividend and dividend return. The performance and
growth variables are measured over two-year, three-year, and four-year intervals. Only the coefficients of interest
appear in the table. The variables in parentheses are the estimated standard deviations of the coefficients. The
symbols *,**,*** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively.

Variable
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
TWO-YEAR INTERVAL
Compensation level regressions
Return without dividends
0.48 *** 0.24 *** 0.26 *** 0.23 *** 0.32 ***
(0.10)
(0.08)
(0.07)
(0.05)
(0.07)
(t-2 to t)
Dividend return
-0.18
-4.00
-2.23 * -1.40
-3.79 ***
(0.82)
(1.30)
(1.31)
(1.08)
(1.07)
(t-2 to t)
Change-in-compensation regressions
Return without dividends
0.41 *** 0.36 *** 0.22 *** 0.40 *** 0.45 ***
(0.11)
(0.09)
(0.08)
(0.06)
(0.08)
(t-2 to t)
*
Dividend return
1.27
1.80
-0.67
1.25
-0.10
(0.72)
(1.29)
(1.31)
(1.06)
(1.05)
(t-2 to t)
THREE-YEAR INTERVAL
Compensation level regressions
Return without dividends
0.48 *** 0.23 *** 0.20 *** 0.24 *** 0.34 ***
(0.10)
(0.09)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(t-3 to t)
*
Dividend return
0.16
-1.10
-1.75
-0.50
-0.63
(1.03)
(0.74)
(1.05)
(0.97)
(0.92)
(t-3 to t)
Change-in-compensation regressions
Return without dividends
0.59 *** 0.28 *** 0.24 *** 0.20 *** 0.35 ***
(0.11)
(0.09)
(0.08)
(0.07)
(0.08)
(t-3 to t)
**
Dividend return
1.99
0.21
-0.31
-0.22
0.35 ***
(0.90)
(0.68)
(1.00)
(0.92)
(0.08)
(t-3 to t)
FOUR-YEAR INTERVAL
Compensation level regressions
Return without dividends
(t-4 to t)
Dividend return
(t-4 to t)
Change-in-compensation regressions
Return without dividends
(t-4 to t)
Dividend return
(t-4 to t)

2002

0.27 ***
(0.07)

-4.65 ***
(1.21)

0.30 ***
(0.07)

-0.35
(1.15)

0.34 ***
(0.07)

-3.23 ***
(0.85)

0.37 ***
(0.07)

-0.50
(0.83)

0.39 ***

0.18 **

0.24 ***

0.41 *** 0.42 ***

(0.10)

(0.09)

(0.07)

(0.09)

(0.07)

-1.13

0.09

0.43

0.67

-1.13

(0.86)

(0.72)

(0.93)

(0.92)

(0.84)

0.46 ***

0.14 *

0.22 ***

0.48 *** 0.41 ***

(0.11)

(0.08)

(0.08)

(0.11)

(0.08)

0.83

0.61

0.01

0.77

1.04

(0.85)

(0.64)

(0.91)

(1.03)

(0.88)

31

