NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONTRACTUAL VERSUS GENERIC OUTSOURCING:
THE ROLE OF PROXIMITY
Robert C. Feenstra
Barbara J. Spencer
Working Paper 11885
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11885
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2005

We would like to thank Chang Hong for her very helpful assistance with the empirical research. Barbara
Spencer is also grateful for financial support from the Social Science and Humanities Research Council of
Canada. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Robert C. Feenstra and Barbara J. Spencer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Contractual Versus Generic Outsourcing: The Role of Proximity
Robert C. Feenstra and Barbara J. Spencer
NBER Working Paper No. 11885
December 2005
JEL No. F1, L24
ABSTRACT
We explore the relationship between proximity of buyers and sellers and the organizational form of
outsourcing. Outsourcing can be "contractual" in which suppliers undertake specific investments or
involve "generic" market transactions. Proximity expands the variety of products sourced through
contracts abroad rather than at home, but the range of generic imports is unchanged. A higher-quality
foreign workforce raises the variety of contractual trade, but at the expense of generics. We confirm
these predictions using data for ordinary versus processing exports from Chinese provinces to
destination markets and also the predictions of an extended model that allows for multinational
production.
Robert C. Feenstra
Department of Economics
University of California
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
rcfeenstra@ucdavis.edu
Barbara J. Spencer
University of British Columbia
Sauder School of Business
2053 Main Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z2 CANADA
and NBER
barbara.spencer@sauder.ubc.ca

Contractual versus Generic Outsourcing:
The Role of Proximity
1. Introduction
The importance of distance in international trade has been well-established by empirical
work on the gravity equation. Beyond its influence on the volume of trade, however, distance can
also have an impact on the organization of trade and production. For example, Evans and Harrigan
(2005) have recently shown the importance of proximity between the buyer and seller in the
sourcing of apparel production. More generally, we will argue in this paper that proximity between
buyers and sellers is a key determinant of the contractual relations between parties engaged in
international outsourcing.
To provide an illustration of the contractual relations we have in mind, consider Figure 1.
There we show the manufacturing exports of China to various destination countries in 2002, broken
down into the proportions accounted for by “ordinary” exports, processing exports by Chineseowned firms (labelled “other processing”), and processing exports by foreign-owned firms (labelled
“FDI processing”). Processing exports are produced under contractual arrangements with foreign
firms, whereas “ordinary” exports do not have these arrangements. Figure 1(A) shows the dollar
amount of trade, and Figure 1(B) shows percentages. These proportions of trade are quite different
across destination countries. For example, Japan (the closest country) imports the greatest
proportion of goods as FDI processing, followed by the United States (a distant but very large
country), European Union, ASEAN countries, Canada, South America and South Africa.
Apart from the distance from China to various destination countries, another aspect of
proximity is the distance from a Chinese province to the nearest port or land border. There are huge
differences across the 30 Chinese provinces in their proximity to the coast, and as a result, in their

1

levels of exports and proportions of ordinary versus processing trade. Some examples are illustrated
in Figure 2, where Figure 2(A) shows the dollar amount of trade and Figure 2(B) shows percentages.
We see that the coastal province of Guangdong has the highest exports and the greatest proportion
in FDI processing, followed by Fujian/Hainan, Beijing/Tianjin, Shanghai, and other coastal regions.
Inland areas, by contrast, have little processing trade in general, and even less accounted for by
foreign-owned firms.
With these examples in mind, we explore the relationship between proximity of the buyer
and seller and the organizational form of outsourcing. Our point of departure is recent literature in
international trade dealing with incomplete contracts between firms in the provision of specialized
inputs.1 This literature has mostly emphasised the importance of proximity with respect to the ability
to enforce contracts, monitor workers or gain information.2 But the role of proximity is more
complicated than that, because distance also affects the outside options of the firms involved in a
contractual outsourcing relationship. In this paper, the outside option for the buyer is to purchase
non-specialized parts on the spot market, referred to as “generic outsourcing.”3 Because distance

1

For example, Antràs (2003) argues that in more capital-intensive industries, a greater share of
trade is “intra-firm,” i.e. between a parent and its subsidiaries. Antràs and Helpman (2004) analyse a
more general multi-industry, multi-country model, where the type of contracts and ownership between
firms will depend on features of the industry (the productivity distribution of firms) as well features of the
host countries (such as factors prices). See Helpman (2005) and Spencer (2005) for surveys.
2

For example, Antras (2005) assumes that contracts between firms in different countries are
harder to enforce than contracts between firms in the same country. Grossman and Helpman (2004)
suppose that it is easier to monitor workers at home. Head, Ries and Spencer (2004) emphasizes the
importance of local information about the buyer’s needs in designing relationship-specific investments.
3

Spencer and Qiu (2001), Qiu and Spencer (2002) and Head, Ries and Spencer (2004)
incorporate the spot-market purchase of generic parts as an outside option for a buyer in a model of
incomplete contracts. In Head, Ries and Spencer (2004), multinational firms producing abroad may
contract with home country suppliers, but otherwise these papers focus on domestic contractual
outsourcing. The recent work of Schwartz and Van Assche (2005) also examines contractual (or “ideal”)
outsourcing versus arm’s length purchases of inputs in an international context.
2

affects the price of generic inputs, it affects the outside option under Nash bargaining and hence the
outcome from contractual outsourcing. It is this linkage between distance, generic outsourcing and
contractual outsourcing that we investigate, both theoretically and empirically.
In the model described in sections 2 and 3 there are two countries, a high-wage country and
a low-wage country. The buyer is located in the high-wage country, while suppliers can be located
in either country or can take the form of a multinational with headquarters in the high-wage country
and production in the low-wage country. Contacts are assumed to be incomplete: suppliers make an
up-front relationship-specific investment so as to specialize an input, but are rewarded only through
ex-post bargaining over the price of the component or part. Since the threat-point of the buyer
involves the import of a generic parts from a spot-market in the low-wage country, the alternative
to contractual outsourcing is arm’s length purchases as in standard models of perfect competition
and trade.
To provide some intuition as to the workings of the model, suppose that the marginal cost
of buying abroad falls, as would occur due to a reduction in transport costs. Then the model predicts
that the profits of contractual exporters from the low wage country would be unchanged for any
given level of exports. This occurs because the reduction in cost applies to generic as well as
contractual goods with the result that the buyer’s outside option of arm’s-length purchases improves
by the amount of the cost decrease. Nash bargaining then implies that the contracted price will fall
by the same amount as the arm’s length price and the cost decrease. Consequently, a reduction in
foreign costs has no effect on the buyer’s choice between contractual and generic imports. But the
tradeoff between foreign and domestic contractual outsourcing is affected, since the former is
cheaper. As a result, the low-wage country exports a greater range of goods under contractual
arrangements, displacing contractual production in the high wage country. This gives rise to an
3

important prediction for the empirical analysis: lower trade costs due to closer proximity to a lowwage country should be associated with a higher proportion of imported varieties that are of the
contractual rather than the generic type.
We examine this hypothesis empirically in section 3, using data on processing versus
“ordinary” exports from Chinese provinces to various destination countries.4 As their name suggests,
processing exports are goods that rely on imported inputs that are processed in China with the
finished good exported. Provided the finished good is not sold domestically, Chinese customs
authorities allow the imported inputs to enter the country duty free. We presume that all such
relationships are contractual, in the sense that the buyer specifies the characteristics of the good and
makes payment accordingly. In contrast, “ordinary” exports are goods that could be equally well
sold domestically, and have no special customs treatment. We presume that these exports are not
specialized for a particular buyer and represent arm’s-length transactions between unrelated firms,
like the “generic” outsourcing in our model.
In section 4, we extend the model to include the possibility of contractual outsourcing to a
multinational firm that has headquarters in the high-wage country, but produces through FDI
(foreign direct investment) in the low-wage country. Again, we generate predictions about the
variety of goods that would be produced under FDI versus under the two forms of outsourcing.
Under mild assumptions, we find that the most technologically sophisticated inputs are produced
domestically through contractual outsourcing to domestic firms; the next most sophisticated are
contracted to multinational firms producing through FDI; products with even less sophistication are

4

Feenstra and Hanson (2005) use Chinese data similar to that used here to examine two types of
processing exports, depending on which party (the Chinese manager or foreign firm) own and controls the
imported inputs. In contrast, we are comparing processing exports (by either Chinese-owned or foreignowned firms) with the variety of ordinary exports.
4

produced through contractual outsourcing directly to firms in the low-wage country; and the simplest
inputs are produced and exported under generic outsourcing. As before, a decrease in trade costs
should increase the proportion of exported varieties that are of the contractual type, but the increase
should be concentrated in an expansion of multinational production rather than contractual
outsourcing to unaffiliated firms in the low-wage country.
For the empirical analysis, we are interested in explaining processing exports versus ordinary
exports as well as the extent of foreign ownership within the processing category. We find support
for the theoretical predictions of our model. Specifically, we find that the range of processing
exports from Chinese provinces are much more sensitive to internal distance (from the province to
the nearest shipping port or major border crossing) than are ordinary exports. More remote provinces
have a lower variety of processing exports relative to ordinary exports, as already suggested by
Figure 2. In contrast to the proportions of total trade as shown in Figure 2, however, our results are
obtained by using the export variety – or “extensive margin” – of ordinary exports versus processing
exports. The negative effect of distance on the variety of processing exports is reinforced by having
a lower quality provincial workforce, which also tilts trade towards ordinary exports and away from
processed varieties . Furthermore, within processing exports, it is foreign-owned multinational firms
that are the most sensitive to distance and to the quality of the workforce: a province that is closer
to the border or has a higher-quality workforce will have relatively more processed varieties
exported by foreign-owned firms.
Our empirical results therefore provide support for the main predictions of our model.
Beyond that, our empirical method is of some general interest because it uses the “extensive margin”
as the dependent variable in gravity-like equations. This technique has also been used recently by
Chen and Feenstra (2005) and Hillberry and Hummels (2005), and enables us to quantify the impact
5

of distance (and other variables) on the organizational structure of trade. These conclusions are
discussed further in section 5.

2. The Model.
The model we develop is related to the work of Grossman and Helpman (2002, 2005), and
the papers by Antràs cited above, which use the property-rights theory of Grossman and Hart (1986)
to model global outsourcing. Likewise, we use a Grossman-Hart framework, which includes a
relationship-specific investment (RSI) that a supplier must make, thereby creating a “holdup”
problem.5
There are two countries: a high-wage developed country, denoted by H and a low-wage
developing country denoted by L. We model a buyer or “assembler” in country H that produces a
final good using a fixed proportion of each of a large number of intermediate goods or parts.
“Suppliers” in country H and country L potentially make relationship-specific investments so as
produce innovations in design (blueprints) that specialize parts in ways that are of value only to the
particular assembler. Contracts are incomplete in the sense that it is not possible to condition
payment on the level of investment. Thus each supplier must make its investment up-front with the
distribution of rents subsequently determined through ex-post bargaining. The assembler can choose
to purchase specialized parts through contractual outsourcing in either country H or country L, but
also has the option of purchasing “generic” versions of the parts from a spot market. Due to the cost
advantage of production in L, generic parts are produced only in country L.
Figure 3 illustrates the various organizational forms, which are distinguished as follows:
5

In contrast, Grossman and Helpman (2004) apply the incentive-systems framework of
Holmstrom and Milgrom (1994) to model managerial compensation in global production, and Marin and
Verdier (2002, 2003) and Puga and Trefler (2002) extend the Aghion and Tirole (1997) theory of
delegation of authority to general equilibrium.
6

Contractual outsourcing:
Domestic outsourcing - type H supplier, RSI and production in H
Multinational supplier - type M supplier, RSI in H and production in L
Foreign outsourcing - type L supplier, RSI and production in L
Generic outsourcing: spot market in country L.
Suppliers undertake RSI only in their country of origin, but production can take place in
either country. Thus, suppliers from country H have the option of producing at home or producing
as a multinational through FDI in country L. Multinationals from H gain access to the lower wage
in country L, but must pay a fixed cost, F, to set up a plant. However, suppliers from country L
produce only in country L.6 Letting the index i represent these three organizational forms, then i =
L if the contract is with a supplier in L, i = H if the contract is with a supplier in H with production
in H and i = M (for multinational) if a supplier in H undertakes RSI in H, but produces in L.
Parts differ with respect to the effectiveness of RSI in creating rent for the assembler. We
interpret this variation as mainly reflecting differences in technological sophistication. Thus we
would expect that parts with high effectiveness of RSI are the more technologically sophisticated
inputs, that require significant investment to keep up with technological change.7 Letting D(z) 0 (0,1]
denote the effectiveness of RSI for part z, parts are ordered from low to high D(z) on the continuum
z 0 [0, Ž], where D(0) > 0 and D(Ž) = 1. For convenience we assume that one unit of the final good
requires just one of each of the intermediate goods.

Following Spencer and Qiu (2001), we assume

6

Suppliers from L producing in H would be dominated by suppliers from H that do not pay F.

7

Based on U.K. manufacturing data, Acemoglu et al. (2004) finds that outsourcing (rather than
vertical integration by the buyer) is more likely when the supplier is technologically intensive. The
effectiveness of RSI may also be increased by other factors such as a larger cost-share in final-good
production (see Spencer and Qiu, 2001, and Acemoglu et. al. 2004).
7

that the rent created by RSI takes the form of a reduction in marginal assembly costs. For example,
the blueprints created by RSI could improve the fit of each part with the other parts involved in the
assembly process or, alternatively, could speed up “just-in-time” delivery. As a result, the total rent
created by any given level of RSI is increasing in the output of the assembler. The idea that the scale
of a buyer increases the benefits from supplier investment seems appealing in considering the
extensive contractual outsourcing of a firm such as Wal-Mart.
We introduce a minimum level of RSI, denoted k, that will later play an important role in
distinguishing the various cases. The idea is that suppliers must invest k just to obtain a basic
knowledge of the assembler’s requirements. For example, k could include the set up costs for an
R&D lab. Letting k represent the level of RSI, it follows that only the portion, k - k, of this
investment is effective in creating rent. Thus we assume that an investment, k, by a supplier of type
i = H creates rent, rH , in the form of a reduction in assembly cost for each unit purchased, where
rH /D(z)(k - k)1/2.

(1)

The functional form in (1) implies that rent per unit is increasing in k, but at a decreasing rate.
Letting y represent the assembler’s (and the supplier’s) output, the total rent created is rHy.
Multinationals of type M undertaking production in the low-wage country are less efficient
than suppliers of type H in the quality of manufacture of specialized inputs due to lower skill in the
workforce. Letting q 0 (0,1) denote the quality of specialized inputs produced by multinationals in
country L relative to quality in country H, we assume that the rent created by RSI is reduced by the
fraction q. One could imagine that a less skilled workforce reduces the fraction of output that meets
the exacting manufacturing tolerances of the blueprints created by RSI. Multinationals have access
to the same technology as in country H, but the lower technological level of country L further
reduces the quality of manufacturing by firms of type L by the fraction, 8 0 (0,1). Consequently, the
8

rent per unit of output created by an investment k by suppliers of types L and M is given by:
rL / 8qD(z)(k - k)1/2, rM / qD(z)(k - k)1/2.

(2)

Suppliers from country L do not undertake FDI in country H, since the fixed cost, F, would reduce
their profits relative to suppliers of type H. One could also suppose that multinationals with
headquarters in country L would remain at a technological disadvantage.
In modelling contractual outsourcing, we assume that Nash bargaining takes place over the
price that will be paid on delivery of the specialized input without the potential for lump-sum
transfers. As a result, there is an efficiency loss due to prices that exceed marginal cost. This
assumption captures an element of realism since pure-price contracts are the norm for international
outsourcing between unrelated firms, perhaps because lump-sum transfers are difficult to enforce.8
Both RSI and the cost F of FDI are assumed to be non-contractible9, whereas the marginal costs of
production in each country are contractible. Since the up-front costs of RSI create economies of
scale, maximum profit is achieved when only one firm invests. Thus we assume that the assembler
bargains with at most one supplier of each part.10
The subgame perfect equilibrium incorporates three stages of decision. At stage 1, potential
contractual suppliers are formed in countries L and H with full awareness of the subsequent
8

The fact that prices of inputs exceed marginal cost changes final-good output and the demand for
parts, but not decisions taking output as given. The exclusion of lump-sum transfers is not crucial, since
our main results either hold output fixed or are independent of endogenous changes in output.
9

RSI involves unverifiable efforts in obtaining information about the needs of the assembler and
ways to coordinate with other suppliers. It is difficult to verify F since it is incurred in a foreign country
and may also include the cost of managerial effort.
10

The possibility that the assembler bargains with two suppliers so as to increase competition is
less important in this context because of the option of generic outsourcing. One could imagine that there
are a large number of potential suppliers for each part z, but that based on a random draw only one
supplier in each country achieves the highest productivity in RSI as represented by D(z). If more than one
firm invests, then the assembler bargains with the supplier that would increase its profits the most. Since
potential suppliers correctly anticipate this outcome, at most one firm will choose to invest for each part.
9

equilibrium outcomes. Firms in country H decide whether to produce in country H (i = H) or become
a multinational by investing F to set up a plant in country L (i = M). At stage 2, each supplier
chooses its profit-maximizing level of investment, which becomes sunk. If a firm decides not to
invest, it exits and the part is later produced only as a generic. At stage 3, the assembler engages in
simultaneous Nash bargaining with suppliers of type i = H,M L over the prices, denoted pi(z), of
parts z. The assembler also commits to its output, y, at this stage. If bargaining is successful, the
assembler orders y units of each part at the contracted price. Otherwise, the assembler buys y units
of a generic version of the part at marginal cost from a spot market in country L.

3. Purely domestic or purely international outsourcing.
A. Predictions of the model
In this section we consider the possibility that contractual outsourcing involves purely
domestic suppliers (type i = H) or, alternatively, purely foreign suppliers (type i = L) where each
supplier undertakes both RSI and production in its own country. Letting wH(z) denote the (constant)
marginal cost of production of part z in country H and wL(z) the (constant) marginal cost at which
the good can be produced in country L and transported to country H, then * / wH(z) - wL(z) > 0
represents the cost advantage of country L over country H. For simplicity we assume that * is the
same across all parts.
Since ki is sunk and not contractible, in Nash bargaining with an assembler of scale y in stage
3, a type i supplier of part z would gain a surplus of y[pi(z) - wi(z)] from a contract at a price pi(z).
Taking into account the rent created by RSI, the marginal cost of part z to the assembler is then (i(z)

/ pi(z) - ri. The threat point of the assembler if bargaining breaks down is to import the generic part
at a marginal cost, wL(z). Consequently, the assembler gains y[wL(z) - (i(z)] from agreement.

10

Summing the gains of the assembler and supplier, the overall surplus from agreement is y[rH - *] if
the supplier is of type H and yrL if the supplier is of type L. Assuming that the parties have equal
bargaining power and taking into account the cost of RSI, suppliers of types H and L respectively
earn profit11:

BH = y(rH - *)/2 - kH and BL = yrL/2 - kL.

(3)

The corresponding gains of the assembler are y(rH - *)/2 and yrL/2. Since rH - * > 0 and rL > 0,
agreement is always reached for ki > k. Otherwise, generic parts are imported.
For simplicity, we assume that the number of parts required for production is sufficiently
large that a change in RSI level or in the location of production for just one part will have a very
small effect on overall marginal cost, which is determined by the sum of the prices paid for parts.
Since the effect on the assembler’s choice of output is negligible, suppliers decide on their levels
of RSI taking y as given. In stage 2, setting ki to maximize Bi for i = H, L as in (3) and using (1) and
(2), we obtain:
kH = (yD(z)/4)2 + k, rH = y(D(z))2/4
kL = [8qyD(z)/4]2 + k, rL = (8q)2y(D(z))2/4.

(4)

Thus from (3) and (4), suppliers of type H and L earn profits

BH = BH(z,y) = (yD(z))2/16 - y*/2 - k
BL = BL(z,y) = (8q)2(yD(z))2/16 - k.

(5)

We assume that the assembler is the principal and hence the assembler’s preferences
dominate with respect to whether or not bargaining takes place with a particular type of supplier.
In choosing between a type H and a type L supplier, the assembler is indifferent at part z = ILH (I for

Since pH(z) - wH(z) = wL(z) - (H(z) = (rH - *)/2 and pL(z) - wL(z) = wL(z) - (L(z) = rL/2, (3)
follows from Bi = y(pi(z) - wi(z)) - ki.
11

11

indifference) satisfying rH - * = rL, where, from (4),

D(ILH) = [4*/y(1- (8q)2)]1/2.

(6)

Since rH - * $ rL for z $ ILH , the assembler prefers contracts with type H suppliers for z $ ILH and
type L suppliers for z < ILH. However suppliers must also be willing to invest. Letting part H satisfy

BH(H,y) = 0 and part L satisfy BL(L,y) = 0, then, from (5) we obtain:
D(H) = 4[k + y*/2]1/2/y, D(L) = 4(k)1/2/y8q.

(7)

Thus a requirement for investment is z $ H for type H suppliers and z $ L for type L.
It is notable from (5) that the profit of a type L supplier is independent of marginal cost,
wL(z). Since wL(z) represents both the marginal cost of suppliers of type L and the marginal cost of
suppliers of generic parts, the total surplus generated by a supplier of type L is simply the rent, rL,
generated by RSI. This surplus is shared equally between the parties by increasing the price, pL(z),
to just offset any increase in wL(z). By contrast, the total surplus generated by an agreement with a
supplier of type H is reduced by *, due to the threat point of importing generic parts. Consequently,
as shown by (7), an increase in * raises H, so as to reduce the entry of suppliers of type H, but * has
no effect on the part z = L at which a supplier of type L is just willing to produce.
Proposition 1 (see Appendix A for the proof) sets out the conditions that determine the
choice of organizational form. To express these conditions, we define $8q / (8q)2/(1 - (8q)2) for 8q
< 1, which is increasing in 8q as the quality of manufacturing of suppliers of type L improves. If 8q
is sufficiently close to 1, then suppliers of type L would drive out suppliers of type H due to the
lower wage in L. To focus on internal solutions, we assume D(ILH) < 1, D(L) < 1 and D(H) < 1, which
require 12:

12

From (6) and (7), 16k/(y)2 < (8q)2 < 1 - 4*/y.
12

16k/[(y)2 - 16k] < $8q < y/4* - 1 and k/y* < y/16* - ½.

(8)

Proposition 1: Assume (8).
(A) If k/y* $ $ 8q/2 then ILH < H # L and contractual outsourcing is restricted to purely domestic type
H suppliers in the high-wage country. The assembler contracts with H for parts, z 0 [H , Ž], with
higher productivity of RSI and imports generic parts z 0 [0, H).
(B) If k/y* < $ 8q/2, then a range of parts with the highest productivity of RSI are produced
domestically in the high-wage country through contractual outsourcing to suppliers of type H,
whereas a range of parts with the next highest productivity level of RSI are imported from the lowwage country through contractual outsourcing to suppliers of type L. The remaining parts are
imported as generics. There are two subcases:
(i) If ($ 8q - 1)/4 # k/y* < $ 8q/2, then L < H and ILH # H . The assembler contracts with H for parts
z 0 [H, Ž], with L for parts z 0[L, H) and imports generic parts z 0 [0, L ).
(ii) If k/y* < ($ 8q -1)/4 then $ 8q > 1 and L < H < ILH . The assembler contracts with H for parts z

0 [ILH, Ž], and with L for parts z 0[L, ILH) and imports generic parts z 0 [0, L).
As Proposition 1 shows, the value of the minimum investment, k, required for RSI relative
to the cost savings, *y, from production in the low-wage country L is critical for determining the
range of parts produced by each type of supplier. A high value of k/y* acts as a barrier to entry for
suppliers of type L, particularly for parts with a low productivity of RSI due to a low D(z). From
Proposition 1(A), if k/y* $ $8q/2, then H # L, which implies that it is profitable for type L to produce
only the parts with high productivity of RSI that type H suppliers also find profitable. Since ILH <
H, the assembler prefers a contract with type H over type L with the result that imports are limited
to generic parts with low productivity of RSI.
13

Alternatively, if k/y* < $8q/2, as in Proposition 1(B), then L < H , reflecting the greater ease
of entry of type L suppliers. The assembler engages in both international and domestic contractual
outsourcing, but parts with the highest productivity of RSI are produced at home. There are two
sub-cases. For ($8q - 1)/4 < k/y* < $8q/2, we show in B(i) that the assembler prefers type H suppliers
if they are willing to enter (ILH < H) and hence type L suppliers gain contracts only for the parts, z

0 [L ,H), with lower productivity of RSI that type H suppliers are not willing to produce. The case
k/y* < $8q -1, examined in B(ii), is a possibility only if type L and type H suppliers are sufficiently
similar in terms of quality of manufacturing that $8q > 1. This similarity means that the assembler
tends to favor low-cost suppliers of type L ( H < ILH). Thus type L suppliers gain contracts for parts
z 0 [H, ILH) that type H would like to produce. Contracts are awarded to type H for z $ ILH and to
type L for z 0 [L, ILH). Again, generic parts are imported for z < L.

B. Comparative static effects
In our empirical analysis we are able to measure international contractual outsourcing, but
not contractual outsourcing at home, so henceforth we assume L < H to ensure that there is some
contractual outsourcing to firms in country L. From Proposition 1, this requires k/y* < $8q/2 so as
to rule out case (A) in which contractual outsourcing is restricted to country H. Of primary interest
for the empirical analysis is the effect of trade costs as measured by the distance between the various
outsourcing locations and destination countries. Since wL(z) includes the cost of transport to country
H, a reduction in trade costs would increase the cost advantage, *, of the low-wage country. We are
also interested in the effects of an improvement in the quality of manufacturing in country L, as
represented by an increase in q. In addition, we consider the effects of variations in the scale, y, of
the assembler. Corollary 1 sets out the relevant comparative static effects.

14

Corollary 1. Assume L < H and (8).
(A) An increase in scale, y, of the assembler reduces L, H and ILH, and hence reduces the range of
generic exports from country L and raises the range of parts produced under contractual
outsourcing in country H.
(B) Hold y fixed.(i) An increase in the cost advantage *, has no effect on L, but H and ILH increase.
Thus the range of contractual exports from country L rises at the expense of contractual outsourcing
in country H. The range of generic exports is unchanged (ii) An improvement in quality, q, reduces
L, has no effect on H, but increases ILH. Thus the range of contractual exports from country L is
increased at the expense of generic exports. If k/y* < ($ 8q -1)/4, then H < ILH and the reduction in
the assembler’s preference for type H suppliers arising from the increase in ILH, narrows the range
of parts produced through contractual outsourcing in country H.
Proof: The proof of Corollary 1 follows directly from the expressions for L , H and ILH in (6) and
(7) and Proposition 1.
Corollary 1(B) provides us with the following testable hypotheses:13
(I) An increase in the cost advantage * of the low-wage country raises its range of contractual
exports, with no impact on its range of generic exports;
(II) An increase in the quality q of the foreign workforce raises its range of contractual exports, and
lowers its range of generic exports.
We test these hypotheses by constructing measures of the range of contractual and generic
exports from Chinese provinces to destination countries, and examining the impact of differences

13

Corollary 1 refers to effects on the range of exports, which are our primary focus of interest.
Predictions as to the volume of exports may differ. For example, an increase in scale reduces the range of
generic imports, but since the volume increases, the effect on the value of generic exports is ambiguous.
15

in the provinces’ cost advantage (due to proximity to the destination countries) and workforce
quality. Before turning to these empirical tests, we should note one potential difficulty: hypotheses
(I) and (II) are derived holding the scale of the assembler, y, fixed, but in principle this scale is
endogenous because it depends on the assembler’s marginal cost. Marginal cost is determined by
adding up the assembler’s net marginal cost for each part, which in turn depends on the range of
parts covered by each organizational form. If a change in a parameter leads to a shift in
organizational form that reduces marginal cost, then we would expect the output of the assembler
to rise (given demand).14 But with an increase in y, Corollary 1(A) states that the range of generic
exports from the low-wage country are reduced, with an ambiguous impact on its range of
contractual exports, which therefore modifies hypotheses (I) and (II).
Fortunately, the ambiguity arising from endogenous changes in the scale of output (which
we cannot control for empirically) can be resolved. Instead of focussing on the absolute range of
contractual or generic exports from the low-wage country, we consider their relative magnitude, i.e.
the proportion of exported varieties that are contractual rather than generic. As shown in Corollary
2, this approach allows us to vary the scale of output y endogenously, and still obtain definite
predictions about how the cost advantage *, and quality q, affect the relative range of products
produced through contractual versus generic outsourcing.

Corollary 2. Assume L < H and (8).
Let T denote the proportion of exported varieties from country L that are of the contractual rather
than generic type. Then T is increasing in (i) the scale, y, of the assembler, (ii) the cost advantage,

14

See Spencer and Qiu(2001) for an analysis of the feedback effects between marginal cost,
output and RSI for the case in which only type H suppliers undertake RSI.
16

*, of country L and (iii) the quality q, of manufacturing in country L.
Proof: The results follow from T /1 - D(L)/D(H) =1 - (k)1/2/8q(k +y*/2)1/2 for ($ 8q - 1)/4 # k/y* <

$ 8q/2, and T /1 - D(L)/D(ILH) =1 - (k/y*)1/2/$8q for k/y* < ($8q -1)/4, so dT/dy > 0, MT/M* > 0 and
MT/Mq > 0.

G

This Corollary leads to our third testable hypothesis:
(III) An increase in the cost-advantage of the low-wage country or the quality of its workforce (with
any induced increase in assembler scale) raises the proportion of exported varieties from country L
that are contractual rather than generic.
In our empirical work we will examine hypotheses (I) and (II) using separate regressions
where the dependent variables are the range of contractual versus generic exports, respectively.
Because these two hypotheses hold assembler scale constant, we should not necessarily expect the
hypotheses to apply as stated. But the weaker hypothesis (III), which involves a comparison of the
two regressions, should hold even with endogenous changes in the scale of the assembler.

C. Estimation
To test these comparative statics effects we make use of a dataset on Chinese exports by
province to all destination countries.15 Chinese exports are distinguished by whether they are
“ordinary” versus “processing” exports. The latter category is composed of goods for which parts
are initially imported duty-free; used in China; and the finished good must then be exported (since
no duties were paid on the parts, it cannot be sold domestically). By its very nature, we can expect
that processing trade is done under contract with some foreign buyer. However, the same categories

15

Data sources are described in Appendix B.
17

of final goods can instead be purchased as “ordinary” exports, which does not involve any prior
agreement between buyer and seller as to the imported parts, methods of assembly, etc. Therefore,
we identify Chinese processing exports as resulting from contractual outsourcing, and Chinese
ordinary exports as what we have called generic outsourcing.
Our primary interest is in the ranges of goods exported by the low-wage country: these
ranges are given in our theory by [0,L) for generic outsourcing and [L, H) or [L, ILH) for contractual
outsourcing. (We do not attempt to measure outsourcing within the high-wage country). In order
to measure the ranges of goods empirically, we appeal to the “extensive margin” recently used by
Hummels and Klenow (2005). To define this, let I t jk ⊂ {1,..., N } denote the set of goods exported by
province j of China to destination county k, in year t and I t* ≡ ∪ I t jk denote the total set of goods
j ,k

exported by China. Also, let x it* , i ∈ I t* denote the total exports of good i from China to the world in
year t and x*t total exports from China. With this notation, the extensive margin of province j to
country k in year t is defined by:

∑x

EM t jk ≡

i ∈I t jk

∑x

*
it

∑ x it*

=

*
it

i ∈I t jk

x t*

(9)

i ∈I t*

Feenstra (1994) shows how this type of formula can be obtained from an underlying CES
aggregator function, and represents the theoretically appropriate way to measure product variety in
a CES framework. Notice that the numerator and denominator of (9) differ only by the set of goods
over which the summation is taken: in the numerator, the summation is taken over the set of goods
exported by province j to country k, whereas in the denominator the summation if taken over all
goods exported by China in year t. Therefore, the variation in (9) across provinces and destination
countries represents differences in the product varieties traded between them, and not the value of
18

exports.
jk
jk
Letting x it , i ∈ I t represent the value of exports of good i from province j to country k in

jk
year t, where x t ≡

∑

i ∈I tjk

xitjk , Hummels and Klenow (2005) further propose the following formula

for the intensive margin of exports between region j and country k:

∑x

IM t ≡
jk

i ∈I t jk

jk
it

∑ x it*

i ∈I t jk

x tjk
=
∑ x it*

(10)

i ∈I tjk

Notice that the difference between the numerator and denominator of (10) comes from the value of
exports: in the numerator it is the exports from province j to country k, summed over goods i ∈ I t jk ,
jk
whereas in the denominator it is total Chinese exports, summed over the same set i ∈ I t . In this

sense, the intensive margin measures the amount exported by each province to each country, relative
to the country total. By multiplying the extensive and intensive margins we obtain exports from
province j to country k, relative to Chinese total exports:
EM t × IM t
jk

jk

x tjk
= * .
xt

(11)

Thus, the extensive and intensive margins are a decomposition of the exports from each province
to each country into their variety and volume components, respectively.
Estimates of a gravity equation using the extensive margin as the dependent variable are
shown in Table 1. (For comparison, in Appendix Table C1, we also report the estimates obtained
using the intensive margin as a dependent variable.) The regressions in the top half of Table 1 use
the extensive margin constructed from ordinary exports as the dependent variable, while the
regressions in the bottom half of Table 1 use the extensive margin constructed from processing
exports as the dependent variable. In each case, we have annual data on Chinese exports from 1988-

19

2000, but for brevity just report the regressions at 3-year intervals. The regressors include GDP per
capita as well as the average manufacturing wage in the source province: these are treated as
endogenous, and as instruments we use the fraction of the population with primary, junior, senior
and university education. Next, we include GDP per capita in the destination country as well as
population in the source provinces and destination countries. In addition, we use two measures of
distance: the internal distance from the province to the nearest shipping port or major border
crossing; and then the external distance from that port/border crossing to the destination country.
Both of these will measure transportation costs, with provinces that are closer to their destination
markets have a cost advantage over more distant provinces.
Our primary interest is in the effect of distance on the extensive margins. The theoretical
hypothesis (I) is that distance should impact the range of contractual outsourcing, i.e. the extensive
margin of processing exports, but not impact the range of generic outsourcing, i.e. the extensive
margin of ordinary exports. From Table 1, we see that external distance has no significant impact
on the extensive margin of either ordinary or processing exports, but that internal distance affect
both extensive margins. However, consistent with hypothesis (III), internal distance has a
substantially greater negative impact on processing exports as compared to ordinary exports: in
2000, greater internal distance reduces the range of processing exports by a factor of 10 times more
than it reduces ordinary exports. We take these estimates as providing support for our hypothesis
that the range of processing exports is more sensitive to distance than are generic exports, at least
for internal distance from the province to the nearest port/border crossing.
A second hypothesis is that a higher quality workforce in the source province will contribute
to a greater range of processing exports. Recall that we have used the education level of the
population as instruments for the manufacturing wage (and also for the GDP per capital of the
20

province). We therefore interpret the manufacturing wage as a measure of workers quality rather
than labor cost. In Table 1, we see that the manufacturing wage has a negative coefficient for
ordinary exports, consistent with hypothesis (II), and either a positive or near-zero and insignificant
coefficient for processing exports. These results are not as clean as what we obtain for distance,
but still offer significant support for hypothesis (II).
In Table 2 we repeat the regressions from Table 1, but now weight them by the volume of
trade from each province to each destination country. That is, we use the predicted intensive
margins (from the regression reported in Table A1) as weights. The results in Table 2 for the
distance variables are similar to those in the unweighted regressions of Table 1: internal distance has
a much greater negative impact on the range of processing exports than ordinary exports, confirming
hypothesis (III) with respect to cost advantages due to distance. In Table 2, the manufacturing wage
is now positive and significant (for 1994 - 2000) for the range of processing exports, and negative
and significant (for several years) for ordinary exports. These results offer more support for
hypothesis (II), that a higher quality workforce results in a greater range of contractual outsourcing
(processing exports) at the expense of generic outsourcing (ordinary exports).
Two control variables are related to the size of the destination countries – their GDP per
capita and populations – which might have captured the scale of the assembler. However, it turns
out that both these variables are highly insignificant, so we are not controlling for that variable.
Instead, our regression indicates that there is a scale effect of the source province: an increase in the
provincial population has a much greater positive effect on the range of processing exports than
ordinary exports, especially in more recent years. This finding suggests to us that an expanded
model with free entry of assemblers might be appropriate, whereby larger provinces can support the
outsourcing requirements of a greater number of foreign assemblers, especially for contractual
21

outsourcing. That empirical prediction is beyond the scope of the model in this paper, however.

4. Outsourcing production via FDI
A: Predictions of the model
This section adds the possibility of contractual outsourcing to multinational suppliers of type
M that undertake RSI in country H, but set up a wholly owned subsidiary to manufacture the parts
in country L. Compared with type H suppliers, multinationals benefit from the lower wage in
country L, but they must pay the fixed cost, F, to set up a plant, and the lower quality of
manufacturing in country L reduces the rent created by RSI (see (2)). Type L suppliers have an even
lower quality of manufacturing due to inferior technology, but they are not subject to the fixed cost.
More formally, type M suppliers earn profit, given by BM = y[pM(z) - wL(z)] - kM - F, where
pM(z) is the price of the product determined by Nash bargaining with the assembler at stage 3. Since
both kM and F are not contractible, it follows, analogous to the previous bargaining outcomes (see
(3)), that BM = yrM/2 - kM - F, where rM / qD(z)(kM - k)½ from (2). The assembler gains yrM/2. From
profit maximization at stage 2, we obtain
kM = (yqD(z))2/16 + k, rM = y(qD(z))2/4.

(12)

Consequently, we can express the stage 1 profit of a multinational as:

BM = BM(z,y,F) = (yqD(z))2/16 - k - F.

(13)

As (13) shows, just as for contractual suppliers from country L, the profits of multinationals from
contractual production in L do not depend on the marginal cost, wL(z).
Setting rH - * = rM to define part z = IMH, the assembler prefers a type H rather than a type M
supplier if and only if z $ IMH where, letting $q / (q)2/(1 - (q)2) and using (12) and (4), we obtain

D(IMH) = [4*/y(1- (q)2)]½ = [4*(1 + $q)/y]½.

22

(14)

However, the assembler always prefers type M to type L due to type M’s greater creation of rent16.
Letting z = M satisfy BM(M,y,F) = 0, investment by multinationals is profitable only if z $ M, where

D(M) = 4(k + F)1/2/yq.

(15)

Proposition 2 (see Appendix A for the proof) describes the various outcomes with respect
to the choice of supplier. To reduce the number of cases, we restrict attention to F/y* # 1/4 in
Proposition 2A, which implies that the fixed cost of FDI is at most one quarter of the savings, y*,
from the lower wage in country L. With fixed costs in this lower range, there is a closer
correspondence between the assembler’s preference for type M suppliers and their availability.17 As
Proposition 2(A) shows, if F/y* # 1/4 and H # M, then the assembler prefers H over M for z $ H
(due to IMH # H ). In this case, type H suppliers drive out type M suppliers and the possibilities with
respect to contractual and generic outsourcing are described by Proposition 1, parts (A) and (B)(i).18
Proposition 2(B) then develops the various cases that arise when some parts are supplied by
multinationals. In part B(i), we compare type H with type M suppliers, whereas in B(ii), we compare
type M with type L suppliers and also consider the potential for generic imports. Again to focus on
internal solutions, we assume D(IMH) < 1 and D(M) < 1 which require19:
16(k + F)/[(y)2 - 16(k + F)] < $q < y/4* - 1.

16

(16)

From (12) and (4), rL = (8)2rM where 8 < 1.

The assumption F/y* # 1/4 rules out H < M < IMH in which the assembler contracts with H for z
0 [H, M) (type M is not available), with M for z 0 [M ,IMH) and again with H for z $ IMH.
17

18

The possibility L < H < ILH in Proposition 1 part (B)(ii) is ruled out since if the assembler
prefers suppliers of type H whenever M would enter (i.e. IMH < M) , then the assembler also prefers H to L
whenever L would enter (i.e. ILH < L).
19

We use (14) and (15) to obtain 16(k + F)/(y)2 < (q)2 < 1 - 4*/y.
23

Proposition 2 Assume (8) and (16).
(A) If ($ q/2 - k/y*)/(1 + $ q) # F/y* # 1/4, then I MH # H # M and I LH # H. Purely domestic suppliers
of type H drive out multinationals and Proposition 1, parts (A) and (B)(i) apply.
(B) Suppose F/y* < ($ q/2 - k/y*)/(1 + $ q), which requires k/y* < $ q/2.
(i) Parts with the highest productivity of RSI are produced through domestic contractual outsourcing
to suppliers of type H, whereas parts with the next highest productivity level are contracted to
multinationals of type M that export from country L. (a) If k/y* $ ($ q - 1)/4, then M < H and IMH <
H. The assembler contracts with H for z 0 [H, Ž] and with M for z 0 [M, H). (b) If k/y* <($ q - 1)/4,
then M < H < IMH. The assembler contracts with H for z 0 [IMH, Ž] and with M for z 0 [M , IMH).
(ii) Purely domestic (type L) suppliers in country L gain contracts only for lower productivity parts
that multinationals (type M) are not willing to produce. If F/k > 1/$ 8, then L < M . The assembler
contracts with type L for z 0 [L, M) and imports generic parts for z 0 [0, L).

As B(i) of Proposition 2 demonstrates, parts with the highest productivity of RSI are
produced at home through contractual outsourcing in country H, whereas parts with the next highest
productivity are produced through contractual outsourcing to multinationals of type M that
undertake RSI in country H, but produce in L through FDI. Turning to B(ii), we show that if F/k >
1/$8 where $8 / (8)2/(1 - (8)2), suppliers of type L receive contracts for a range of parts in which the
productivity of RSI is further reduced. Because of the higher quality of manufacturing, the assembler
always prefers a type M over a type L supplier. Consequently, there is a role for contracting with
suppliers of type L only for the range of parts z 0 [L, M), where the fixed cost, F, is sufficiently high
to prevent the entry of M. If F/k # 1/$8, then M drives out L. At the lowest levels of productivity of
RSI, only generic parts are exported from country L.

24

Figure 3 (introduced in Section 2) illustrates the ranking of suppliers with respect to the
productivity of RSI: the most productive firms are type H suppliers (i.e. domestic outsourcing);
followed by type M suppliers (multinationals); followed by type L suppliers (foreign outsourcing);
followed by generic suppliers of intermediate inputs on the spot market in country L. This type of
ranking is similar in spirit to that obtained by Antràs and Helpman (2004) (see also the survey by
Helpman, 2005), except that firms in their framework differ in their marginal cost of production. In
our framework, by contrast, firms differ in the productivity of RSI.

B. Comparative static effects
In Corollary 3, we extend Proposition 2 to examine the effects of the parameters, y, * and
q, taking into account the option that the assembler in country H may contract with a multinational
supplier of type M producing in the low-wage country. We restrict attention to the cases satisfying
L < M < H so as to ensure that contractual exporting involves both type L and type M suppliers.20

Corollary 3. Assume L < M < H , (8) and (16).
(A) An increase in output, y, reduces L , M , H, and IMH and hence reduces the range of generic
exports from country L and raises the range of parts produced under contractual outsourcing in
country H. Since M falls by more than L, fewer varieties are exported by suppliers of type L.
(B) Hold y fixed. (i) An increase in the cost advantage, *, has no effect on L or M, but H and IMH are
increased, with the result that the range of parts exported from country L by multinationals is
increased at the expense of contractual outsourcing in country H. There is no change in the range
of parts exported by contractual suppliers of type L or exported as generics. (ii) An improvement
in the quality, q, of manufacturing in country L reduces L and M, but H is unchanged and IMH rises.
20

From Proposition 3, L < M < H iff F/y* < 1/4, F/y* < ($ q/2 - k/y*)/(1 + $ q) and F/k > 1/$8.
25

There is an increase in the range of contractual exports from country L due to an increase in the
range of parts exported by multinationals and a reduction in the range of generic exports. Since M
falls by more than L ,fewer varieties are exported by suppliers of type L. If k/y* < ($ 8q -1)/4, then
the fall in the assembler’s preference for type H suppliers narrows the range of parts produced
through domestic contractual outsourcing.
Proof: (A) If L < M, then dD(M)/dy = - D(M)/y < dD(L)/dy = - D(L)/y and hence that the range of
parts produced by M expands more than the range of parts produced by L. The remaining results in
(A) and (B) follow directly from the expressions for L , M, H, IMH (see (7), (14) and (15)) and
Proposition 2. G

Part (B) of this Corollary leads to the following hypotheses:
(IN) Increases in the cost advantage * of the low-wage country raises its range of contractual exports
made by multinationals, with no change on the range of contractual exports made by unaffiliated
firms or in the range of generic exports;
(IIN) Increases in the quality q of the foreign workforce raises the range of contractual exports by
multinationals, and lowers the range of contractual exports by unaffiliated firms and the range of
generic exports.
Similar to hypotheses (I) and (II), hypotheses (IN) and (IIN) are derived while holding constant
the scale of the assembler, y, but in principle this scale can change. So we next state an extension
that allows for the endogenous increase in scale, y, due to a rise in cost advantage or workforce
quality in the low-wage country. In this result we define RM and RL to represent the proportion of
varieties that are exported by contractual suppliers of type M and L respectively. The sum, RM + RL,
analogous to T in Corollary 2, represents the proportion of exported varieties that are of the

26

contractual rather than the generic type:

Corollary 4. Assume L < M < H , (8) and (16).
In response to an increase in the cost advantage, *, of country L, the quality, q, of manufacturing
in country L or the scale, y, of the assembler, there is an increase in the proportion RM of varieties
that are exported by multinational firms of type M and a reduction in the proportion, RL, of varieties
that are exported by contractual suppliers of type L. Overall, a greater variety of parts is produced
through international contractual outsourcing at the expense of generic exports.
Proof: For the case IMH # H, the results follow from RM / 1 - D(M)/D(H) = 1 - (k + F)1/2/q(k +y*/2)1/2
and RL / (D(M) - D(L))/D(H) = (k + F)1/2/q(k +y*/2)1/2. Similarly for H < IMH the results follow from
using RM / 1 - D(M)/D(IMH ) and RL /(D(M) - D(L))/D(IMH).

G

Thus, by considering the proportion of varieties exported by multinationals or unaffiliated
contractual suppliers this Corollary shows that we obtain the following hypothesis:
(IIIN) Increases in the cost-advantage of the low-wage country or the quality of its workforce (with
any induced increase in assembler scale) will raise the proportion RM of varieties that are exported
by multinational firms, lower the proportion RL of varieties that are exported by contractual
suppliers in the low-wage country, and also lower the range of generic exports.
The implications for the range of generic exports from the low-wage country are very similar
to what we found without multinationals, so in our testing we will not repeat the regressions related
to Chinese ordinary exports (as shown in the upper-half of Tables 1 and 2). Rather, we will focus
on processing exports and the range of varieties exported by multinationals versus Chinese-owned
firms.

27

C. Estimation
To test the model predictions for FDI, we re-calculate the extensive margins separately for
the processing exports of foreign-owned firms and the processing exports of domestic Chinese firms.
Estimates of a gravity equation using the extensive margin as the dependent variable are shown in
Table 3 (unweighted) and Table 4 (weighted). (The gravity equations using the intensive margin
as the dependent variable are shown in Appendix Table A2, and the predicted intensive margins are
used as weights.) The regressions in the top half of Tables 3 and 4 use the extensive margin
constructed from the processing exports of domestic firms as the dependent variable, while the
regression in the bottom half use the extensive margin constructed from processing exports of
foreign-owned firms as the dependent variable. As before, we report the regression at 3-year
intervals, using the same regressors as in Tables 1 and 2.
Once again, our primary interest is in the effect of distance on the external margins. In Table
3, the impact of external distance is insignificant in most cases,21 while the effect of internal distance
is negative and significant in most cases. Furthermore, the impact of internal distance is stronger
for the foreign-owned enterprises than for the domestic enterprises, especially in years before 2000.
This asymmetry also appears in the weighted regressions of Table 4, where external distance has an
insignificant impact on the range of processed goods in all cases, and internal distance has a larger
negative impact on the range of processed exports from foreign-owned firms than from domestic
firms. These results support the hypothesis (IIIN) that the variety of components produced through
offshore production by FDI subsidiaries is more sensitive to transport costs than is the variety of
21

Note that in the cases where the external distance coefficient is significant in Table 3, then it is
positive rather than negative. This occurs in several years for the processing exports of foreign-owned
firms. It suggested that more distant countries (e.g. the U.S.), will purchase more varieties from foreignowned firms (such as their own subsidiaries). However, this effect is no longer significant in the weighted
regressions shown in Table 4.
28

contractual exports from domestic Chinese firms. Thus, as one moves towards inland provinces, the
distribution of foreign-owned firms engaged in processing becomes sparse more rapidly than
domestic firms engaged in processing.
Our second hypothesis is that a higher quality workforce in the source province will
contribute to a greater range of processing exports by foreign-owned firms. Recall that we have
using the education level of the population as instruments for the manufacturing wage, and so we
treat that variable as a measure of workforce quality. In both Tables 3 and 4, the manufacturing
wage has a positive impact on the range of processing exports from foreign-owned firms, whereas
its coefficient for domestic firms varies in sign and significance across the years. Even when
workforce quality (measured by the manufacturing wage) has a positive impact on processing
exports of domestic firms, it nearly always has a greater positive impact on the processing exports
of foreign-owned firms (with the only exception being 1994 in Table 3). Therefore, an improvement
in worker quality increases the proportion of processing varieties being exported by multinationals
relative to domestically-owned firms, as in hypothesis (IIIN). In summary, we have shown that by
separating processing exports into varieties exported by multinationals versus those exported by
Chinese-owned firms, the multinationals are more sensitive to (internal) distance and workforce
quality, as our model implies.

5. Conclusions
This paper examines the determinants of the organizational form and location of suppliers
at home or abroad in outsourcing relationships. The buyer requires a continuum of parts which vary
based on the effectiveness of relationship-specific investment in creating rent for the buyer.
Assuming this effectiveness is increasing in the technological sophistication of parts, we obtain the

29

following ranking. The range or variety of parts with the highest technological sophistication are
produced in the high wage country; as technological sophistication falls, parts are produced in turn,
by contractual outsourcing to multinationals in the low-wage country, contractual outsourcing to
purely domestic firms in the low-wage country and the purchase of generic parts through the import
on non-specialized parts from the low-wage country.
Due to the buyer’s outside option of importing generic parts, an important implication of the
model is that countries that are closer in physical distance to a low-wage country should benefit from
lower trade costs leading to an increase in the variety or range of parts that are imported through
contractual rather than generic outsourcing. The model also predicts that as physical distance falls,
a greater proportion of imports should be mediated through multinationals rather than direct
contractual outsourcing to the low-wage country or through the import of generic parts.
We use a gravity specification based on Chinese export data by province to a large number
of destination countries to test these and other predictions. Assuming that contractual exports are
represented by processing exports and ordinary manufactures by “generics”, the data identifies three
organizational forms: foreign owned enterprises (multinational firms), Chinese contractual exporters,
and exporters of generic products. Since we are interested in effects on the variety of exports
associated with each organizational form, the relevant dependent variable is the “extensive margin”
of exports rather than the value of exports traditionally used in gravity equation estimations.
We examine the effects of distance in two dimensions: the “internal” distance from each
province to the closest port and then the subsequent “external” distance to the destination country.
Although external distance tends to have no significant impact on the extensive margin of either
ordinary or processing exports, in most cases internal distance is significant in ways that support our
model. First, internal distance has a substantially greater negative impact on processing exports than
30

ordinary exports. Indeed, the reduction in the variety of processing exports can be as much as 10
times the reduction in the variety of ordinary exports. Second, within the processing category, there
is a significant decrease in the variety of exports supplied by foreign-owned firms as one moves
inland, whereas the effect on the variety of exports supplied by Chinese firms tends to be less
significant and in many cases, not significant. In sum, these results demonstrate a substantial role
for proximity (especially internal distance in China) in shaping the organizational form of
outsourcing.

APPENDIX A - Proofs of Propositions
Proof of Proposition 1: From (6) and (7), we first derive some basic relationships:

D(L) $ D(H) iff k/y* $ $8q/2;
D(H) $ D(ILH) iff k/y* $ ($8q -1)/4
D(L) # D(ILH) iff k/y* # $8q/4.

(A1)

(A) If $ 8q/2 # k/y* < y/16* - ½ then from (A1) and (8), we obtain H # L and ILH < H < Ž. Thus the
assembler prefers i = H over i = L for the range of z under which suppliers of type L would
potentially enter and suppliers of type H are willing to produce whenever suppliers of type L would
enter. Consequently, no contracts i = L are awarded. Suppliers of type i = H undertake RSI and
accept contracts for z 0 [H , Ž] and generic parts are imported for z 0 [0, H).
(B)(i) If ($8q - 1)/4 < k/y* < $8q/2, then L < H and ILH < H < Ž from (A1) and (8). For both of the
possible orderings: ILH < L < H and L < ILH # H, the assembler prefers i = H relative to i = L. Thus
type H suppliers produce parts z 0 [H, Ž) and type L produce parts z 0[L, H) that suppliers of type
H are not willing to produce. Generic parts are imported for z 0[0, L). (B)(ii) If k/y* <($8q -1)/4,
31

then L < H < ILH from (A1) and ILH < Ž from (8). We have $8q > 1 due to k/y* > 0. The assembler
chooses type H for z 0 [ILH, Ž] and type L for z 0 [L, ILH). Generic parts are imported for z 0 [0,L).

G
Proof of Proposition 2: From (7), (14) and (15), we obtain

D(M) $ D(IMH) iff (k +F)/y* $ $q/4.
D(M) $ D(H) iff F/y* $ [$q/2 - k/y*]/(1+$q)
D(H) $ D(IMH) iff k/y* $ ($q - 1)/4
D(L) < D(M) iff F > k(1 - (8)2)/(8)2 = k/$8.

(A2)

A further useful relationship is
k/y* $ ($q - 1)/4 iff ($q/2 - k/y*)/(1 + $q) # 1/4.

(A3)

(A) Since ($q/2 - k/y*)/(1+ $q) # F/y* < 1/4, we obtain k/y* $ ($q - 1)/4 from (A3) and it follows
from (A2) that IMH # H # M. The assembler chooses H for z 0 [H, Ž] and there is no FDI.
Proposition 1, parts (A) and (B)(i) then apply, but since $8q < $q and k/y* $ ($q - 1)/4, we have k/y*
> ($8q - 1)/4 ruling out part B(ii).
(B)(i)(a) From F/y* < ($ q/2 - k/y*)/(1 + $ q), k/y* $ ($q - 1)/4 and (A2), we obtain M < H and IMH
< H.
(b) From F/y* < ($ q/2 - k/y*)/(1 + $q), k/y* < ($q - 1)/4 and (A2), we obtain M < H < IMH.
(B)(ii) From (A2), L < M iff F > k(1 - (8)2)/(8)2 = k/$8. Since rL = (8)2rM where 8 < 1, the assembler
prefers M over L and chooses L only for parts z 0[L, M).

32

G

APPENDIX B - Data Sources
Chinese export data are from the Customs General Administration of the People’s Republic of China
(China. Customs General Administration, Statistics Department. "China Trade Information." Hong
Kong: Economic Information Agency). These data are purchased from Mr. George Chen, China
Customs Statistics Information Center, Economic Information Agency, Hong Kong,
EIAET@PACIFIC.NET.HK , and are used to construct the extensive margins used as the dependent
variables in Tables 1 - 4. The independent variables are obtained from various sources:
1) China’s Regional Economy After Seventeen Years Reform and Open, Xinjiang Statistical Bureau,
1998, which is a collection of data from the provincial statistic yearbooks for 1978-1995.
2) China’s Statistic Yearbook, 1989-2004: used for provincial GDP, population and wages.
3) Chinese railroad timetable: used for the Internal distance: measured by train hours.
The external distance is taken from Lin (2001) and Ma (2004), and is the external shipping distance
between Chinese ports and the international ports, which is obtained from a special world map
designed for sketching ocean transportation.
4) Major figures of the Fourth National Population Census of China, 1991, China Statistics
Publisher House: used for the percentages of the population with primary, junior, senior and
university education.
5) GDP and population of the destination markets are taken from the Penn World Tables.

33

Appendix Table C1: Intensive Margin, Manufacturing Exports

1988
GDP per capita
(province)
Manufact wage
GDP per capita
(country)
Population
(province)
Population
(country)
External distance
Internal distance
Observations
R-squared

0.97**
(0.24)
4.12**
(1.63)
0.12**
(0.02)
0.65**
(0.09)
0.58**
(0.03)
-1.46**
(0.09)
-0.08
(0.05)
1912
0.34
1988

Ordinary Export
1991
1994
1.18**
1.17**
(0.17)
(0.16)
1.53
2.33**
(0.89)
(0.35)
0.21**
0.22**
(0.01)
(0.01)
0.77**
0.83**
(0.07)
(0.05)
0.62**
0.70**
(0.03)
(0.02)
-1.44**
-1.13**
(0.06)
(0.05)
-0.08*
-0.06
(0.04)
(0.04)
2219
2850
0.45
0.5
Processing Export
1991
1994

1997

2000

1.02**
(0.17)
1.38**
(0.27)
0.20**
(0.01)
0.78**
(0.04)
0.90**
(0.02)
-0.96**
(0.05)
-0.19**
(0.03)
2861
0.56

0.89**
(0.17)
0.75*
(0.29)
0.23**
(0.01)
0.85**
(0.05)
0.88**
(0.02)
-0.87**
(0.05)
-0.33**
(0.04)
2843
0.54

1997

2000

0.05
0.54**
0.31
0.32
0.37
(0.25)
(0.21)
(0.20)
(0.21)
(0.21)
6.27**
3.98**
2.09**
1.28**
0.83*
(1.70)
(1.04)
(0.48)
(0.34)
(0.37)
0.09**
0.18**
0.20**
0.21**
0.23**
GDP per capita
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(country)
0.41**
0.50**
0.39**
0.48**
0.50**
Population
(0.08)
(0.08)
(0.07)
(0.06)
(0.07)
(province)
0.46**
0.52**
0.61**
0.77**
0.73**
Population
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.03)
(country)
-1.19**
-1.22**
-1.18**
-1.16**
-1.01**
External distance
(0.09)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.09)
-0.26**
-0.15**
-0.16**
-0.28**
-0.28**
Internal distance
(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.06)
(0.05)
(0.05)
1757
2015
2399
2382
2310
Observations
0.31
0.36
0.39
0.43
0.39
R-squared
Robust standard errors are in parentheses, * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
A constant term is included in the regression (but not reported). Instruments used for GDP
per capita (province) and the manufacturing wage are the percentages of the population
with primary, junior, senior and university education.
GDP per capita
(province)
Manufact wage

34

Appendix Table C2: Intensive Margin, Processing Exports

1988
GDP per capita
(province)
Manufact wage
GDP per capita
(country)
Population
(province)
Population
(country)
External distance
Internal distance
Observations
R-squared

-0.37
(0.34)
6.99**
(1.62)
0.12**
(0.02)
-0.002
(0.12)
0.47**
(0.04)
-1.22**
(0.10)
-0.16**
(0.06)
1272
0.32
1988

Domestic Firms
1991
1994
0.58*
1.13**
(0.26)
(0.22)
2.37*
1.77**
(1.05)
(0.58)
0.15**
0.22**
(0.02)
(0.01)
0.39**
0.56**
(0.09)
(0.07)
0.50**
0.62**
(0.04)
(0.03)
-1.19**
-1.16**
(0.07)
(0.07)
-0.20**
-0.02
(0.05)
(0.06)
1513
1689
0.34
0.42
Foreign Owned Firms
1991
1994

1997

2000

0.49
(0.26)
1.41**
(0.44)
0.18**
(0.01)
0.57**
(0.07)
0.72**
(0.04)
-1.13**
(0.07)
-0.06
(0.05)
1648
0.38

0.19
(0.23)
1.57**
(0.43)
0.18**
(0.01)
0.59**
(0.08)
0.64**
(0.03)
-1.16**
(0.08)
-0.04
(0.05)
1754
0.37

1997

2000

-1.11**
-0.24
-0.51
0.12
0.08
(0.44)
(0.32)
(0.31)
(0.35)
(0.36)
4.07*
1.6
-0.15
0.14
0.33
(1.89)
(1.21)
(0.77)
(0.56)
(0.61)
0.16**
0.26**
0.28**
0.25**
0.23**
GDP per capita
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(country)
-0.51**
0.15
0.17
0.26**
0.11
Population
(0.17)
(0.10)
(0.10)
(0.09)
(0.09)
(province)
0.42**
0.54**
0.62**
0.71**
0.63**
Population
(0.05)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(country)
-1.35**
-1.18**
-1.10**
-1.03**
-1.03**
External distance
(0.11)
(0.09)
(0.08)
(0.09)
(0.11)
-0.16*
-0.31**
-0.55**
-0.37**
-0.34**
Internal distance
(0.07)
(0.06)
(0.07)
(0.06)
(0.06)
1104
1269
1462
1493
1518
Observations
0.27
0.33
0.33
0.33
0.3
R-squared
Robust standard errors are in parentheses, * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
A constant term is included in the regression (but not reported). Instruments used for GDP per
capita (province) and the manufacturing wage are the percentage of population with primary,
junior, senior and university education.
GDP per capita
(province)
Manufact wage

35

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Philippe Aghion, Rachel Griffith and Fabrizio Zillibotti, 2004. “Vertical
Integration and Technology: Theory and Evidence”, NBER working paper w10997
Aghion, Phillipe and Jean Tirole, 1997. “Formal and Real Authority in Organizations,” Journal
of Political Economy, 105(1), 1-29.
Antràs, Pol, 2003. “Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118,
1375-1418
Antràs, Pol, 2005. “Incomplete Contracts and the Product Cycle,” American Economic Review,
95(4), September, 1054-1073
Antràs, Pol and Elhanan Helpman, 2004. “Global Sourcing,” Journal of Political Economy 112 (3),
552-580.
Chen, Yongmin and Robert C. Feenstra, 2005. “Buyer Investment, Product Variety, and Intrafirm
Trade,” NBER Working paper No. 11752.
Evans, Carolyn and James Harrigan, 2005. “Distance, Time and Specialization,” American
Economic Review, 95(1), March, 292-313.
Feenstra, Robert C., 1994. “New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International Prices,”
American Economic Review, 84(1), March, 157-177.
Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson, 2005. “Ownership and Control in Outsourcing to
China,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120 (2), 729-761.
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, 2002. “Integration versus Outsourcing in Industry
Equilibrium,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(1), 85-120
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, 2004. “Managerial Incentives and International
Organization of Production,” Journal of International Economics 63, 237-262
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, 2005. “Outsourcing in a Global Economy,” Review of
Economic Studies, 72 (1), 135-160
Grossman, Sanford J and Oliver D. Hart, 1986. “Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of
Vertical and Lateral Integration,” Journal of Political Economy, 94(4), August, 691 - 719.
Head Keith, Ries John and Barbara J. Spencer, 2004. “Vertical Networks and U.S. Auto Parts
Exports: Is Japan Different?”, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 13(1), 37- 67.

36

Helpman, Elhanan, 2005. “Trade, FDI, and the Organization of Firms,” Harvard University and
CIAR.
Hillberry, Russell and David L. Hummels, 2005. “Trade Responses to Geographic Frictions: A
Decomposition Using Micro-Data,” University of Melbourne and Purdue University.
Holmstrom, Bengt and Paul Milgrom, 1994. “The Firm as an Incentive System,” American
Economic Review, 84(4), 972-991.
Hummels, David L. and Klenow, Peter J., 2005. “The Variety and Quality of a Nation's Trade,”
American Economic Review, 95(3), June 704-723.
Lin, Songhua, 2000. “International Trade, Location and Wage Inequality in China,” University of
California, Davis, Ph.D. dissertation.
Ma, Alyson, 2004. “Geographical Location of Foreign Direct Investment and Wage Inequality in
China,” University of California, Davis, Ph.D. dissertation.
Marin, Dalia and Thierry Verdier, 2002. “Power Inside the Firm and the Market: A General
Equilibrium Approach,” Centre for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper No. 4358, London
Marin, Dalia and Thierry Verdier, 2003. “Globalization and the Empowerment of Talent,” Centre
for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper No. 4129, December
Puga, Diego and Daniel Trefler. 2002. “Knowledge Creation and Control in Organizations.”
NBER Working Paper no. 9121.
Qiu, Larry D. and Barbara J. Spencer, 2002. “Keiretsu and Relationship-Specific Investments:
Implications for Market-Opening Policy,” Journal of International Economics, 58(1), 49-79.
Spencer, Barbara J and Larry Qiu, 2001. “Keiretsu and Relationship-Specific Investments: A Barrier
to Trade?”, International Economic Review, 42 (4), 871-901.
Spencer, Barbara J., 2005. “International Outsourcing and Incomplete Contracts,” Canadian Journal
of Economics, 38(4), November, 1107-1135.
Schwartz, Galina A. and Ari Van Assche, 2005. “Firm Heterogeneity, Input Specificity and the
Optimal Outsourcing Strategy, ” HEC Montreal and UC Berkeley.

37

Table 1: Extensive Margin, Manufacturing Exports (Unweighted)

1988
GDP per capita
(province)
Manufact wage
GDP per capita
(country)
Population
(province)
Population
(country)
External distance
Internal distance
Observations
R-squared

0.360**
(0.011)
-0.613**
(0.070)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.231**
(0.007)
-0.002
(0.002)
-0.000
(0.003)
-0.050**
(0.003)
1912
0.79

1988

Ordinary Export
1991
1994
0.248**
(0.008)
-0.506**
(0.034)
0.000
(0.001)
0.143**
(0.005)
0.000
(0.001)
0.000
(0.002)
-0.049**
(0.002)
2219
0.77

0.148**
(0.006)
-0.033**
(0.010)
-0.000
(0.000)
0.072**
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.002)
2850
0.57

Processing Export
1991
1994

1997

2000

0.170**
(0.007)
-0.126**
(0.009)
-0.000
(0.000)
0.057**
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.007**
(0.001)
2861
0.62

0.135**
(0.005)
-0.058**
(0.006)
-0.001
(0.000)
0.072**
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.000
(0.002)
-0.010**
(0.001)
2843
0.59

1997

2000

0.495**
0.549**
0.866**
0.833**
0.678**
(0.052)
(0.043)
(0.040)
(0.045)
(0.042)
0.218
0.309
-0.087
-0.099
0.272**
(0.301)
(0.241)
(0.087)
(0.083)
(0.093)
0.003
0.001
0.001
-0.002
-0.008**
GDP per capita
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(country)
0.429**
0.451**
0.470**
0.412**
0.435**
Population
(0.032)
(0.023)
(0.016)
(0.013)
(0.012)
(province)
-0.003
0.003
-0.001
-0.012**
-0.017**
Population
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.005)
(country)
-0.015
-0.018
-0.013
0.007
0.028*
External distance
(0.012)
(0.012)
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.012)
-0.090**
-0.101**
-0.065**
-0.098**
-0.114**
Internal distance
(0.008)
(0.010)
(0.009)
(0.007)
(0.007)
1757
2015
2399
2382
2310
Observations
0.51
0.52
0.65
0.70
0.73
R-squared
Robust standard errors in parentheses * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
A constant term is included in the regression (but not reported). Instruments used for GDP per
capita (province) and the manufacturing wage are the percentages of the population with
primary, junior, senior and university education.

GDP per capita
(province)
Manufact wage

38

Table 2: Extensive Margin, Manufacturing Exports (Weighted)

GDP per capita
(province)
Manufact wage
GDP per capita
(country)
Population
(province)
Population
(country)
External distance
Internal distance
Observations
R-squared

1988

Ordinary Export
1991

1994

1997

2000

0.293**
(0.024)
-0.126**
(0.048)
0.000
(0.001)
0.241**
(0.016)
0.000
(0.002)
-0.000
(0.003)
-0.040**
(0.005)
1912
0.83

0.195**
(0.020)
-0.209**
(0.042)
0.001
(0.001)
0.157**
(0.009)
-0.000
(0.002)
-0.005
(0.003)
-0.046**
(0.004)
2219
0.84

0.066**
(0.011)
0.100**
(0.033)
-0.000
(0.001)
0.049**
(0.004)
0.000
(0.001)
0.001
(0.002)
0.003
(0.003)
2850
0.36

0.054**
(0.015)
-0.010
(0.022)
0.000
(0.001)
0.039**
(0.004)
-0.000
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.016**
(0.002)
2861
0.54

0.108**
(0.012)
-0.066**
(0.013)
0.000
(0.001)
0.031**
(0.003)
-0.000
(0.001)
-0.002
(0.001)
-0.004
(0.002)
2843
0.40

1997

2000

1988

Processing Export
1991
1994

0.585**
0.518**
0.581**
0.593**
0.618**
(0.120)
(0.056)
(0.095)
(0.081)
(0.069)
-0.098
-0.302*
0.607*
0.127
0.178
(0.131)
(0.134)
(0.237)
(0.123)
(0.116)
0.001
-0.001
0.002
0.002
-0.006
GDP per capita
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(country)
0.408**
0.304**
0.342**
0.321**
0.351**
Population
(0.082)
(0.029)
(0.031)
(0.022)
(0.018)
(province)
-0.004
0.001
0.002
-0.003
-0.009
Population
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.010)
(0.008)
(0.007)
(country)
0.000
-0.008
0.014
0.008
0.020
External distance
(0.010)
(0.011)
(0.024)
(0.015)
(0.012)
-0.051**
-0.081**
0.002
-0.089**
-0.118**
Internal distance
(0.016)
(0.014)
(0.023)
(0.012)
(0.010)
1757
2015
2399
2382
2310
Observations
0.52
0.59
0.50
0.72
0.78
R-squared
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
A constant term is included in the regression (but not reported). Instruments used for GDP per
capita (province) and the manufacturing wage are the percentages of the population with
primary, junior, senior and university education.
GDP per capita
(province)
Manufact wage

39

Table 3: Extensive Margin, Processing Exports (Unweighted)
Domestic Firms
1991
1994

1988
GDP per capita
(province)
Manufact wage
GDP per capita
(country)
Population
(province)
Population
(country)
External distance
Internal distance
Observations
R-squared

0.422**
(0.066)
0.512
(0.281)
-0.000
(0.002)
0.362**
(0.059)
-0.002
(0.005)
0.012
(0.013)
-0.035**
(0.008)
1272
0.34

1988

0.327**
(0.057)
1.012**
(0.194)
-0.000
(0.002)
0.348**
(0.040)
0.002
(0.005)
-0.007
(0.011)
-0.004
(0.007)
1514
0.17

0.355**
(0.033)
0.576**
(0.068)
0.002
(0.002)
0.269**
(0.011)
-0.000
(0.004)
0.015
(0.009)
-0.055**
(0.007)
1704
0.66

Foreign-Owned Firms
1991
1994

1997

2000

0.862**
(0.051)
-0.374**
(0.078)
0.000
(0.002)
0.356**
(0.010)
-0.006
(0.004)
0.006
(0.010)
-0.088**
(0.005)
1664
0.79

0.782**
(0.048)
0.014
(0.110)
-0.002
(0.003)
0.432**
(0.014)
-0.013*
(0.006)
0.027*
(0.013)
-0.142**
(0.008)
1753
0.76

1997

2000

-0.299
0.185
0.934**
0.883**
0.919**
(0.153)
(0.099)
(0.070)
(0.109)
(0.116)
3.562**
2.474**
0.359*
0.463*
0.680**
(0.700)
(0.499)
(0.159)
(0.184)
(0.229)
-0.017**
-0.003
0.004
0.002
-0.003
GDP per capita
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(country)
0.220**
0.413**
0.505**
0.562**
0.652**
Population
(0.064)
(0.038)
(0.030)
(0.034)
(0.028)
(province)
-0.027*
-0.006
-0.001
-0.001
0.008
Population
(0.013)
(0.011)
(0.007)
(0.009)
(0.009)
(country)
0.205**
0.050*
0.028
0.020
0.039*
External distance
(0.038)
(0.023)
(0.018)
(0.018)
(0.020)
-0.190**
-0.150**
-0.124**
-0.182**
-0.170**
Internal distance
(0.022)
(0.015)
(0.013)
(0.011)
(0.011)
1104
1269
1462
1493
1518
Observations
0.26
0.30
0.65
0.65
0.72
R-squared
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
A constant term is included in the regression (but not reported). Instruments used for GDP per
capita (province) and the manufacturing wage are the percentages of the population with primary,
junior, senior and university education.
GDP per capita
(province)
Manufact wage

40

Table 4: Extensive Margin, Processing Exports (Weighted)

1988
GDP per capita
(province)
Manufact wage
GDP per capita
(country)
Population
(province)
Population
(country)
External distance
Internal distance
Observations
R-squared

1.111**
(0.339)
-0.931*
(0.396)
0.002
(0.004)
0.771**
(0.237)
-0.005
(0.018)
0.004
(0.019)
-0.012
(0.034)
1272
0.54

1988

Domestic Firms
1991
0.237**
(0.050)
0.236*
(0.095)
-0.001
(0.002)
0.163**
(0.027)
-0.002
(0.004)
0.007
(0.009)
-0.022**
(0.008)
1514
0.40

1994

1997

2000

0.273**
(0.088)
0.877**
(0.180)
-0.003
(0.004)
0.223**
(0.033)
0.003
(0.007)
0.023
(0.014)
-0.003
(0.017)
1704
0.52

0.736**
(0.095)
-0.086
(0.112)
-0.001
(0.003)
0.348**
(0.024)
-0.001
(0.006)
0.003
(0.011)
-0.068**
(0.009)
1664
0.78

0.759**
(0.101)
0.166
(0.155)
-0.002
(0.005)
0.461**
(0.024)
-0.009
(0.008)
0.008
(0.015)
-0.126**
(0.013)
1753
0.81

1997

2000

Foreign-Owned Firms
1991
1994

-0.746
0.347*
0.709**
0.756**
1.083**
(0.505)
(0.136)
(0.143)
(0.139)
(0.209)
5.028*
1.370**
0.890**
0.413
0.147
(2.521)
(0.405)
(0.287)
(0.212)
(0.362)
-0.005
-0.009
0.005
-0.005
-0.011
GDP per capita
(0.013)
(0.009)
(0.011)
(0.008)
(0.007)
(country)
0.141
0.341**
0.393**
0.456**
0.553**
Population
(0.201)
(0.058)
(0.049)
(0.036)
(0.032)
(province)
0.016
-0.013
0.005
-0.003
-0.007
Population
(0.049)
(0.017)
(0.012)
(0.012)
(0.012)
(country)
0.150
0.065
0.006
0.014
0.031
External distance
(0.079)
(0.034)
(0.039)
(0.024)
(0.020)
-0.388**
-0.176**
-0.104**
-0.188**
-0.165**
Internal distance
(0.085)
(0.026)
(0.029)
(0.019)
(0.019)
1104
1269
1462
1493
1518
Observations
0.45
0.53
0.56
0.69
0.76
R-squared
Robust standard errors in parentheses * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
A constant term is included in the regression (but not reported). Instruments used for GDP per
capita (province) and the manufacturing wage are the percentages of the population with primary,
junior, senior and university education.
GDP per capita
(province)
Manufact wage

41

Figure 1(A): Chinese Manufacturing Exports 2002, By Destination, billion $
70

60

Ordinary Export
Other Processing Export

50

billion $

FDI Processing Export
40

30

20

10

0

South Africa

South America

Canada

ASEAN

Japan

EU

US

Figure 1(B): China Manufacturing Exports 2002, By Destination, Percent
100%

90%

Ordinary Export

80%

Other Processing Export

70%

FDI Processing Export

Percent

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

South Africa

South America

Canada

ASEAN

42

Japan

EU

US

Figure 2(A): China Manufacturing Exports, By Source Region, billion$
120

Ordinary Export

100

Other Processing Export

billion $

80

FDI Processing Export

60

40

20

g

g
G

Ji
an

gs

u

N

&

ua

Zh

ng
d

on

ej
ia
n

st
C
oa
or

th

ng
Sh
a

Ti
an
&
Be
iji
n

&
Fu
j ia
n

ha
i

jin

n
H

M

ai
na

t
So
u

id
dl
e
M

th

N

or

W
es

th

t
W
es
th
N
or

id
dl
e

0

Figure 2(B): China Manufacturing Exports, By Source Region, Percent
100
90

Ordinary Export
80

Other Processing Export

70

FDI Processing Export

50
40
30
20
10

g

g

on
ng
d
ua
G

Zh
&
u
gs
Ji
an

43

ej
ia
n

st
th
N
or

Sh
a

ng

C
oa

ha
i

jin
Be
iji
n

&

&

Ti
an

H
ai
na

n

id
dl
e
Fu
j ia
n

th
So
u

M

t
W
es

or
N
id
dl
e
M

th

W
es

th

t

0

N
or

Percent

60

Figure 3: Forms of contractual and generic outsourcing

44

