NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MONITORING WORKS:
GETTING TEACHERS TO COME TO SCHOOL
Esther Duflo
Rema Hanna
Working Paper 11880
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11880
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2005

This project is a collaborative exercise involving many people. Foremost, we are deeply indebted to Seva
Mandir, and especially to Neelima Khetan and Priyanka Singh, who made this evaluation possible. We thank
Ritwik Sakar and Ashwin Vasan for their excellent work coordinating the fieldwork. Greg Fischer, Shehla
Imran, Callie Scott and Kudzai Takavarasha provided superb research assistance. For their helpful comments,
we thank Abhijit Banerjee, Rachel Glennerster, Michael Kremer and Sendhil Mullainathan. For financial
support, we thank the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Esther Duflo and Rema Hanna. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Monitoring Works: Getting Teachers to Come to School
Esther Duflo and Rema Hanna
NBER Working Paper No. 11880
December 2005
JEL No. I20, I21, J13, J30, O10
ABSTRACT
In the rural areas of developing countries, teacher absence is a widespread problem. This paper tests
whether a simple incentive program based on teacher presence can reduce teacher absence, and
whether it has the potential to lead to more teaching activities and better learning. In 60 informal
one-teacher schools in rural India, randomly chosen out of 120 (the treatment schools), a financial
incentive program was initiated to reduce absenteeism. Teachers were given a camera with a tamperproof date and time function, along with instructions to have one of the children photograph the
teacher and other students at the beginning and end of the school day. The time and date stamps on
the photographs were used to track teacher attendance. A teacher's salary was a direct function of his
attendance. The remaining 60 schools served as comparison schools. The introduction of the
program resulted in an immediate decline in teacher absence. The absence rate (measured using
unannounced visits both in treatment and comparison schools) changed from an average of 42
percent in the comparison schools to 22 percent in the treatment schools. When the schools were
open, teachers were as likely to be teaching in both types of schools, and the number of students
present was roughly the same. The program positively affected child achievement levels: a year after
the start of the program, test scores in program schools were 0.17 standard deviations higher than
in the comparison schools and children were 40 percent more likely to be admitted into regular
schools.
Esther Duflo
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-252G
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
eduflo@mit.edu

Rema Hanna
Department of Economics
Wagner Graduate School of Public Service
New York University
295 Lafayette Street
New York, NY 10012
rnh4@nyu.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
The United Nations Millennium Development Goals call for achieving universal primary
education by 2015. In response, many developing countries, including India, are rapidly improving access
to primary schooling. However, improved access often is not matched by improvements in school
quality. As a result, while more children start primary school, many leave after just a few years, after
having learned very little in the process. For example, in Uttar Pradesh, India, half of the students
enrolled in primary school can not even read a simple sentence (Banerjee et al., 2005). Such poor
learning outcomes may be an artifact of high absence among teachers. Using unannounced visits to
measure teacher attendance, a nationally representative survey found that 24 percent of teachers in India
were absent from the classroom during normal school hours (Chaudhury, et al., 2005a, b).1 The situation
in India is particularly bleak. In terms of absence rates, India ranked seventh among the eight countries
for which comparable data was collected. Getting teachers to attend school may help India achieve the
improvements in school quality needed to make “universal primary education” a meaningful term.
It has been argued that teachers fail to attend school because neither their principal nor the
beneficiary has the capacity to both effectively monitor and penalize absence. The principals, usually
governments (but also NGOs), have the power to penalize absences, but, being far removed, may not be
able to effectively monitor attendance. As such, they often lack the information needed to enforce
attendance rules. The community can effectively monitor attendance, but it often lacks the power to
penalize absence. One solution—championed by many, including the 2004 World Development Report—
is to expand community control by improving community-based monitoring; strengthening the flow of
information between the community and the principal; involving the community in decisions to hire, fire,
and pay teachers; or transferring wholesome control of teachers to the community.
However, evidence from a variety of contexts suggests that community control interventions have
not been particularly effective at reducing absence (Banerjee and Duflo, 2005). Banerjee, Deaton, and
1

Although teachers do have some official non-teaching duties, this absence rate is much too high to be fully
explained by this particular story.

1

Duflo (2004) found that community-based monitoring, even when robustly structured, did not reduce
absenteeism among service providers at government health facilities in rural India. Information sharing
and auxiliary rewards for teachers fare no better. Kremer and Vermeersch (2005) found no effect for a
program in rural Kenya that empowered school committees to monitor teachers, share performance
information with officers in the Ministry of Education, and to give prizes to the best-performing teachers.
Ensuring that teachers have closer ties to the community, which may entail high community pressure, had
no effect on absence either. Chaudhury et al. (2005b) found that locally hired teachers, teachers in
schools with a Parents-Teachers’ Association, teachers with longer local tenure, and contract teachers and
teachers at non-formal schools run by NGOs (who, in addition, faced a greater risk of dismissal) all had
absence rates significantly higher than those of government school teachers.2 Finally, Olken (2004) found
that increasing community participation in meetings where public officials accounted for expenditure of
public funds did not reduce corruption in local development projects in Indonesia.
There is limited evidence that external control, coupled with a clear and credible threat of
punishment, may be more effective at inducing “good” behavior. Contrary to his findings on community
participation, in the same study, Olken (2004) found that the threat of a top-down audit resulted in a
significant decline in corruption. Chaudhury et al. (2005b) report that teachers at schools that were
inspected more often tended to have lower absentee rates.
In this paper, we formally test whether direct monitoring, coupled with high-powered incentives,
results in higher quality schooling. In particular, we study a scheme aimed at reducing truancy among
teachers at NGO-run non-formal education centers (NFEs) in rural India. Seva Mandir, the NGO running
the NFEs, used cameras with tamper-proof date and time functions to monitor daily teacher absence.
Then, they provided teachers with financial incentives that were based on the detailed attendance data
recorded by the cameras. We take advantage of Seva Mandir’s program to answer three main questions:
If teachers are given high-powered incentives to attend school based on external monitoring, will they

2

It may, however, be said that the difficult conditions (remote areas, part-time teachers and students, etc.) under
which these schools operate may counterbalance the effects of community pressure.

2

attend school more? If teachers attend school more, will they teach more? Finally, if teacher absenteeism
is reduced, will children learn more as a result?
While there are many good reasons to believe that high-powered incentives based on presence
may reduce absenteeism, the incentives may fail if teachers face constraints that do not allow them to take
advantage of the incentive scheme. For example, some argue that teachers do not come to school because
they must participate in meetings, training sessions, election or census duty, etc. Others add that teachers
live so far from school and are subject to so many pressures that attending school regularly is not
possible, especially in informal schools.
Even if incentives increase teacher attendance, it is unclear whether or not they actually increase
child learning levels. Teachers may be subject to multitasking, where the agent concentrates on the
easiest way to increase the rewarded measure with little or no gains in the measure the principal
ultimately wants to improve (Holstrom and Milgrom, 1991). Under this particular type of incentive
scheme, teachers may focus on being present (or even on being present just during the few minutes when
they are to be monitored), but reduce their efforts in other dimensions. The fear of multitasking is not
completely unfounded; there is evidence that other incentive programs have been prone to multitasking.
Glewwe, Ilias and Kremer (2003) estimated the effect of a teacher incentive program based on child test
scores in Kenya. They found that the program did increase test scores in the short run, but that the gains in
learning were only temporary and were not accompanied by increases in teacher attendance or effort.
Teachers, they concluded, may have just gamed the system by teaching to the test.3 Studies in the United
States provide further evidence of similar gaming behavior among educators facing high-powered
incentives, including altering what was served at lunch on the day of the test (Figlio and Winicki, 2002),
manipulating who took the test (Figlio and Getzler, 2002), and outright cheating (Jacob and Levitt, 2003).

3

Lavy (2004) provides a more optimistic assessment of a teacher incentive program in Israel.

3

Several other theories also suggest that providing financial incentives to attend may cause
teachers to teach less even as they attend school more.4 First, such schemes may demoralize teachers,
resulting in less effort. In laboratory experiments, Fehr and Schmidt (2004) found that individuals under
high-powered incentive systems may lose their motivation and, thus, work less than under a flat wage
regime. Second, financial incentives may harm a teacher’s intrinsic motivation, that is, the sense of duty
or enjoyment of the job that motivates them to come to work (Kreps, 1997). This threat is particularly real
for teachers, who as a group may have strong intrinsic motivation because of the value they place on
interacting with children and in seeing the children succeed. (Despite the high absence rate, this can be
said of teachers in developing countries. After all, despite very difficult circumstances and the lack of any
sanctions if they do not come, most of them do come to school and do teach on most days.) If, given
incentives based on presence, teachers may come to believe that just attending class is enough and that
their behavior in the classroom is not important. Finally, some teachers, who previously believed that they
were required to work every day in the month, might decide to stop working once they have reached their
target income for the month (Fehr and Gotte, 2002).
On the other hand, incentives can improve child learning levels if the main cost of working for a
teacher is the opportunity cost of going to school, rather than carrying out other income generating
activities (such as tending the field or working in another job for a day). Once a teacher has come to
school, the marginal cost of actually teaching may be quite low. Under these circumstances, an incentive
system that directly rewards presence would have the best chance of increasing child learning. Thus,
whether or not an incentive program based on absence can improve teaching effectiveness and learning
outcomes is ultimately an empirical question.
In this study, we examine the impact of Seva Mandir’s teacher incentive program on teacher
presence, teaching activities, and child learning. Seva Mandir runs single-teacher non-formal education
centers (NFEs). NFEs are informal schools, run either by local governments (Panchayat) or by NGOs,

4

Chaudhuury (2005a), for example, found that only 45 percent of teachers in India were actually teaching at the
time of the unannounced visits.

4

which cater to children for whom the government school is too far or has too rigid a schedule. NFEs have
played a crucial role in increasing access to education in India, with over 21 million Indian children,
mostly poor and rural, enrolled in NFEs. Seva Mandir’s NFEs serve the populations in the tribal villages
of Udaipur, Rajasthan. Udaipur is a sparsely populated, hilly region where villages are often remote and
hard to reach, making regular monitoring of the NFEs difficult. As a result, absence rates among teachers
are high, despite the threat of dismissal for repeated absence. Banerjee et al. (2004) found an absence rate
of 40 percent in 1995. In this study, at the baseline taken in 2003, we find an absence rate of 44 percent.
Faced with such high absenteeism, Seva Mandir implemented an innovative incentive program in
September, 2003. In 60 randomly selected program schools, Seva Mandir gave teachers a camera, along
with instructions to have one of the students take a picture of the teacher and the other students at the start
and close of each school day. The cameras had tamper-proof date and time functions, allowing for the
collection of accurate information on teacher attendance that was then used to calculate teachers’ salaries
(see Figure 1 for a sample picture, with the date in the bottom right corner). Each teacher was paid
according to the number of “valid” school days for which they were actually present. A “valid” day was
defined as one for which the opening and closing photos were separated by at least five hours and both
photos showed a minimum number of children. In the 60 comparison schools, teachers were paid a fixed
rate for the month, and were told (as usual) that they could be dismissed for repeated, unexcused
absences.
The introduction of the program resulted in an immediate and long lasting improvement in
teacher attendance rates in treatment schools (as measured through one unannounced visit per month in
both treatment and comparison schools). Over the 18 months of the program, teachers at program schools
had an absence rate of 22 percent, roughly half of the 44 percent baseline and the 42 percent at
comparison schools. Some 36 percent of program teachers had better than 90 percent presence compared
to only 1 percent of comparison teachers. Extreme delinquency, over 50 percent absence, was eradicated
in program schools. That absence rates stayed low after the end of the (proper) evaluation phase implies

5

that the effect was not due to a Hawthorne Effect—namely, teachers did not change their behavior simply
for the experiment.
We see no evidence that effort declined in other dimensions. When school was open, teachers
were as likely to be teaching in treatment as in comparison schools, confirming our intuition that the
marginal costs of teaching are low once the teacher is present. However, because they had better
attendance records than their comparison school counterparts, teachers at treatment schools taught for the
equivalent of 54 more child days (or a third more) per month. Student attendance was the same in both
groups, but more teaching meant more learning for children in treatment schools. A year after the start of
the program, their test scores were 0.17 standard deviations higher than those of children in comparison
schools. The program impact and cost compares favorably with other successful education programs in
developing countries.
The findings clearly demonstrate the link between simple, straightforward, well-enforced
incentives and teacher presence, as well as the link between teacher presence and student achievement. In
theory, this type of incentive scheme is already in place. Teachers are paid to come to work every day,
and most school systems, both private and public, have provisions to penalize unexplained absences. In
developing countries, however, teachers are typically not punished (much less dismissed) for poor
attendance.5 Seva Mandir’s program did not require elaborate reengineering of school institutions; it
instead provided the means to enforce existing rules and strengthen existing incentives. The implication
for policy is that one way to rapidly achieve the much-needed improvements in school quality may be to
find ways of enforcing the existing rules.6 In addition, the findings suggest that external monitoring
coupled with simple, direct incentives may also be used to reduce absence among providers of other
services essential to development, such as health, in rural areas where the need is the greatest and absence
is most prevalent.

5

Chaudhury et al. (2005a) report that, the 25 percent absence rate notwithstanding, only one principal in their
sample of 3,000 government schools reported a case in which a teacher was fired for repeated absence.
6
Of course, it is not necessarily easy to enforce such rules: teachers are an important political constituency and may
be able to successfully oppose even a drive to enforce existing rules.

6

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II provides a detailed description of
the incentive program and the evaluation techniques. The results are presented in Section III. Section IV
concludes.

II.

THE PROGRAM AND THE EVALUATION

1. Non-formal Education Centers
Non-formal education centers (NFEs) are an integral component of India’s education system.
Since the National Policy on Education of 1986, they have played an increasingly important role in
India’s drive towards universal primary education. The NFEs serve two main purposes. First, since they
are easier to establish and cheaper to run, they have been the primary instrument for rapidly expanding
access to schooling to children in poor, remote rural areas where there are no government schools or
where schools are far away. The government of Madhya Pradesh, for example, mandated that NFEs be
established for all communities where there were no schools within a kilometer. Second, the NFEs have
been used to ease children, who may otherwise not attend school, to join a government school at the ageappropriate grade level. In particular, since NFEs are subject to fewer regulations than government
schools, they can tailor their hours and curricula to meet the diverse needs of the children. As of 1997, 21
million children were enrolled in NFEs across India (Education for All Forum, 2000).
Children of all ages may attend, though most were between 7-10 years in our sample. Nearly all
the children are illiterate when they first join the centers. In the setting of our project, the NFEs are open
six hours a day and have 20 students, all taught in one classroom by one teacher, who is recruited from
the local community and has, on average, completed up to a 10th grade education. Instruction focuses on
teaching children basic Hindi and math skills.

2. The Program

7

Seva Mandir administers about 150 non-formal primary education centers (NFEs) in the tribal
villages of Udaipur, Rajasthan. Udaipur is a sparsely populated, arid and hilly region, where villages are
remote and access is difficult. As a result, it is often difficult for Seva Mandir to regularly monitor the
NFEs. Absenteeism is high, despite the organization’s policy calling for dismissal of absent teachers. A
1995 study (Banerjee et al., 2005) found that the absence rate was 40 percent, while the baseline of this
study (in August 2003) found that the rate was 44 percent.
Seva Mandir was, therefore, motivated to identify ways to reduce absenteeism among its teachers.
To this end, they implemented an innovative external monitoring program in September 2003. They chose
120 schools to participate in the study, with 60 randomly selected schools for the program serving as the
treatment group and the remaining 60 as the comparison group. In the 60 treatment schools, Seva Mandir
gave each teacher a camera, along with instructions for one of the students to take a photograph of the
teacher and the other students at the start and end of each school day. The cameras had a tamper-proof
date and time function, which made it possible to precisely track each school’s openings and closings.7
As Figure 1 demonstrates, the day of the month and the time of day appear in the right corner (the month
does not appear, but there is no ambiguity about that since the rolls were changed every month). Camera
upkeep (replacing batteries, changing and collecting film) was done monthly at regularly scheduled
teacher meetings. If a camera malfunctioned, teachers were instructed to call the program hotline within
48 hours. Someone was then dispatched to replace the camera, and teachers were credited for the day in
which the camera was broken.8
The monthly base salary for teachers was set at Rs1000 for 21 days of work in a month. In the
treatment schools, teachers received a Rs50 bonus for each additional day they attended in excess of the
21 days. Similarly, they received a Rs50 fine for each day of the 21 days they did not attend work. A
“valid” day was defined as a day in which the opening and closing photographs were separated by at least
7

The time and data buttons on the cameras were covered with heavy tape, and each had a seal that would indicate if
it had been tampered with. Fines would have been imposed if cameras had been tampered with (this did not happen)
or if they had been used for another purpose (this happened in one case, when a teacher photographed his family).
8
Teachers were given the 48-hour leeway to report malfunctioning cameras because not all villages have a working
phone and phone services are not always reliable.

8

five hours and enough children (at least eight) were present in both photos to indicate that the school was
actually functioning. Due to ethical and political concerns, Seva Mandir capped the fine at Rs500; hence,
a teacher’s salary ranged from Rs 500 to Rs 1,300. In the 60 comparison schools, teachers were paid the
flat rate of Rs 1,000, and were told that they could be dismissed for poor attendance (though this happens
very rarely, and did not happen during the span of the evaluation).
Seva Mandir pays its teachers every two months. In each two-month period, they collected the
last roll of film a few days before the salary payment, so that the bonus or the fine was paid immediately
after the end of the relevant time period. Moreover, after the first payment, teachers in the treatment
schools were shown a detailed breakdown of how their payment was calculated, in order to reinforce the
understanding of the program.

3. Evaluation

In this paper, we evaluate the effectiveness of Seva Mandir’s incentive program in improving
school quality. To do so, an independent evaluation team led by Vidhya Bhawan (a Udaipur-based
consortium of schools and teacher training institutes) and MIT’s Poverty Action Lab collected regular
data on the functioning of the program. Data was collected to answer three basic questions: If teachers
are provided with high-powered incentives to attend school that are based on external monitoring, will
they attend more? If they do attend school more, will teaching time increase? Finally, will children learn
more as a result?
The Poverty Action Lab collected data on teacher attendance through one random unannounced
visit per month in both treatment and comparison schools. By comparing the absence rates obtained from
the random checks across the two types of schools, we can determine the incentive program’s effect on
absenteeism. In addition, Seva Mandir provided access to all of the camera and payment data for the
treatment schools, allowing us to compare absence rates measured by the random checks against those
measured by the cameras. In addition to verifying whether the random checks provide a good estimate of

9

actual attendance rates, this comparison also allows us to verify whether teachers were simply coming to
school in the mornings and afternoons for the photos, rather than attending the entire school day.
Data collected on teacher and student activity at the time of the random unannounced visit allow
us to determine whether the teacher taught more as a result of the program. For schools that were open
during the visit, the enumerator noted what the teachers and students were doing: if the children were
sitting in class, if anything was written on the blackboard, and if the teacher was talking to the children.
Since the schools have only one teacher and one classroom, these activities could be observed before the
teacher and students could adjust their behavior.
Since teaching time is also a function of child attendance, student attendance data was collected at
the time of the random check. After completing the observation sheet, the enumerator conducted a roll
call to document which children on the evaluation roster were present.9 Enumerators also noted whether
any of the absent children had dropped out of school or had enrolled in a government school, and then
updated the evaluation roster to include new children.
To determine whether child learning increased as a result of the incentive program, in
collaboration with Seva Mandir, the evaluation team administered three basic competency exams: a pretest in August 2003, a mid-test in April 2004, and a post-test in September 2004. The pre-test followed
Seva Mandir’s usual testing protocol: children were given either a written exam (for those who could
write) or an oral exam (for those who could not). For the mid-test and post-test, all children were given
the oral exam and an opportunity to try the written exam. Those unable to write got a zero on the written
section. The oral exam tested simple math skills (counting, one-digit addition, simple division) and basic
Hindi vocabulary skills, while the written exam tested for these competencies plus more complex math
skills (two-digit addition and subtraction, multiplication and division), the ability to construct sentences,
and reading comprehension. Thus, the written exam tested both a child’s ability to write and his ability to
handle material requiring higher levels of competency relative to the oral exam.

9

Evaluation rosters were different from the school roster in that they included all children enrolled at the beginning
of the experiment and all children enrolled subsequently.

10

Finally, detailed data were collected on teachers' characteristics to determine the extent to which
the program impact on child learning varied with teacher characteristics. First, to determine whether the
effect on learning depended upon a teacher’s academic ability, Seva Mandir administered a competency
exam to each teacher prior to the program. Second, after the program had been in place for two months,
the evaluation team observed each school for a whole day, in order to assess whether the impact of the
program depended on the pedagogy employed by the teachers.

III. Results

In this section, we begin by reporting the results of the baseline survey and assessing the integrity
of the randomized framework (Section 1). Then, we discuss the impact of the program on teacher
attendance (Section 2), child attendance (Section 3) and child learning (Section 4). Finally, in Section 5,
we provide a cost-benefit analysis of the program.

1. Baseline and Experiment Integrity

Given that schools were randomly allocated to the treatment and comparison groups, we expected
the quality of schooling measures before the program onset to be similar across the groups. Before the
program was announced in August 2003, the evaluators were able to randomly visit 44 schools in the
treatment group and 41 in the comparison. Panel A of Table 1 shows that the attendance rates were 66
percent and 63 percent, respectively. The difference is not significant. Other measures of school quality
were also similar prior to the program: in all dimensions shown in Table 1 (number of students present in
school at the time of visit, infrastructure, teacher qualification and performance), the treatment schools
appear to be slightly better than comparison schools, but the differences are always small and never
significant. The last row in the table shows the F-statistic for the joint significance of the treatment
variable in all of the equations in Panel B through E. The F-statistic is 1.13, with a p-value of 0.25,

11

implying that the comparison and treatment schools were indistinguishable from one another at the
program’s inception.
Baseline academic achievement and preparedness were the same for students across the two types
of schools. Table 2 presents the results of the pre-test (administered in August 2003). Panel A shows the
percentage of children who could write. Panels B and C show the results from the oral and written tests,
respectively. On average, students in both groups were at the same level of preparedness before the
program, though there seems to be greater dispersion in the treatment schools. In the pre-test, 17 percent
of children in the treatment schools and 19 percent in the comparison schools took the written exam. The
difference is not significant. Those who took the oral exam were somewhat worse in treatment schools,
and those who took the written exam were somewhat better in treatment schools. Again, the differences
are not significant.

2. Teacher Absence

The effect on teacher absence was both immediate and long-lasting. Figure 2 shows the fraction
of schools found open on the day of the random visit, by month. Between August and September, teacher
attendance increased in treatment schools relative to the comparison schools. For the remainder of the
program, the attendance rates in treatment and comparison schools followed similar seasonal fluctuations,
with treatment school attendance systematically higher than comparison school attendance.
As Figure 2 shows, the effect of the program remained strong even after the administration of the
post-test, which marked the end of the evaluation. Since the program had been so effective, Seva Mandir
maintained it, but only had enough resources to keep the program running at the 60 treatment schools
(expansion to all the schools is planned in the coming months). Random checks conducted after the posttest showed that higher attendance rates persisted at treatment schools even after the teachers knew that
the experiment was over and that the program had become permanent. This implies that teachers did not

12

change their behavior simply for the duration of the experiment. In other words, there is no evidence that
the program’s effect is due to a Hawthorne effect.
Table 3 presents a detailed breakdown of the effect of the program on absentee rates. Columns 1
and 2 report the means for the treatment and comparison schools, respectively, over the entire period for
which random checks were conducted (September 2003 to March 2005). Column 3 presents the
difference between the treatment and comparison schools for this entire period, while Columns 4 through
6 present the difference for three time periods: until the mid-test, between the mid-test and post-test, and
after the post-test. On average, teacher absence was 20 percentage points lower in the treatment schools
than in the comparison schools. Thus, the program almost halved absence rates in treatment schools. The
treatment effect was smaller for the period between the mid-test and post-test, largely because comparison
school teachers attended class more often, and then rose 26 percentage points after the post-test. The
reduction in the number of instances where the school was closed was much larger than that of a previous
program which tried to reduce school closures by hiring a second teacher in Seva Mandir’s NFEs, and
reduced absenteeism by only 15 percentage points (Banerjee, Jacob and Kremer, 2005), both because
individual teacher absence rates remained high and because teachers coordinated to come on the same
day.
The program effects on teacher attendance were pervasive—teacher attendance increased in both
high- and low-attendance treatment schools. Figure 3A plots the observed density of absence rates in
treatment and comparison schools for the 20 random checks conducted during the program, while Figure
3B graphs the estimated cumulative density function of the frequency of attendance assuming that the
distribution of absence follows a beta-binomial distribution. The actual and estimated distributions are
very similar, indicating that the assumption of a binomial distribution is quite accurate. Both figures
clearly show that the incentive program shifted the entire distribution of absence for treatment teachers.
Of the 20 days, not one of 60 teachers in the comparison schools was present on all days and only one
was present for 19. Almost 15 percent of teachers were absent more than half the time. On the other
hand, six of the 60 program teachers were present for all days, six were present for 19 of the 20 days, and

13

all teachers were present at least half the time. Therefore, the camera program was effective on two
margins: it eliminated extremely delinquent behavior (less than 50 percent presence), and increased the
number of teachers with perfect or very high attendance records.
The evidence suggests that there were very few instances of “gaming” of the system. The fact
that treatment teachers had a lower absence rate at the random checks, which were conducted in the
middle of the day, suggests that teachers did not attend class at the start and end of the day just to sit for
the photographs, and then leave in the intervening period. A comparison of the random check data and
the camera data provides direct proof of this. Table 4 shows that for the treatment schools, the camera
data tends to match the random check data quite closely. Out of the 976 cases, 82 percent had perfectly
matching random check and camera data, that is, the school was open and the photos were valid or the
school was closed and the photos were not valid. In 15 percent of the cases, the school was found open at
the random check, but the photos indicated that the day was not considered “valid” (which is of course
not an instance of “gaming”). There are 43 cases (4 percent) where the school was closed and the photos
were valid, but only 19 (1.7 percent) of these were due to teachers being absent in the middle of the day
during the random check and shown as present both before and after. In the other 24 cases, the data did
not match because the random check was completed after the school had closed for the day, or there was
missing data on the time of the random check or photo (Table 4, Panel C). These instances declined over
time: during the last five months of the program, there were no cases where teachers left in the middle of
the day.
Of the 131 cases (15 percent) where the school was open but the photos were invalid, it was
primarily because there was only one photo (37 percent of the cases) or because the school was open for
less than the full five hours (29 percent).10 This suggests that for a small number of cases, the random
check may have designated a comparison school as open for the day, even though it was open for only

10

As the program progressed, teachers fully grasped that their salary was fully determined by the photographs, and
as a result, discrepancies between the camera and random check data decline over time. For example, in the first
three months of the program, there were 58 cases where the school was open, but the photos were invalid. For the
final three months, there were only 15 such cases.

14

part of the school day. Therefore, since the program may also have affected the length of each school day,
the random check data may, if anything, underestimate the effect of the program on total teaching time a
child received. Figure 4 provides some support for this hypothesis. It plots the difference in average
teacher attendance for treatment and comparison schools at the time of the random check. The figure
illustrates that the difference in the attendance rate increased throughout the day, suggesting that teachers
in treatment schools not only attended more often, but also kept the schools open for more hours.

2. Teacher Behavior

Though the program increased teacher attendance and the length of the school day, the program
could still be considered ineffective if the teachers compensated for increased presence by teaching less.
We looked at activity data collected at the time of the random check to determine what the teachers were
doing while present in the classroom. It is important to note that since we can only measure the impact of
the program on teacher performance for schools that were open, the fact that treatment schools were open
more may introduce selection bias. That is, if teachers who tended to be absent also tended to teach less
when present, the treatment effect may be biased downward since more observations would be drawn
from among such low-effort teachers in the treatment group than in the comparison group. Table 5 shows
that there was no significant difference in the activities of teachers in program and comparison schools
during the random visit. In the comparison schools, as in the treatment schools, teachers were as likely to
be in the classroom, to have used the blackboard, and to be addressing students when the enumerator
arrived. This does not appear to have changed during the duration of the program (Appendix Figure 1).
The fact that, as opposed to just showing up to class more, teachers did not reduce their effort in
school suggests that the fears of multitasking and loss of intrinsic motivation were unfounded. Instead,
our findings confirm that once teachers were forced to attend (and therefore to forgo the additional
earnings they could get by doing something else, or their leisure time), the marginal cost of teaching may
not have been that large.

15

The teachers’ general acceptance of the incentive system may be an additional reason
why multitasking was not a problem: Several months into the program, teachers were asked to
fill out feedback forms, which gave us a qualitative impression of the program’s perception
among teachers. Seva Mandir also conducted a feedback session at their bi-annual sessions,
which were attended by members of the research team. No teachers complained about the
principle of the program, though many teachers had some specific complaints about the
inflexibility of the rules. (For example, many did not like the fact that a day was not valid even if
a teacher was present 4 hours and 55 minutes—the normal school day is six hours, but an hour’s
slack was given to the teachers—or the fact that getting eight children to assemble on time at the
beginning of the day is difficult, or the fact that the program did not plan for any sick leave or
leave for extenuating circumstances, such as a funeral.) However, many felt empowered by the
fact that the bonus of performing better (and being better paid as a result) was actually in their
hands: “Our payments have increased, so my interest in running the center has gone up.” Others
described how the payment system had made others in the community less likely to burden the
teacher with other responsibilities (such as being the secretary of a town meeting) once town
members knew that a teacher would be penalized if he did not attend school on a given day. This
suggests that the program may actually have stronger effects in the long run, as it signals a
change in the norms of what teachers are expected to do.

3. Child Attendance

On the feedback forms, many teachers said that the teachers had made children, as well as
themselves, attend more regularly: “This program has instilled a sense of discipline among us as well as
the students. Since we come on time, the students have to come on time as well.” Unfortunately,

16

conditional on whether a school was open, the effect of the program on child attendance cannot be
directly estimated without bias, because of selection of the observations where the school was open. If
schools that were typically open also attracted more children, and the program induced the “worst” school
(with fewer children attending regularly) to be open more often in the treatment schools than in the
comparison schools, then the selection bias will tend to bias the effect of the program on child attendance
downwards. In fact, selection bias is a realistic concern since, for the comparison schools, there is a
positive correlation between the number of times a school is found open and the number of children found
in school.
Even so, child attendance was actually higher in treatment schools, although the difference is
insignificant. In Table 6, we present the participation rates of a child in an open school, by treatment
status.11 While an average child’s participation rate was slightly higher in treatment schools (51 percent)
than in comparison schools (49 percent), this difference is not significant. Excluding children who left
the NFE, child attendance is higher overall (64 percent for treatment and 61 percent for comparison
schools), but the difference is also insignificant.
Treatment schools had more teaching days. Even if the program did not increase child attendance
on a particular day, the increase in the number of days the school was open should result in more days of
teaching per child. The impact of the program on child instruction time is reported in Rows 3 and 4 of
Table 6. Taking into account days in which the schools were closed, a child in a treatment school
received 10 percentage points (or 30 percent) more days of instruction than a child in a comparison
school. Assuming 27 days of work in a month (schools are open six days a week), a child obtained 2.7
more days of instruction time a month at treatment schools. Since there are roughly 20 children per
classroom, this figure translates into 54 more child-days of instruction per month in program schools than
in comparison schools. This effect is larger than that of successful interventions that have used child

11

“Participation” subsumes both attendance and enrollment. It is the correct concept to use in an environment when
being enrolled does not necessarily indicate that the child actually attends school. The participation dummy is
defined for every day a random check is conducted, and is equal to 1 if the child is present on that day and 0
otherwise.

17

participation as the principal lever to increase child participation, such as the PROGRESA program of
conditional cash transfers, which increased enrollment by 3.4 percent in primary schools and had no
impact on attendance (Schultz, 2004); de-worming, which increased participation by 7.5 percentage
points (Miguel and Kremer, 2004); a child incentive program (Kremer, Miguel, and Thornton, 2004),
which increased participation by 5 percentage points; and a child sponsorship program, which increased
participation by 8 percentage points (Kremer et al., 2004). The effect is comparable to that of adding a
second teacher in Seva Mandir NFEs (Banerjee, Jacob and Kremer, 2005), which increased the number of
days of instruction per month by 3.1.
In summary, since children were as likely to attend class on a given day in treatment schools as in
comparison schools, and because the school was open much more often, children received significantly
more days of instruction in the treatment schools. This finding suggests that the high teacher absence we
observed is not likely to be the efficient response to a lack of interest by the children: if it were the case
that children came to school 55 percent of the time because they could afford to attend more than a certain
number of days, then we would see a sharp reduction in children presence in treatment schools on days
where the school was open. On the other hand, we do not see a sharp increase in the presence of children
in treatment schools despite the increased presence of the teachers. This suggests that either teacher
absence is not the main cause of the irregular child presence, or that the children have not yet had time to
adjust to this new pattern.

4. Effects on Learning

Children in treatment schools, on average, received 30 percent more instruction time than
children in comparison schools. Over the course of a year, this resulted in 34 more days of instruction per
child. Did this result lead to an increase in test scores?

18

4.1 Attrition and Means of Mid- and Post-Test

Before comparing test scores in the treatment and comparison schools, we must first ensure that
selective attrition does not invalidate the comparison. There are three possible sources of attrition. First, a
few centers closed down immediately after the program started. These closures were unrelated to the
program, and equally distributed among treatment and comparison schools. We made no attempt to track
the children from these centers. Second, some children leave the NFEs, either because they drop out of
school altogether or because they start attending regular primary schools. Finally, some children were
absent on testing days. To minimize the impact of attrition on the study, we made considerable attempts
to track down children who did not show for the last two tests (even if they had left the NFE) and
administered the post-test to them. Consequently, attrition was fairly limited. Of the 2,230 students who
took the pre-test, 1,893 also took the mid-test, and 1,760 also took the post-test. Table 7 shows the
attrition in the treatment and comparison groups as well as the characteristics of the attriters. At the time
of the mid-test, attrition was higher in the comparison group than in the treatment group. At the time of
the post-test, attrition was similar in both groups, and children who dropped out of the treatment group
were similar to those that dropped out of the comparison group.
Table 7 also provides some simple descriptive statistics, comparing the test scores of treatment
and comparison children. The first row presents the percentage of children who were able to take the
written exam, while subsequent rows provide the mean exam score (normalized by the mid-test
comparison group). Relative to the pre-test and mid-test, many more children, in both the treatment and
comparison schools, were able to write by the post-test. On the post-test, students did slightly worse in
math relative to the mid-test comparison, but they performed much better in language.
Table 7 also shows the simple differences between treatment and comparison at the mid- and
post-tests. On both tests, in both language and math, the treatment students did better than the comparison
students (a 0.16 standard deviation increase and 0.11 standard deviations in language at the post-test

19

score), even though the differences are not significant at 95 percent. To obtain more statistical precision,
we control for individual pre-test results.

4.2. Test Results

In Table 8, we report the impact of the program on the mid-test (conducted in April) and the posttest (conducted in October). We compare the average test scores of students in the treatment and
comparison schools, conditional on a child’s pre-program competency and preparedness level. In a
regression framework, we model the effect of being in a school j that is being treated (Treatj) on child i’s
test score (Scoreikj) on test k (where k denotes either the mid- or post-test exam):

Scoreikj=β1+β2Treatj+β3Pre_Writij+β4Oral_Scoreij+ β5Written_Scoreij +εijk.

[1]

Because test scores are highly autocorrelated, controlling for a child’s test scores before the program
increases the precision of our estimate. However, the specific structure of the pre-test (i.e. the fact that
children either took the written or the oral test) does not allow for a traditional difference-in-difference
(DD) strategy. Instead of a DD approach, we include a variable containing the child’s pre-test score for
the oral test if he took the oral pre-test and 0 otherwise (Oral_Scoreij), the child’s pre-test score on the
written test if he took the written test and 0 otherwise (Written_Scoreij), and an indicator variable for
whether he took the written test at the pre-test (Pre_Writij).12 Standard errors are clustered by school.
Each cell in Table 8 represents the treatment effect (β2) obtained in a separate regression. For ease of

12

At the pre-test, children were given either the oral or the written score. At the mid- and post-test, every child took
the oral part, and every child who could write took the written exam (all children were given a chance to try the
written exam; if they could not read, they were given a zero for the written test).

20

interpretation, the mid-test results (Columns 1 to 4) and post-test results (Columns 5 to 8) are expressed in
the standard deviation of the distribution of the mid-test score in the comparison schools.13
The tables reveal that the program had a significant impact on learning, even as early as the midtest. Children in treatment schools gained 0.16 standard deviations of the test score distribution in
language, 0.15 standard deviations in math, and 0.17 overall (Panel A). Children with higher initial test
scores gained the most from the program: those able to write at the pre-test had mid-test test scores 0.25
standard deviations higher in treatment schools than in comparison schools (Panel C). Children whose
scores were below the median scores on the pre-test show no significant gains in test scores (Panel D).
The differences between students in the treatment and comparison schools persisted in the posttest (Columns 5 to 8). Children in treatment schools gained 0.21 standard deviations in language, 0.16 in
math, and 0.17 overall (Panel A). Similar to the mid-test, much of the gains came from children with
higher initial learning levels. The treatment effect of 0.17 standard deviations compares favorably to
other successful educational interventions, such as the Tennessee Star experiment in the United States
(Kruger and Whitmore, 2001) , the Balsakhi Remedial Education Program in India during its first year
(Banerjee, et al., 2005), and a girls’ incentive program in Kenya (Kremer, Miguel and Thornton, 2004).
We compare the impact of the program on girls versus boys in Table 9. As in Table 8, we
continue to comparison for the pre-test scores. The first two rows of Panel A list the individual treatment
effects for girls and boys, respectively, while the third row reports the difference in their treatment effects.
The data shows that girls gained as much from the program as boys. On the mid-test, 7 percentage-points
more of girls in the treatment schools were able to write relative to the comparison schools, compared to
only 2 percentage-points of boys (this 5-percentage point difference is significant). The post-test also
suggests that girls gained slightly more from the program than the boys, but these differences are not
significant.
13

Scores are normalized such that the mean and standard deviation of the comparison group at the time of the midtest exam is zero and one, respectively. (Specifically, we subtract the mean of the comparison group in the pre-test,
and divide by the standard deviation.) This allows for comparison across samples, as well as with results from other
studies. We could not normalize with respect to the pre-test score distribution since not every child took the same
test at the pre-test.

21

4.3. Leaving the NFE

NFEs prepare children, who might not otherwise attend school, to join government schools at the
age-appropriate grade level. To join a government school, children must demonstrate proficiency for a
grade, either by passing an exam or through vetting by a government teacher. The ability to join schools is
therefore a strong signal of the success of an NFE in fulfilling its mission. The program increased the
number of children graduating to the government schools. As shown in Table 10, 14 percent of students
in the treatment schools graduated to the government schools, compared to only 10 percent in the
comparison schools, a 40 percent increase.
In the final row of Table 10, we present the dropout rates for children who left school entirely
(i.e. left the NFE and did not join a government school). The dropout rate is slightly lower for the
treatment schools, but we cannot reject the hypothesis that the difference between treatment and
comparison schools is zero.

4.4 Teacher Presence on Learning

The previous sections presented the reduced form analysis of the effect of the incentives program
on child learning. Table 11 interprets what these estimates can tell us about the impact of teacher
presence. Columns 1 to 3 report simple correlations between teacher presence and test scores.
Specifically, they report the coefficient estimate of the number of times a school was found open (Openj)
on a regression of the mid-test or post-test scores:
Scoreikj=β1+β2Openj+β3Pre_Writij+β4Oral_Scoreij+ β5Written_Scoreij +εijk.

[2]

As in the previous tables, we continue to control for the child’s pre-test score and to cluster standard
errors by school.

22

Column 1 reports OLS estimation of Equation 2 for comparison schools in order to obtain the
correlation between presence and child achievement levels. In this case, the random check data is used to
estimate the number of times a school is found open. The coefficient is 0.20, indicating that the test scores
of children in centers open 100 percent of the time would be 0.10 standard deviations higher than those of
children in a center open 50 percent of the time. The coefficient is also insignificant.
This point estimate is similar to those reported in other studies (Chaudhury, et al., 2005a) and
suggests that the effect of teacher attendance on learning is not that large. Chaudhury et al. (2005a)
conjectures that the measurement of absence rates based on a few random visits per school have
considerable error, and may thus bias the results downwards. Consistent with this theory, the effect on
the post-test scores, where having more months of random check data allows us to better estimate the
absence rate per school, becomes larger (0.58 standard deviations). Our study provides a much more
direct test of this hypothesis, since, for treatment teachers, the photograph data gives us the actual
attendance. We present the OLS estimate of the effect of presence for treatment teachers using the
random check data (Column 2) and camera data (Column 3). Overall, the effect of teacher presence is
larger in the treatment schools than the comparison schools (compare 0.39 in Column 2 to 0.20 in Column
1, both obtained with random check data). More interestingly, consistent with the measurement error
hypothesis, the effect of teacher presence is larger and much more significant when using the more
accurate measure of presence, especially for the mid-test scores (the estimate is 0.87 standard deviations
in the Column 3, compared to 0.39 in Column 2). For the post-test, where we have a much more accurate
measure of presence from the random check data, the results from the two methods are instead similar
(0.98 in Column 3 versus 1.17 in Column 2).
Finally, in Column 4, we pool both samples and instrument Openj (as measured by the random
check) by the treatment status of the school to obtain exogenous variation in the percentage of time the
school was found open in the random check. Since we have shown that the program had a direct effect on
the length of the school day, as well as whether or not the school opened at all, the 2SLS estimate
captures the joint effect of outright absence and of a longer school day. The 2SLS estimates are higher

23

than the OLS results found in Column 1, and they are indistinguishable from the OLS results in Column
3, obtained with the precisely measured absence. This suggests that the relatively low correlation
between teacher absence and test scores that was observed in previous studies is indeed likely to be due to
measurement error in the teacher absence data, and that reducing absence would have the potential to
greatly increase test scores. Even a 10 percentage point reduction in the absence rate would result in a
0.10 standard deviation increase in test scores.

4.5. Teacher and Child Characteristics

In Table 12, we examine whether the treatment effect varies based on teacher and student
characteristics. Each cell in Table 12 reports the coefficient estimate (β4) of the interaction of
being in a treated school and a school’s characteristic (Charj) on a regression of the test score:

Scoreikj=β1+β2Treatj+ β3 Charj + β4 Treatj* Charj+β5Xij +εijk

[3]

Xij includes controls for pre-test scores and controls for the interaction of the pre-test scores with the
school characteristic. In Columns 1 and 2, we interact the treatment effect with a teacher’s academic
abilities at the start of the program; the treatment effect is slightly larger for teachers with higher test
scores and for teachers with more years of schooling, but this effect is small and not always significant.
The treatment effect does not vary based on the infrastructure level of the school (Column 3), and does
not vary much based on teacher pedagogy (Column 4) or student behavior (Column 5) at the time of the
school observations in October 2003. This suggests that regardless of the level of school infrastructure or
teaching competency, initiating the incentive program can result in positive gains to learning.

5. Costs-Benefit Analysis

24

The evaluation presented in this paper shows that a straightforward monitoring and incentive
program can effectively reduce teacher truancy. The benefits (in terms of child learning) of running such
a program, relative to costs, are high, and comparable to other successful education programs in
developing countries (evaluated with randomized evaluations).
Table 13 presents an estimate of the administrative costs of the program for one year. For the
treatment schools, the average teacher salary was nearly Rs 1,000. Since the flat salary paid to
comparison teachers was also Rs1,000, the program did not increase expenditure on teacher salaries.
Other program costs (administration, developing the pictures, and buying the cameras) amounted to
Rs5,379 per center per year. This cost corresponds to 40 percent of a teacher’s yearly salary, but to only
Rs268 ($6) per child per year (assuming about 20 children per teacher).14 Expressed in terms of cost per
outcome, this program cost 11 cents for each additional instruction day per child, $60 per additional
school year, and $3.58 for increasing test scores by 0.10 standard deviations.
The cost per standard deviation improvement in test scores is higher than that of the Balsakhi
Remedial Education Program evaluated in Banerjee et al. (2005). In the Balsakhi program, a second
teacher (often a woman) was hired to provide remedial tutoring to children who had been identified as
lagging behind their peers. The Balsakhi program resulted in a 0.14 increase for Rs 107 during its first
year (and larger increases in its second year), which makes it over 2.5 times more cost effective.
However, the Balsakhi program was evaluated in an urban setting, in the cities of Mumbai and Vadodara,
where the external monitoring of teachers is cheaper. In contrast, the second teacher program evaluated
in Udaipur district by Banerjee, et al. (2005), while it reduced school closures by 15 percent and increased
the number of child-days, did not result in any improvement in test scores. The cost-effectiveness of the
Seva Mandir camera program is comparable to that of other successful education programs in rural
Africa: the cost per 0.10 standard deviations of the camera program ($3.58) is similar to that of a girl’s
14

This estimate does take into account the opportunity cost for teachers and children. Note, however, that the effects
are larger than they could be if the program was implemented on a large scale, and more cost-effective technology
(such as digital cameras) could be used.

25

scholarship program ($3.53) that was evaluated in Kremer, Miguel and Thornton (2004). The scholarship
program is currently the only program that has been proven to durably improve test scores in Africa.15
Using the estimate in Table 6, we calculate that the cost per year of schooling is 6/0.10=$60 per
additional year of schooling due to the program. This is much higher than the cost of the de-worming
program in Africa (evaluated to be only $3.53 per additional year of schooling), 16 but lower than that of
any other programs evaluated there, such as the child incentive program ($90 per extra year), or a child
sponsorship program which delivered uniforms to children ($99 per extra year).17 It is also just over half
the cost of the two-teacher program, previously implemented in Seva Mandir, which, evaluated at the
current teacher’s salary, cost $115 per extra year of schooling.18 Thus, the camera program, even in its
pilot form (which used an expensive way to develop photographs) is a cost-effective program compared
to many others, both in terms of increasing instruction time and in terms of increasing learning.

IV.

Conclusion

Addressing the startlingly high rates of teacher absenteeism in developing countries is a critical
step for increasing school quality. The failure of school systems to carry out their own rules regarding
teacher presence has led some to believe that only community pressure can increase school quality.
However, several recent studies have shown that, for a variety of reasons, community monitoring often
delivers disappointing results.
15

The test-based teacher incentive program that was evaluated in Glewwe, Ilias and Kremer (2003) had a cost of
$3.41 per 0.10 standard deviations, its gains on test scores were considered to be temporary, and it reflects gaming
rather than real learning improvement.
16
In making this comparison, it is worth noting that Kremer and Miguel (2004) use the cost of the de-worming
program if implemented on a large scale, whereas we use the cost of the program as implemented in this small scale
pilot. However, even the cost of the program they actually evaluated was only about three times larger than what
they used for the cost-benefit evaluation, which still makes the de-worming program a more cost-effective way to
improve instruction time.
17
The cost per year of the PROGRESA program in primary schools is substantially larger ($5,902.45). However, the
PROGRESA program is primarily a transfer program to families, and its cost effectiveness should probably not be
based on its effect on school outcomes alone.
18
The cost-effectiveness figure reported by Banerjee, Jacob and Kremer (2005) is $4.82 per extra month, or $58 per
extra year, but the teachers were then paid Rs400, which was, according to the authors, untenable even then, in the
face of competition for teachers, and was subsequently increased to Rs100.

26

In this paper, we show that in contrast to community monitoring, external monitoring, coupled
with high-powered incentives, can be a cost-effective method to improve school quality. In particular, we
show that the direct monitoring of teachers, combined with simple and credible incentives based on
teacher presence can lead to a large increase in teacher attendance, even if implemented in a difficult
environment. The program cut teacher absence from an average of 42 percent in the comparison schools
to 22 percent in the treatment schools. As a result, students in program schools benefited from about 30
percent more instruction time. The program had a statistically and economically significant impact on test
scores. After a year, child test scores in program schools were 0.17 standard deviations higher than in
comparison schools, and children were more likely to be admitted to regular primary schools. Despite
being implemented on a small scale, the program is cost-effective.
Our findings show that external monitoring systems can succeed in reducing absenteeism in
situations where internal systems have failed. Often times, monitoring systems have failed because
individuals within institutions have chosen to ignore their own rules. For example, top-down monitoring
systems have been shown to fail when the headmasters are in charge of implementing them (Kremer and
Chen, 2001), because the headmasters have marked the teachers present even if they were absent. In
contrast, mechanical systems, such as using cameras, have the advantage of not being subject to the
discretion of any one individual: a commitment at a senior level would make its implementation viable.
These results suggest that extending Seva Mandir’s incentive program to other non-formal
schools has the potential to increase learning levels for India’s most vulnerable children. However, the
one question that remains is whether it is politically feasible to implement an effective monitoring system
in government schools. Since teachers in government schools are much more politically powerful than
NFE teachers, it may prove impossible to institute a system where they would be monitored daily using a
camera or similar device such as a date-time stamp, and other methods may prove necessary (such as
having more frequent inspections). However, these results do tell us that finding ways to monitor and
reward presence can in principle be effective in tackling the absence problem and improving learning.
Moreover, our findings suggest that whatever barriers currently prevent teachers from attending school

27

regularly (distance, other activities, lack of interest by children, etc.), they are not insurmountable. Given
the political will, it is therefore likely that solutions to the absence problem could be found in government
schools as well. These results thus tell us both that absenteeism can be addressed, and that doing so would
be worthwhile.

28

Works Cited
Banerjee, Abhijit, Rukmini Barnerji, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster, Stuti Khemani, Sendhil
Mullainathan, and Marc Shotland (2005), “The Impact of Information, Awareness and
Participation on Learning Outcomes” MIMEO, Poverty Action Lab, MIT.
Banerjee, Abhijit, and Esther Duflo (2005), “Addressing Absence,” forthcoming, Journal of Economic
Perspectives.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Angus Deaton and Esther Duflo (2004), “Wealth, Health and Health Services in Rural
Rajasthan,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Suraj Jacob and Michael Kremer, with Jenny Lanjouw and Peter Lanjouw (2005),
“Moving to Universal Education! Costs and Trade offs” MIMEO, MIT.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Shawn Cole, Esther Duflo and Leigh Linden (2005), “Remedying Education: Evidence
from Two Randomized Experiments in India” Poverty Action Lab working paper.
Chaudhury, Nazmul, Jeffrey Hammer, Michael Kremer, Karthik Muralidharan,
F. Halsey Rogers (2005a), “Provider Absence in Schools and Health Clinics,” forthcoming, Journal of
Economic Perspective,
Chaudhury, Nazmul, Jeffrey Hammer, Michael Kremer, Karthik Muralidharan,
F. Halsey Rogers (2005b), "Teacher Absence in India: A Snapshot," forthcoming in Journal of the
European Economic Association.
Education for All Forum (2000), EFA Country Assessment Country Reports.
Fehr, Ernst, and Schmidt (2004), “Fairness and Incentives in a Multi-task Principal–Agent Model”
Scandinavian Journal of Economics 106(3), 453–474
Fehr, Ernst and Lorenz Gotte (2002), “Do Workers Work More if Wages are High? Evidence from a
Randomized Field Experiment,” University of Zurich Working Paper 125.
Figlio, David and Lawrence S. Getzler (2002) “Accountability, Ability and Disability: Gaming The
System,” NBER Working Paper 9307.
Figlio, David and Josh Winicki (2002), “Food for Thought? The Effects of School Accountability Plans
on School Nutrition, “ NBER Working Paper 9319.
Glewwe, Paul, Nauman Ilias and Michael Kremer (2003), “Teacher Incentives,” MIMEO, Harvard.
Glewwe, Paul, Michael Kremer, and Sylvie Moulin. (1997). "Textbooks and Test scores: Evidence from a
Prospective Evaluation in Kenya", unpublished working paper.
Holmstrom, Bengt and P. Milgrom (1991), "Multi-Task Principal-Agent Problems: Incentive Contracts,
Asset Ownership and Job Design,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization.

29

Jacob, Brian and Steve Levitt (2003), “Rotten Apples: An Investigation of the Prevalence and Predictors
of Teacher Cheating,” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Kremer, Michael and Daniel Chen (2001), “An Interim Report on a Teacher Attendance
Incentive Program in Kenya,” MIMEO, Harvard University
Kremer, Michael, Edward Miguel and Rebecca Thorntorn (2004) “Incentives to Learn” NBER Working
Paper #10971, December.
Kremer, Michael and Christel Vermeersch (2005), “School Committee Empowerment:
Preliminary Notes,” MIMEO, Harvard University.
Kreps, David (1997), “Intrinsic Motivation and Extrinsic Incentives,” American Economic Review.
Krueger, Alan and Diane M. Whitmore (2001), "The Effect of Attending a Small Class in the Early
Grades on College-Test Taking and Middle School Test Results: Evidence from Project STAR,"
Economic Journal.
Lavy, Victor (2004), “Paying for Performance: The Effect of Individual Financial Incentives on Teachers’
Productivity and Students’ Scholastic Outcomes,” MIMEO, Hebrew University.
Miguel, Edward and Michael Kremer (2004), “Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and Health in
the Presence of Treatment Externalities,” Econometrica.
Olken, Ben (2004), “Monitoring Corruption: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia,” MIMEO,
Harvard.
Schultz, Paul (2004), “School Subsidies for the Poor: Evaluating the Mexican Progresa Poverty
Program” Journal of Development Economics.
World Bank (2004), “Making Service Work for Poor People,” World Development
Report, Washington and Oxford: World Bank and Oxford University Press.

30

Figure 1: Photographs from Program

Table 1: Is School Quality Similar in Treatment and Control Groups Prior to Program?
Treatment
Control
Difference
(1)
(2)
(3)
A. Teacher Attendance
Percent of Schools Open
0.66
0.63
0.02
(0.10)
44
41
85
B. Student Participation (Random Check)
Number of Students Present
17.72
29
Teacher Test Scores

C. Teacher Qualifications
34.99

Teacher Highest Grade Completed

15.54
26
33.62

53

56

10.21

9.80

57

54

D. Teacher Performance Measures (Random Check)
Percentage of Children Sitting Within Classroom
0.85
0.84

Percent of Teachers Interacting with Students

Blackboards Utilized

Infrastructure Index

29

26

0.79

0.73

29

26

0.86

0.85

22

26

E. School Infrastructure
3.39
57

Fstat(1,115)

3.20
55

2.19
(2.23)
55
1.37
(2.01)
56
0.41
(0.46)
111
0.01
(0.09)
55
0.06
(0.12)
55
0.01
(0.11)
48
0.19
(0.30)
112
1.32

Notes: (1) Teacher Performance Measures from Random Checks only include schools that were
open during the random check. (2) Infrastructure Index: 1-5 points, with one point given if the
following school attribute is sufficient: Space for Children to Play, Physical Space for Children in
Room, Lighting, Library, Floor Mats

Took Written Exam

Table 2: Are Students Similar Prior To Program?
Levels
Normalized by Control
Treatment Control Difference
Treatment Control Difference
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A. Can the Child Write?
0.17
0.19
-0.02
(0.04)
1136
1094
2230

Math Score on Oral Exam

Language Score on Oral Exam

Total Score on Oral Exam

Math Score on Written Exam

Language Score on Written Exam

Total Score on Written Exam

B. Oral Exam
7.82
8.12
940

888

3.63

3.74

940

888

11.44

11.95

940

888

-0.30
(0.27)
1828

-0.10

0.00

940

888

-0.10
(0.30)
1828

-0.03

0.00

940

888

-0.51
(0.48)
1828

-0.08

0.00

940

888

0.23

0.00

196

206

0.08

0.00

196

206

C. Written Exam
8.62
7.98
0.64
(0.51)
196
206
402
3.62

3.44

196

206

12.17

11.41

0.18
(0.46)
402

-0.10
(0.09)
1828
-0.03
(0.08)
1828
-0.08
(0.07)
1828
0.23
(0.18)
402
0.08
(0.20)
402

0.76
0.16
0.00
0.16
(0.90)
(0.19)
196
206
402
196
206
402
Notes: (1) Sample includes every student present at pre-test exam. (2) Children who could write were given
a written exam. Children who could not write were given an oral exam. (3) Standard errors are clustered by
school.

Post Test (Sept 03 -OctFigure
04)
2: Percentage of Schools Open during Random Checks
100%

Treatment

80%

60%

Control
40%

20%

Mid-Test

Post-Test

0%
Aug

Sept

Oct

Nov

Dec

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sept

Oct

Nov

Dec

Jan

Feb

Mar

Month

Note: (1) The program began in Sept 2003. August only includes schools checked before announcement of program (August 25). September includes all random
checks between August 26 through the end of September. (2) Child learning levels were assessed in a mid-test (April 2004) and a post-test (November 2004). After the
post-test, the "official" evaluation period was ended. Random checks continued in both the treatment and control schools.

Table 3: Teacher Attendance
Sept 2003-March 2005
Treatment
Control
Diff
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.78
0.58
0.2
(0.04)
1103
1086
2189

Open

Difference Between Treatment and Control Schools
Until Mid-Test Mid to Post Test After Post Test
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.2
0.14
0.26
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.05)

Notes: (1) Child learning levels were assessed in a mid-test (April 2004) and a post-test (November 2004).
After the post-test, the "official" evaluation period was ended. Random checks continued in both the
treatment and control schools. (2) Standard errors are clustered by school.
Figure 3A: Impact of the Cameras
(out of 20 vis its )

Number of Teachers present exactly x
times

10
T reat m ent
8

6
Cont rol
4

2

0
1

3

5

7

9

11

13

15

17

70

80

19

Atte n dan ce Fre qu e n cy

Figure 3B: Teacher Attendence
1.00

0.80

0.60

0.40

0.20

0.00
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

90

Attendance Frequency
Treatment

Control

Note: Figure 3B is the estimated CDF of attendance, assuming that absense follows a betabinomial distribution.

100

Table 4: Comparing Random Checks to Photo Data for Treatment Schools
Scenario
Number
Percent of Total
A. Possible Scenarios
School Open and Valid Photos
673
69%
School Open and Invalid Photos
131
13%
School Closed and Valid Photos
43
4%
School Closed and Invalid Photos
129
13%
B. Out of 131 where School is Open, the photos are invalid because….
School not open for full 5 hours
31
24%
Only one photo
44
34%
Not enough Children
28
21%
Instructor not in Photo
8
6%
No photograph
20
15%
C. Out of 43 where School is Closed and the photos are valid…..
Random check completed after the school closed
4
Teacher left in the middle of the day
19
Random Check Time Missing
17
Photo Data Missing
3

9%
44%
40%
7%

Figure 4: Difference in the Percent of Open Schools Between Treatment
and Control, By Hour
0.40

Percent

0.30

0.20

0.10

0.00
8 AM

9 AM

10 AM

11 AM

Time

12 PM

1 PM

Table 5: Teacher Performance

Percent of Children Sitting Within
Classroom

Percent of Teachers Interacting with
Students

Blackboards Utilized

Sept 2003-March 2005
Treatment
Control
Diff
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.89
0.88
0.01
(0.01)
865
633
1498
0.68

0.69

865

633

0.93

0.93

-0.02
(0.03)
1498

Difference Between Treatment and Control Schools
Until Mid-Test Mid to Post Test After Post Test
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.01
0.04
-0.04
(0.02)
(0.03)
(0.03)

-0.03
(0.02)

0.01
(0.02)

0.02
(0.03)

0.00
-0.04
0.08
-0.07
(0.01)
(0.04)
(0.05)
(0.05)
843
615
1458
Notes: (1) Teacher Performance Measures from Random Checks only include schools that were open during the random check. (2)
Standard errors are clustered by school.

Attendance of Students Present at Pre-Test Exam

Attendance for Children who did not leave NFE

Presence for Students Present at Pre-Test Exam

Presence for Student who did not leave NFE

Table 6: Child Attendance
Sept 03-March 05
Treatment Control
Diff
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.51
0.49
0.02
(0.03)
15536
11217
26753
0.64

0.61

10890

8193

0.42

0.32

18889

17194

0.53

0.40

Difference Between Treatment and Control Schools
Until Mid-Test Mid to Post Test After Post Test
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.02
0.03
0.02
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.04)

0.03
(0.03)
19083

0.02
(0.03)

0.05
(0.03)

0.05
(0.04)

0.1
(0.03)
36083

0.1
(0.03)

0.09
(0.04)

0.11
(0.04)

0.13
0.1
0.13
0.18
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.05)
13162
12524
25686
Notes: (1) Standard errors are clustered at the level of the school. (2) Child attendance data collected during random check. (3) Pre-test exam
determined child enrollment at the start of the program.

Percent Attrition

Table 7: Descriptive Statistics for Mid Test and Post Test
Mid Test
Treatment Control Difference
A. Attrition Process
0.11
0.22
-0.10
(0.05)

Treatment

Post Test
Control Difference

0.24

0.21

0.03
(0.04)

Difference in Percent Written of Pre-Test attriters-stayers

0.01

0.03

0.02
(0.06)

0.06

-0.03

0.10
(0.06)

Difference in Verbal Test of Pre-Test attriters-stayers

0.05

0.08

-0.03
(0.14)

0.02

0.12

-0.10
(0.14)

Difference in Written Test of Pre-Test attriters-stayers

-0.41

-0.23

-0.18
(0.34)

-0.19

-0.13

-0.06
(0.29)

0.03
(0.04)

0.61

0.57

0.04
(0.05)

Took Written

B. Exam Score Means
0.36
0.33

Math

0.14

0.00

0.14
(0.10)

-0.08

-0.24

0.16
(0.15)

Language

0.14

0.00

0.14
(0.10)

1.71

1.60

0.11
(0.11)

Total

0.14

0.00

0.14
(0.10)

0.35

0.24

0.12
(0.11)

Notes: (1) Test Scores in Panel B are normalized by the mean of the mid-test control. (2) Standard Errors are clustered by school.

Took
Written
(1)
0.04
(0.03)
1893

Table 8: Estimation of Treatment Effects for the Mid- and Post-Test
Mid-Test
Post-Test
Took
Math
Lang
Total
Math
Lang
Written
(5)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(6)
(7)
A. All Children
0.15
0.16
0.17
0.06
0.21
0.16
(0.07)
(0.06)
(0.06)
(0.04)
(0.12)
(0.08)
1893
1893
1893
1760
1760
1760

Total
(8)
0.17
(0.09)
1760

0.13
(0.06)
1550

B. Took Pre-Test Oral
0.15
(0.07)
1550

0.2
(0.14)
1454

0.13
(0.09)
1454

0.16
(0.10)
1454

0.19
(0.12)
343

0.28
(0.11)
343

C. Took Pre-Test Written
0.25
(0.11)
343

0.28
(0.18)
306

0.28
(0.11)
306

0.25
(0.12)
306

0.06
(0.07)
958

D. Below Median Rank on Pre-Test
0.11
0.09
0.07
(0.06)
(0.06)
(0.16)
958
958
897

0.01
(0.11)
897

0.05
(0.11)
897

0.23
(0.09)
935

E. Above Median Rank on Pre-Test
0.21
0.23
0.32
(0.08)
(0.08)
(0.12)
935
935
863

0.32
(0.09)
863

0.28
(0.08)
863

0.14
(0.08)
1550

Notes: (1) The table presents the coefficient estimate of being in a treated school on the sum of a child's score on the
oral and written exams. All regressions include controls for the child's learning levels prior to the program. (2) The
mid and post test scores normalized by mid test control group. (3) Standard errors are clustered by school.

Girls

Table 9: Treatment Effects for the Mid- and Post-Test, by Gender
Mid-Test
Post-Test
Took Written
Took Written
Total Score
Total Score
(1)
(3)
(2)
(4)
0.07
0.2
0.07
0.18
(0.03)
(0.07)
(0.05)
(0.09)
891
891
821
821

Boys

0.02
(0.04)
988

0.14
(0.07)
988

0.05
(0.04)
929

0.16
(0.10)
929

Interaction of Female
and Treat

0.06
(0.03)
1879

0.07
(0.07)
1879

0.04
(0.04)
1750

0.03
(0.08)
1750

Notes: (1) The table presents the coefficient estimate of being in a treated school on the sum of a
child's score on the oral and written exams. All regressions include controls for the child's learning
levels prior to the program. (2) The mid and post test scores normalized by mid test control group.
(3) Standard errors are clustered by school.

Table 10: Dropouts and Movement into Government Schools
Treatment
Control
Diff
(1)
(2)
(3)
Child Left NFE
0.30
0.28
0.02
(0.04)
1136
1061
2197
Child Enrolled in Government School

Child Dropped Out of School

0.14

0.10

1136

1061

0.16

0.18

1136

1061

0.04
(0.03)
2197
-0.02
(0.03)
2197

Notes: (1) Standard errors are clustered at the level of the school. (2) Dropouts are defined as
being absent for the last 5 random checks in which a school was found open.

Method:
Sample:
Data:

Took Written

Total Score

N

Table 11: Does the Random Check Predict Test Scores?
OLS
OLS
OLS
2SLS
Control Schools
Treatment Schools Treatment Schools
All Schools
Random Check
Random Check
Photographs
Random Check
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A. Mid-test (Sept 03-April 04)
0.02
0.28
0.36
0.26
(0.10)
(0.08)
(0.11)
(0.19)
0.20
(0.19)

0.39
(0.21)

0.87
(0.22)

1.07
(0.43)

878

1015

1015

1893

B. Post-test (Sept 03 -Oct 04)
0.51
0.59
(0.15)
(0.20)

0.33
(0.22)

Took Written

0.24
(0.16)

Total Score

0.58
(0.35)

1.17
(0.36)

0.98
(0.53)

0.97
(0.47)

883

877

877

1760

N

Notes: (1) The table presents the coefficient estimate of the teacher's attendance on the sum of a child's score
on the oral and written exams. All regressions include controls for the child's learning levels prior to the
program. (2) The mid and post test scores normalized by mid test control group. (3) Standard errors are
clustered by school.

Table 12: Interactions with Teacher Skills and Performance
Teacher Skills
Highest Grade
Infrastructure
Good Teacher
Good Student
Test Scores
Completed
Index
Behavior
Behavior
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A. Mid Test
Took Written
0.00
0.03
0.00
0.08
0.11
(0.00)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.06)
(0.06)
Total Score
0.01
0.06
0.01
0.07
0.17
(0.01)
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.12)
(0.12)
B. Post Test
Took Written
0.00
0.01
0.04
0.08
-0.08
(0.00)
(0.02)
(0.03)
(0.08)
(0.08)
Total Score
0.01
0.02
-0.05
0.14
-0.08
(0.01)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.18)
(0.18)
Notes: (1) Standard Errors are clustered by school. (2) Teacher observations were conducted in
September thru October 2004. (3) Test Scores and Highest Grade Completed are in levels. The
Infrastructure Index is the same as in Table 1. The Teacher and Student Behaviors are measured as
being above the median in terms of each behavior.

Table 13: Cost of Program Per Center over 12 Month Period
Item
Cost
A. Camera Cost
Camera Cost1
Film Cost
Battery Cost
Photo Development and Printing:

1133
1392
552
1852

B. Salaries
Teacher Salaries

2

0
3

Labor Cost to Run Program

450

Total Costs to Run Program
5379
Notes: (1) Assumes cameras last 3 years (2) Average Teacher Salary is
Rs1000 under program. In the absence of the program, it would be
Rs1000. (3) It takes approximately 50 man hours to process 115 schools
per month. Assume a staff worker being paid Rs 10,000 per month and
works a 40 hour week. Thus, it takes 1/2 hour of labor at Rs37.5 to
complete one center per month.

Appendix 1A: Ratio of Students Inside the Classroom to Outside the Classroom
120%

Treatment
100%

80%

60%

40%

Control
20%

0%
Aug

Oct

Dec

Feb

Apr

Jun

Aug

Oct

Dec

Feb

Oct

Dec

Feb

Dec

Feb

Month

Appendix Figure 1B: Blackboards Used

120%

Treatment

100%
80%
60%

Control
40%
20%
0%
Aug

Oct

Dec

Feb

Apr

Jun

Aug

Month

Appendix Figure 1C: Teacher Interacting with Student

100%

Treatment
80%

60%

40%

Control
20%

0%
Aug

Oct

Dec

Feb

Apr

Jun

Month

Aug

Oct

