                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    INVESTOR SENTIMENT AND CORPORATE FINANCE:
                                MICRO AND MACRO

                                             Owen A. Lamont
                                             Jeremy C. Stein

                                          Working Paper 11882
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11882


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2005




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Owen A. Lamont and Jeremy C. Stein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Investor Sentiment and Corporate Finance: Micro and Macro
Owen A. Lamont and Jeremy C. Stein
NBER Working Paper No. 11882
December 2005
JEL No. G14, G32, G34

                                            ABSTRACT

We document that net equity issuance is considerably more sensitive to aggregate stock returns and
Q's than to firm-level stock returns and Q's. Very similar patterns also emerge when we look at

merger activity. In light of earlier work (Campbell 1991, Vuolteenaho 2002) which finds that

aggregate stock returns are less informative about future cashflows than are firm-level stock returns--

and thus, potentially more strongly influenced by investor sentiment--these results suggest that both

equity issuance and mergers are to a significant extent driven by market-timing considerations, as

opposed to by purely fundamental factors.

Owen A. Lamont
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
owen.lamont@yale.edu

Jeremy C. Stein
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer 209
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeremy_stein@harvard.edu
         Investor Sentiment and Corporate Finance: Micro and Macro
                    Owen A. Lamont and Jeremy C. Stein*

       Figure 1 plots three time series over the interval 1927-2003: i) a measure of

aggregate net equity issuance in the U.S.; ii) a measure of aggregate merger activity; and

iii) the aggregate market-to-book ratio.1 As can be clearly seen, and as a number of

observers have pointed out, both equity issuance and merger activity are strongly

correlated with the level of the stock market, and with each other.

       Broadly speaking, there are two classes of theories that might explain these

patterns. According to the neoclassical view, the market is efficient, and all movements

in stock prices rationally reflect changes either in expected future cashflows or in proper

discount rates. Thus if prices are high, firms might want to issue more equity because the

flexibility inherent in a less-leveraged capital structure is especially appealing when a

large number of positive-NPV projects are available. And similarly, mergers might be

more valuable in such periods, because it becomes all the more important to reallocate

capital to the highest-value users (Boyan Jovanovic and Peter L. Rousseau, 2002).

       By contrast, the behavioral view argues that managers time their equity issues to

take advantage of stock prices that are sometimes too high relative to fundamentals (e.g.,

Jay R. Ritter and Tim Loughran, 1995, Malcolm Baker and Jeffrey Wurgler 2000). And

similarly, some mergers—in particular, stock-for-stock mergers—are nothing more than

a leading example of such opportunistic timing, since a stock-for-stock merger makes a

convenient excuse for a large equity issue that might otherwise be hard to justify (Andrei

Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny 2003).2

       In this paper, we provide some new evidence that cuts in favor of the behavioral

view. Our starting point is Paul A. Samuelson’s dictum that market efficiency is a better


                                             1
description of the pricing of individual stocks in the cross section than of the pricing of

the aggregate market. As quoted by Robert J. Shiller (2001, p. 243), Samuelson claims:

        “Modern markets show considerable micro efficiency…I [hypothesize] considerable
macro inefficiency, in the sense of long waves in the time series of aggregate indexes of security
prices below and above various definitions of fundamental values.”


           Samuelson’s dictum has been made concrete in empirical work by John Campbell

(1991) and Tuomo Vuolteenaho (2002). Campbell shows that innovations to aggregate

stock returns are largely transitory: less than half of the variance in returns is due to

changes in expected cashflows, leading to predictable reversals in future returns. If one

adopts a behavioral perspective and thinks of return predictability as being indicative of

investor sentiment, this is consistent with Samuelson’s idea that the aggregate market is

quite inefficient, with a large fraction of its price variation being due to non-fundamental

factors.     In contrast, Vuolteenaho shows that innovations to idiosyncratic firm-level

returns are largely permanent: most of the variation in returns is driven by cashflow

news, with a smaller component due to time-varying expected returns. This suggests that

firm-level relative prices are reasonably efficient, with a smaller role for sentiment.

           The key insight that underlies our testing strategy is the following: if a given

movement (say one percent) in aggregate stock prices contains a greater proportion of

investor sentiment than the same-sized movement in firm-level prices, then according to

the behavioral/timing view, equity issuance and mergers should respond more sensitively

to aggregate price movements than to firm-specific price movements.                 In contrast,

according to the neoclassical view all movements in stock prices are about some aspect of

fundamentals (either cashflows or discount rates) and so there should be no differential

sensitivity to the aggregate vs. firm-specific components of prices.3



                                                2
       Using different data sources and sample periods, we find evidence in favor of the

behavioral view. Net equity issuance is considerably more sensitive to aggregate stock

returns and Q’s than to firm-level returns and Q’s. Very similar patterns also emerge

when we look at merger activity. These results suggest that both equity issuance and

mergers are to a significant extent driven by market-timing considerations, as opposed to

by purely fundamental factors.

       In addition to equity issuance and mergers, we also look at the behavior of

investment. Here the predictions of the behavioral view are less clear-cut. Intuitively, a

manager whose stock is overvalued will certainly want to issue more shares, but whether

the proceeds of the issue go into new physical capital—as opposed to simply being

invested in T-bills—is less obvious, and depends on considerations of time horizons and

financial constraints (Jeremy C. Stein 1996). Interestingly, our empirical results for

investment are less clear-cut as well. Depending on the specification, investment appears

to be either equally sensitive to aggregate and firm-specific stock prices (as in the

neoclassical view) or somewhat more sensitive to the former (as in the behavioral view).

       I. Data

       Our sample consists of all common stocks on CRSP. From CRSP we obtain the

number of shares outstanding for each firm, as well as stock returns and prices. From

Compustat we obtain capital expenditures, net capital stock, and the book value of equity.

For pre-Compustat values of book equity, we use data from Ken French’s web page. We

calculate Q as the ratio of the market value of equity to the book value of equity, and I/K

as the ratio of capital expenditures to net property plant and equipment at the beginning

of the year.   Our Q series starts in 1927, and our I/K series starts in 1963, when




                                            3
Compustat coverage becomes sufficiently complete. We also obtain information on

mergers from the CRSP merger database, starting in 1973.

       Our measure of net equity issuance—an aggregate dollar-weighted version of

which is plotted in Figure 1—follows Kent Daniel and Sheridan Titman (2006), and goes

back to 1927. For each firm, we define net issuance in year t as simply the split-adjusted

percentage change in shares outstanding from December of year t-1 to December of year

t. This change can be either negative (reflecting, e.g., share repurchases) or positive

(reflecting, e.g., exercises of executive stock options, seasoned equity offerings, or stock-

financed mergers). Note that our issuance measure only covers firms that already exist on

CRSP, so it does not include initial public offerings and other new lists. We do not use

new lists because we require lagged variables to run our regressions. As shown in Owen

A. Lamont (2002), adding new lists would roughly double the dollar quantity of issuance.

       We compute market returns using three-year compounded value-weighted returns

for all common stocks on CRSP. To generate a market-wide measure of Q, we take the

ratio of the sum of the market capitalization of all stocks (for whom book value is

available) to the sum of the book value of all stocks—this is the market-to-book series

shown in Figure 1. For our regressions, we discard all observations for which Q is

greater than 100 or less than 0.01. We also discard observations on I/K for financial

firms (those with an SIC code starting with 6), or for firms with negative investment.

Finally, in a further effort to control outliers, we exclude from all regressions any firm in

the bottom quintile of market capitalization in a given year. For regressions involving

book value or capital stock, we additionally exclude firms in the bottom quintile of those

variables in a given year. We should emphasize that our results are generally more




                                             4
striking if we do not employ these outlier screens, since their primary effect is to increase

the estimated coefficients on firm-specific returns and Q’s.

       II. Results

       Table 1 displays our results. For each firm-level dependent variable (equity

issuance, mergers, or I/K) we run: (i) a bivariate regression in which the two independent

variables are the return on the aggregate market over the prior three years, R3YRt-1, and

the idiosyncratic return on the firm’s stock over the prior three years, (r3yrt-1 - R3YRt-1);

and (ii) a bivariate regression in which the two independent variables are the market-to-

book ratio for the aggregate market at the start of the year, Qt-1, and the idiosyncratic

market-to-book ratio for the firm at the start of the year, (qt-1 - Qt-1). The coefficients

from the first set of regressions appear in the first two columns of the table; the

coefficients from the second set appear in the third and fourth columns.

       Row 1 of the table considers our net issuance measure over the period 1927-2003.

From the first two columns we see that issuance responds positively to both aggregate

and idiosyncratic returns. However, the coefficient on the former, at 0.020, is almost

seven times the coefficient on the latter, at 0.003. The difference between the two is also

strongly statistically significant, with a p-value of 0.006. In the regression that uses Q’s

instead of returns, we get a similar result: the coefficient on aggregate Q is 0.018, while

that on idiosyncratic Q is 0.003, with the difference again being highly significant.

       To understand the economic magnitude of the coefficients reported in Row 1, it is

helpful to know that average firm-level issuance is about 0.06 (i.e., a firm increases its

shares outstanding by six percent in a typical year), while aggregate Q has an average of

1.5. Thus the coefficient of 0.018 on aggregate Q means that when Q is twice its




                                             5
historical value (as occurred around 1999), we can expect issuance for an individual firm

to be about 45 percent above its historical average (0.018*1.5/.06 = 0.45).

       Rows 2 and 3 consider all mergers and stock-for-stock mergers respectively, over

the sample period 1973-2000. The dependent variable in these regressions is a dummy

that equals one if the firm in question was an acquirer in a merger that was first

announced in the given year. The results run closely parallel to those for issuance, and

are essentially identical whether we look at the returns regressions or the Q regressions:

in either type of specification, the aggregate component of stock prices has an effect on

merger activity that is approximately six to seven times as big as the idiosyncratic

component, with the differences again being statistically significant in all cases.

       The quantitative effect of aggregate stock prices on merger activity is large as

well. The unconditional probability of a firm in our sample being an acquirer in any

given year is on the order of 3.0 percent. When aggregate Q is twice its historical

average, our regression estimates imply that this probability goes up by about 1.8

percentage points, or by 60 percent of the unconditional value.

       Finally, in Row 4, we look at our investment measure I/K. Here the results are

less clear-cut.   When we put returns on the right-hand side, I/K shows the same

qualitative pattern as equity issuance and mergers—it is significantly more sensitive to

market returns than to idiosyncratic returns, with coefficients on the two variables of

0.085 and 0.043 respectively. However, when we put Q on the right-hand side, the

coefficients are almost identical, at 0.046 and 0.040 respectively.

       Thus overall, the investment results do not yield a decisive rejection of the

neoclassical view. At the same time, if one takes the perspective that predictability in




                                              6
aggregate stock returns is driven by investor sentiment (rather than by rational variation

in discount rates), the investment results can equally well be interpreted as consistent

with a version of the behavioral model in which managers have short horizons and simply

seek to maximize current stock prices. As demonstrated by Stein (1996), in such a world

short-horizon managers still follow the dictates of Q theory, so the link between

investment and stock prices is similar to that in a neoclassical setting.

       The results do allow for a more conclusive rejection of an alternative version of

the behavioral model, one in which managers have long horizons, and seek to maximize

their perception of fundamental value. Stein (1996) shows that in this case, managers

ignore sentiment-driven fluctuations in stock prices when making investment decisions.

According to our logic, this should lead to smaller coefficients on aggregate returns and

Q’s than on their idiosyncratic counterparts, a prediction for which we find no evidence.

       However one interprets the results for investment, the difference between these

results and those for issuance and mergers is instructive. In particular, if one stipulates

that the patterns for investment in the Q-based regressions are entirely reflective of the

neoclassical view, then it would seem hard to argue that the corresponding patterns for

issuance and mergers also are, since they look so fundamentally different. For example,

one cannot easily write off our behavioral interpretation of the issuance and merger

results simply by appealing to some form of mis-measurement in idiosyncratic Q’s, since

the investment results suggest that, using the same data, it is quite possible to get equally

high estimates for the coefficients on idiosyncratic and aggregate Q.

       We have tried many robustness tests, including: 1) using year fixed effects when

estimating the idiosyncratic coefficients; 2) using concave transforms of the independent




                                              7
variables such as logged returns and log(Q); and 3) Winsorizing the idiosyncratic

independent variables (returns and Q’s) at their 5th and 95th percentile values. The latter

two are particularly relevant if one worries that, e.g., issuance or mergers are inherently

concave functions of Q. If so, one could obtain different coefficients on the aggregate

and idiosyncratic components of Q simply because the latter has more variance.

       As it turns out, however, the results reported in Table 1 hold up well to these

variations. In all cases we continue to find that, for both issuance and mergers, the

aggregate coefficients on returns and Q are significantly higher than the idiosyncratic

ones. For investment the patterns are more mixed, much as in Table 1: in some cases the

coefficient on the aggregate component of stock prices is significantly higher than the

firm-specific component, but this is far from universally true.

       III. Conclusions

       Corporate equity issuance and merger activity are substantially more sensitive to

aggregate stock prices than to firm-level prices. This basic pattern is hard to reconcile

with the neoclassical model. However, in light of the relatively greater degree of

predictability in aggregate returns, it is what one would expect based on a market-timing

model of corporate financing behavior.

       Our basic empirical strategy can be applied in a variety of other ways. Beyond

our specific macro-vs.-micro approach, one can imagine other methods of identifying

more and less sentiment-prone components of stock prices, based perhaps on news events

or trading by different types of investors. We predict that future work will uncover a

general tendency for corporate issuance to respond more strongly to those components of

stock prices that are relatively sentiment-intensive.




                                              8
References

Baker, Malcolm and Wurgler, Jeffrey. “The Equity Share in New Issues and

Aggregate Stock Returns.” Journal of Finance, October 2000, 55(5), pp. 2219-2257.

Campbell, John Y. “A Variance Decomposition for Stock Returns.” Economic Journal,

March 1991, 101(405), pp. 157-179.

Daniel, Kent, and Titman, Sheridan. “Market Reactions to Tangible and Intangible

Information.” Journal of Finance, 2006, forthcoming.

Jovanovic, Boyan and Rousseau, Peter L. “The Q-Theory of Mergers.” American

Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, May 2002, 92(2), pp. 198-204.

Lamont, Owen A. “Evaluating Value Weighting: Corporate Events and Market Timing.”

Working paper, Yale University, 2002.

Loughran, Tim and Ritter, Jay R. “The New Issues Puzzle.” Journal of Finance, March

1995, 50(1), pp. 23-51.

Shiller, Robert J. Irrational Exuberance. New York: Broadway Books, 2001.

Shleifer, Andrei and Vishny, Robert W. “Stock Market Driven Acquisitions.” Journal

of Financial Economics, December 2003, 70(3), pp. 295-311.

Stein, Jeremy C. “Rational Capital Budgeting in an Irrational World.” Journal of

Business, October 1996, 69(4), pp. 429-455.

Verter, Geoffrey. “Timing Merger Waves.” Working paper, Harvard University, 2003.

Vuolteenaho, Tuomo. “What Drives Firm-Level Stock Returns?” Journal of Finance,

February 2002, 57(1), pp. 233-264.




                                           9
                                          Table 1
                Sensitivity of Equity Issuance, Mergers and Investment to
               Market-Wide and Firm-Specific Components of Stock Prices


                                 Returns Regressions                           Q Regressions
                            Aggregate Firm                                Aggregate Firm
                            R3YRt-1    r3yrt-1- R3YRt-1 p-val             Qt-1      qt-1-Qt-1 p-val
 Dependent variable:
 1. Net Issuance,    0.020                  0.003                0.006 0.018              0.003       0.000
 1927-2003           (3.36)                 (4.75)                     (7.03)             (4.09)

 2. All Mergers,            0.020           0.003                0.007 0.013              0.002       0.000
 1973-2000                  (3.34)          (4.52)                     (5.74)             (2.34)

 3. Equity Mergers,         0.012           0.002                0.049 0.012              0.002       0.000
 1973-2000                  (2.43)          (3.32)                     (7.92)             (3.81)

 4. I/K,                    0.085           0.043                0.001 0.046              0.040       0.586
 1963-2003                  (8.03)          (14.32)                    (3.55)             (9.74)



Note: For each firm-level dependent variable measured over year t we run: (i) a bivariate regression in
which the two independent variables are the return on the aggregate market over the three-year period
ending in December of year t-1, R3YRt-1, and the idiosyncratic return on the firm’s stock over the same
period (r3yrt-1 - R3YRt-1); and (ii) a bivariate regression in which the two independent variables are the
market-to-book ratio for the aggregate market at the start of the year, Qt-1, and the idiosyncratic market-to-
book ratio, (qt-1 - Qt-1). The coefficients from the first set of regressions appear in the first two columns;
those from the second set appear in the third and fourth columns. Net issuance is the change in the number
of split-adjusted shares outstanding from year t-1 to year t, divided by shares outstanding in year t-1.
Mergers are measured with a dummy that takes on the value one if the firm was the acquirer in a successful
transaction that was announced in year t. I/K is capital expenditures in year t divided by start-of-year
property, plant and equipment. The t-statistics in parentheses are based on standard errors clustered by
year. The p-values are from the test that the aggregate and firm-specific coefficients are equal.




                                                      10
                                 Figure 1
                    Aggregate Market-to-Book, Mergers,
                      and Equity Issuance, 1927-2003

   6
   4
   2
   0
   -2




              32             46               60             73             87              01
                                                   Year
                                           Issuance                  M/B
                                           Merger




Note: Issuance is the dollar-weighted average of the annual change in individual firms’ shares
outstanding, expressed in percentage points. M/B is the ratio of the aggregate market value of
listed firms to their aggregate book value. Merger, which comes from Verter (2003), is the
number of mergers in a given year divided by the number of listed firms.




                                         11
          Footnotes
*
    Lamont: School of Management, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520. Stein:

Department of Economics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138. Thanks to the

National Science Foundation for financial support, to Geoffrey Verter for sharing his

merger data, to John Friedman for research assistance, and to Malcolm Baker and Tuomo

Vuolteenaho for helpful comments.
1
    We describe the construction of the issuance and market-to-book variables below. The

merger series is from Geoffrey Verter (2003) and is approximately the number of

mergers in a given year divided by the number of publicly traded firms.
2
    The most clear-cut prediction of the behavioral theory of mergers is that there will be

more stock-for-stock mergers when the difference in the degree of overvaluation between

acquirers and targets is large. To map this into a prediction involving the overall level of

the market, one must implicitly assume that there is a pool of potential targets whose

prices are relatively insensitive to investor sentiment, so that a wave of positive sentiment

pushes up the prices of acquirers relative to these targets.
3
    A caveat is that, like the rest of the empirical Q literature, we implicitly maintain the

assumption of capital-stock homogeneity—i.e., there is no distinction between the value

of assets in place and future investment opportunities. If this assumption fails to hold,

one might observe, e.g., a higher sensitivity of equity issuance to the aggregate as

opposed to firm-specific component of prices even in an efficient-markets setting, simply

because the former is more informative about future investment opportunities, while the

latter is more informative about the value of existing assets.




                                              12
