NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ROLE OF FOREIGN CURRENCY DEBT IN FINANCIAL CRISES:
1880-1913 vs. 1972-1997
Michael D. Bordo
Christopher M. Meissner
Working Paper 11897
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11897
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2005

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Michael D. Bordo and Christopher M. Meissner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Role of Foreign Currency Debt in Financial Crises: 1880-1913 vs. 1972-1997
Michael D. Bordo and Christopher M. Meissner
NBER Working Paper No. 11897
December 2005
JEL No. N1, N2, E5, F3
ABSTRACT
What is the role of foreign currency debt in precipitating financial crises? In this paper we compare
the 1880 to 1913 period to recent experience. We examine debt crises, currency crises, banking
crises and the interrelation between these varieties of crises. We pay special attention to the role of
hard currency debt, currency mismatches and debt intolerance. We find fairly robust evidence that
high exposure to foreign currency debt does not necessarily lead to a high chance of having a debt
crisis, currency crisis, or a banking crisis. A key finding is some countries do not suffer from great
financial fragility despite high exposure to original sin. In the nineteenth century, the British
offshoots and Scandinavia generally avoided severe financial meltdowns while today many advanced
countries have high original sin but have had few financial crises. The common denominator in both
periods is that currency mismatches matter. A strong reserve position or high exports relative to hard
currency liabilities helps decrease the likelihood of a debt crisis, currency crisis or a banking crisis.
This strengthens the evidence for the hypothesis that foreign currency debt is dangerous when mismanaged. We discuss the robustness of these results and make some general comparisons based on
this evidence from over 60 years of intense international capital market integration.
Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
New Jersey Hall
Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1284
and NBER
bordo@fas-econ.rutgers.edu
Christopher M. Meissner
Faculty of Economics and Politics
University of Cambridge
Austin Robinson Building
Sidgwick Avenue
Cambridge CB3 9DD
ENGLAND
cm331@hermes.cam.ac.uk

The Role of Foreign Currency Debt in Financial Crises:
1880-1913 vs. 1972-1997*

December 5, 2005
Michael D. Bordo
Rutgers University and NBER
Christopher M. Meissner
University of Cambridge, King’s College and NBER
Abstract
What is the role of foreign currency debt in precipitating financial crises? In this paper we
compare the 1880 to 1913 period to recent experience. We examine debt crises, currency crises,
banking crises and the interrelation between these varieties of crises. We pay special attention to
the role of hard currency debt, currency mismatches and debt intolerance. We find fairly robust
evidence that high exposure to foreign currency debt does not necessarily lead to a high chance of
having a debt crisis, currency crisis, or a banking crisis. A key finding is some countries do not
suffer from great financial fragility despite high exposure to original sin. In the nineteenth
century, the British offshoots and Scandinavia generally avoided severe financial meltdowns
while today many advanced countries have high original sin but have had few financial crises.
The common denominator in both periods is that currency mismatches matter. A strong reserve
position or high exports relative to hard currency liabilities helps decrease the likelihood of a debt
crisis, currency crisis or a banking crisis. This strengthens the evidence for the hypothesis that
foreign currency debt is dangerous when mis-managed. We discuss the robustness of these results
and make some general comparisons based on this evidence from over 60 years of intense
international capital market integration.

1. Introduction
The period from 1870-1913 was a period of globalization in both goods and
financial markets comparable to the present era of globalization. It was also a period
rife with emerging market financial crises with great resonance for the experience that
we have observed in the past decade. In both eras many emerging countries faced
frequent currency crises, banking crises and twin crises. They also faced a number of
*
We thank Antonio David and Wagner Dada for excellent research assistance. Comments from Mario
Blejer, Luis Catão, Carlo Cottarelli, Barry Eichengreen, Marc Flandreau, Daniel Lederman, Kim
Oosterlinck, Anna Schwartz and participants at conferences at Humboldt University Berlin, the Bank
of England, the Emerging Markets Finance conference at Cass Business School, NBER Summer
Institute, the 2005 Dubrovnik Economic Conference, and the IMF are also appreciated. Errors remain
our responsibility. The financial assistance from ESRC grant RES 000-22-0001 and ESRC World
Economy and Finance Programme grant RES-156-25-0014 is gratefully acknowledged.

1

debt crises coming on the heels of banking and currency trouble. In both periods
many of these countries suffered from what Eichengreen and Hausmann (1999) refer
to as original sin. The external debt that they accumulated to finance their
development was almost strictly denominated in foreign currency or in terms of gold
(or had gold clauses) before 1914, just as emerging market debt today is almost
entirely denominated in dollars, euros or yen. When the exchange rate depreciates,
debt service in gold or foreign currency becomes very difficult leading to an increased
likelihood of default, the consequent drying up of external funding and economic
collapse.
The emerging country experience stands in contrast to that of the advanced
core countries which are financially mature, have credibility and either issue bonds
denominated in terms of their own currency or manage their significant hard currency
debt carefully. There were few crises in these countries. This leads us to wonder
whether these debt structures might play a role in explaining the difference in crisis
incidence. We also investigate whether balance sheet mismatches as discussed in
Goldstein and Turner (2004) mattered. Finally we also examine whether poor
reputation and accumulated default experience was a problem as hypothesized by
Carmen Reinhart, Kenneth Rogoff and Miguel Savastano (2003) in their work on debt
intolerance.
We have developed a database to allow us to identify and distinguish original
sin and balance sheet crises from more traditional currency and banking crises for
roughly 30 countries (both advanced and emerging) from 1880-1913 and over 40
countries between 1972 and 1997 the post-Bretton Woods period. We have data both
on type of crisis incidence and on the fundamentals that economists believe are
determinants of crises. A caveat worth keeping in mind is that the original sin data
and our mismatch data especially in the recent period are highly incomplete and
researchers still lack the coverage necessary to make definitive conclusions. Our data
set then is somewhat unique in that the coverage and quality of the available data
from 100 years ago are somewhat better than contemporary data. Nevertheless, we
use the data of limited quality to estimate the probability of having a particular type of
crisis using standard pooled probit models so as to show the correlation between
original sin, mismatch and financial crises.
Our results do not find unambiguous support for the idea that hard currency
debt is always associated with more financial turbulence. Good financial management
2

of the original sin condition, strong financial development and agile responsiveness to
crises seem to play a role in helping avoid crises. In fact, we find evidence that
countries with significant or full-blown original sin can be divided into two subgroups. For example in the pre-1914 period, one group includes countries such as
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Italy and Portugal each of which suffered a financial
catastrophe between 1880 and 1913. The other group, including Australia, Canada,
New Zealand, Norway, and the US had relatively little trouble with financial crises in
terms of frequency or virulence.
We argue that today countries like Greece, Ireland, Israel, Spain, Sweden, and
Singapore look similar to the latter set. On the other hand, countries like Argentina,
Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia and Brazil which suffer from financial fragility,
manifested by more frequent and more encompassing crises, look like the former set
of the nineteenth century. Today, measured original sin in both groups of countries is
high, but crisis incidence has been much lower in the first set of countries.
We ascribe this partially to good debt management or avoidance of currency
mismatches on the aggregate balance sheet and partially to special country
characteristics that vary over time and are most difficult to control for
econometrically. The latter group of countries do not seem to possess either of these
strengths. We also argue there are two other sets of countries. One consists of the
most peripheral regions. These suffer from original sin, but they are closed to
international capital flows and hence have been more successful at avoiding crises.
The other includes the most advanced economies without original sin, strong financial
systems and infrequent currency and debt crises.
This is a more extensive categorization than simply core versus periphery or
industrialized vs. emerging market. It also highlights the fact that original sin is not
always associated with financial crises. Some countries are able to avoid the vicious
cycle of exchange rate depreciation and balance sheet deterioration that often leads to
financial catastrophe. Others seem unable to do so. Some countries are financially
robust while others are overwhelmingly vulnerable. This categorization seems to be
evident in the two historically distinct periods of financial globalization. It moves us
closer to understanding which country characteristics interact with original sin so as to
produce financial fragility. Conditioning on observables and allowing for
unobservable heterogeneity in the ability to deal with and withstand crises leads us to
the conclusion that there is substantial evidence that careful debt management matters
3

when original sin is a fact of life. When countries match their hard currency liabilities
with hard currency reserves or take out such debt in proportion to their export earning
potential, they reduce their exposure to currency and banking crises which often can
spill over into debt crises in the presence of balance sheet effects. Finally we sound a
note of caution. Since many of our comparative results are based on data that are
limited in coverage and different in scope, we discuss the vital need for further
research and data collection efforts to maximize the information available from the
historical record.

2. History, Financial Crises, Balance Sheets and Hard Currency Debt

In this paper we view banking trouble, currency crises and debt crises that
occur in the same or consecutive years as inter-related phenomena. This is different
from first generation currency crisis models that viewed them as events arising from
unsustainable fiscal policy under a pegged exchange rate. It is also different from a
strand of the literature which views banking crises as arising uniquely from poor
supervision, weak structure or stochastic liquidity runs. Our view is that while some
countries had crises that unfolded in ways the older generation of models would
predict, other countries faced financial meltdown by having twin (banking and
currency crises) or even triple crises, where in addition to a large depreciation and
disruption in the banking sector sovereign debt went into default.
One important factor determining the ultimate outcome may be an interaction
between the nature of the debt contracts in place and the robustness of the financial
system. Our framework for thinking about financial crises is very much parallel to
that enunciated in Mishkin (2003) which in turn is inspired by an open-economy
approach to the credit channel transmission mechanism of monetary policy. Balance
sheets, net worth and informational asymmetries are key ingredients in this type of a
model.
Initial trouble might begin in the banking sector for a number of reasons. One
possibility is that international interest rates rise. This worsens the balance sheets of
non-financial firms and banks alike. As the number of non-performing loans rises and
net worth falls, a decline in lending can occur contributing further to output losses. At
this point, internationally mobile capital may take a decidedly pessimistic view of
4

returns in the debtor country and either stop coming in (a sudden stop) or reverse
itself leaving significant short-term financing gaps.
This reversal leads to more trouble in the financial sector and increased stress
for non-financial firms which are forced to cut investment because of the lack of
financing. Governments may have trouble making interest payments on debt coming
due as capital markets become unwilling to continue rolling debt over. The capital
flow reversal, if large enough, could also force the abandonment of an exchange rate
peg and a large change in the nominal exchange rate. Floating regimes could also see
large depreciation occur under such a scenario.
A view inspired by the events of the late 1990s regarding the impact of such
exchange rate changes is that they may be contractionary.1 This is where original sin
enters the picture. Since the majority of obligations for nearly all countries are in
foreign currency or, in the late nineteenth century, denominated in terms of a fixed
amount of gold, depreciation vis-à-vis creditor countries or breaking the link between
gold and the domestic currency could lead to increases in the real value of debt. This
is a redistribution of wealth from domestic borrowers to their creditors who are
expecting a certain amount of gold or foreign currency.2 When net worth matters for
lending decisions, this decline in the net worth of debtors can lead to another round
of “disintermediation” causing widespread bankruptcies due to liquidity problems. All
else equal, the deterioration to debtors’ balance sheets would be more severe the
greater the amount of fixed interest rate hard currency debt outstanding.
There is some contention in the literature as to whether all is in fact equal.
Goldstein and Turner (2003) have argued that often countries insure themselves
against exchange rate movements. Hard currency debt can be backed up by hard
currency assets. Alternatively, countries could have enough export capacity to offset
changes in liabilities due to exchange rate swings. To gauge the actual effect of
original sin one must take account of the mismatch position or the entire balance sheet
1

Theoretical work by Céspedes, Chang and Velasco (2004) demonstrates how under certain very
plausible circumstances original sin can lead to contractionary depreciations. They also point out that
multiple factors matter for how depreciations interact with economic fluctuations. These are: the level
of original sin, the level of indebtedness, openness to trade and the degree of financial friction. Their
theoretical model divides countries into a financially robust region and a financially vulnerable region.
The latter experience contractionary depreciations.
2
Eichengreen, Hausmann and Panizza (2003) argue that what matters is the aggregate external
mismatch and if all debt is domestic, that one sector’s losses are the others’ gains. Our view however is
that net worth matters. When a debtor’s net worth deteriorates, borrowing capacity falls, and the capital
markets seize up. This is one reason why we should focus on domestic and external hard currency debt
rather than just foreign holdings (or issues) of hard currency debt.
5

position of an economy. We describe how we do this below. Moreover, Reinhart,
Rogoff and Savastano (2003) have argued that original sin is a proxy for a weak
financial system and poor fiscal control. As we describe below, we control for some
of these fundamentals too, allowing for a test of this competing hypothesis.

2.1 The Role of Original Sin
It has been the case since at least the 18th century that debt issued on
international capital markets has been denominated in the currency of the market of
issue and not the currency of the issuing country. In fact a large amount of locally
issued debt was payable in a fixed amount of gold and today is indexed or made
payable in foreign currencies. It has also long been noted that such debt can become
more onerous to repay in the face of depreciations, and that since emerging markets
often face rapid exchange rate depreciations associated with sudden stops and
reversals of capital inflows or very loose monetary policy, these countries are more
often the victims of such a volatile combination.
Over the last ten years, these phenomena have started to be addressed in the
economics literature. Eichengreen and Hausmann (1997) argued that the danger of
exchange rate fluctuations in the face of foreign currency borrowing might oblige
many countries to adopt hard currency pegs. They coined the term “original sin”
because they argued foreign currency denominated debt was imposed by international
capital markets. Nations with poor reputations, and even nations with good
reputations or solid fundamentals, are obliged to issue debt in key international
currencies. In other words, domestic policies or problems were not the only reason
countries could not borrow in their own currencies. Because of “original sin” and the
problems that could be generated in the face of a devaluation, Eichengreen and
Hausmann (1999) argued that exchange rate policy was of the utmost importance
even for those countries where fundamentals and fiscal policies were sound but which
might fall victim to a liquidity run.
One key controversy remains. Exactly how harmful is original sin? Early work
by Eichengreen and Hausmann used mainly anecdotal evidence both on the incidence
of original sin and its effects. Very recent work by the same authors along with Ugo
Panizza (Eichengreen, Hausmann and Panizza 2005) has shown that countries with
6

higher original sin have higher exchange rate volatility and higher macroeconomic
volatility. Flandreau (2003) argues that in the nineteenth century depreciation
increased the debt burden because of original sin which led to sovereign debt crises.
He illustrates this with reference to several cases. But we are unaware of any work
which has attempted to find a systematic empirical association between original sin
and financial crises either in the past or for the period between 1972 and 1997.3
For the historical period, we collected data from various national sources on
hard currency debt and augmented and compared this with data made available by
Flandreau and Zúmer (2004). What we refer to as hard currency debt is debt that
carried a gold clause or was made payable at a fixed rate in a foreign currency.4 Our
measure of original sin is the ratio of this quantity to total public debt outstanding.
This measure is different from the measure we use for the 1972-1997 period.
For this period we use the measure of original sin defined in Eichengreen Hausmann,
and Panizza (2005). This measure of international original sin for country i based on
securities

issued

OS i = max 1 −

by

residents

and

non-residents

internationally

is

Securities issued in currency i
,0 .5
Securities issued by country i

We must be clear that there is a potential problem in the original sin data. It is
only available for the period 1993-1997. We calculate the within country average of
the observations available. We then use this average value for all the years in which a
country appears in the data set. This broadens the time span of our sample, but
obviously creates some measurement error in our key explanatory variable and
complicates any “within-style” regressions. We are confident that the bias imparted is
3

Our conclusions differ from Flandreau’s as we take on a wider set of hypotheses and cases. Empirical
work by Flandreau and Zúmer (2004) which regresses sovereign bond yields on a ratio of interest
service to government revenues and a number of other variables also argues that hard currency or gold
debt was dangerous. Their tests are quite different from ours since our dependent variables are debt
crises, banking crises, or currency crises. Frankel and Rose (1996) examined “currency crashes,”
external debt and exchange rate fluctuations, but their approach to measuring original sin, its impact
and the type of crises considered is different than ours. Specifically, they look at the transmission of
shocks from the core through the interest rate on foreign currency debt.
4
The data appendix from Bordo and Meissner (forthcoming) has more to say about the structure of this
debt. Flandreau and Zúmer (2004) highlight just some of the difficulties in defining this type of debt.
Italian bonds for example had de facto gold clauses for foreigners but not for residents, but de jure gold
clauses for both classes of creditors for a certain proportion of the debt. Likewise, Spain arbitrarily
implemented a residency distinction for manner of repayment around 1900. US debt was sometimes
vague ex ante about the terms of repayment and often repayment was promised “in specie”. Mostly this
was meant to be gold but could have meant silver which secularly depreciated against gold after 1873.
Still our measure is at least a good proxy for the variable of interest.
5
For the 1972-1997 period this measure runs from 0 to 100 while for the historical period it is based
on the 0 to 1 scale.
7

not too severe. This relies on the fact that original sin is extremely slow to move over
time and for most countries it does not move from 100 over the observation period.
Figures below show this country by country and qualitative evidence by Eichengreen
et. al. make this assertion seem reasonable.6
One key difference between markets today and in the nineteenth century is
that recently debt has been issued in quite a few small country currencies by agents
from leading countries allowing opportunities for debt swaps. That is, for some
countries, the numerator and the denominator in the difference term differ
substantially because many other countries issue debt in their currency. To the best of
our knowledge it does not appear that foreigners pre-1914 were issuing debt in other
exotic currencies. In the pre-1914 case, original sin was not reduced through swaps
(Flandreau 2003 p. 20) hence we can restrict attention in the numerator of this
expression to securities issued in local currency (without gold clauses) only by
residents.
The other key difference between our nineteenth century measure and the
contemporary measure that we use is that in the historical period we look at debt
issued in domestic and international markets instead of looking only at international
issues. One reason we view this as important is because many domestic issues of the
day carried gold clauses. As described above, in the case where monetary authorities
devalued the local currency in terms of gold this would have an effect similar to a
depreciation when a country had foreign currency debt. In either event, real debt
repayments for local currency gold clause debt and for foreign currency debt would
both increase.7 Hence, in the early period we do not classify debt as “debt issued in
(local) currency i" if it contained a “gold clause” stipulating a fixed quantity of gold
per unit of local currency payable. Only debt payable in local paper currency, without
mention of the gold-local currency exchange rate upon payment of coupons and
principal, is included in the ratio above. The latter period data leaves out domestically
issued debt.

6

Australia, Canada and South Africa saw large declines in their original sin measures over the 1980s.
Because of this we understate their measures in the 1970s. In the econometrics this is likely to lead to
slight upward bias of the positive effect of original sin on crisis incidence since these countries had few
crises but actually had high original sin.
7
We are finessing the question of what happens to the real exchange rate and prices in general. We
assume here that nominal depreciations are equivalent to real depreciations in the short-run perhaps
because of sticky prices. On the domestic side, we assume going off gold or a depreciation implies a
depreciation of the local currency versus gold and domestic prices are constant over the short run.
8

The question then arises of how related our measures are in the two periods,
and this hinges on how domestic original sin relates to international original sin.
Unfortunately there is not much data available to answer this question. Eichengreen,
Hausman and Panizza (2003) collected data for two dozen countries and show that in
several of these, domestic original sin diverges distinctly from the level of original
sin. But for the most part, original sin and domestic original sin are highly correlated
and so we are comfortable using the international measure.8
Figure 1 shows the ratio of hard currency government debt to total government
debt by country between 1880 and 1913. Our time series plots reveal most countries’
measure of original sin to be fairly constant over time. Some countries’ situations
“worsened”. In the nineteenth century, Japan became more exposed to foreign
currency debt as it entered global capital markets from the late 1890s. Argentina and
Brazil converted local currency paper debt into gold clause debt in the 1890s. Only
Spain and Italy appear to have decidedly decreased their reliance on hard currency
debt relative to internal currency debt. These nations often had floating currencies
throughout the period. As noted by Flandreau and Sussman (2005), their situations
appear similar to those of Russia and Austria-Hungary, countries which had relatively
low degrees of original sin and which also had floating currencies over most of the
period we cover. These are the counter-examples to those who believe that poor fiscal
history, a shaky exchange rate policy and economic backwardness are causes of
original sin. Nearly all of these countries had previous episodes of debt default and
chronically poor fiscal situations.
Figure 2 shows the evolution of the original sin measure for various countries
between 1993 and 1997. We also see the strong persistence in the original sin measure
over these five years. Only Denmark, New Zealand and South Africa seem to have
large changes in original sin while a few other developed countries have mild
changes. The less developed countries and the emerging markets seem to have little
change.
Figure 3 shows the long-run averages in the nineteenth century of our original
sin measure. This also reveals a counterintuitive ranking, but is consistent with
previous findings by Flandreau and Sussman (2005) and Eichengreen, Hausmann and
8

The share of each kind of debt (domestic and external issues) will also obviously matter. This could
be one reason why we find that more developed countries with larger pools of domestic savings and
larger domestic debt markets are able to deal with measures of original sin that are quite high.
9

Panizza (2005). Financial centers have less original sin. Small peripheral countries
have a lot of original sin. Countries with ostensibly rotten fiscal institutions and poor
international track records have intermediate levels of original sin. Notice that Spain,
Russia, Austria-Hungary, Italy and Argentina are all towards the lower middle of the
spectrum. However, some countries with sound fiscal, financial and monetary records,
like Denmark and Sweden also fall into this range. These countries, had financial
institutions that were evolving in the same direction as the core.9
Figure 4 displays the 1993-1997 within country averages of original sin.
Again, a counter-intuitive ranking comes forth if one believes that poor financial
development and a lack of credibility matter for original sin. Amongst the countries
with measures of original sin between 80 and 100, we see highly developed countries
such as Belgium, Finland, Ireland, Singapore and Sweden. At the same time, nearly
all emerging markets except perhaps South Africa also have high levels of original
sin. Figures 3 and 4 then provoke the question: are fundamentals (both those directly
observable and those that are less easy to systematically operationalize) more
important for explaining crisis incidence than the actual level of hard currency debt or
original sin?
2.2 Currency Mismatches
Goldstein and Turner (2004) have argued that currency “mismatches” are the
main potential problem with foreign currency debt. Countries that have foreign
currency liabilities which are not offset by foreign currency assets may be more likely
than countries with more foreign assets to find it difficult to repay their foreign
currency debts in the event of a depreciation. On the margin, changes in the exchange
rate can become a problem the greater the mismatch as local currency assets lose
value in terms of the foreign liabilities. Goldstein and Turner have three key
ingredients to their overall measure of a nation’s mismatch. They first use the
difference between all reported foreign assets and foreign currency liabilities
outstanding. They then divide this measure by exports (or imports if the difference is

9

In Bordo and Meissner (2005) we discuss the qualitative and historical evidence on the evolution of
original sin and present several case studies of crisis experiences.
10

positive) to account for openness to trade.10 For example, (when positive) the
mismatch decreases with exports because a depreciation would likely attract a larger
amount of extra foreign currency resources available to the domestic economy and
thus such a country would be more naturally hedged. Finally they pre-multiply this
ratio by the ratio of all reported foreign currency liabilities to all reported liabilities
outstanding.
Data on government and non-government foreign assets is difficult to
assemble today and probably impossible for the pre-World War I era. In the
nineteenth century, we focus on the government’s mismatch and believe this is a
relatively good proxy for the economy-wide mismatch. The functional form we
choose is different from Goldstein and Turner and slightly closer to that used in
Eichengreen, Hausmann and Panizza (2003).11 For country i we have

.

Mismatch i =

total hard currency debt outstanding - international reserves
exports

For the nineteenth century, our measure of reserves usually only includes gold
reserves held at the central bank, in the banking system or held by the government
treasury. The sources are listed in the appendix to Bordo and Meissner (2005). For
the twentieth century we use international reserves as given in data underlying
Bordo et. al. (2001).
For the twentieth century, we use the total of external debt given in the World
Bank’s Global Development Finance or the level of external debt given by the IMF’s
International Financial Statistics for countries not listed in the former. For the
nineteenth century, total hard currency debt (domestic and international issues) is
10

Goldstein and Turner choose a functional form so that the boost to exports from a depreciation
improves a nation’s balance sheet. Though the Goldstein and Turner metric (and our version of theirs)
is one measure of the balance sheet position, it is not the ideal measure of a nation’s balance sheet.
There are omitted ingredients that could make a difference to the balance sheet. For example, for this
period, one could theoretically refine this measure by including foreign currency and gold revenues
collected through tariffs, and perhaps foreign assets held in banks. Most of these data would be
impossible to collect for a reasonable number of observations. Functional form is also something for
future research. For comparability we choose a measure as close to the Goldstein and Turner form as
possible.
11
Eichengreen Hausmann and Panizza (2003) report that the correlation between their measure of
mismatch and the Goldstein and Turner measure is 0.82.
11

calculated directly if the data is available or by multiplying the total debt outstanding
by the percentage of total debt that is payable in gold or foreign currencies.12 A
priori, a higher mismatch measure should be correlated with more financial crises. As
such it compares with the Goldstein and Turner measure. Nevertheless, it does take a
slightly different functional form and potentially does leave out a significant fraction
of total assets and liabilities in the economy. The median of our twentieth century
mismatch measure is 0.95 with a standard deviation of 1.3. In the nineteenth century
the values are 0.79 and 2.66.

2.3 Debt Intolerance
A new literature on sovereign financial difficulties has emphasized the role of
past defaults in creating current difficulties. Reinhart, Rogoff and Savastano (2003)
(RRS) have coined the term debt intolerance. This line of research tries to explain
why some countries are able to sustain very high debt to GDP ratios while other
emerging market countries run into debt problems with comparatively low debt to
GDP ratios. Their evidence suggests that past defaults generate poor sovereign
ratings. Countries with worse track records in international capital markets suffer
greater financial fragility due to increased borrowing costs at a given level of debt to
GDP. An alternative view might be that default history or sovereign ratings are
proxies for other underlying structural or institutional problems. Hence we would also
like to control for such fundamentals, as far as possible, to allow for the possibility of
graduation from debt intolerance.
Given these hypotheses, we would like our tests to include a measure of
default history. For the nineteenth century sample, we interact a public debt to
government revenue ratio with an indicator variable that equals one if a country had at
least one default episode between 1800 and 1880. In the twentieth century sample our
debt sustainability measure changes to the debt to output ratio since output data is
12

Goldstein and Turner note that net worth increases with depreciation for net creditors. To get around
the fact that an increase in the denominator of mismatch would decrease the mismatch measure for net
creditors they divide by imports when assets exceed liabilities. For all of the results we present, we
divide by exports. In our nineteenth century sample, we also tried dividing by imports when
appropriate. The two measures have a correlation of 0.999. Our results do not change significantly in
that sample when we divide by imports for those observations with positive numerators.
12

more reliable and our debt measures include more than just government debt. We
interact this ratio with an indicator that equals one if there was a default in the country
between 1824 and 1971. If the increase in the probability of a financial crisis for a
marginal increase in the debt to revenue or debt to GDP ratio is larger for a peripheral
country or a past defaulter, we would argue there is evidence in support of the debt
intolerance hypothesis.

2.4 Other Data and Hypotheses
The literature on predicting financial crises with econometric techniques is
abundant. Our approach is inspired by the pared down methodology of Frankel and
Rose (1996) who looked at currency crashes at the annual level. Many subsequent
papers have made modifications to this early attempt and have largely been
unsuccessful at accurately predicting any type of financial crisis with great accuracy.13
However, some approaches and explanatory variables have done reasonably well in
predicting crises or at least being strongly and statistically significantly correlated
with crises in a way consonant with priors based on economic theory.14
We attempt to control for the union of the variables from the extant literature
that are applicable to the time period at hand. In parentheses we list the variable used
in the 1972-1997 period if it varies from that used in the early period. The list
includes total outstanding government debt divided by government revenue (debt to
GDP), growth in the terms of trade, the trade balance divided by nominal GDP, the
domestic long-term interest rate, an indicator for whether the country maintained a
gold standard (or a pegged exchange rate), growth of the money supply, the ratio of
gold reserves in the banking system to notes in circulation (the ratio of reserves to
M2), and the yield on British long-term bonds (the unweighted average of G7 longterm interest rates).15 The variables used depend on which type of crisis we are
examining and are well indicated in the respective tables. Our sources, and definitions
of these variables are located in the data appendix.
13

See Berg and Patillo (1999) for a broad comparison of some important papers in this literature.
Glick and Hutchinson (2001) explore twin crises in emerging markets, and our methodology to
gauge the interaction between banking, currency and debt crises in part resembles theirs.
15
In previous work we used the deviation of the real exchange rate from the period average but this
variable is rather ad hoc as it is not a real effective exchange rate. It was not terribly informative and
there is a lack of data in the present period so we have dropped it.

14

13

A complete list of the included countries for the basic specifications is also
found in the data appendix. The specifications from the 1880-1913 sample include
roughly 21 countries which were also examined in Bordo, Eichengreen, Klingebiel,
and Martínez-Peria (2001). We have added information on crises and macro data for
nine other countries. These new additions include Austria-Hungary, Egypt, India,
Mexico, New Zealand, Russia, South Africa, Turkey, and Uruguay. However
limitations in availability of the macro data prevent all of these countries from
appearing in each and every specification. For the 1972-1997 sample, he number of
countries that actually appear in the estimations is somewhat counts roughly 36
countries in the typical econometric model.

2.5 Crises, 1880-1913
In Figure 5 we present the frequency of various types of crises (banking,
currency, twin, debt, “third generation” crises and all types of crisis together).16 This
is the number of years a country was in crisis divided by total possible years of
observation. We use the country-year as the unit of observation and eliminate all
country-years that witness ongoing crises from the denominator (except for third
generation crises where we do not eliminate ongoing banking and currency crises) to
come up with a total number for years of observation. We see the pattern found in
Bordo et. al. (2001) in terms of the relative frequency of types of crises. The
predominant form of crises before 1914 were banking crises, followed by currency
crises, twin and then debt crises.17
By comparison, the most recent period seems much more crisis prone
measured in any of these several ways. Today the incidence of currency crises is quite
high and debt crises accompanied by banking and/or currency crises are much more
frequent although still quite uncommon overall.

16
Our crisis dates and the methodology we use to classify years of crisis are listed in the appendix. We
define a crisis as “third generation” if there was a debt crisis accompanied by either a banking crisis
(ongoing or in the first year) a currency crisis or both in the same or previous year.
17
Debt crises were not demarcated by Bordo et al. (2001)

14

Figures 6, 7, 8 and 9 present scatter plots of the percentage of time a country
was in a crisis episode versus our measure of original sin and our mismatch
variables.18 In the pre-World War I era, there appears to be an inverse U relationship
between debt crises and original sin. Countries with intermediate ranges of original
sin seem to take longer to resolve their debt crises than those at either end of the
spectrum. No such pattern is evident in the latest period. In fact there appears to be a
direct positive relationship between the severity of debt crises and the average level of
original sin and similarly for currency and banking crises. But still there is a much
larger variance in experience at the upper levels of original sin. This observation
raises the possibility that countries manage original sin in very different ways.
Also there appears to be a positive relationship between mismatches and the
length of time spent in a debt crisis. At the same time, the scatters in Figures 8 and 9
which feature mismatch on the x-axis seem too chaotic to discern with certainty much
of a pattern. Further conditioning is likely to be important.
As to the “quadratic” or inverse U in the nineteenth century, it seems intuitive
that the financial centers which were more economically developed had fewer crises
than nations like Russia, Argentina and Italy. But what about the countries with high
measures of original sin and a low likelihood of a crisis? These data points include
primarily the British offshoots like Australia, Canada, New Zealand and the US but
also small European countries like Norway and Finland. This hump-shaped
relationship is some (unconditional) evidence that original sin is not always related to
more financial fragility. There are three possibilities that might explain this inverse U
pattern. First, some other omitted but observable variable protected these countries
from crises. Second, some unmeasured but time invariant factor helped them to avoid
crises (e.g., strong institutions or the market’s “trust”). Finally there is the possibility
that time-variant unobservable factors such as improvements in the financial system
or the ability to deal with crises as and when they arose are at play.
One might conjecture that these countries avoided crises because of their
strong financial systems and fiscal institutions, especially when compared to the
southern European periphery and the Latin American countries which make up most
of the observations in the middle ground. In the nineteenth century, casual inspection
18

For debt crises we present the “alternative debt crises” series which takes the numerator to be the
number of years in which there was no resolution or international agreement on debt repayment rather
than just the first year of a crisis.
15

of the data suggests that at higher per capita income levels original sin is less likely to
cause debt or banking crises.19 The next section controls for a host of other plausible
factors that might be omitted from this simple scatter plot and illustrates the
interaction between different types of crises.

4. Statistical Findings
Our statistical approach is a basic multivariate summary of the data. We
correlate crisis probabilities with a set of key explanatory variables.20 We use pooled
probit specifications, and the dependent variable is the first year of a debt crisis,
currency crisis, banking crisis or twin crisis. Our data set is an unbalanced panel, and
the observational unit is the country year. We omit country years that include ongoing
crises. Throughout, we control for the lack of statistical independence between
country observations by using heteroscedasticity robust, country clustered standard
errors.21 We first present specifications with as many variables as is feasible and then
as a robustness check we drop the most statistically insignificant variables or we
attempt to avoid possible collinearity problems.22 Finally after using pooled probits
we move to linear probability models with country fixed effects to control for
previously time invariant unobservable variables that could be causing spurious
inferences in the pooled models.
19
The case of Argentina in the late nineteenth century is perplexing in this regard. It was one of the
richest countries in this period and yet the Baring crisis resulted in a major financial and economic
blow to the republic. Our inference that higher per capita income alleviated the danger of original sin
can only be made after disregarding Argentina.
20
Endogeneity of the regressors as well as usual specification problems may be present. We attempted
to mitigate endogeneity biases in un-reported specifications by using lagged values of the explanatory
variables. Results in these cases did not change drastically in qualitative terms. Of course this solution
is only valid if variables are not too persistent. Also, using lags creates measurement error issues which
are likely to be problematic for consistent estimation.
21
We estimated random effects probit models as well but found them to perform weakly as they are
known to do when the number of explanatory variables is large relative to the sample size. The
estimated correlation between within country observations was poorly estimated especially in the
nineteenth century sample. Such specifications are more robust in the later sample and present results
qualitatively very similar to the pooled probits we present. Finally “fixed effects” logit or conditional
logit is a non-starter since many countries do not experience crises in the sample. We have however
estimated linear probability fixed effects models to check the sensitivity of our some baseline models,
and we present thee below.
22
The appendix lists the key variables and their availability for each country so the reader can see what
the various samples look like. The issue of model specification is of course not trivial. We are taking a
decidedly reduced form approach, and we use the econometrics as supplements to the qualitative
theoretical conclusions and historical record.

16

For the most part our finding is that more original sin, when not properly
managed, increases the likelihood of currency banking and debt crises. There is some
evidence that currency mismatches catalyze debt crises by being at the root of
banking and currency crises which then feed through to debt problems. However, in
avoiding debt crises or financial meltdowns there is an important role for the level of
financial and economic development and other hard to measure factors.
For example the positive association between original sin or hard currency
debt on debt crises in both periods and banking crises in the twentieth century is
smaller at the highest levels of per capita income. Without allowing for an interaction
between original sin and this key variable, there is a positive and then a negative
relationship between the ratio of hard currency debt to total debt and the frequency of
debt and banking crises in the nineteenth century. All of this suggests that original sin
may contribute to more financial crises but that sometimes the damage can be limited
as the development process continues.
Our findings point to fairly solid evidence that mismatches are positively
correlated with many types of crises especially in our post-1972 sample. This suggests
that countries can mitigate the dangers of original sin. We also demonstrate that after
controlling for country fixed effects, mismatches seem to be linked to banking and
currency crises in both time periods. Moreover, we also find these types of events
increase the chances of a debt crisis. Thus mis-managed original sin appears to have
an important link to financial blowouts.
As mentioned, we also explore the inter-relation between various types of
crises. We find strong evidence that debt crises are associated with the outbreak of a
currency crisis in both periods. To some extent, the evidence shows that debt crises
are associated with banking crises. An interesting difference between the two periods
arises for twin banking and currency crises. In the nineteenth century, we find that
banking crises and currency crises are positively associated (proxied by
contemporaneous and lagged indicators of each type of crisis) though none of the
coefficients is statistically distinguishable from zero at high levels of confidence. In
the twentieth century, however, we see a negative relationship between the two types
of crises. This evidence presents the possibility that conditional on having a crisis,
episodes of instability were more likely to overwhelm the financial system in the
nineteenth century, whereas today, banking crises are quite unrelated to currency
crashes and debt sustainability.
17

4.1 Debt Crises

Tables 1 and 2 present results from various specifications where the initial
year of a debt crisis is the dependent variable. Table 1 is for the 1880 to 1913 sample
and Table 2 is for the 1972-1997 sample.
Column one of Table 1 presents a comprehensive specification that includes a
variable set as large as possible and which also allows for controls for original sin and
currency mismatches. We see that there is an inverse U shaped pattern in original sin
and in mismatches.23 There is also evidence of debt intolerance. These variables are
statistically significant (at better than the 90 percent level of confidence) at the means
for each of these controls.24 Figure 10 illustrates the shape of the marginal effect for
various values of the hard currency debt ratio with two standard error confidence
bands.
The size of the estimated coefficients on the hard currency debt ratios are also
economically significant. Figure 11 presents the predicted probabilities of a debt crisis
for various values of the ratio of hard currency debt to total debt. We hold all controls
at their mean except the currency crisis indicator and the lagged banking crisis
indicator which take on the value one or zero. By allowing the other crisis indicators
to vary, we demonstrate the strength of the interaction between various types of
crises. Here one can easily see the significance of this measure of original sin
especially in the range of original sin equal to 50 percent where the predicted
probability of having a debt crisis peaks. One also can appreciate the interaction
between banking crises, currency crises and debt crises. At an original sin level of 50
percent, having a banking crisis in the previous year and a currency crisis in the same
23

The reason we include squared terms is twofold: first, the scatter plots suggest there might be such a
relationship; second, including a simple linear term return a coefficient on original sin that is negative
and statistically insignificant. The latter result contradicts the basic theoretical proposition in the
literature and may also arise due to omitted variables biases which we discuss below. The squared term
allows us to readily illustrate these two possibilities simultaneously
24
The statistical significance of the interaction effects and polynomial terms must be approached with
caution. We are interested in the statistical significance of the partial derivative of the probability with
respect to say hard currency debt at various values. We do not report the statistical significance of such
an effect for the debt intolerance interactions or for the interactions of variables with GDP. We do
however present simulated confidence bands and the mean partial effect of original sin arising from the
quadratic in original sin in figures below. These were calculated using code made available by William
Clark at http://homepages.nyu.edu/%7emrg217/interaction.html.
18

year increases the predicted probability of a debt crisis by over 10 times from 0.023 to
0.25. Column 2 pares down the specification dropping the controls for mismatch to
see if multicollinearity is a problem. We still see a similar quadratic form. Column 3
leaves out original sin and leaves in the mismatch variables. Mismatch itself does not
appear to be a strongly statistically significant direct determinant of debt crises in the
nineteenth century.25
The inverse U in original sin says that more original sin is associated with a
higher likelihood of a debt crisis, but those observations with levels of original sin
greater than 50 to 60 percent face a lower likelihood of a crisis despite higher levels of
exposure to hard currency debt. These are the countries in the areas of recent
settlement like Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and the US which had strong
financial systems, good fiscal institutions and which borrowed largely for productive
investments. The possibility of three econometric inference problems arise here:
extreme heterogeneity related to time-invariant characteristics, omitted and
unobservable time-varying characteristics correlated with our explanatory variables
and omitted variables correlated with the included variables that are potentially
observable. We deal with omitted but time invariant factors below, and we see that the
evidence is unclear as to whether these factors are at play. In any case, the inverse U
relationship suggests a division of the countries in the nineteenth century sample into
three groups. The first group includes the financial centers of Europe with low or no
original sin and few crises. The second and third groups consist of emerging market
countries. Countries in the second group possessed stable institutions, strong and
flexible financial systems able to cope with crises (e.g., the US or Japan, Denmark
and Sweden) or intricate correspondent banking relationships and colonial ties (e.g.,
Australia, Canada, and New Zealand). The third group includes the periphery
countries of the Latin American cone and the Mediterranean region with episodes of
fiscal profligacy (Greece and Portugal) or periods of instability in their banking
systems (e.g., Argentina with its new banking laws of the 1880s and Italy prior to the
financial sector restructuring that took place in the 1890s).26
In terms of mismatch, there is evidence that past the mean level of mismatch a
worse mismatch position leads to a lower likelihood of a debt crisis. While the partial
25

This is true even if we exclude the squared mismatch term.
See the capsule histories of these crisis episodes included in Bordo et. al. (2001) for a brief summary
and further reading. Bordo and Meissner (forthcoming) also report in more detail the experiences of the
US, Australia, Brazil and Argentina in the 1890s.
26

19

effects are not highly statistically significant, the point estimates do suggest that on
the way up to the mean mismatch reserve holdings or greater export exposure can
limit the chances of a debt crisis. After the mean, the marginal effect is estimated to
be negative. This could be further substantiation (albeit weak due to the lack of
precision in the estimates) of the idea that other factors that we have not controlled for
such as the ability to deal with and manage crises matter. For example, amongst the
countries with very high mismatch levels we see Portugal, Italy and Greece but also
the US, Australia, and Canada.
Most other variables have signs that fit our priors: more gold reserves relative
to notes outstanding, a larger trade surplus to GDP ratio, not being on the gold
standard, a lower long-term interest rate, and a calm international environment in
capital markets, as measured by the interest rate on British consols, are all associated
with lower probabilities of debt crises. The statistical significance of the coefficients
on these variables varies however.27 There is also evidence as we have seen, that
currency crises and banking crises are positively associated with the outbreak of a
debt default. This gives currency to the balance sheet view of crises discussed above.
We also provide a measure of the fit of the model. This is gauged by the
percentage of actual crises that were predicted to be crisis episodes, and the
percentage of non-crisis years that are predicted to be non-crisis years. We use a
predicted probability of greater than 0.1 to classify a country as having a debt crisis.
This is a low threshold, but debt crises are relatively rare in the raw sample. (The
sample frequency is 0.01.) For the debt crises, the type I errors are fairly small and the
type II errors are mainly concentrated in the country years immediately preceding or
coming after actual crises.28
Table 2 presents the results of similar specifications for debt crises for the
1972-1997 period. Column 1 shows that there is a positive relationship between our
measure of original sin and debt crises. The estimate is not too precise just as one

27

Unreported likelihood ratio tests between the shorter and longer models cannot reject their
equivalence. Perhaps the positive coefficient on the gold standard variable is compatible with theories
that argue that rigid exchange rate policies amplify negative external shocks more than flexible rates.
But since the statistical significance varies a lot by specification, we do not see overwhelming evidence
for any hypothesis suggesting a positive or negative coefficient here. See Edwards (2003) for a wideranging discussion of exchange rate regimes and crises.
28
For other types of crises we fail to correctly classify many crisis episodes even at low thresholds. We
use the 0.1 barrier for currency and banking crises. Obviously our tabulations are sensitive to these
thresholds. Our maximum predicted probabilities rarely exceed 0.2 for any type of crisis.
20

might expect after having looked at the scatter plots. The experience at high levels of
original sin appears to be quite varied even after conditioning on a host of controls.
In column 1 there is no sign of mismatch being a statistically significant
determinant of debt crises and no evidence of debt intolerance. Similar to the
nineteenth century, we do see a positive and statistically significant association
between currency crises and debt crises. Having a currency crisis raises the
probability of having a debt crisis by over 5 percentage points. The point estimates on
contemporary and lagged values of banking crises are positive but not highly
statistically significant.
To take the strain off the sample with so many explanatory variables, we pare
down the specification in column 2 and find that original sin has a positive impact on
the likelihood of a crisis, and it is now slightly more statistically significant. Column
4eliminates the original sin measure and reinstates the mismatch measure to see if
collinearity might have been the reason for the low precision in column 1. Indeed in
column four we see that mismatches increase the susceptibility to debt crises and the
marginal effect is statistically significant. A one point increase in the mismatch ratio
(equivalent to one standard deviation) would imply that the probability of a debt crisis
increases by 0.02.
Column 3 introduces the logarithm of GDP per capita and its square as a
control variable.29 This allows us to show how GDP per capita interacts with original
sin to affect crisis outcomes. When we do this we see that middle income countries,
roughly where the emerging markets would be located, are the most likely to have a
crisis when other control variables are held constant. Figure 12 shows this by
presenting the predicted probability of a crisis for various levels of per capita output
holding original sin at 100 (its maximum and also the modal value). We also compare
those probabilities when the currency crisis indicator is one and zero so as to show yet
again that at any level of output per capita currency crises and debt crises are likely to
come together when original sin is high. It should be noted that the hump shaped
pattern does not disappear when we include the mismatch position along with the
29
We tried simply interacting original sin with GDP per capita as we did for the 1880-1913 period but
the results seemed counterintuitive although we cannot rule out such a specification for any other
reason. We found the marginal effect of original sin was negative and approached zero for higher levels
of GDP per capita. On the other hand the marginal effect of GDP per capita was negative and
approached zero as original sin increased. We also interacted original sin directly with GDP per capita
and its square. The marginal effects were consistent with the idea that original sin’s marginal impact is
largest at intermediate levels of per capita GDP.

21

original sin measure or even by itself. In fact mismatch enters with a negative sign
and is highly statistically insignificant in either specification.
The quadratic hump we see in the predicted probabilities leads us to suggest
that countries can be broken into three categories when original sin is high. First, to
the left, are the poorest countries (e.g., Colombia, Nigeria, and Pakistan) which,
despite suffering from original sin, are not relying on external finance as much as the
countries in the “big push” phase of development (e.g., Argentina, Brazil, Korea,
Mexico, and Taiwan). Then, to the far right, there are the highly developed countries
(e.g., Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Norway, Spain, and Sweden) which because they
are small, or unlucky not to have a key currency, also suffer from liability
dollarization. Nevertheless, either external financing is less significant or they have
the capability to deal with shocks to the financial system in ways we have not
controlled for and hence to avoid crises. The middle income emerging markets which
rely on external financing are the ones most at risk of seeing their hard currency
liabilities interact with currency crashes leading to a debt default episode.
Figure 13 illustrates this four part categorization. Here the “radar” graph plots
variables of interest on each axis and the lines connecting the particular values
represent the ordering of the different groups of countries. We classified countries
into four groups based on GDP per capita and levels of original sin. The first are those
with GDP per capita lower than $2,900 where the average level of original sin
between 1993 and 1997 was 99.9 percent. The second are those with GDP per capita
between $2,900 and $8,100 with an average value of average original sin equal to 76,
and finally two groups with GDP above $8,100 one with an original sin level greater
than 20 percent and also one with less than 20 percent.
Next we chose variables of interest such as the average trade deficit within
each group, the average time spent in a debt crisis, the average predicted probability
of a debt crisis (based on the model in column three of table 2) and the median
predicted probability based on the same model and our mismatch variable. The richest
countries are lower on all five dimensions. The middle income, emerging markets are
highest on these dimensions except for the average predicted probability of having a
debt crisis.30 Trade deficits are twice as high on average in these countries and they
30

This measure is sensitive to the GDP cutoff point. If we lower it slightly then we include a few more
countries like Chile and Venezuela which had debt crises. This reverses the ordering on this dimension.
In any case the difference is not significant..
22

have a median predicted probability twice as high as the less developed countries. .
There are quite a few observations of rich countries with original sin higher than 20
percent (or 50 percent for that matter). So while one might be tempted to argue that
only rich countries were free from original sin and hence have lower probabilities of
a crisis these numbers refute such an argument. It would appear that many of the
richest countries have original sin and still have a low chance of a debt crisis.
Moreover the figure suggests such countries run bigger trade surpluses or lower
deficits and also control their mismatch positions better than the middle income
countries making them even less prone to crisis episodes. Nevertheless it would be
wrong to assume that this is all of the story as the probit results which hold other
factors constant show. Figure 12 illustrates that even after controlling for these factors
middle income countries seem to be more at risk.

4.2 Currency Crises
Column 1 of Table 3 presents an inclusive specification where the dependent
variable is the probability of having a currency crisis between 1880 and 1913. 31 There
are 17 events to be predicted in this sample. None of the variables are statistically
significant at standard levels of confidence except for the gold cover ratio.
Endogeneity is a worry here since quite obviously it would be much lower in the
midst of an attack on a currency.
In terms of marginal effects, we see still see a quadratic in original sin in
column 2, and a positive relationship between the mismatch variable in column three.
Some marginal effects of the other variables have the expected signs while others do
not. However, nothing in column two or three is statistically significant except for the
trade balance to GDP which has a positive sign as it did in the Frankel and Rose

31

As Flandreau and Zúmer (2004) have emphasized, the debt revenue ratio and the original sin
variables can increase when the nominal exchange rate changes and when there is hard currency debt.
To the extent that this supports the argument that a crisis is more likely with a depreciation, then there
is no problem here. But an endogeneity problem could arise if we predict currency crises with variables
that are functions of the nominal exchange rate such as the hard currency debt ratio. To avoid this issue
we tried lagging such variables in the currency crisis specifications. Our results regarding such
variables in the currency crisis regressions are similar in qualitative terms when we use one or two lags
of mismatch, hard currency to total debt and the debt to revenue ratio.
23

(1996) study of the late twentieth century.32 Lagging this variable causes the
magnitude of the coefficient and its statistical significance to fall also suggesting
some endogeneity problems.
The positive coefficient on the mismatch variable suggests that original sin is
dangerous, but that countries that have original sin may be able to avoid currency
crises if they manage to collect adequate reserves or are sufficiently open. Since the
outbreak of a debt crisis seems to be associated with currency crises (see Table 1), this
is weak evidence that poorly managed original sin is indirectly associated with
currency crises.
In Table 4 we present similar specifications that try to explain currency crises
between 1972 and 1997. Here there is evidence that original sin leads to a higher
chance of a currency crisis when we do not control for the mismatch position.
Mismatches however do seem to be strongly associated with currency crises both
controlling for original sin (column one) and not controlling for original sin (column
3). This result is again highly suggestive that proper management of original sin can
help alleviate not only currency crises but the chain reactions leading to debt default
related to balance sheet effects.
The current account is negatively related to currency crises (as is intuitive).
Increases in long-term interest rates lead to more crises as do rapid increases in the
money supply. These marginal effects are all statistically significant throughout.
There is some evidence that a banking crisis in the previous year is associated with a
currency crisis (p-value 0.16).
Overall the models in the nineteenth century fit poorly as judged by the high
Type I errors while the models of the twentieth century make far fewer of such errors.
The opposite is true of type II errors. In the latter sample, far too many currency crises
are predicted. In terms of comparison, it seems as if the most we can say is that
mismatches contribute to currency crises in both periods. At the same time this
comparison is strained because of the high degree of uncertainty surrounding the point
estimates of the marginal effects.

32

Alas, the marginal effect of changes in the current account in their paper was statistically
insignificant. The seemingly counter-intuitive result that net exporters have a higher chance of a crisis
seems to arise from the fact that the small peripheral countries in our sample tend to be net exporters
while GB, France and Switzerland, for example, have highly negative ratios for this variable and had of
course
24

4.3 Banking Crises
In pooled probit specifications there is no overwhelming evidence that
banking crises are associated with original sin and currency mismatches in either
period. However, the evidence is again mixed in terms of statistical significance.
Similar to what we see with debt crises, there appear to be factors that diminish the
impact of original sin. Between 1880 and 1913 we see a quadratic or inverse U as we
did in Table 1. Between 1972 and 1997 we see that the impact of more original sin is
higher in low and middle income countries than in high income countries. There is
evidence of a straightforward positive link between mismatch and banking crises in
the twentieth century.
Column one of Table 5 presents a baseline probit model for banking crises.
Here we see the same inverse U pattern for original sin that we saw with debt crises.
However we cannot reject the hypothesis that the entire marginal effect is zero at
standard levels of confidence.
Columns 2 and 3 of Table 5 re-run the basic specification of column 1 to see if
collinearity between original sin and mismatch contributed to the lack of precision. It
turns out that in neither column are the coefficients much different and their statistical
significance does not change dramatically.33 In terms of fit, all of the models seem
nearly equivalent by the log likelihood values. Only about 20 percent of actual sample
crises are predicted reliably. Most of the other controls have the expected signs but
are not statistically significant except the trade surplus to GDP ratio. We do see
positive marginal effects on the currency crisis indicators but neither of them are
statistically significant at conventional levels.
Table 6 turns to the late twentieth century. In column one we see results
similar to the debt crisis specifications in Table 2. Original sin and mismatch are
positively related to crises but alas they are both statistically indistinguishable from
zero. Column two demonstrates that original sin is not statistically insignificant
because of severe collinearity with the mismatch control. Columns three and four are
more promising in terms of substantive lessons. In column three we tried to see if an
33
One possibility why mismatch is not significant here, while it seems to be in the twentieth century, is
that the measure here relates only to public debt and borrowing. In the twentieth century sample the
measure includes both public and private borrowing. As we shall see, controlling for such
heterogeneity shows mismatch is positively correlated to banking crises in the nineteenth century.

25

interaction between the logarithm of GDP per capita and original sin made the
estimates more precise. Figure 14 illustrates that at higher levels of GDP per person a
100 percent level of original sin is less dangerous. The predicted probability drops by
more than one third when moving from an income level of slightly less than $3,000
(e.g. Mexico, Malaysia, Thailand, Brazil in 1995) to an income level matching
Austria, Canada, Denmark, or the US of roughly $22,000.34 Finally column four
shows that the marginal effect of a greater mismatch is positive and statistically
significant. A one point increase in the mismatch variable would lead to a substantive
increase in the predicted probability of roughly 0.02 percentage points. The other
controls that are statistically significant are the growth of the money supply (positive
coefficient), the trade surplus to GDP ratio (negative) and the long-term interest rate
(positive). We find negative point estimates for the marginal effects of currency crises
and lagged currency crises but these are not close to being statistically significant.
Overall the results again suggest that avoiding mismatches and other unobservables
that may be highly correlated with GDP per capita in some way affect how dangerous
original sin is. We also find no evidence that currency crises cause or are associated
with banking crises in this late twentieth century sample. This final bit of evidence
suggests to us that there is a big difference between banking crises in the nineteenth
century and the twentieth century. Specifically banking crises seem to be isolated
events in the most recent period, and we conjecture they have their roots in regulation,
deregulation and domestic liberalization. In the previous period banking was less
regulated, more open, less protected by a lender of last resort, and there is some very
weak evidence of a more direct connection between currency and banking distress.

4.4 Robustness: Controlling for Country-Level Heterogeneity
In our nineteenth century sample we found some evidence that after a certain
point more hard currency debt relative to the total seemed to be associated with fewer
debt crises and banking crises. In the late twentieth century, we also see some
evidence that original sin interacts in a complex way with GDP per capita. Above we
noted that this finding could be due to unobservables or omitted observables.
34

These figures are measured in real 1989 US dollars.
26

One robustness check is to make sure that these findings are not spurious or
due to the possibility that the level of original sin is correlated with factors or
characteristics of countries we have left out of the analysis. Perhaps those most at risk
take care to protect their financial systems from crises or have effective ways of
dealing with crises despite their high levels of original sin. If these factors were time
invariant, an econometric solution to such a problem is to include country-level
indicator variables or “fixed effects”.
Since this is infeasible to do in a limited dependent variable model with our
particular data configuration, we move to a “fixed effects” linear probability model
estimated by OLS. Table 7 re-specifies the models of column 1 from Table 1, column
1 of Table 3 and column 1 of Table 5 in this way. Like the previous results, the
models fit fairly poorly since there are so few crises compared to non-crisis years.
Many of the coefficients on the basic macro controls are statistically insignificant.
Nevertheless the results regarding the coefficients on the original sin and mismatch
variables are qualitatively very similar to the findings in the previous tables.
For debt crises and banking crises, we find evidence of the very same
quadratic pattern from Table 1 and Table 5. However the marginal effect of the hard
currency debt ratio is not statistically significant.35 We take away three lessons from
column 1 and column 3. The fact that the quadratic shape (i.e., the point estimates on
original sin and its square are positive and negative respectively) does not disappear
suggests that it is unlikely to be time invariant unobservables which are causing the
inverse U. If it were simply a case of omitted time invariant variables we would have
expected the inclusion of fixed effects to reveal a statistically significant and positive
relationship between original sin and crises. At the same time, there are two other
possible interpretations of column one and column three. One is that since original sin
moves relatively slowly over time the fixed effects would naturally be unable to
estimate the impact of original sin on crises. But equally one might also conclude that
hard currency debt is not associated with debt or banking crises once proper controls
are included, and we cannot rule this out. Only more clever identification strategies or
more data will be able confirm which one of these assertions is correct.

35

That is, the true marginal effect of changes in the hard currency debt ratio (at all values of the hard
currency debt ratio) calculated with the analytical standard error of the marginal effect and not the
coefficient on the square term. Again, we used the code supplied by William Clark to calculate these
figures.
27

If one still argued for the inverse U on the grounds that fixed effects are
inefficient and an inappropriate specification, then for the nineteenth century we are
left with the result that time-invariant underlying fundamentals like empire status or
resource endowments probably do not explain how places like the US, Canada,
Australia and Scandinavia managed to carry high original sin and also avoid severe
financial crises. There is also no evidence that a better mismatch position directly
helped avoid debt crises. This suggests the possibility that these places had a more
active approach to managing crises or their financial systems were structured in a way
that helped stave off financial meltdown following a major shock.36 Oppositely there
is little evidence that places like Argentina, Brazil, Greece, Italy, and Portugal faced
financial meltdowns because of time-invariant characteristics such as “bad
government” or institutions or simply because they were in the geographic or
economic periphery.37 Moreover we can observe that financial systems and
institutions change significantly over time within countries. The run up to the
Portuguese debt debacle in 1892 witnessed fiscal excess or the Argentinean financial
system of the 1880s was poorly designed. But in the wake of these crises structural
reforms may have been made that secured a more sustainable financial position in
later decades. To eliminate the quadratic and have the hope of revealing a positive
marginal effect of hard currency debt we would need better controls and indicators for

36

The endogeneity of the level of original sin should be explored and other experiences across time
should be compared. The endogeneity bias would appear to be small. Eichengreen, Hausmann and
Panizza (2003, 2005), and Flandreau and Sussman (2005) take the view that original sin is inversely
related to country size. Having a financial center also decreases original sin. Being large and/or having
a financial center makes for liquid markets in the domestic currency and increases the demand for such
assets in the portfolio of international investors. Because of this, “endogeneity” may be less of an issue
than one might conjecture at the outset. Evidence from Australia, New Zealand and the US in Bordo,
Meissner and Redish (2005) suggests that wars and large shocks that closed international markets and
forced governments into the domestic markets catalyzed the process. Still other factors are obviously
necessary for these factors to be viable explanations.
37

In other un-reported specifications, we tried using proxies for good institutions and financial
development in our probit models. We included the ratio of the money stock to GDP, a British Empire
indicator, a central bank indicator and a branch banking indicator. None of these variables eliminated
the quadratic pattern or gave rise to a conditionally positive relationship between original sin and debt
crises, currency crises or banking crises. In the debt crisis specifications, it is not feasible to estimate
the equations with an empire dummy simply because no included dominion, colony or other member of
the British Commonwealth ever had a debt default in this period. This indicator would be a perfect
predictor of not having a debt crisis. So we are left clinging to the notion that the countries with lots of
original sin like the US Canada, Australia and New Zealand and perhaps the Scandinavian countries
were different along other dimensions than those captured by these proxy variables. Caballero, Cowan
and Kearns (2004) talk about currency-trust and country-trust which could be factors at play here but
which are not easily captured with any one explanatory variable.
28

the robustness of the financial system and so forth. More research is clearly required
here.
For currency crises, the link between a crisis and original sin (or mismatch) is
indirect since the coefficients on hard currency debt are not highly statistically
significant. Rather it turns out that the association between original sin and currency
crises seems to be coming through the outbreak of banking problems in the previous
year. Indeed mismatches seem to be positively associated with banking crises as seen
in column 3 even after controlling for unobservables in this way. The coefficient is
highly statistically significant as well. In column 2 there is evidence that banking
crises do have an impact on currency crises which in turn have a positive impact on
debt crises as seen in column 1. This suggests that good debt management and sound
borrowing practices were at the root of preventing financial meltdown.
We also performed a fixed effects linear probability model for the 1972-1997
period and report these results in Table 8. Given the way we have chosen to control
for original sin by using the 1993-1997 average we are unable to control for this key
variable. The key determinants of debt crises seem to be the debt output ratio, interest
rates and also the existence of a currency crisis. Most of the other coefficients are not
statistically significant.
Importantly we also find that mismatch is positively and statistically
significantly related to currency crises (p-value 0.026), and for banking crises the
coefficient is also positive but only has a p-value of 0.19. We note a similar indirect
connection to debt crises as in the nineteenth century. The chain of logic points to the
following conclusion. Better borrowing safeguards in the form of lower mismatches
could stem the explosion of a currency crisis. Since contemporary and lagged
currency crises appear to be strongly associated with debt crises in column 1 of Table
8, all else equal, it is likely that better mismatches can limit exposure to financial
implosion.
The evidence from controlling for unobservables and country-specific
heterogeneity provides very mixed evidence (at best) for the idea that original sin
itself is the culprit for major financial meltdowns. On the other hand mismatch
matters. Lower mismatches seem to be associated in both periods with fewer
outbreaks of currency or banking crises. Stemming these types of crises assists
countries in avoiding the onset of a debt default or a total financial meltdown. The
presence of original sin makes implementing safeguards important. Reserve
29

accumulation or openness to exports are viable strategies to avoid trouble currency
and banking runs which in turn have a high likelihood themselves of feeding through
to debt crises.

Conclusions
Our central finding is that hard currency debt itself may not always generate a
higher likelihood of a financial crisis. Some countries in the nineteenth century with
very high levels of original sin were less prone to debt crises than those with
intermediate levels. In the late twentieth century, many countries have original sin
levels of 100 percent and have avoided crises. On the other hand, emerging markets
that also suffer from original sin fell victim to debt crises and had high financial
instability.
We find evidence that not backing up hard currency debt with foreign reserves
and having a larger export sector for a given level of hard currency debt can both help
decrease the incidence of debt, currency and banking crises. Mismatches matter. We
have found evidence both before 1913 and since 1972 that they matter for banking
and currency crises. Moreover, since there is evidence that outbreaks of banking and
currency crises are associated with debt crises, mismatches are associated at a
fundamental level with more robust financial systems. The evidence is then that
original sin matters when not properly managed. Reserve accumulation, openness to
international trade and exchange rate policy are all important. Nevertheless our
mismatch measure is far from ideal, and it is somewhat collinear with the original sin
measure. More and better data is the only solution to this identification problem.
Nevertheless Eichengreen, Hausmann and Panizza (2003) argue that original sin is a
second best outcome. If countries cannot issue own-currency debt and then are forced
by market discipline to hold costly reserves to insure themselves against currency
speculation this may not be socially optimal.
The interaction effects we tested for lead us to suggest a division of various
types of countries. Three or four categories seem to be apparent. The financial centers
with low original sin and strong financial fundamentals obviously avoid crises. Other
highly developed countries that are small in terms of global output, and carry high
30

original sin also avoid severe financial crises. In terms of less developed countries,
there are many which are relatively closed to external capital flows or have yet to kick
start the development process. These countries also have original sin like the rest of
the world but are not prone to volatile capital movements. The most dangerous
combination seems to be high original sin in an emerging market. These countries saw
huge capital inflows in the 1880s, the late 1970s and early 1980s and again in the
early 1990s. Their fragility to current account reversals and the virulence of these two
major episodes is no doubt explained in part by exposure to hard currency liabilities.
There is also a bigger picture in terms of the interaction between crises. We
find evidence of connections between banking, currency and debt crises. The balance
sheet view of crises or the third generation type of crisis is as much of a fact of life
today as it was in the late nineteenth century. Given that third generation crises
remain a possibility, the evidence suggests that better balance sheet management will
be necessary to help avoid crises. It will also keep financial turbulence from becoming
a financial catastrophe.
Finally we end on a cautious note. Our results are fragile to the exact
specification we impose and the sample sizes are precariously small. The econometric
techniques and specifications could be further refined as a means to improve
efficiency. The models we estimate are not direct estimates of structural equations.
The original sin data is incomplete and more and better measures will have to be
collected. We need more comprehensive measures that include domestic original sin
and private finance. We also need longer time series of the original sin measure than
those currently available. Once this data has been collected and analysed, our tentative
assertions will face more stringent tests. We offer early conclusions, but to improve
our understanding of the connection between hard currency debt and financial chaos
better data availability is of the utmost importance.
Again, our bottom line is that original sin often makes debt crises more likely and
makes avoiding currency and banking crises more difficult. But the lesson from two
different periods of globalization is that more careful debt management policies and
the development of sound fiscal and financial institutions seem to make it possible for
governments and firms to avoid severe financial crises and economic disaster.

31

References
Beim, David O. & Calomiris, C.W. (2001) Emerging Financial Markets New York:
MacGraw-Hill, 2001.
Berg, Andrew and Catherine Patillo (1999) “Are Currency Crises Predictable? A Test.
IMF Staff papers, vol. 46, no. 2 June.
Bordo, Michael D. (2003) “Market Discipline and Financial Crises Policy; An
Historical Perspective.” Research in Financial Services: Private and Public Policy. vol
15, pp154-182.
Bordo, Michael D., Barry Eichengreen, Daniela Klingebiel, and Maria Soledad
Martinez-Peria (2001) “Is the Crisis Problem Growing More Severe?” Economic
Policy vol. 32 pp 51-75.
Bordo, Michael D. and Marc Flandreau (2003) “Core Periphery, Exchange Rate
Regimes and Globalization” in Michael D. Bordo, Alan M. Taylor and Jeffrey G.
Williamson eds. Globalization in Historical Perspective. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Bordo, Michael D., and Jonung, L. (1996). ‘Monetary regimes, inflation, and
monetary reform: An essay in honor of Axel Leijonhufvud.’ in Inflation, Institutions,
and Information: Essays in Honor of Axel Leijonhufvud (D. Vaz and K. Velupillai,
eds.). London: Macmillan.
Bordo, Michael D. and Christopher M. Meissner (forthcoming) “Financial Crises, 1880-1913:
The Role of Foreign Currency Debt” with Michael D. Bordo in Sebastian Edwards, Gerardo
Esquivel and Graciela Marquez, et. al. eds. (provisional title Growth, Protection and Crises:
Latin America from an Historical Perspective) Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Bordo, Michael D., Christopher M. Meissner and Angela Redish (2005) “How
‘Original Sin’ was overcome: the evolution of external debt denominated in domestic
currencies in the United States and the British Dominions 1800-2000.” in Barry
Eichengreen and Ricardo Hausmann (eds.), Other People’s Money Chicago:
University of Chicago Press
Bordo, Michael D. and Anna Schwartz (1996) “The Operation of the Specie standardEvidence for Core and Peripheral Countries” in de Macedo, Jorge, Eichengreen, B
and Reis, J (eds.) Currency Convertibility: The Gold Standard and Beyond,
Routledge, London.
Caballero, Ricardo, Cowan Kevin and Jonathan Kearns (2004) “Fear of Sudden
Stops: Lessons from Australia and Chile” NBER working paper 10519.
Céspedes, Luis Felipe, Roberto Chang and Andrés Velasco (2004) “Balance Sheets
and Exchange Rate Policy” American Economic Review vol.94 (4) September.
32

Edwards, Sebastian (2003) “Exchange Rate Regimes, Capital Flows and Crisis
Prevention” in Martin Feldstein ed. Economic and Financial Crises in Emerging
Markets. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Eichengreen, Barry and Ricardo Hausmann (1999), “Exchange Rates and Financial
Fragility” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. New Challenges for Monetary Policy
pp. 329-368.
Eichengreen, Barry, Ricardo Hausmann and Ugo Panizza (2003) “Currency
Mismatches, Debt Intolerance, and Original Sin: Why they are not the Same and Why
it Matters.” NBER working paper 10036.
Eichengreen, Barry, Ricardo Hausmann and Ugo Panizza (2005), “The Pain of
Original Sin,” in Barry Eichengreen and Ricardo Hausmann (eds.), Other People’s
Money Chicago: University of Chicago Press
Flandreau, Marc (2003) “Crises and punishment: moral hazard and the pre-1914
international financial architecture” in Marc Flandreau ed. Money Doctors: The
Experience of International Financial Advising, 1850-2000. London: Routledge.
Flandreau, Marc and Nathan Sussman (2005), “Old Sins,” in Barry Eichengreen and
Ricardo Hausmann (eds.), Other People’s Money, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Flandreau, Marc and F. Zúmer (2004) The Making of Global Finance. OECD: Paris.
Data from http://www.eh.net/databases/finance/
Frankel, Jeff and Andrew K. Rose (1996) “Currency Crashes in Emerging Markets:
An Empirical Treatment” (with Jeffrey Frankel), The Journal of International
Economics.
Glick, Rueven and Michael Hutchinson (2001) “Banking and Currency Crises: How
Common are Twins?” in Financial Crises in Emrging Markets R. Glick, R. Moreno
and M.M. Spiegel eds. Cambridge University Press: New York.
Goldstein, Morris and Philip Turner (2004), “Controlling Currency Mismatches in
Emerging Market Economies” Washington: Institute of International Economics.
Meissner, Christopher M. (forthcoming) “New World Order: Explaining the
International Diffusion of the Gold Standard, 1870-1913” Journal of International
Economics.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (2003) “Financial Policies and the Prevention of Financial Crises
in Emerging Market Countries” in Martin Feldstein ed. Economic and Financial
Crises in Emerging Markets. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
33

Obstfeld, Maurice and Alan M. Taylor (2003) “Sovereign Risk ,Credibility and the
Gold Standard, 1870-1913 versus 1925-1931” Economic Journal vol. 113 (487) pp 135
Reinhart, Carmen, Kenneth Rogoff and Miguel Savastano (2003), “Debt Intolerance,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, pp.1-74.

Data Appendix
General notes:
For the 1972-1997 sample most of our macroeconomic variables come from Bordo et.
al. (2001) and sources are described therein. Where a variable was missing we filled it
in according to the descriptions below and in the text.

Debt:
1880-1913: In general we have defined external debt or hard currency debt as the
amount outstanding of long-term debt issued abroad plus the amount outstanding of
domestic gold (or silver) debt. Internal debt refers to the outstanding stock of
domestic paper debt. However in a few cases listed below we have not been able to
discern from the sources how much of the “domestic” or internal debt was payable in
gold. More work will have to be put into these cases. However, one will note that for
these cases the total amount of domestic debt is rather small.
1972-1997: Most data was available in the World Bank’s Global Development
Finance database. This includes many varieties of international obligations0 including
private, official and multilateral debt. We supplemented this with external debt from
the International Financial Statistics.
Long-term interest rates:
1880-1913 This is the interest rate on long-term bonds given by Obstfeld and Taylor
(2003).

34

Exchange rate regimes: Data on gold standard adherence comes from Meissner
(forthcoming) augmented with data from Obstfeld and Taylor (2003)
Default Indicator:
1880-1913: Our default indicator was created if there were one or more defaults prior
to 1880.
1972-1997: Our default indicator was created if there were one or more defaults prior
to 1972.
This data is taken from a spreadsheet underlying Reinhart, Rogoff and Savastano
(2003).
Crisis Dating: As in Bordo et. al ( 2001) we date currency and banking crises using
both qualitative and quantitative evidence. For all countries besides Austria-Hungary,
Russia, New Zealand, South Africa, Mexico, Turkey, Egypt, Uruguay and India we
have relied on the dates of Bordo et. al. We have tried to date currency crises, when
possible, by using an approach based on the exchange market pressure (EMP)
methodology which looks at changes in reserves, the exchange rate and the interest
rate.
Debt crisis dates were based on Beim and Calomiris (2001). Only private
lending to sovereign nations is considered when building those default dates. Not
every instance of technical default is included in the chronology, the authors
identified periods (six months or more) where all or part of interest/principal
payments were suspended, reduced or rescheduled. Some of those episodes are
outright debt repudiations, while others were reschedulings agreed upon mutually by
lenders and borrowers. Also data is taken from a spreadsheet underlying Reinhart,
Rogoff and Savastano (2003).

35

Table 1 Determinants of Debt Crises, 1880-1913
Regressors
Hard currency debt as
a percentage of total debt

(1)
0.075**
(0.031)

(2)
0.061**
(0.030)

(3)
---

Square of hard currency
debt ratio

-0.073**
(0.030)

-0.069**
(0.027)

---

Debt/Revenue

-0.002*
(0.001)
0.009***
(0.003)
-0.221***
(0.018)
0.003
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.0004)
-0.054
(0.044)
0.004
(0.002)
0.017
(0.011)
0.022
(0.017)
-0.031
(0.025)
-0.072**
(0.035)
0.060**
(0.026)
-0.001
(0.008)
0.017
(0.013)
0.049
(0.033)
-4.11
(3.52)
530
83.3
98
0.64
-11.93

-0.001
(0.001)
0.003
(0.002)
-0.058
(0.062)
---

-0.001
(0.002)
0.005*
(0.003)
-0.129*
(0.074)
0.005
(0.005)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.002
(0.058)
0.005*
(0.003)
0.021
(0.017)
0.015
(0.012)
-0.023
(0.016)
-0.057**
(0.027)
0.075*
(0.041)
0.0004
(0.010)
0.038
(0.031)
0.015
(0.017)
-6.33
(2.77)**
530
83.3
98.8
0.56
-14.3

Debt/Revenue*Pre-1880 Default
Pre-1880 Default
Mismatch
Square of mismatch
Trade balance/GDP
Long-term interest rate
Consol interest rate
Gold standard dummy
Growth of the money supply
Gold reserves/notes in circulation
Currency crisis in t
Currency crisis in t- 1
Banking crisis in t
Banking crisis in t- 1
constant
Number of obs
Percentage of Correct Positives
Percentage of Correct Negatives
Psuedo R-squared
log-likelihood value

--0.002
(0.055)
0.003**
(0.001)
0.014
(0.016)
0.006
(0.013)
-0.020
(0.017)
-0.034
(0.028)
0.031
(0.022)
0.012
(0.016)
-0.004
(0.010)
0.034
(0.021)
-4.72
(2.35)**
530
66.7
98.6
0.50
-16.3

Notes: Dependent variable is a binary indicator for a debt crisis. Marginal effects of variables on
the probability of a crisis are reported. Robust clustered standard errors
are in parentheses. See the text for precise definitions of variables. Positive signifies crisis year; * pvalue < 0.1; ** p-value < 0.05; *** p-value < 0.01

36

Table 2 Determinants of Debt Crises, 1972-1997
Regressors
Original Sin
Debt/Output
Debt/Output*Pre-1970 Default
Pre-1970 Default
Mismatch
ln (real GDP per capita)
square of ln (real GDP per capita)
Trade balance/GDP
Long-term interest rate
G7 average long term interest rate
Pegged exchange rate regime
Currency crisis in t
Currency crisis in t-1
Banking crisis in t
Banking crisis in t-1
constant
Number of obs
Percentage of Correct Positives
Percentage of Correct Negatives
Psuedo R-squared
log-likelihood value

(1)
0.016*
(0.010)
0.001***
(0.0002)
0.0001
(0.0002)
-0.034
(0.043)
-0.003
(0.006)
---

(2)
0.008*
(0.005)
0.001***
(0.0001)
---

(3)
0.002
(0.002)
0.001***
(0.0001)
---

(4)
---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

0.002
(0.001)
0.009***
(0.003)
0.004
(0.004)
-0.033***
(0.009)
0.053*
(0.030)
0.045
(0.028)
-0.000
(0.016)
0.020
(0.018)
-26.68
(9.69)
520
82.3
93.8
0.50
-37.82

0.002
(0.001)
0.006**
(0.003)
0.004
(0.004)
-0.025***
(0.007)
0.049*
(0.029)
0.034
(0.023)
0.005
(0.015)
0.016
(0.017)
-26.77
(9.69)
530
82.3
93.9
0.49
-37.8

0.316**
(0.145)
-0.019**
(0.009)
0.001
(0.001)
0.001
(0.004)
0.005
(0.158)
-0.018***
(0.005)
0.054**
(0.026)
0.024
(0.015)
0.009
(0.013)
0.014
(0.016)
-52.17
(17.44)
524
93.75
95.4
.54
-32.33

0.020***
(0.006)
---

-----

---0.0001
(0.002)
0.005**
(0.002)
0.007***
(0.003)
-0.008
(0.015)
0.061*
(0.036)
0.071**
(0.033)
0.010
(0.018)
0.002
(0.022)
-4.42
(0.63)
571
50
91.1
0.25
-64.55

Notes: Dependent variable is a binary indicator for a debt crisis. Marginal effects of variables on the probability of a
crisis are reported. Robust clustered standard errors are in parentheses.
See the text for precise definitions of variables. Positive signifies crisis year; * p-value < 0.1; ** p-value < 0.05; *** pvalue < 0.01

37

Table 3 Determinants of Currency Crises, 1880-1913
Regressors
(1)

(2)

(3)

Hard currency debt as
a percentage of total debt

-0.009
(0.057)

0.019
(0.044)

---

Square of hard currency
debt ratio

-0.003
(0.061)

-0.011
(0.047)

---

Mismatch

0.002
(0.003)
-0.002
(0.003)
0.524
(0.374)
0.138
(0.101)
0.004
(0.004)
-0.004
(0.026)
0.038
(0.025)
-0.051
(0.109)
-0.052*
(0.028)
0.035
(0.052)
0.084
(0.083)
-1.51
(1.27)
500
11.7
94
0.0871
-67.72

---0.001
(0.002)
---

0.003
(0.003)
-0.003
(0.002)
---

0.191**
(0.089)
0.004
(0.003)
0.007
(0.023)
---

0.226***
(0.087)
0.003
(0.004)
0.004
(0.025)
---

-0.041
(0.067)
-0.024
(0.023)
---

-0.041
(0.069)
-0.019
(0.023)
---

---

---

-1.79
(1.05)
555
0
98
0.0479
-72.35

-1.57
(1.05)
555
5.9
98.8
0.053
-71.94

Debt/Revenue
Growth of terms of trade
Trade balance/GDP
Long-term interest rate
Consol interest rate
Gold standard dummy
Growth of the money supply
Gold reserves/notes in circulation
Banking Crisis in t
Banking Crisis in t-1
constant
Number of obs
Percentage of Correct Positives
Percentage of Correct Negatives
Psuedo R-squared
log-likelihood value

Notes: Dependent variable is a binary indicator for a currency crisis. Marginal effects of variables on
the probability of a crisis are reported. Robust clustered standard errors
are in parentheses. See the text for precise definitions of variables. Positive signifies crisis year. * pvalue < 0.1; ** p-value < 0.05; *** p-value < 0.01

38

Table 4 Determinants of Currency Crises, 1972-1997

Regressors
Original Sin
Mismatch
Debt/Output
Growth of terms of trade
Trade balance/GDP
Pegged exchnage rate regime
Long-term interest rate
G7 average long term interest rate
Growth of the money supply
M2 / Reserves
Banking Crisis in t
Banking Crisis in t-1
constant
Number of obs
Percentage of Correct Positives
Percentage of Correct Negatives
Psuedo R-squared
log-likelihood value

(1)
0.0007
(0.001)
0.040***
(0.013)
0.001**
(0.000)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.007**
(0.003)
0.066
(0.057)
0.022***
(0.007)
-0.012*
(0.007)
0.00005***
(0.00001)
0.007***
(0.002)
-0.038
(0.054)
0.095
(0.078)
-2.83
(0.55)
419
83.6
52.7
0.13
-150.71

(2)
0.001**
(0.001)
---

(3)
---

0.001***
(0.000)
---

0.032***
(0.011)
0.0004
(0.0003)
---

-0.007***
(0.003)
---

-0.007***
(0.003)
---

0.012***
(0.004)
-0.010
(0.007)
0.0001***
(0.00004)
0.007***
(0.001)
---

0.014***
(0.003)
-0.007
(0.006)
0.00006***
(0.00001)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.063
(0.048)
0.096
(0.071)
-1.76
(0.31)
641
77.9
46.1
0.082
-232.44

---2.22
(0.35)
609
89.4
37.4
0.07
-226.56

Notes: Dependent variable is a binary indicator for a currency crisis. Marginal effects of variables
on the probability of a crisis are reported. Robust clustered standard errors

are in parentheses. See the text for precise definitions of variables. Positive signifies
crisis year. * p-value < 0.1; ** p-value < 0.05; *** p-value < 0.01

39

Table 5 Determinants of Banking Crises, 1880-1913
Regressors
Hard currency debt as
a percentage of total debt

(1)
0.018
(0.075)

(2)
0.035
(0.067)

(3)
---

Square of hard currency
debt ratio

-0.024
(0.078)

-0.037
(0.072)

---

Debt/Revenue

-0.002
(0.003)
0.004
(0.003)
-0.592
(0.381)
0.364**
(0.176)
-0.006
(0.022)
0.038
(0.069)
0.025
(0.030)
0.004
(0.005)
0.023
(0.026)
0.073
(0.070)
0.072
(0.075)
-2.75
(0.94)
496
16.6
96.6
0.07
-71.56

-0.0002
(0.002)
---

-0.002
(0.003)
0.004
(0.004)
-0.578
(0.387)
0.356**
(0.163)
-0.010
(0.020)
0.029
(0.072)
0.038
(0.029)
0.004
(0.005)
0.024
(0.025)
0.075
(0.072)
0.073
(0.080)
-2.75
(0.92)
496
16.6
96.4
0.07
-71.63

Mismatch
Growth of terms of trade
Trade balance/GDP
Gold standard dummy
Growth of the money supply
Gold reserves/notes in circulation
Long-term interest rate
Consol interest rate
Currency crisis in t
Currency crisis in t- 1
constant
Number of obs
Percentage of Correct Positives
Percentage of Correct Negatives
Psuedo R-squared
log-likelihood value

-0.542
(0.378)
0.323**
(0.160)
0.000
(0.019)
0.030
(0.071)
0.026
(0.024)
0.006
(0.006)
0.026
(0.026)
0.079
(0.075)
0.068
(0.074)
-2.94
(0.89)
496
22.2
96.8
0.07
-71.99

Notes: Dependent variable is a binary indicator for a banking crisis. Marginal effects of variables
on the probability of a crisis are reported. Robust clustered standard errors are in parentheses.
See the text for precise definitions of variables.
Positive signifies crisis year. * p-value < 0.1; ** p-value < 0.05; *** p-value < 0.01

40

Table 6 Determinants of Banking Crises, 1972-1997

Regressors
Original Sin
Mismatch
Original Sin * ln(real GDP per capita)
ln(real GDP per capita)
Debt/Output
Growth of terms of trade
Trade balance/GDP
Pegged exchnage rate regime
Growth of the money supply
M2 / Reserves
Long-term interest rate
G7 average long term interest rate
Currency crisis in t
Currency crisis in t- 1
constant
Number of obs
Percentage of Correct Positives
Percentage of Correct Negatives
Psuedo R-squared
log-likelihood value

(1)
0.001
(0.001)
0.017
(0.011)
---

(2)
0.001
(0.001)
---

(3)
0.050***
(0.016)
---

---

---

---

-0.0004
(0.0005)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.006**
(0.003)
-0.002
(0.023)
0.00005*
(0.0003)
0.001
(0.002)
0.013***
(0.005)
0.0001
(0.006)
-0.015
(0.032)
-0.021
(0.032)
-3.54
(0.91)
345
40
85.8
0.11
-68.13

-0.0001
(0.004)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.004
(0.002)
-0.008
(0.021)
0.00007***
(0.00002)
0.002
(0.002)
0.011**
(0.004)
0.002
(0.006)
-0.012
(0.031)
-0.023
(0.029)
-3.85
(1.00)
367
40
88.1
0.091
-70.56

-0.005***
(0.002)
0.496***
(0.158)
-0.0003
(0.0004)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.006**
(0.003)
-0.015
(0.020)
0.0007***
(0.00002)
0.002
(0.002)
0.014**
(0.007)
-0.002
(0.007)
-0.012
(0.032)
-0.021
(0.029)
-53.78
(16.6)
367
50
87.3
0.13
-67.18

(4)
--0.020**
(0.010)
-----0.0002
(0.0003)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.003
(0.002)
0.014
(0.021)
0.00006*
(0.00003)
0.00006
(0.00007)
0.008*
(0.005)
0.002
(0.007)
-0.026
(0.028)
-0.032
(0.028)
-2.72
(0.58)
405
32
85.5
0.07
-87.57

Notes: Dependent variable is a binary indicator for a banking crisis. Marginal effects of variables on the probability of
a crisis are reported. Robust clustered standard errors are in parentheses.
See the text for precise definitions of variables. Positive signifies crisis year. * p-value < 0.1; ** p-value < 0.05; *** pvalue < 0.01

41

Table 7 Fixed Effects Estimations, 1880-1913
Regressors
Hard currency debt as
a percentage of total debt

Debt Crises
(1)
0.112
(0.095)

Currency Crises
(2)
-0.142
(0.141)

Banking Crises
(3)
0.158
(0.152)

Square of hard currency
debt ratio

-0.127
(0.093)

-0.084
(0.139)

-0.150
(0.152)

0.017***
(0.005)
-0.001
(0.010)
-0.001*
(0.000)
-0.303
(0.343)
-0.313*
(0.162)
0.046***
(0.007)
-0.013
(0.023)
-0.031
(0.055)
0.040
(0.034)
0.094***
(0.026)
0.089***
(0.027)
0.034
(0.029)
0.011
(0.025)
0.043*
(0.024)
-0.322***
(0.086)
478
0.1
7.86***

0.0001
(0.008)
0.012
(0.009)
---

-0.006
(0.009)
0.027***
(0.010)
---

0.716
(0.577)
0.030
(0.279)
0.002
(0.009)
0.004
(0.039)
-0.116
(0.087)
0.023
(0.059)
-0.0001
(0.044)
---

-0.677
(0.591)
0.405
(0.285)
0.006
(0.009)
-0.076*
(0.039)
0.155
(0.096)
0.021
(0.060)
0.055
(0.044)
0.077*
(0.047)
0.072
(0.050)
---

Debt/Revenue
Mismatch
Square of mismatch
Growth of terms of trade
Trade balance/GDP
long term interest rate
Gold standard dummy
Growth of the money supply
Gold reserves/notes in circulation
Consol
Currency Crisis in t
Currnecy Crisis in t-1
Banking Crisis in t
Banking Crisis in t-1
constant
Number of obs
R-squared
F-stat

--0.041
(0.041)
0.087**
(0.040)
0.103
(0.151)
500
0.0012
1.23

---0.106
(0.153)
496
0.01
2.32***

Notes: Dependent variable is a binary indicator for a banking crisis. Estimation is by OLS with
country indicators. See the text for precise definitions of variables. R-squared
is the overall R-squared. * p-value < 0.1; ** p-value < 0.05; *** p-value < 0.01

42

Table 8 Fixed Effects Estimations, 1972-1997
Regressors
Mismatch
Debt/Output
Trade balance/GDP
Growth of terms of trade

Debt Crises
(1)
-0.001
(0.012)
0.002***
(0.001)
0.001
(0.002)
---

M2 / Reserves
G7 average long term interest rate
Long-term interest rate
Pegged exchnage rate regime
Growth of the money supply
Currency Crisis in t
Currnecy Crisis in t-1
Banking Crisis in t
Banking Crisis in t-1
constant
Number of obs
R-squared
F-stat

--0.007
(0.005)
0.004
(0.005)
0.005
(0.025)
--0.057**
(0.024)
0.069***
(0.023)
0.007
(0.027)
0.034
(0.028)
-0.167***
(0.045)
571
0.09
5.96***

Currency Crises
(2)
0.057**
(0.025)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.009**
(0.004)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.0
(0.0004)
0.003
(0.012)
0.009
(0.011)
0.047
(0.060)
0.00009*
(0.00005)
-----0.038
(0.054)
0.079
(0.056)
-0.148
(0.114)
491
0.05
2.64***

Banking Crises
(3)
0.031
(0.023)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.005
(0.004)
-0.0006
(0.001)
-0.0001
(0.0003)
-0.003
(0.010)
0.012
(0.009)
0.010
(0.050)
0.00009
(0.0001)
-0.016
(0.040)
-0.025
(0.040)
-----0.026
(0.094)
405
0.02
0.77

Notes: Dependent variable is a binary indicator for a banking crisis. Estimation is by OLS with
country indicators. See the text for precise definitions of variables. R-squared
is the overall R-squared. * p-value < 0.1; ** p-value < 0.05; *** p-value < 0.01

43

Australia

Austria

Belgium

Brazil

Canada

Chile

Denmark

Finland

France

Germany

Greece

India

Italy

Japan

Mexico

Netherlands

New Zealand

Norway

Portugal

Russia

South Africa

Spain

Sweden

0

.5

1

0

.5

1

0

.5

1

0

.5

1

Argentina

1880 1890 1900 1910

United Kingdom

United States

Uruguay

.5

1

Switzerland

0

Ratio of Hard Currency Debt to Total Government Debt

Figure 1 Hard Currency Debt as a Percentage of Total Public Debt, 1880-1913

1880 1890 1900 1910

1880 1890 1900 1910

Graphs by country

1880 1890 1900 1910

1880 1890 1900 1910

Year

44

1880 1890 1900 1910

A r ge n tin a

A ust ra li a

A ust ri a

B e lg iu m

B ra z il

C O LO M B IA

CO S TA RIC A

C a na d a

C h il e

C h in a

D en m ar k

E C U AD O R

F in la n d

F r an c e

G HAN A

G e rm a ny

G ree c e

HO N G K O N G

IC E L A N D

I N D IA

0
10 0
50
0
10 0
50
0
10 0
0

50

O riginal S in , bound ed at zero

50

10 0

Figure 2 The Evolution of Original Sin in Sample Countries 1993-1997

1993

1994

19 95

1996

19 97 1993

G ra p h s b y co u n tr y n a m e

199 4

1995

199 6

19 97 1993

1994

1995

199 6

1997 1993

Year

Notes: Data source is Eichengreen, Hausmann, and Panizza (2004).

45

1 994

1995

1996

1997 19 93

1 994

1995

1 996

1997

IN D IA

I N D O N E SI A

IR E L AN D

IS R A EL

It a ly

J AM A I C A

Ja p a n

K O R EA

M AL A YS IA

M E XIC O

N E W Z E AL A N D

N et he r la nd s

N o rw a y

P A KI ST AN

PE R U

P H IL IP P IN E S

P o rt ug a l

S IN G A P O R E

S OU T H A F R I C A

S R I L AN KA

Sp a in

S w ed e n

S w itz e r la nd

T AI W A N

T H A IL A N D

T U R K EY

URUG UA Y

U n ite d K in g d om

U n ite d S ta te s

V E N E Z U E LA

50 100
0
50 100
0
50 100
0
50 100
0
50 100

19 93

19 94 1 99 5 19 96 1 99 7 19 93

19 94

19 95 1 99 6 19 97 1 99 3 19 94

19 95 19 96

Z I M BA B W E

0

Original Sin, bounded at zero

0

50 100

Figure 2 (cont.) The Evolution of Original Sin in Sample Countries 1993-1997

19 93 1 99 4 19 95

19 96 1 9 97

G rap hs by c ou n try n am e

Y e ar

46

19 97

19 93 1 99 4 19 95 1 99 6 19 97

19 93

19 94 1 99 5 19 96 1 99 7

Figure 3 Average Ratio of Hard Currency Public Debt to Total Public Debt, 1880-1913

Average Hard Currency Public Debt to
Total Public Debt

1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00

Country

47

Swit
zerla
n
Germ d
Unite
any
d Sta
tes
Japa
n
Italy
Fra
Unite
d Kin nce
gdom
Portu
ga
Cana l
Aust da
ralia
New Spain
Zea
Neth land
e
Sout rlands
h Afr
Hong ica
Ko
Denm ng
a
Belg rk
ium
Aust
ria
Gree
Sing ce
apor
e
Irelan
Swe d
Indo den
nesia
Finla
n
Norw d
a
Thail y
Philip and
pine
Mala s
y
Arge sia
ntina
Icela
nd
Mexic
o
Taiw
an
K
Vene orea
zue
Pakis la
tan
Chin
a
Chile
Peru
India
Sri L
anka
Braz
il
Colo
mbia
Ghan
a
Zimb
abw
Ecua e
do
Jam r
aica
Israe
l
Tu
Cost rkey
a Ric
Urug a
uay

Average Original Sin Measure

Figure 4 Average Level of Original Sin Between 1993 and 1997
1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

Country

Notes: Data come from Eichengreen, Hausmann and Panizza (2005)

48

Figure 5 Crisis Frequency in Percentage Probability per Year, 1880-1913 vs 19721997.

Percent Probability per year

16
14
12
10
8

1880-1913

6

1970-1997

4
2
0

Banking Currency
Crises
Crises

Twin
Crises

Debt
Crises

Type of Crisis

49

"Third All Crises
Gen."
Crises

Figure 6 Crisis Frequencies By Country versus the Average Level of Hard Currency
Public Debt to Total Public Debt, 1880-1913

0.4
0.35

Debt Crises

0.3

Twin Crises

percentage

0.25
0.2

Currency Crises

0.15

Banking Crises
0.1
0.05
0
-0.05
-0.1
-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Average ratio of hard currency debt to total debt

Notes: Crisis frequencies are calculated by dividing the number of years in which a
country experienced a crisis by the total sample years. Both numerator and denominator
exclude years of ongoing crisis. However, the debt crises series is calculated as the
percentage of the period spent without a resolution of a debt default

50

Figure 7 Crisis Frequencies By Country versus the Average Level of Original Sin,
1972-1997
0.7
0.6

Percent Probability

0.5

Banking Crises

0.4

Currency Crises
Debt Crises

0.3

Twin Crises
Third Gen. Crises

0.2

Alternative Debt Crises

0.1
0
-10

10

30

50

70

90

-0.1
Average Original Sin Measure

Note: Crisis frequencies are calculated by dividing the number of years in which a
country experienced a crisis by the total sample years. Both numerator and denominator
exclude years of ongoing crisis. However, alternative debt crises is the percentage of the
period spent without a resolution of a debt default.

51

Figure 8 Crisis Frequencies by Country versus the Average Level of the
“Mismatch” Measure, 1880-1913

0.4
0.35

Debt Crises

0.3

Twin Crises

percentage

0.25
0.2

Currency Crises

0.15

Banking Crises

0.1
0.05
0
-0.05
-0.1
-10 -9

-8

-7

-6

-5 -4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Average "Mismatch"

Notes: The mismatch variable for debt crises uses interest payments. The mismatch for other types of
crises uses debt outstanding. See text for explanations.

52

Figure 9 Crisis Frequencies by Country versus the Average Level of the
“Mismatch” Measure, 1972-1997

0.7
0.6

Percent probability

0.5
Banking Crises

0.4

Currency Crises
Debt Crises

0.3

Twin Crises
Third Gen. Crises

0.2

Alternative Debt Crises

0.1
0
-0.5

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

-0.1
Average Mismatch

Notes: See notes to Figure 7 and text for definitions.

53

3

3.5

4

Figure 10 Marginal Effect of the Ratio of Hard Currency Debt to Total Debt
0.1

Marginal Effect

0.05

0

c
-0.05

-0.1
0

0.05

0.1 0.15

0.2 0.25

0.3 0.35

0.4 0.45

0.5 0.55

0.6 0.65

0.7 0.75

0.8 0.85

0.9 0.95

Ratio of Hard Currency Debt to Total Debt

Notes: Figures are calculated based on the model in column 1 of Table 1. Currency crisis
indicator equals one, lagged banking crisis equals one and other variables are at their
sample means.

54

Figure 11 Predicted Probabilities of a Debt Crisis, 1880-1913

Predicted Probability of a Debt Crisis

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1

Currency Crisis at t &
Banking Crisis at t-1

0.05

Currency Crisis at t

0
-0.05

no currency crisis at t

-0.1
-0.15
-0.2
0

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Ratio of Hard Currency Debt to Total Debt

Notes: Figures are calculated based on the model in column 1 of Table 1. The
probabilities are evaluated at the sample means of the control variables with the
exception of the currency crisis and banking crisis variables as indicated above.

55

Figure 12 Predicted Probabilities of a Debt Crisis, 1972-1997.

0.2
0.15

Currency Crisis at t
no currency crisis at t

0.1
0.05

1,
09
7
1,
80
8
2,
98
1
4,
91
5
8,
10
3
13
,3
60
22
,0
26
36
,3
16
59
,8
74

0
40
3

Predicted Probability of a Debt Crisis

0.25

real GDP per capita 1989$

Notes: Figures are calculated based on the model in column 3 of Table 2. The
probabilities are evaluated at the sample means of the control variables with the
exception of the currency crisis indicator which is zero or one and output which varies as
displayed.

56

Figure 13 “Radar” Chart Showing the Four-Part Categorization of Countries, 19721997.
Median Predicted Probability of a Debt
Crisis
< $2,900
$2,900 to $8,100
>$8,100 & high OS

1

>$8,1000 & low OS

0.4
Median mismatch
1.58

Avg. Trade Deficit/GDP

00

1.7
0.4 0.04

-0.77

0.41

2.9

6.11

0

0

4
5

Average Predicted Probability of a Debt
Crisis

8
Avg. Debt Crisis Frequency

9

Notes: The figure shows four bands of countries. They are divided on their GDP
measures. The first category being all country year observations where real GDP per
capita is less than $2,900. Low OS means an observation’s average original sin was less
than or equal to 20 percent. High original sin implies a measure of greater than 20
percent. All measures on each axis are on the same scale. Predicted and actual
probabilities are based on the 0 to 100 scale. The predicted probabilities come from the
model estimated in column 3 of Table 2.

57

Figure 14 Predicted Probabilities of a Banking Crisis, 1972-1997
0.09
Predcited Probabillity

0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01

40
3
66
5
1,
09
7
1,
80
8
2,
98
1
4,
91
5
8,
10
13 3
,3
6
22 0
,0
2
36 6
,3
1
59 6
,8
74

0

Real GDP per capita

Notes: Figures are calculated based on the model in column 3 of Table 6. The
probabilities are evaluated at the sample means of the control variables with the
exception of GDP per capita which varies as displayed.

58

Table A.1 Crisis Dates, 1880-1913

59

Table A.1 (continued) Crisis Dates, 1880-1913

Uruguay

USA

UK

Turkey

DC

Switzerland

Sweden

Spain

South Africa

Russia

Portugal

Norway

New Zealand

1880

Netherlands

Mexico

Japan

Year

DC

1881

BC

1882

DC

1883
1884

BC

BC

1885

DC

1886
1887
1888
1889

BC

1890

BC

1891

BC,CC

1892

CC

CC
CC

DC

DC

1893

BC

BC,CC

1894
1895
1896
1897

BC

BC

1898
1899
1900

CC

1901

BC

1902
1903
1904

CC

BC

CC

1905
1906
1907

BC

1908

CC

BC

BC

BC

1909
1910
1911
1912
1913

BC

Note: CC represents currency crises, BC represents banking crises, DC represents debt crises.

60

61

Table A.2 Crisis Dates 1972-1997

1
62

Table A.2 (Continued) Crisis Dates, 1972-1997

1
63

Table A.3 Countries in the Estimation Samples
Countries in the 1972-1997 Estimation Sample

Countries in the 1880-1913 Estimation Sample

Argentina
Australia
Bangladesh
Belgium
Brazil
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cote D'Ivoire
Canada
Chile
Denmark
Ecuador
Egypt
Ghana
India
Indonesia
Jamaica
Malaysia
Mexico

Argentina
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Brazil
Canada
Denmark
France
Germany
Greece

Nigeria
Norway
Pakistan
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Senegal
Sri Lanka
Spain
Sweden
Thailand
Turkey
Uruguay
United Kingdom
United States
Venezuela
Zimbabwe

64

Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Russia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United States

