                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               INTERNATIONALIZATION AND STOCK MARKET LIQUIDITY

                                              Ross Levine
                                            Sergio Schmukler

                                          Working Paper 11894
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11894


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2005




Levine: Brown University and the NBER (ross_levine@brown.edu). Schmukler: World Bank
(sschmukler@worldbank.org). The paper was revised while Schmukler was visiting the IMF Research
Department. We thank Tatiana Didier and Juan Carlos Gozzi Valdez for truly outstanding research
assistance. We are grateful to Franklin Allen and Marco Pagano for very useful and detailed comments. We
also received very helpful suggestions from Gordon Alexander, Luca Benzoni, Stijn Claessens, Peter Henry,
Eduardo Loyo, Ugo Panizza, Valery Polknichenko, Helene Rey, Michael Schill, Frank Warnock, two
anonymous referees, seminar participants at Dartmouth College, the Econometric Society Meetings (Chile),
the NBER IASE Meeting in PUC-Rio (Brazil), the University of Minnesota, the University of Virginia
(Darden School of Business), the University of Zurich, and the World Bank. For help with the data, we thank
particularly Florencia Moizeszowicz and also Pamela Dottin, Monica Erpen, Dori Flanagan, Marina Halac,
Angela Marshall, Konstantinos Tzioumis, Richard Webster-Smith, and Cheryl Workman. Levine is grateful
for generous financial support from the BSI Gamma Foundation. Schmukler thanks the World Bank Latin
American Regional Studies Program and Research Support Budget for ample financial support. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the views of the World Bank. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Ross Levine and Sergio Schmukler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Internationalization and Stock Market Liquidity
Ross Levine and Sergio Schmukler
NBER Working Paper No. 11894
December 2005
JEL No. IG15, F36, F20

                                            ABSTRACT

What is the impact of internationalization (firms raising capital and trading in international markets)
on the liquidity of the remaining firms in domestic markets? To address this question, we assemble
a panel database of nearly 2,900 firms from 45 emerging economies over the period 1989-2000,
constructed from annual and daily data. First, we find evidence of migration. The domestic trading
of firms that cross-list or issue depositary receipts in foreign public exchanges tends to decrease,
while a significant proportion of their trading activity concentrates in international markets. Second,
this migration is negatively related to the liquidity of the remaining firms in their home market
through two separate channels. There are liquidity spillovers within markets, with aggregate
domestic trading activity being positively associated with the liquidity of individual firms in the
same market. Moreover, the proportion of trading abroad is negatively related to the liquidity of
firms in the domestic market.

Ross Levine
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
ross_levine@brown.edu

Sergio Schmukler
World Bank
sschmukler@worldbank.org
1. Introduction

         This paper analyzes the impact of firms from emerging economies that internationalize by

issuing depositary receipts, cross-listing, or raising capital in international equity markets on the

liquidity of the remaining firms in the domestic stock market. Although an extensive literature finds

that internationalization helps these “international firms,” researchers are only beginning to assess the

ramifications of internationalization on “domestic firms,” those firms that do not internationalize.1

Similarly,     although     emerging       market     policymakers        increasingly      express     concerns      that

internationalization is hurting their domestic markets, surprisingly little research examines the impact

of internationalization on domestic firms.2 To evaluate the cross-firm distributional effects of

internationalization, we first examine the relation between internationalization and the trading of

international firms by documenting what happens to a firm’s trading activity and location of this

trading after it internationalizes. We then study whether the trading activity of international firms is

associated with the liquidity of domestic firms. Specifically, we examine whether there are market

externalities: Is aggregate trading activity related to the liquidity of individual firms trading in the

same market? We also test whether the location of trading activity of international firms affects the

liquidity of domestic firms.

         The literature provides conflicting predictions about the relation between internationalization

and the liquidity of domestic firms. Consider first the two-part “migration and spillover” mechanism.

“Migration” means that internationalization induces a shift in the trading of international firms out of

1
  Some examine the volume and liquidity of international firms in domestic markets, e.g., see Hargis (1998), Noronha et
al. (1996), and Pulatkonak and Sofianos (1999). Others study the impact of internationalization on stock prices, e.g., see
Alexander et al. (1988), Foerster and Karolyi (1999), and Miller (1999). Still others analyze asset size, growth, financing
constraints, and the capital structure of firms, e.g., see Pagano et al. (2002), and Schmukler and Vesperoni (2006). See
Karolyi (2006) for a review.
2
  For concerns that local markets are becoming illiquid due to internationalization, see Bovespa, (1996), Federation des
Bourses de Valeurs (2000), Financial Times (1998), Latin Finance (1999, 2004); and The Economist (2000). To
overcome the illiquidity of domestic markets policymakers are trying to come up with new solutions, like the creation of
Novo Mercado in Brazil or the establishment of regional stock exchanges. See World Bank (2004).


                                                            1
the domestic market and into international financial centers. This may occur because international

markets have lower information and transaction costs (Chowdhry and Nanda, 1991; Lang et al.,

2003), lower settlement risk (Velli, 1994), or more efficient risk pricing (Patro, 2000). “Spillover”

means that the aggregate trading in a market is related to the liquidity of individual equities. Using

data from the U.S., Chordia et al. (2000), Hasbrouck and Seppi (2001), and Coughernour and Saad

(2004) find that liquidity is not simply an asset specific attribute; rather, an individual asset’s

liquidity co-moves with market liquidity. Beyond the possibility that common factors influence the

liquidity of all firms in a market, there might be spillovers, whereby aggregate market activity

influences the liquidity of individual firms. Spillovers could occur because of fixed costs associated

with operating a market, like running brokerage firms and clearing and settling transactions. With

spillovers, therefore, the migration of trading of international firms could increase the per-trade cost

of domestic stock transactions and reduce the liquidity of domestic firms. Combined, migration and

spillovers imply that cross-listing or issuing depositary receipts in public international stock markets

hurts the liquidity of domestic firms.

           The internationalization process might affect domestic markets beyond the migration-

spillover channel. If it is more desirable to trade securities in major international financial centers and

if investors are concerned about country-specific risk, then as some firms from a country

internationalize, investors will shift their trading of that country’s risk (as embodied in both

international and domestic firms) out of domestic firms and into international firms in the

international market. Indeed, there is evidence that U.S. investors prefer ADR over non-ADR stocks.3

The resultant shift in investor interest from domestic to international firms could hurt the liquidity of

domestic firms beyond the effect through the reduction in domestic trading of international firms. At

the firm level, internationalization might signal firm quality, which provides an additional mechanism
3
    See, Aggarwal et al. (2005), Bradshaw et al. (2004), and Edison and Warnock (2004).


                                                             2
linking internationalization with a drop in domestic firm liquidity (Stulz, 1999). For example,

internationalization might allow corporations to alleviate agency and informational asymmetry

problems by “bonding” themselves into markets with greater disclosure requirements and stronger

shareholder protection systems (Doidge et al., 2004; Gozzi et al., 2005; Reese and Weisbach, 2002;

Siegel, 2005). Or, internationalization might reduce firms’ cost of capital, by allowing them to

overcome barriers between markets. From this perspective, internationalization provides a signal

about firm quality, as the market is better able to distinguish “good” from “bad” firms (those that do

not internationalize).4 By signaling firm quality, therefore, internationalization could hurt domestic

firm liquidity.

        Other papers, however, question the negative effects of internationalization on domestic

liquidity. Hargis (2000) argues that cross-listings can transform a segmented equity market with low

liquidity into an integrated market with high trading activity and liquidity. Alexander et al. (1987)

and Domowitz et al. (1998) hold that internationalization stimulates domestic trading of international

firms by increasing market integration. Moreover, Halling et al. (2005) argue that foreign trading of

European firms declines after an initial increase, with liquidity returning to the domestic market (the

“flow-back” effect). Also, if internationalization improves transparency, this could increase the

domestic trading of international firms with positive spillover effects for the rest of the domestic

market (Hargis and Ramanlal, 1998). It is also legitimate to question whether the finding of spillovers

in the U.S. market generalizes to emerging stock exchanges and whether investors indeed prefer

international to domestic firms. Thus, the linkages between internationalization and domestic market

liquidity remain open empirical questions.



4
  Cantale (1996) and Fuerst (1998) present models with information asymmetry and establish a signaling equilibrium in
which firms with better prospects are able to distinguish themselves from firms with lower future profitability by cross-
listing in markets with stricter regulatory environments.


                                                           3
        To study the effects of internationalization, we assemble liquidity and trading indicators on

nearly 2,900 firms from across 45 emerging market countries, covering the period 1989-2000. To

measure trading activity, we use yearly turnover, which equals the value of a firm’s transactions in a

market divided by the firm’s market capitalization. Turnover, and similar trade-based indicators, are

frequently used to proxy for liquidity since (i) many countries do not have bid-ask spread information

(especially time series data),5 (ii) it is difficult to collect the daily data for such a large panel of firms

and countries, and (iii) past research identifies a strong link between turnover and firm performance,

industrial expansion, and national growth.6 Nevertheless, since turnover does not directly measure

trading costs or the price impact of transactions, we interpret turnover less as a precise measure of

liquidity and more a as a general index of trading activity.

        We also compute two indicators of liquidity, which are constructed from daily data. First,

Amihud’s (2002) illiquidity index, which equals the ratio of a stock’s absolute returns to its value

traded. Hasbrouck (2005) finds that, within the class of price-impact liquidity estimates, Amihud’s

(2002) illiquidity index is the most reliable proxy of trading costs. Second, we compute the

proportion of days in a year when there are no changes in the price of a security. Since researchers

have used liquidity measures based on this zero return index in recent studies (Lesmond, 2005;

Lesmond et al., 1999), we use it to assess further the relation between internationalization and the

liquidity of domestic firms.




5
  Also, some research argues that turnover can be a better proxy for liquidity than bid-ask spreads due to problems with
measuring spreads. From a theoretical perspective, Amihud and Mendelson (1986) and Stoll (1978a) suggest a direct link
between trading costs and trading volume and holding periods, respectively. Empirically, Atkins and Dyl (1997) and Stoll
(1978b) confirm these predictions. Petersen and Fialkowski (1994) demonstrate the problems with computing accurate
bid-ask spreads. Consequently, a large number papers use turnover and volume-based proxies of liquidity (e.g., Brennan
et al., 1998; Datar et al., 1998; Haugen and Baker, 1996; Rouwenhorst, 1999).
6
  In terms of theory, Levine (1991) models the link between trading activity and both firm and national growth.
Empirically, Beck and Levine (2002, 2004), Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (1998), and Levine and Zervos (1998a)
demonstrate the importance of turnover for explaining firm performance, industrial expansion, and economic growth.


                                                           4
         The results are broadly consistent with migration. When a firm cross-lists or issues depositary

receipts in a public international exchange (e.g., the New York Stock Exchange, the London Stock

Exchange, or NASDAQ), the domestic trading of its shares does not rise; rather, trading tends to

migrate out of the domestic market and into the international market. However, firms that raise

capital abroad without providing an easy vehicle for having their shares traded internationally, tend to

experience an increase, not a decrease, in domestic trading activity.7 Furthermore, an important

fraction of the total trading activity of firms that internationalize into a major public exchanges shifts

abroad. On average, the percentage of trading in the domestic market falls to less that 60 percent after

internationalization, with no significant flow-back effect in our sample.

         The results are also consistent with spillovers: An individual stock’s liquidity is closely

related to aggregate trading activity in its market. The aggregate domestic turnover of international

firms is positively associated with the turnover of domestic firms and negatively associated with both

the Amihud and zero-return illiquidity indexes for domestic firms. Importantly, the positive relation

between the liquidity of an individual domestic firm’s stock and the aggregate trading of international

firms in the domestic market holds when controlling for many time-varying country traits, country

dummy variables, firm-specific characteristics, and the trading activity of that country’s firms in

international markets. Overall, the results are consistent with the migration and spillover view.

Consistent with migration, cross-listing and issuing depositary receipts are associated with a drop in

the turnover of international firms in their domestic markets and a shift of their trading abroad.




7
  For instance, firms that raise money through private placements in the U.S. by means of Rule 144A can only trade
among qualified institutional buyers on the PORTAL system. Firms that issue Level I ADRs trade on the over-the-counter
market (OTC), which is not an organized market or exchange, but rather a network of securities dealers. These markets
tend to provide less liquidity than public exchanges and therefore are less likely to generate migration of trading abroad.
Therefore, we analyze these types of listings separately from cross-listings and capital raisings in major public exchanges
and confirm that they have different effects on the domestic trading of international firms.


                                                            5
Consistent with spillovers, the drop in the turnover of international firms in the domestic market is

associated with a drop in the liquidity of domestic firms.

       Another important finding of the paper is that internationalization is negatively associated

with the liquidity of domestic firms beyond the migration-spillover channel. The fraction of total

trading of a country’s stocks (domestic and international) occurring in international markets is

strongly, negatively related to the liquidity of domestic firms. Thus, not only is there a close

connection between the aggregate domestic trading of international firms and a domestic firm’s

liquidity, but the share of trading occurring in international markets is independently and negatively

linked to the liquidity of domestic firms.

       Our research has both political economy and market microstructure implications. First, we

find that international financial integration can have distributional implications. Firms that

internationalize win: Internationalization boosts the total trading of international firms and they grow

after internationalizing (Gozzi et al., 2005; Levine and Schmukler, 2003). But, domestic firms lose.

The liquidity of their shares falls as other firms internationalize their trading activity. Thus, different

firms are likely to have very different views about public policies related to internationalization. For

instance, if there are high fixed costs to internationalizing and a country lowers legal barrier to

internationalization, then its largest firms will tend to benefit relative to smaller firms for which the

fixed costs represent a comparatively large barrier. Second, we find evidence of spillovers in stock

markets around the world. This has potentially important implications for markets in an era of

globalization. The prevalence of spillovers represents a powerful force encouraging liquidity to

concentrate in a few major financial centers, domestically or abroad.

       This paper’s assessment of the impact of internationalization on the turnover and liquidity of

domestic firms is related to a large literature on internationalization. First, research analyzes the




                                                    6
impact of market integration on economic growth and investment (Bekaert et al., 2005; Henry, 2000;

Levine and Zervos, 1998a,b). In this paper, we do not focus on financial integration broadly defined.

Rather, we examine the impact of the decision of one set of firms to internationalize on the liquidity

of those firms that do not internationalize. Second, as noted above, an extensive literature studies the

effects of internationalization on international firms. Although we contribute to this work by

assessing the connection between internationalization and the trading activity of international firms

using our new database, the focus of our research is different. We concentrate on examining the link

between internationalization and domestic firms.

       Our work builds on two aggregate assessments of financial integration. Moel (2001) and

Karolyi (2004) find a negative association between the fraction of a country’s stocks that issue

American Depositary Receipts (ADRs) and domestic market turnover. Our research makes several

contributions. First, we use firm-level data, follow firms through time, and examine what happens to

firms when they internationalize. Second, by using daily data for each firm, we compute commonly

used proxies of liquidity and assess what happens to the liquidity of individual domestic firms as

other firms internationalize. Third, we disentangle some of the channels through which

internationalization can influence domestic stocks. Fourth, we substantially expand the country

coverage. Our data cover 45 countries, while Karolyi (2004) and Moel (2001) study 12 countries and

28 countries respectively. Fifth, besides examining firms that internationalize by issuing depositary

receipts in New York, we also examine (i) firms that issue depositary receipts in other countries and

(ii) firms that cross-list and/or raise capital in New York and other financial centers. Sixth, we collect

and incorporate time-varying data on the international trading activities of international firms. This

allows us to identify more confidently the independent link between internationalization and

domestic firm liquidity.




                                                    7
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data. Section 3 discusses

the econometric methodology and presents the results. Section 4 concludes.



2. Data

        To assess the connection between internationalization and the liquidity of domestic stocks, we

construct a novel dataset using (i) firm-level data on trading and liquidity in the domestic market, (ii)

data on the international activity of firms, including stock trading in international markets and dates

of cross-listings, depositary receipts issuances, and capital raisings in international equity markets,

(iii) firm-level data on firm attributes, and (iv) country-level data on turnover, macroeconomic,

institutional, and financial conditions. Since the data come from various sources, we match the firm-

level variables on domestic stock market trading and liquidity, the firm-level balance sheet

information, the data on the international equity market activities of each firm, and country-level

characteristics.

        As a measure of trading activity, which is also frequently used by researchers as a proxy for

liquidity, we employ turnover, which equals a firm’s value traded divided by its market

capitalization. The data come from the Standard & Poor’s Emerging Markets Data Base (EMDB),

formerly collected by the International Finance Corporation (IFC) of the World Bank. In cross-

checking with country sources, the EMDB is very accurate. For Argentina, however, we discovered

that the EMDB is inconsistent over time. Thus, unlike previous studies, we circumvent this problem

by collecting the data directly from the Buenos Aires Stock Exchange. The EMDB provides data on

domestic market capitalization and domestic value traded in current U.S. dollars by firm. Although

the EMBD is one of the most comprehensive databases on firm-level trading of equities around the

world, the EMDB focuses on emerging markets and does not include 100 percent of local firms (i.e.,




                                                   8
while varying by country, the EMDB typically covers about 70 percent of market capitalization). We

have sufficient data to compute turnover for 2,875 firms.

       We use daily data from Datastream to construct firm-level measures of annual liquidity for a

broad cross-section of more than 1,000 firms, across 31 countries, over 12 years, totaling almost

1,600,000 firm-day observations. To measure firm-level liquidity, we construct Amihud’s (2002)

illiquidity index and the share of zero-return days. Section 3 defines these two illiquidity variables.

After constructing these measures at a daily frequency, we aggregate and calculate the liquidity

measures on a yearly basis to match the other data. We require that firms have a minimum of 50 daily

observations within a year to compute the illiquidity measures. For the Amihud illiquidity ratio, we

eliminate daily observations with absolute returns over 50 percent (following Lesmond, 2005) and

remove the top and bottom one percent of the daily observations before computing the yearly

measure to control for outliers. In calculating these illiquidity measures, we only use firms with data

on turnover from the EMDB to keep results comparable across tables. Since data on returns is more

easily available than data on trading activity, the number of daily observations used to compute the

zero return measure is significantly higher than that used to calculate Amihud’s illiquidity index,

which requires information on value traded. We use nearly 1,600,000 daily observations to compute

the zero return measure and over 1,050,000 daily observations to calculate Amihud’s illiquidity

index. Despite these differences, we were able to compute both annual liquidity measures for similar

samples in terms of firm and time-series coverage.

       Regarding the international equity market activities of firms, we collect more data than past

studies to provide a more accurate categorization of the internationalization process. While most

papers focus only on the ADR market and ignore internationalization in equity markets beyond the




                                                  9
U.S., we consider a much broader array of international equity markets. The data for identifying and

dating each firm’s international activities come from different sources.

       We start with data from the Bank of New York. Besides the bank’s standard database (the

Complete Depositary Receipt Directory) that contains information on current depositary receipt

activities, the Bank of New York gave us access to their historical databases and reports on (i)

depositary receipt program initiation dates, (ii) termination dates (if any), (iii) capital raisings, and

(iv) trading activity. We complement these data with information from JP Morgan and Citigroup on

ADR program initiation dates. The use of these additional sources helps us to cross-check the data,

obtain missing information, and correct reporting errors. These data form a comprehensive database

on ADR and Global Depositary Receipt (GDR) programs. The historical data start in January 1956,

but the vast majority of programs begins after 1980.

       We augment this information on dating the initiation of international equity market activities

with data from Euromoney, the London Stock Exchange (LSE), NASDAQ, and the New York Stock

Exchange (NYSE). Euromoney provides the dates when firms raise equity capital in international

markets, including cross-listings and issuance of global depositary receipts, which substantively

enhances the accurate categorization of firms as international or domestic. The Euromoney database

covers 8,795 cross-border equity issuance and cross-listing operations from 5,665 firms in 86

countries over the period January 1983 - April 2001. LSE, NASDAQ, and NYSE provide information

on listing dates by foreign corporations.

       Consistent with our objective of assembling a broad database on internationalization, we

classify firms as international if they ever (i) issue depositary receipts, (ii) cross-list, or (iii) raise

equity capital through private or public placements abroad. In the time-series dimension, a firm

becomes international from the first time it issues a depositary receipt, cross-lists, or raises capital




                                                    10
abroad. If it then de-lists, it is considered domestic again. Cross-listings, depositary receipts, and

capital raisings on major public exchanges clearly involve ongoing trading of local firms in foreign

countries. However, private capital raisings or cross-listings on over-the-counter (OTC) markets are

different because they do not provide firms with an easy vehicle for having their shares traded

abroad. Thus, while the issuance of depositary receipts and cross-listing on public exchanges may

involve the two effects discussed in the Introduction (migration and spillovers), cross-listings on

OTC markets and private capital raisings are less likely to generate migration. Therefore, we analyze

these types of listings separately from cross-listings and capital raisings in public exchanges and

confirm that they have a different relation with the domestic trading of international firms.

       We use balance sheet information on each firm to control for firm-specific characteristics that

may influence liquidity. For simplicity, in the results discussed below, we present the regressions

controlling for firm size only, but the results are robust to controlling for other firm traits, e.g., sales

growth and industry dummy variables. We obtain these data from the Worldscope database

(Thomson Financial Company).

       Regarding the country-level trading variables, we compute the aggregate domestic turnover of

international and domestic firms from firm-level turnover data. Additionally, we compute the share of

total trading taking place abroad. To measure total domestic trading, we use aggregate country-level

data on value traded domestically from the EMDB. To calculate trading abroad, we use data on ADR

trading. The dataset comes from the Bank of New York, providing the value traded in U.S. dollars at

the firm level. We then aggregate these data to obtain country-level measures. Data from the LSE and

the Frankfurt Stock Exchange (FSE) on the trading of depositary receipts and cross-listed firms are

not available for our entire time span and, thus, are not included in our dataset. This underestimates




                                                    11
the amount of trading abroad, but it is unlikely to systematically bias the results in any particular

direction.

       We include an assortment of country-level control variables. In particular, we use gross

domestic product (GDP) per capita as a measure of countries’ overall economic development. We

also control for a country’s stock market development by including the aggregate market

capitalization as a percentage of GDP. We also estimated all the regressions including the law and

order index as an independent variable to control for each country’s legal and institutional

environment. The law and order index rarely enters significantly because it is highly correlated with

GDP per capita. Moreover, its inclusion does not affect any of the results reported below. Finally,

since we analyze the impact of firms’ decisions to internationalize, it is important to control for the

stock market openness. Therefore, we include two alternative measures of stock market liberalization.

The first one is a dummy variable which equals one after a country liberalizes its stock market, and

zero otherwise. The data for dating the liberalization of stock markets come two sources: Bekaert et

al. (2005), who present official liberalization dates, and Vinhas de Souza (2005), who constructs an

index of the extent of stock market liberalization for Eastern European countries. We combine these

two sources to get the widest possible coverage. The second stock market liberalization variable

comes from Edison and Warnock (2003) and measures the degree of market integration by estimating

the availability of a country’s equities to foreigners. Note that the two liberalization variables differ in

terms of country coverage. The Edison and Warnock measure covers 29 countries, while we have

data to compute the stock market liberalization dummy for 39 of the countries included in our

sample. As a robustness test, we estimated all the regressions including only firms from those

countries that have data on both liberalization variables (27 countries) and obtained similar results.




                                                    12
         The final dataset covers the period 1989 to 2000, with over 9,000 firm-year observations,

from 45 emerging economies (as classified by the EMDB). To control for the effects of possible

outliers and data entry errors, we eliminate year observations when the dependent variable in a

regression is more than three standard deviations away from the country mean. Appendix Table I lists

the countries included in the study and the number of domestic and international firms per country

used for the dependent variables and to compute the aggregate turnover measures.8 Appendix Table I

also has summary statistics of the liquidity and trading variables. Appendix Table II provides

additional information on the data sources.



3. Methodology and Results

         This section examines the mechanisms through which firms that access international equity

markets may affect the liquidity of firms that do not internationalize. The first part of this analysis

involves testing for migration. Does the trading of a firm’s stock migrate from the domestic to the

international market after it internationalizes? Second, we test for how this migration might affect the

liquidity of domestic firms. In particular, are the aggregate domestic trading activity of international

firms and the share of trading abroad associated with the liquidity of individual stocks traded in the

local market?

3.1. MIGRATION

3.1.1. Migration: Cross-listing and Issuing Depositary Receipts in Public Exchanges

         We first examine what happens to the trading of a firm in the domestic market after it cross-

lists, issues a depositary receipt, or raises capital in an international public exchange. That is, we


8
  The difference in the number of firms used in the regressions and those used to calculate the aggregate measures is
explained by the availability of data on the firm-level characteristics included in the regressions. Also, note that in the
regressions of domestic firms we control for the average domestic turnover of firms that cross-listed or raised capital in
major international exchanges, therefore only these international firms are used to compute the aggregate measures.


                                                           13
examine only firms that create a mechanism to have their shares easily traded in a major international

financial market. In this way, we restrict the sample to firms for which substantial migration is

feasible. We estimate the following specification,

    T jI, c ,t = φ × Aj , c ,t + α × ID j , c ,t + β × TcD,t + γ × STcI,t + θ × Cc , t + δ1 × nc + δ 2 × τ t + ε j , c,t .   (1)

The regressions include country and year effects ( nc and τ t respectively), though these are not

reported in the tables. The regressions are estimated using Newey-West standard errors, reported in

brackets. These standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation within firms. For

robustness, the last column in each table also reports results estimated using standard errors clustered

at the firm level.

             T jI, c , t is the logarithm of one plus the turnover ratio of international firm j from country c in

year t, where the turnover ratio equals the total value traded of firm j’s stock during year t divided by

firm j’s market capitalization.9 The superscript I designates that it is an international firm, which is a

firm that issues a depositary receipt, cross-lists, or raises capital abroad at some point in the sample.

As noted, we further restrict the sample in Table I to firms that cross-list or issue depositary receipts

in public exchanges.

              A j ,c ,t equals the logarithm of the total assets (in U.S. dollars) of firm j from country c in year

t. Since research suggests that large, liquid firms tend to internationalize and since we want to capture

the independent relation between internationalization and local activity, we control for firm size.

              ID j ,c ,t is a dummy variable that equals zero if firm j from country c during year t has not yet

internationalized. It equals one in the year the firm internationalizes and remains one thereafter unless


9
 We use this transformation because the total value traded is sometimes zero. Out of a total of more than 13,200 firm-
year observations with data on turnover in our dataset, there are only 273 observation with total value traded equal to
zero. We estimated all the regressions excluding those observations and obtained results similar to those reported below.
We also estimated the regressions using the log of turnover and obtained similar results.


                                                                           14
the firm de-lists or ends its depositary receipt program. In defining the internationalization dummy,

we use the firm’s first internationalization activity. Thus, if a firm first issues a private placement

abroad and later cross-lists in an international public exchange, this firm is not included in the Table I

regressions. If the estimated coefficient on ID j ,c ,t is negative (i.e., if α <0), then this indicates that

when a firm internationalizes its turnover in the local market tends to fall.

        TcD,t is the logarithm of one plus the average turnover of domestic firms in country c during

year t. Since we are testing whether the domestic trading activity of international firms changes when

a firm internationalizes, we include the trading activity of other firms in the domestic market to

control for the myriad of factors shaping aggregate domestic trading activity. This helps identify the

connection between a firm’s decision to internationalize and its domestic trading activity.

Furthermore, including the average turnover of domestic firms provides information on the relation

between the domestic activity of an individual firm, T jI, c , t , and aggregate market activity. In particular,

a positive coefficient on the average turnover of domestic firms indicates that an individual firm’s

domestic trading activity is positively associated with aggregate trading in the market.

        STcI,t equals the logarithm of one plus the value traded abroad of country c’s international

firms in year t divided by the total value traded in all markets of country c’s international and

domestic firms in year t. Including this variable provides an estimate of the relation between the

degree to which a country’s firms are traded abroad and the domestic trading of a firm’s shares. This

also provides greater power in assessing the independent relation between a firm’s decision to

internationalize and the trading of its shares on the local market.

        Cc ,t is a set of time-varying country characteristics. We include two alternative measures of

the openness of each country’s stock exchanges. The stock market liberalization dummy equals zero



                                                      15
before a country liberalizes and one after a country formally allows foreign investors to invest in

domestic equities. The Edison and Warnock (2003) liberalization measure is the ratio of the market

capitalization of the S&P/IFC Investable Index over the total market capitalization of each country.10

This index provides a quantitative measure of the availability of the country’s equities to foreigners.

We include these indicators in the analyses to control for the possibility that national policies toward

stock market liberalization will affect both domestic trading activity and internationalization decision.

We also control for the country’s level of economic and financial development as measured by GDP

per capita and domestic stock market capitalization divided by the country’s GDP. Thus, we want to

evaluate the relation between a firm’s decision to internationalize and its domestic trading activity

while holding constant country and financial development.

         The regressions reported in Table I and throughout the paper use unbalanced panels. Since the

sample of firms for which we have complete sets of dependent and independent variables varies

considerably over time, using a balanced sample reduces the overall number of observations

significantly. Also, note that within each table the sample of firms varies across specifications, due to

differences in the coverage of the country-level variables used in the regressions. We also estimated

all the regressions holding the sample size constant across specifications and found similar results.

         Table I provides evidence broadly consistent with migration. More specifically, firms that

cross-list or issue depositary receipts tend to experience a drop in domestic trading activity. Across

the different specifications, the internationalization dummy                     (ID )
                                                                                     j ,c ,t   enters with a negative

coefficient. It enters significantly at the five percent level when using Newey-West standard errors

that are robust to heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation at the firm level (regressions 1 – 5) and at the


10
  Edison and Warnock (2003) calculate a smoothed measure that takes into account asymmetric shocks to investable and
non-investable stocks, which would lead to changes in the ratio of market capitalization. They convert this variable into a
capital control measure by taking one less the adjusted ratio. To be consistent with the stock market liberalization dummy,
we converted their capital control measure into a liberalization index by subtracting one from it.


                                                           16
ten percent level when using standard errors clustered at the firm level (regression 6). Critically, we

find that a firm’s domestic trading activity falls after it cross-lists or issues a depositary receipt in an

international public exchange even when controlling for aggregate trading activity in the domestic

market, liberalization of the domestic market, firm size, a number of country characteristics, as well

as country and year dummy variables. The size of the coefficient in regression 5 of Table I indicates

that the average firm experiences a fall of its domestic turnover of about 17 percent after cross-listing

or issuing a depositary receipt in an international public exchange. To compute this, note that the

dependent variable in these regressions is the logarithm of one plus the domestic turnover of

international firms. Since the coefficient on the internationalization dummy is -0.06, the estimated

relation indicates that internationalization is associated with a six percent drop in one plus the

domestic turnover of international firms. Given that the average domestic turnover for the sample of

international firms included in regression 5 is 0.55, this implies that internationalization into a public

stock exchange is associated with a drop of 0.093 or 17 percent in the domestic turnover of the

average firm.

       Furthermore, Table I indicates a strong positive association between the average level of

trading activity by domestic firms in the market and the domestic turnover of the firm that

internationalizes. Average turnover of domestic firms enters positively and significantly in all of the

regressions. This shows that the domestic trading activity of an individual firm is positively linked to

aggregate trading in the market even after controlling for country and year effects, many time-varying

country effects, as well as the size of the firm. The effect is also economically relevant. The size of

the coefficient in regression 5 of Table I indicates that an individual international firm’s domestic

turnover tends to rise by more than five percent when there is an increase in the average turnover of

domestic firms of 10 percent. To see this, note that the coefficient in regression 5 in Table I indicates




                                                    17
that a rise in one plus the average turnover of domestic firms of five percent is associated with an

increase in one plus the domestic turnover of international firms of 2.2 percent. Given that the

average turnover of domestic firms in these regressions is 0.9, this means that an 11 percent increase

in this variable leads to a 6.1 percent increase in the domestic turnover of international firms, where

the average domestic turnover of international firms is about 0.55. After controlling for the

internationalization dummy and average turnover, however, the other variables add little explanatory

power. The only exceptions are the size of the stock market (market capitalization/GDP) and to a

lower extent the Edison and Warnock (2003) liberalization measure.11, 12

3.1.2. Migration: Private Placements and Level I ADRs

         As a robustness check, we examine firms that internationalize in a manner that does not

provide a mechanism for their shares to be easily traded on an international public exchange. Thus, if

migration is driving the earlier results in Table I, we should not observe a negative coefficient on the

internationalization dummy when examining this sub-sample of firms, for which migration is less

likely. More specifically, we examine firms that internationalize (i) through private placements in

international markets or (ii) by cross-listing on the U.S. over-the-counter (OTC) market through

Level I ADR programs. Level I ADRs are quoted on the Pink Sheets Electronic Quotation Service

11
   To estimate whether the variables of interest explain the high R-squares reported in the table, we ran the regressions
using only country and year dummies plus assets and compared this R-square with those of the regressions in the table. In
essence, we compute the partial R-square of the variables on which we are focusing the analysis. This provides a very
conservative estimate because it overestimates the explanatory power of the country and year dummies. Specifically, none
of the relation between domestic trading of international firms and the components of the variables of interest that are
associated with the dummy variables and assets is assigned to the variables of interest. We find that the
Internationalization Dummy and the average turnover of domestic firms account for about 15 percent of the regression R-
square. Running the regressions only with the variables of interest yields an R-square of 0.38.
12
   We also examined the degree to which the association between the domestic turnover of each international firm and the
average turnover of domestic firms arises from time-series or cross-sectional relations. We computed the within and
between R-squares, where the within R-square is the R-square of a regression in deviations from the mean and the
between R-square is the R-square of a cross-sectional regression using the sample averages of the variables. We estimated
each of these regressions excluding and including the average turnover of domestic firms, always including the other
variables in the regression. The results indicate that the average turnover of domestic firms explains more than 10 percent
of the total within-country variation in the data and about 35 percent of the total between-country variation. Thus, the
association between the domestic turnover of each international firm and the average turnover of domestic firms arises
from both time-series and cross-sectional variation in the data.


                                                           18
and/or the OTC Bulletin Board for use by a network of security dealers that make markets in the

particular securities. This arrangement is much more cumbersome and costly than trading on a major

public exchange. Similarly, while private placements under rule 144A in the U.S. are traded on the

electronic PORTAL system among qualified institutions, internationalization in this manner does not

provide a vehicle for firms to have their shares as widely and inexpensively traded as in a major

public stock market. For comparison purposes, therefore, we examine this subset of firms for which

migration will tend to be more difficult than for those that internationalize through cross-listing or

issuing depositary receipts in a public exchange. As above, in defining the date of

internationalization, we use the firm’s first internationalization activity. In terms of estimation, we

use the same specification and econometric techniques as in Equation (1).

       As shown in Table II, internationalization that does not provide a vehicle for trading shares

abroad on organized exchanges is not associated with a reduction in the turnover of the firm’s shares

in the local market. That is, the internationalization dummy does not enter negatively. Rather, we find

that raising capital through private placements abroad or cross-listing on the U.S. OTC market

through Level I ADRs tends to boost the trading of the firm’s shares in the domestic market. This

positive effect is significant at the five percent level in regressions 1-5 and at the ten percent level

when using clustering at the firm level. This positive relation could represent a signaling effect, as

investors in emerging markets increase their trading of firms that access capital in major financial

centers. Although we do not identify the reasons underlying the positive relation between

internationalization and domestic turnover for these firms, this result highlights our early findings on

migration. When firms from emerging markets internationalize in a way that allows their shares to be

traded abroad, they tend to experience a drop in trading activity in their own markets.




                                                  19
         The Table II regressions suggest that the migration results are not driven by reverse causality,

whereby firms internationalize to flee from deteriorating domestic markets. As already noted, we

control for domestic market conditions. Moreover, the Table II regressions show that firms that

internationalize without providing a mechanism to have their shares traded in public markets abroad

experience an increase, not a decrease, in domestic trading activity, which runs counter to the fleeing

argument. Furthermore, Claessens et al. (2005) show that firms from countries with good economic

and institutional fundamentals are more likely to access and trade in international capital markets,

which also runs counter to the view that firms from countries with poor local environments are the

one that internationalize. Thus, these robustness tests and related findings provide further support to

the migration channel.

3.1.3. Migration: Additional Evidence and Comments

         We provide additional evidence on the size of the migration effect and on the total trading

activity of firms that internationalize by examining a subset of firms with detailed trading data in both

domestic and international markets. Specifically, for firms that internationalize by issuing Level II

and III American Depositary Receipts, we have data on the trading of their shares in both their local

market and in New York. For these firms, we assess the degree to which trading actually shifts

abroad after internationalization and what happens to the total trading of a firm’s shares. We use the

same basic specification provided in Equation (1), except that the dependent variable in Table III is

                                                                   (      )
total turnover of international firm j from country c in year t TT jI, c , t , defined as the sum of its value

traded domestically and abroad divided by its market capitalization, and the dependent variable in

Table IV is the fraction of total turnover of international firm j from country c in year t that takes

                  I             T jI, c , t 
                 
place in New York ST j , c ,t =               .
                               TT     I      
                                    j , c ,t 




                                                     20
         Tables III and IV show that (i) the total turnover of a firm soars after it internationalizes and

(ii) the proportion of total trading that occurs in the local market plummets.13 Specifically, the

coefficients in Table III show that the total turnover of international firms increases by around 38

percent following internationalization.14 Recall from Table I that the domestic turnover of

international firms tends to fall after internationalization. Indeed, the estimated coefficients on the

internationalization dummy in Table IV indicate that one plus the proportion of domestic trading of

an international firm falls by about 21 percent following internationalization. Since this ratio equals

two before internationalization (by definition), these estimates imply that the percentage of domestic

trading of international firms falls to about 58 percent after a firm issues a Level II or III ADR.

         The shift of trading to international market endures. That is, in our sample of emerging market

firms there is no significant flow-back effect. In particular, we estimated the regressions from Table

IV using a series of dummy variables that trace out annual patterns following internationalization. We

found that the share of trading in international markets does not decrease over time.

         These findings are consistent with migration. After controlling for many factors, we find that

firms that internationalize by allowing their shares to be traded in major financial centers tend to

experience a drop in the domestic market trading activity of their shares and a rise in total trading

activity, as trading migrates abroad. Also consistent with migration, firms that internationalize

without establishing a vehicle to have their shares traded internationally in major public exchanges do

not experience a drop in their domestic market trading.




13
   Eun and Sabherwal (2003) find that the higher the fraction of trading occurring in international financial centers, the
higher is the contribution of these international markets to price discovery.
14
   Following the same method as above for illustrating the economic magnitudes of these estimated relations, the
estimated coefficient indicates that one plus the total turnover ratio of firm j from country c in year t rises by about 18
percent following internationalization. This increase is large given that the average value of the total turnover of
international firms included in these regressions is about 0.89, which means that for the average firm, total turnover rises
by 38 percent after it internationalizes.


                                                            21
       In these analyses, we focused on trading activity, not liquidity, for two reasons. First, we want

to assess a possible two-step mechanism linking internationalization with the liquidity of domestic

firms. The first step involves migration: Does a firm’s domestic trading activity shift out of the

domestic market and into international financial centers after it internationalizes? Consequently, we

examine trading, not liquidity. Second, it is conceptually difficult to measure the liquidity of a stock

that is traded in more than one market. The majority of the trading could occur in New York, for

example, where the price is established. In this case, there might be no link between trading and

prices in the local market. Therefore, it would be inappropriate to conclude that the local market is

more or less liquid based on price-impact liquidity measures. We now turn to a different issue: the

relation between migration and the liquidity of domestic firms. Does the domestic trading of firms

that have internationalized influence the liquidity of domestic firms as suggested by the migration-

spillover view? Is there a connection between internationalization and domestic market liquidity

beyond the migration-spillover effect? In particular, is the location of trading activity of international

firms associated with the liquidity of domestic firms?

3.2 SPILLOVERS AND THE INTERNATIONAL MARKET

       This section evaluates whether the aggregate trading of international firms in the domestic

market and the share of trading activity taking place abroad affect the trading activity and liquidity of

individual domestic firms. To conduct this test, we begin by examining whether the trading activity

of a domestic equity varies with the aggregate domestic trading activity of international firms. Then,

we use two specific measures of liquidity to assess whether the liquidity of a domestic equity varies

with the aggregate domestic trading activity of international firms. Finding that trading activity and

liquidity of individual domestic firms are positively associated with the aggregate trading activity of

international firms in the local market after controlling for firm, country, and time-specific factors




                                                   22
would constitute evidence of spillovers. We also analyze whether the share of a country’s total

trading taking place abroad affects the turnover and liquidity of individual domestic firms. Finding a

negative relation between the share of trading occurring in international markets and the liquidity of

domestic equities, would show that internationalization has a negative impact on domestic markets

beyond the migration-spillover channel.

3.2.1. Spillovers and the International Market: Trading Activity

               In Table V, we assess whether the turnover ratio of domestic firm j from country c in year t

(T ) is related to the average domestic turnover of public international firms from country c in year
      D
     j ,c ,t



     ( )
t TcI,t . In testing for spillovers, we only examine the domestic trading activity of international firms

that are traded in public markets abroad, as the evidence presented above shows that the domestic

turnover of these firms tends to fall following internationalization. Thus, TcI,t does not include the

domestic trading activity of firms that internationalized through private placements or through the

OTC market.15 The following specification is estimated:

 T jD,c ,t = φ × A j ,c ,t + β × TcI,t + γ × STcI,t + θ × C c ,t + δ 1 × nc + δ 2 × τ t + ε j ,c,t .            (2)

As in the migration regressions, we estimate Newey-West standard errors, which are robust to

heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation within firms, and also report firm-level clustered standard

errors. We include country and year dummy variables as well. Furthermore, we incorporate the same

time-varying firm and country characteristics discussed and defined in the subsection on migration.

By conditioning on these variables, the goal is to identify the independent relation between the

trading of international firms in the local market and the trading activity (and later liquidity) of

individual domestic firms.


15
   The results hold when using the domestic turnover of all international firms. This supports the basic principle of
spillovers: The aggregate activity of a market influences the liquidity of individual shares.


                                                                     23
         The results are consistent with large spillovers. The coefficient on TcI,t enters positively and

significantly at the one percent level in all of the specifications in Table V. The spillover effects are

economically relevant. The size of the coefficient in regression 5 of Table V implies that the average

domestic firm will experience a five percent reduction in its turnover when the average domestic

turnover of international firms falls by 12 percent.16 Thus, the estimated coefficients suggest an

economically large relation between the trading of an individual domestic firm and the aggregate

trading of international firms on the local market.

         We find these spillover effects when controlling for many country and firms characteristics.

In particular, after conditioning on country and year dummy variables, the size of the domestic firm,

the level of economic development, the size of the local stock market, and indicators of stock market

liberalization, we find evidence consistent with spillovers. Furthermore, the estimated size of the

spillover effect does not vary much when using various combinations of these control variables.

         The fraction of trading that occurs in international financial centers enters negatively and

significantly. Even when controlling for many country traits and while controlling for the domestic

trading of international firms, we find that the fraction of trading activity that occurs abroad is

negatively associated with the domestic trading activity of domestic firms. While it is impossible to

pin one interpretation to the coefficient on this variable, the results suggest that something beyond the

migration and spillover channel links internationalization and domestic markets. For example, the

results indicate that as New York becomes a more important trading place for Mexican stocks

(relative to the total trading of Mexican stocks), the turnover of domestic Mexican stocks declines.



16
   The coefficient shows that a five percent increase in one plus the average domestic turnover of international firms leads
to an increase of three percent in one plus the turnover of domestic firms. Given that the average domestic turnover of
international firms (in this regression) is 0.68 and the average turnover of domestic firms is 1.35, these implies that that
the average domestic firm’s stock will experience a five percent reduction in its turnover when the average domestic
turnover of international firms falls by 12 percent.


                                                            24
Thus, according to this measure, internationalization is associated with a drop in the trading of

domestic firms, even after controlling for local market conditions.

               Finally, note that the logarithm of total assets enters negatively in these regressions. This is

because assets are very highly correlated with market capitalization, and the dependent variable

(turnover) has market capitalization in its denominator. In the tables below where we examine

specific measures of illiquidity, we find a negative relation between firm size and illiquidity.

3.2.2. Spillovers and the International Market: Amihud Illiquidity Index

               Next, we examine the impact of internationalization on the liquidity of domestic equities,

using daily data to compute Amihud’s (2002) illiquidity index. Liquidity is a complex concept that is

not observed directly. While many authors use turnover as a proxy for liquidity, turnover does not

directly measure trading costs or the price impact of transactions. Bid-ask spread measures of trading

costs do not exist for the bulk of our sample, so we compute a price-impact measure. Since

Hasbrouck (2005) finds that, within the class of price-impact liquidity estimates, Amihud’s (2002)

illiquidity index is the most reliable proxy of trading costs, we start with this measure.

               Amihud’s (2002) illiquidity index is defined as the average ratio of absolute return to trading

value. Based on daily data, the illiquidity ratio is defined as follows

                1
                           D j , c ,t
                                        ∆Pj ,c ,d ,t
 I j ,c ,t   =
               D j ,c ,t
                           ∑d =1        V j ,c ,d ,t
                                                       .                                                     (3)


Where I j ,c ,t is the illiquidity ratio of firm j from country c in year t, ∆Pj ,c ,d ,t is the percent change in

the stock price of firm j from country c on day d of year t, V j ,c ,d ,t is the value traded of firms’ j stock

from country c on day d of year t, and D j ,c ,t is the number of days for which the ratio can be

calculated for firm j from country c in year t. The index is multiplied by 106 so the results are easier




                                                           25
to read. This index relates the absolute value of price movement to the value of equity transactions.

This measure follows Kyle’s (1985) concept of liquidity, the response of price to order flow.

       We compute this illiquidity index using daily data on share prices in dollars, so that it can be

interpreted as the percent price response to one dollar worth of trading, allowing for comparison

across countries. As an alternative, we also followed the methodology used by Lesmond (2005),

estimating the illiquidity index using daily prices in local currency and then converting the annual

index into dollars using the average exchange rate over the year to allow for a comparison across

countries. We obtained very similar results to those reported below. We use the same specification as

                                                                                           (    )
in Equation (2), except now the dependent variable is Amihud’s illiquidity index I Dj ,c ,t . In our

sample, this illiquidity measure is correlated with turnover. For domestic firms, the simple correlation

coefficient is -0.33 (significant at the one percent level), that is, as turnover increases illiquidity

decreases.

       The results presented in Table VI provide additional evidence for liquidity spillovers. Average

turnover of public international firms in the domestic market (measured in logarithms) enters

negatively and significantly at the one percent level in all of the illiquidity regressions. This suggests

that less domestic trading of international firms is associated with a drop in the liquidity (higher

Amihud illiquidity index) of domestic firm shares. Again, these results hold when conditioning on a

wide assortment of information. Furthermore, the spillover effects from the domestic trading of

international firms to the liquidity of domestic stocks are relevant, though not enormous. The size of

the coefficient in regression 5 of Table VI suggests that the illiquidity index of the typically domestic

firm will jump by about two percent when the domestic turnover of international firms falls by 10




                                                   26
percent.17 Since internationalization is associated with a drop in the domestic turnover of the average

internationalizing firm of about 17 percent (Table I), these estimates suggest a non-negligible link

between internationalization and the liquidity of domestic firms.

         We also find that the illiquidity of a domestic stock is positively associated with the share of

trading occurring in international markets. This holds even when controlling for local market

conditions, including the domestic trading of international firms. Thus, while the results in Table VI

support the hypothesis of spillovers, the results also indicate that as trading abroad increases in

relative terms, the liquidity of domestic firms falls. This effect is independent of spillover effects.

3.2.3. Spillovers and the International Market: Zero Return Illiquidity Measures

         We finally consider an additional measure of the illiquidity of domestic stocks. ZR Dj ,c ,t equals

the fraction of trading days in a year t when a firm’s stock (firm j from country c) experienced zero

returns. As mentioned in the Introduction, the literature has recently used illiquidity measures based

on the proportion of zero-return days. Lesmond et al. (1999) argue that if the value of information is

insufficient to outweigh the costs associated with transacting, then market participants will choose

not to trade, resulting in an observed zero return. Therefore, the proportion of zero returns is

associated with transaction costs. In our data, the proportion of zero-return days is positively

correlated with the Amihud measure and negatively correlated with turnover, with the correlations

being 0.42 and -0.33, respectively, and in both cases significant at the one percent level. Although

there is greater theoretical appeal to using price-impact liquidity measures, such as the Amihud ratio

employed above, we use this additional measure of liquidity as a robustness check. We also created

an additional indicator of liquidity, equal to the fraction of trading days in year t when a firm’s stock

17
   Following the illustrative examples above, the regression estimates suggest that a five percent decrease in one plus the
average domestic turnover of international firms is associated with an increase of one percent in one plus the Amihud
illiquidity ratio of domestic firms. Given that the average domestic turnover of international firms for the sample included
in this specification is 0.71 and the average illiquidity index for domestic firms is 0.81, this means that the illiquidity of
domestic firms tends to rise by two percent when there is a 12 percent decrease in domestic trading of international firms.


                                                             27
(firm j from country c) experienced zero trading, that is zero returns and no trading activity. Holding

other things constant, more days with no trading suggests less liquidity. When we use this as the

dependent variable, we find very similar results. We compute this measure using daily price data in

domestic currency, as returns calculated using data in foreign currency may be affected by exchange

rate volatility.

        The results in Table VII are consistent with spillovers. The domestic trading of international

firms is negatively associated with illiquidity. In particular, there is a negative and significant (at the

one percent level) relation between the proportion of days with zero returns and the logarithm of one

plus the average turnover of public international firms in the domestic market. Thus, a reduction in

the domestic trading of international firms is associated with an increase in the number days that

domestic firms experience zero returns. Moreover, confirming previous results, when trading abroad

as a share of total trading increases, the proportion of zero return days by domestic firms increases,

i.e. domestic firms become more illiquid.



4. Conclusion

        In this paper, we find evidence that supports the view that internationalization has a negative

impact on domestic stock market liquidity. First, the evidence is broadly consistent with the two-part

migration-spillover view of internationalization. When a firm cross-lists or issues depositary receipts

in an international public exchange (e.g., the NYSE), we find that the trading of the firm’s shares

tends to migrate out of the domestic market and into the international market. Furthermore, there is

strong evidence of spillovers in stock markets. The liquidity of individual domestic firms is positively

associated with the aggregate domestic trading activity of international firms even when controlling

for domestic market conditions, country characteristics, and firm traits. Thus, there is some evidence




                                                    28
for policymakers concerns that firms that cross-list or issue depositary receipts in major public

exchanges facilitate the migration of trading out of the domestic market, which hurts the liquidity of

domestic firms.

       Second, we find that migration and spillovers are not the only links between

internationalization and the liquidity of domestic firms. In particular, the aggregate share of trading

abroad is negatively associated with the liquidity of domestic firms. Thus, even when controlling for

the migration-spillover channel and domestic market conditions, a domestic firm’s liquidity is

negatively linked with the proportion of trading from the same country that takes place aboard. The

findings are consistent with arguments that investors seeking to hold country-specific risk shift their

trading of a country’s stocks to lower cost, lower risk international markets when firms from that

country internationalize. This reduces their trading of domestic firms in the local market, with

negative repercussions on the liquidity of these firms. The findings are also consistent with arguments

that internationalization signals that a firm is of comparatively high quality, which might then have

adverse implications on the liquidity of domestic firms. Thus, substantially more research is needed

into decomposing the relation between internationalization and the drop in domestic firm liquidity.

       The estimated effects suggest that internationalization is associated with important

distributional effects. Firms that internationalize experience a substantial increase in the total

(domestic plus international) trading of their shares. However, the migration of their trading out of

the domestic market and into international markets is tied to a substantive drop in the liquidity of

domestic firms. Thus, internationalization is associated with large distributional changes to liquidity

across firms. These effects are relevant because, as shown by Amihud and Mendelson (1986), firm

liquidity influences the cost of capital. It would be valuable for future research to explore more fully

the country, industry, and firm characteristics that drive corporate internationalization decisions and




                                                  29
to investigate whether domestic firms receive countervailing benefits from the internationalization

process.

        The liquidity spillovers in markets around the world documented in this paper are important

by themselves, even beyond the migration of trading out of local markets. These spillover effects

suggest that there is a powerful force for the consolidation of trading within a few markets. This

consolidation may occur both within a country and across international markets. This paper has

shown that for international firms from emerging economies the relevant market might exist outside

the borders of their home markets. On the other hand, Halling et al. (2005) find that for European

cross-listed firms the relevant market is within their home country. These differences suggest that

markets of different sizes and quality may have different “gravitational pulls” on the trading activity

of cross-listed firms. More research is needed to understand the determinants and implications of

these different equilibria.




                                                  30
References

Aggarwal, R., Klapper, L., and Wysocki, P. (2005) Portfolio preferences of foreign institutional

       investors, Journal of Banking and Finance 29, 2919-2946.

Alexander, G., Eun, C., and Janakiramanan, S. (1988) International listings and stock returns: Some

       empirical evidence, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 23, 135-151.

Alexander, G., Eun, C., and Janakiramanan, S. (1987) Asset pricing and dual listing on foreign

       capital markets: A note, Journal of Finance 42, 151-158.

Amihud, Y. (2002) Illiquidity and stock returns: Cross-section and time-series effects, Journal of

       Financial Markets 5, 31-56.

Amihud, Y. and Mendelson, H. (1986) Asset pricing and the bid-ask spread, Journal of Financial

       Economics 17, 223-249.

Atkins, A. B. and Dyl, E. A. (1997) Transactions costs and holding periods for common stocks,

       Journal of Finance 52, 309-325.

Beck, T. and Levine, R. (2004) Stock Markets, banks, and economic growth: Panel evidence, Journal

       of Banking and Finance 28, 423-442.

Beck, T. and Levine, R. (2002) Industry growth and capital allocation: Does having a market- or

       bank-based system matter?, Journal of Financial Economics 64, 147-180.

Bekaert, G., Harvey, C. R., and Lundblad, C. (2005) Does financial liberalization spur growth?,

       Journal of Financial Economics 77, 3-55

Bovespa (1996) Nova York ataca e os mercados reagem, Revista Bovespa, May.

Bradshaw, M. T., Bushee, B. J., and Miller, G. S. (2004) Accounting choice, home bias, and U.S.

       investment in non-U.S. firms, Journal of Accounting Research 42, 795-841.




                                                 31
Brennan, M. J., Chordia, T., and Subrahmanyam, A. (1998) Alternative factor specifications, security

       characteristics and the cross-section of expected stock returns, Journal of Financial

       Economics 49, 345-373.

Cantale, S. (1996), The choice of a foreign market as a signal, unpublished working paper, Tulane

       University.

Chordia, T., Roll, R., and Subrahmanyam, A. (2000) Commonality in liquidity, Journal of Financial

       Economics 56, 3-28.

Chowdhry, B. and Nanda, V. (1991) Multimarket trading and market liquidity, Review of Financial

       Studies 4, 483-511.

Claessens, S., Klingebiel, D., and Schmukler, S. (2005) Stock market development and

       internationalization: Do economic fundamentals spur both similarly?, Journal of Empirical

       Finance, forthcoming..

Coughenour, J. F. and Saad, M. M. (2004) Common market makers and commonality in liquidity,

       Journal of Financial Economics 73, 37-69.

Datar, V. T., Naik, N. Y., and Radcliffe, R. (1998) Liquidity and stock returns: An alternative test,

       Journal of Financial Markets 1, 205-219.

Demirguc-Kunt, A. and Maksimovic, V. (1998) Law, finance, and firm growth, Journal of Finance

       53, 2107-2137.

Doidge, C. A., Karolyi, A., and Stulz, R. M. (2004) Why are firms that list in the U.S. worth more?,

       Journal of Financial Economics 71, 205-238.

Domowitz, I., Glen, J., and Madhavan, A. (1998) International cross-listing and order flow migration:

       Evidence from an emerging market, Journal of Finance 53, 2001-2027.




                                                  32
Edison, H. and Warnock, F., (2004) U.S. investors’ emerging market equity portfolios: A security-

       level analysis, Review of Economics and Statistics 86, 691-704.

Edison, H. and Warnock, F. (2003) A Simple measure of the intensity of capital controls, Journal of

       Empirical Finance 10, 81-103.

Eun, C. and Sabherwal, S. (2003) Cross-border listings and price discovery: Evidence from US-listed

       Canadian stocks, Journal of Finance 58, 549-574.

Federation des Bourses de Valeurs (2000) Price discovery and the competitiveness of trading

       systems.

Financial Times (1998) ADRs prove a double-edged sword, April 6.

Foerster, S. and Karolyi, A. (1999) The effects of market segmentation and investor recognition on

       asset prices: Evidence from foreign stocks listing in the United States, Journal of Finance 54,

       981-1013.

Fuerst, O. (1998), A theoretical analysis of the investor protection regulations argument for global

       listing of stocks, unpublished working paper, Yale University.

Gozzi, J. C., Levine, R., and Schmukler, S. (2005), Internationalization and the evolution of corporate

       valuation, unpublished working paper, Brown University, previously released as NBER

       Working Paper No. 11023.

Halling, M., Pagano, M., Randl, O., and Zechner, J. (2005) Where is the market? Evidence from

       cross-listings, CEPR Discussion Paper No. 4987.

Hargis, K. (2000) International cross-listing and stock market development in emerging economies,

       International Review of Economics and Finance 9, 101-122.




                                                  33
Hargis, K. (1998), When does multimarket trading improve the quality of the primary market?

       Evidence from international cross-listings, unpublished working paper, Goldman, Sachs and

       Co.

Hargis, K. and Ramanlal, P. (1998) When does internationalization enhance the development of

       domestic stock markets?, Journal of Financial Intermediation 7, 263-292.

Hasbrouck, J. (2005), Trading costs and returns for U.S. equities: The evidence from daily data,

       unpublished working paper, New York University Stern School of Business Department of

       Finance.

Hasbrouck, J. and Seppi, D. J. (2004) Common factors in prices, order flows, and liquidity, Journal

       of Financial Economics 59, 383-411.

Haugen, R. A. and Baker, N. L. (1996) Commonality in the determinants of expected stock returns,

       Journal of Financial Economics 41, 401-439.

Henry, P. (2000) Stock market liberalization, economic reform, and emerging market equity prices,

       Journal of Finance 55, 529-564.

Karolyi, A. (2006) The world of cross-listings and cross-listings of the world: Challenging

       conventional wisdom, Review of Finance, this volume.

Karolyi, A. (2004) The role of ADRs in the development and integration of emerging equity markets,

       Review of Economics and Statistics 86, 670 - 690.

Kyle, A. S. (1985) Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica 53, 1315–1335.

Lang, M., Lins, V., and Miller, D. (2003) ADRs, analysts, and accuracy. Does cross listing in the

       United States improve a firm's information environment and increase market value?, Journal

       of Accounting Research 41, 317-345.

Latin Finance (1999) The incredible shrinking markets, September.




                                                34
Latin Finance (2004) Beware of the bull, December.

Lesmond, D. A. (2005) Liquidity of emerging markets, Journal of Financial Economics 77, 411-452.

Lesmond, D. A., Ogden, J. P., and Trzcinka, C. A. (1999) A new estimate of transaction costs,

       Review of Financial Studies 12, 1113-1141.

Levine, R. (1991) Stock markets, growth, and tax policy, Journal of Finance 46, 1445-1465.

Levine, R. and Schmukler, S. (2003) Migration, spillover, and trade diversion: The impact of

       internationalization on domestic stock market activity, NBER Working Paper No. 9614.

Levine, R. and Zervos, S. (1998a) Stock markets, banks, and economic growth, American Economic

       Review 88, 537-558.

Levine, R. and Zervos, S. (1998b) Capital control liberalization and stock market development,

       World Development 26, 1169-1184.

Miller, D. (1999) The market reaction to international cross-listings: Evidence from depositary

       receipts, Journal of Financial Economics 51, 103-123.

Moel, A. (2001) The role of American Depositary Receipts in the development of emerging markets,

       Economia 2, 209-273.

Noronha, G., Sarin, A., and Saudagaran, S. (1996) Testing for microstructure effects of international

       dual listings using intraday data, Journal of Banking and Finance 20, 965-983.

Pagano, M., Roell, A., and Zechner, J. (2002) The geography of equity listing: Why do European

       companies list abroad?, Journal of Finance 57, 2651-2694.

Patro, D. (2000) Return behavior and pricing of American Depositary Receipts, Journal of

       International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money 10, 43-67.

Petersen, M. and Fialkowski, D. (1994) Posted versus effective spreads: Good prices or bad quotes,

       Journal of Financial Economics 35, 269-292.




                                                 35
Pulatkonak, M. and Sofianos, G. (1999) The distribution of global trading in NYSE-listed non-U.S.

       stocks, NYSE Working Paper 99-03.

Reese, W. A. and Weisbach, M. S. (2002) Protection of minority shareholder interest, cross-listings

       in the United States, and subsequent equity offerings, Journal of Financial Economics 66, 65-

       104.

Rouwenhorst, K.G. (1999) Local return factors and turnover in emerging stock markets, Journal of

       Finance 54, 1439-1463.

Schmukler, S. and Vesperoni, E. (2006) Financial globalization and debt maturity in emerging

       economies, Journal of Development Economics 79, 183-207.

Siegel. J. (2005) Can foreign firms bond themselves effectively by submitting to U.S. law?, Journal

       of Financial Economics 75, 319-360.

Stoll, H. R. (1978a) The supply of dealer services in securities markets, Journal of Finance 33, 1133-

       1151.

Stoll, H. R. (1978b) The pricing of security dealers services: An empirical study of NASDAQ Stocks,

       Journal of Finance 33, 1153-1172.

Stulz, R. M. (1999) Globalization, corporate finance, and the cost of capital, Journal of Applied

       Corporate Finance 12, 8-25.

The Economist (2000) Latin America’s stock markets: High and dry, February 19.

Velli, J. (1994) American Depositary Receipts: An overview, Fordham International Law Journal

       17, 38-57.

Vinhas de Souza, L. (2005). Financial liberalization and business cycles: The experience of the new EU

       member states, in: J. Batten and C. Kearney (eds.) Emerging European Financial Markets:

       Independence and Integration Post-enlargement, Elsevier, Netherlands.




                                                 36
World Bank (2004) Whither Latin American capital markets?, www.worldbank.org/laccapitalmarkets.




                                               37
                                                                              Table I
                                              Domestic Trading Activity of International Firms: Publicly Listed Firms
The dependent variable is the logarithm of one plus the turnover ratio in domestic markets of firms that internationalize by allowing their shares to be traded on a major
international exchange. The internationalization date represents the date of their first international activity. The internationalization dummy (ID j,c,t ) equals one on and after the year
when a firm becomes international and zero otherwise (it becomes zero if a firm is delisted). The regressions include country and year dummies, though they are not reported in the
table. Standard errors are in brackets. Columns (1) to (5) report Newey-West standard errors, which are robust to heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation within firms. Column (6)
reports standard errors adjusted for clustering at the firm-level. *, **, *** mean significance at ten, five, and one percent, respectively. The estimated equation is the following:
                                     T jI, c , t = φ × A j , c , t + α × ID j , c , t + β × TcD, t + γ × ST cI, t + θ × C c , t + δ 1 × nc + δ 2 × τ t + ε j , c,t
                                                                                  Dependent Variable:
                                                                               Log (1+Domestic Turnover)
                                                                              (1)                    (2)                    (3)                    (4)                 (5)           (6)
Log of Total Assetsj,c,t                                                    -0.012                 -0.008                 -0.004                  -0.007              -0.004        -0.004
                                                                           [0.008]                [0.008]                [0.007]                 [0.008]             [0.007]       [0.010]
Internationalization Dummyj,c,t                                             -0.053 **              -0.051 **              -0.056 **               -0.056 **           -0.061 **     -0.061 *
                                                                           [0.025]                [0.025]                [0.025]                 [0.026]             [0.025]       [0.033]
Log (1+ Average Turnover of Domestic Firms)c,t                               0.423 ***              0.440 ***              0.432 ***               0.388 ***           0.434 ***     0.434 ***
                                                                           [0.050]                [0.051]                [0.056]                 [0.053]             [0.054]       [0.055]
Stock Market Liberalization Dummyc,t                                                                0.006                  0.005                                      -0.006        -0.006
                                                                                                  [0.035]                [0.036]                                     [0.037]       [0.034]
Log of (1+Value Traded Abroad/Total Value Traded)c,t                                                                       0.026                  -0.058               0.011         0.011
                                                                                                                         [0.097]                 [0.108]             [0.098]       [0.097]
Stock Market Liberalization                                                                                                                        0.113 *
  Edison and Warnock (2003) Measurec,t                                                                                                           [0.065]
Log of GDP per capitac,t                                                                                                                                               0.008         0.008
                                                                                                                                                                     [0.054]       [0.062]
Market Capitalization / GDPc,t                                                                                                                                         0.125 ***     0.125 ***
                                                                                                                                                                     [0.040]       [0.037]

Country Dummies                                                                Yes                     Yes                    Yes                    Yes                Yes           Yes
Year Dummies                                                                   Yes                     Yes                    Yes                    Yes                Yes           Yes
Number of Observations                                                       1,516                  1,419                   1,390                  1,385              1,390         1,390
Number of Firms                                                                264                    236                     235                    231                235           235
Number of Countries                                                             36                     32                      32                     25                 32            32
R-squared                                                                     0.51                   0.51                    0.48                   0.50               0.48          0.48
                                                                         Table II
                                  Domestic Trading Activity of International Firms: Private Placements and Level I ADRs
The dependent variable is the logarithm of one plus the turnover ratio in domestic markets of firms that internationalize through private placements in international financial centers
or by cross-listing on the U.S. over-the-counter (OTC) market through Level I ADR programs. The internationalization date represents the date of their first international activity.
The internationalization dummy (ID j,c,t ) equals one on and after the year when a firm becomes international and zero otherwise (it becomes zero if a firm is delisted). Firms are
excluded from the regressions if and when they become publicly traded in international equity markets. The regressions include country and year dummies, though they are not
reported in the table. Standard errors are in brackets. Columns (1) to (5) report Newey-West standard errors, which are robust to heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation within firms.
Column (6) reports standard errors adjusted for clustering at the firm-level. *, **, *** mean significance at ten, five, and one percent, respectively. The estimated equation is the
following:

                                     T jI, c , t = φ × A j , c , t + α × ID j , c , t + β × TcD, t + γ × ST cI, t + θ × C c , t + δ 1 × n c + δ 2 × τ t + ε j , c,t
                                                                                  Dependent Variable:
                                                                               Log (1+Domestic Turnover)
                                                                              (1)                    (2)                     (3)                    (4)                 (5)             (6)
Log of Total Assetsj,c,t                                                    -0.014 *               -0.017 **               -0.018   **            -0.015 **            -0.020   **     -0.020
                                                                           [0.008]                [0.008]                 [0.008]                [0.008]              [0.008]         [0.013]
Internationalization Dummyj,c,t                                              0.077 ***              0.082 ***               0.067   ***            0.067 ***            0.062   ***     0.062 *
                                                                           [0.023]                [0.024]                 [0.023]                [0.023]              [0.023]         [0.032]
Log (1+ Average Turnover of Domestic Firms)c,t                               0.543 ***              0.560 ***               0.508   ***            0.470 ***            0.529   ***     0.529 ***
                                                                           [0.049]                [0.052]                 [0.050]                [0.049]              [0.048]         [0.049]
Stock Market Liberalization Dummyc,t                                                                0.012                  -0.005                                      -0.007          -0.007
                                                                                                  [0.027]                 [0.028]                                     [0.029]         [0.036]
Log of (1+Value Traded Abroad/Total Value Traded)c,t                                                                       -0.219   **            -0.290 ***           -0.223   **     -0.223 *
                                                                                                                          [0.098]                [0.093]              [0.099]         [0.113]
Stock Market Liberalization                                                                                                                        0.189 ***
  Edison and Warnock (2003) Measurec,t                                                                                                           [0.057]
Log of GDP per capitac,t                                                                                                                                                0.058           0.058
                                                                                                                                                                      [0.056]         [0.054]
Market Capitalization / GDPc,t                                                                                                                                          0.128 ***       0.128 ***
                                                                                                                                                                      [0.032]         [0.026]

Country Dummies                                                                Yes                     Yes                    Yes                    Yes                 Yes             Yes
Year Dummies                                                                   Yes                     Yes                    Yes                    Yes                 Yes             Yes
Number of Observations                                                       1,720                  1,554                   1,525                  1,622               1,525           1,525
Number of Firms                                                                293                    248                     247                    274                 247             247
Number of Countries                                                             37                     32                      32                     28                  32              32
R-squared                                                                     0.54                   0.56                    0.54                   0.51                0.54            0.54
                                                                           Table III
                                       Total Trading Activity of International Firms: Firms with Level II and III ADRs
The dependent variable is the logarithm of one plus the total turnover ratio of international companies of firms with Level II and III ADR programs, which trade on a major U.S.
exchange (Amex, NASDAQ, or NYSE). The internationalization dummy (ID j,c,t ) equals one on and after the year when a firm starts trading in these markets and zero otherwise (it
becomes zero if a firm is delisted). The regressions include country and year dummies, though they are not reported in the table. Standard errors are in brackets. Columns (1) to (5)
report Newey-West standard errors, which are robust to heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation within firms. Column (6) reports standard errors adjusted for clustering at the firm-
level. *, **, *** mean significance at ten, five, and one percent, respectively. The estimated equation is the following:
                                      TT jI,c ,t = φ × A j ,c ,t + α × ID j ,c ,t + β × TcD,t + γ × STcI,t + θ × Cc ,t + δ 1 × nc + δ 2 × τ t + ε j ,c,t
                                                                              Dependent Variable:
                                                                             Log (1+Total Turnover)
                                                                          (1)                  (2)                  (3)                  (4)                 (5)             (6)
Log of Total Assetsj,c,t                                                -0.046 ***           -0.039 **            -0.030   **          -0.039 ***           -0.026   **     -0.026
                                                                       [0.015]              [0.016]              [0.014]              [0.014]              [0.013]         [0.016]
Internationalization Dummyj,c,t                                          0.196 ***            0.191 ***            0.164   ***          0.169 ***            0.164   ***     0.164 ***
                                                                       [0.038]              [0.038]              [0.038]              [0.039]              [0.040]         [0.044]
Log (1+ Average Turnover of Domestic Firms)c,t                           0.395 ***            0.410 ***            0.383   ***          0.361 ***            0.387   ***     0.387 ***
                                                                       [0.084]              [0.088]              [0.084]              [0.084]              [0.084]         [0.058]
Stock Market Liberalization Dummyc,t                                                         -0.010               -0.017                                    -0.002          -0.002
                                                                                            [0.047]              [0.049]                                   [0.048]         [0.046]
Log of (1+Value Traded Abroad/Total Value Traded)c,t                                                               0.361   ***          0.327 **             0.404   ***     0.404 ***
                                                                                                                 [0.129]              [0.142]              [0.132]         [0.136]
Stock Market Liberalization                                                                                                             0.025
  Edison and Warnock (2003) Measurec,t                                                                                                [0.101]
Log of GDP per capitac,t                                                                                                                                    -0.220 ***      -0.220 ***
                                                                                                                                                           [0.081]         [0.069]
Market Capitalization / GDPc,t                                                                                                                              -0.044          -0.044
                                                                                                                                                           [0.076]         [0.077]

Country Dummies                                                            Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                 Yes             Yes
Year Dummies                                                               Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                 Yes             Yes
Number of Observations                                                     696                  655                  645                  658                 645             645
Number of Firms                                                            119                  106                  105                  110                 105             105
Number of Countries                                                         20                   18                   18                   18                  18              18
R-squared                                                                 0.54                 0.52                 0.50                 0.53                0.51            0.51
                                                                                Table IV
                                                               Migration: Firms with Level II and III ADRs
The dependent variable is the logarithm of one plus the ratio of turnover in domestic markets over the total turnover of firms with Level II and III ADR programs, which trade on a
major U.S. exchange (Amex, NASDAQ, or NYSE). The internationalization dummy (ID j,c,t ) equals one on and after the year when a firm starts trading in these markets and zero
otherwise (it becomes zero if a firm is delisted). The regressions include country and year dummies, though they are not reported in the table. Standard errors are in brackets.
Columns (1) to (5) report Newey-West standard errors, which are robust to heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation within firms. Column (6) reports standard errors adjusted for
clustering at the firm-level. *, **, *** mean significance at ten, five, and one percent, respectively. The estimated equation is the following:
                                       ST jI,c ,t = φ × A j ,c,t + α × ID j ,c ,t + β × TcD,t + γ × STcI,t + θ × C c ,t + δ 1 × nc + δ 2 × τ t + ε j ,c,t
                                                                      Dependent Variable:
                                                       Log (1+Turnover in Domestic Market / Total Turnover)
                                                                         (1)                  (2)                   (3)                  (4)                  (5)             (6)
Log of Total Assetsj,c,t                                                 0.013 **             0.016 ***            0.017   ***          0.013 **              0.014   **      0.014
                                                                       [0.006]              [0.006]              [0.006]              [0.006]               [0.006]         [0.011]
Internationalization Dummyj,c,t                                         -0.227 ***           -0.223 ***           -0.206   ***         -0.208 ***            -0.214   ***    -0.214   ***
                                                                       [0.017]              [0.017]              [0.019]              [0.019]               [0.019]         [0.029]
Log (1+ Average Turnover of Domestic Firms)c,t                           0.077 ***            0.088 ***            0.058   **           0.042                 0.050   *       0.050   *
                                                                       [0.025]              [0.025]              [0.026]              [0.027]               [0.027]         [0.024]
Stock Market Liberalization Dummyc,t                                                         -0.043               -0.037                                     -0.050   **     -0.050   *
                                                                                            [0.027]              [0.023]                                    [0.024]         [0.028]
Log of (1+Value Traded Abroad/Total Value Traded)c,t                                                              -0.341   ***         -0.373 ***            -0.377   ***    -0.377   ***
                                                                                                                 [0.081]              [0.081]               [0.078]         [0.101]
Stock Market Liberalization                                                                                                             0.046
  Edison and Warnock (2003) Measurec,t                                                                                                [0.038]
Log of GDP per capitac,t                                                                                                                                      0.101 **        0.101 **
                                                                                                                                                            [0.044]         [0.043]
Market Capitalization / GDPc,t                                                                                                                                0.114 ***       0.114 ***
                                                                                                                                                            [0.032]         [0.028]

Country Dummies                                                            Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes             Yes
Year Dummies                                                               Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes             Yes
Number of Observations                                                     705                  663                  653                  660                  653             653
Number of Firms                                                            120                  107                  106                  110                  106             106
Number of Countries                                                         20                   18                   18                   18                   18              18
R-squared                                                                 0.54                 0.55                 0.57                 0.56                 0.57            0.57
                                                                                 Table V
                                                                    Trading Activity of Domestic Firms
The dependent variable is the logarithm of one plus the turnover ratio of domestic companies. The regressor T I c,t equals the logarithm of one plus the average domestic turnover of
international firms that are traded in major public exchanges abroad. The regressions include country and year dummies, though they are not reported in the table. Standard errors
are in brackets. Columns (1) to (5) report Newey-West standard errors, which are robust to heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation within firms. Column (6) reports standard errors
adjusted for clustering at the firm-level. *, **, *** mean significance at ten, five, and one percent, respectively. The estimated equation is the following:
                                             T jD, c ,t = φ × A j ,c ,t + β × T cI,t + γ × ST cI,t + θ × C c ,t + δ 1 × n c + δ 2 × τ t + ε   j , c,t

                                                                            Dependent Variable:
                                                                         Log (1+Domestic Turnover)
                                                                        (1)                  (2)                 (3)                  (4)                 (5)            (6)
Log of Total Assetsj,c,t                                              -0.074 ***           -0.072 ***           -0.072 ***           -0.077 ***          -0.072 ***     -0.072 ***
                                                                     [0.004]              [0.004]              [0.004]              [0.005]             [0.004]        [0.007]
Log ( 1+ Average Turnover of Public International                      0.500 ***            0.580 ***            0.567 ***            0.438 ***           0.596 ***      0.596 ***
  Firms in the Domestic Market)c,t                                   [0.033]              [0.035]              [0.038]              [0.039]             [0.038]        [0.038]
Stock Market Liberalization Dummyc,t                                                       -0.022               -0.005                                   -0.004         -0.004
                                                                                          [0.027]              [0.025]                                  [0.026]        [0.026]
Log of (1+Value Traded Abroad/Total Value Traded)c,t                                                            -0.466 ***           -0.526 ***          -0.497 ***     -0.497 ***
                                                                                                               [0.063]              [0.066]             [0.065]        [0.068]
Stock Market Liberalization                                                                                                           0.159 ***
  Edison and Warnock (2003) Measurec,t                                                                                              [0.030]
Log of GDP per capitac,t                                                                                                                                  0.319 ***      0.319 ***
                                                                                                                                                        [0.045]        [0.043]
Market Capitalization / GDPc,t                                                                                                                           -0.108 ***     -0.108 ***
                                                                                                                                                        [0.019]        [0.019]

Country Dummies                                                          Yes                  Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes            Yes
Year Dummies                                                             Yes                  Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes            Yes
Number of Observations                                                 6,480                6,157                5,971               5,938               5,971           5,971
Number of Firms                                                        1,318                1,213                1,195               1,167               1,195           1,195
Number of Countries                                                       36                   32                   32                  25                  32              32
R-squared                                                               0.53                 0.54                 0.52                0.50                0.53            0.53
                                                                             Table VI
                                                       Liquidity of Domestic Firms: Amihud Illiquidity Ratio
The dependent variable is the logarithm of one plus the Amihud illiquidity ratio of domestic companies. The regressor T I c,t equals the logarithm of one plus the average domestic
turnover of international firms that are traded in major public exchanges abroad. The regressions include country and year dummies, though they are not reported in the table.
Standard errors are in brackets. Columns (1) to (5) report Newey-West standard errors, which are robust to heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation within firms. Column (6) reports
standard errors adjusted for clustering at the firm-level. *, **, *** mean significance at ten, five, and one percent, respectively. The estimated equation is the following:
                                             I Dj ,c ,t = φ × A j ,c ,t + β × TcI,t + γ × STcI,t + θ × Cc ,t + δ 1 × nc + δ 2 × τ t + ε j ,c,t
                                                                           Dependent Variable:
                                                                     Log (1+Amihud Illiquidity Ratio)
                                                                        (1)                 (2)                  (3)                  (4)           (5)                (6)
Log of Total Assetsj,c,t                                              -0.097 ***           -0.096 ***          -0.098 ***           -0.100 ***     -0.095 ***         -0.095 ***
                                                                     [0.004]              [0.004]             [0.004]              [0.004]        [0.004]            [0.007]
Log ( 1+ Average Turnover of Public International                     -0.179 ***           -0.220 ***          -0.267 ***           -0.168 ***     -0.180 ***         -0.180 ***
  Firms in the Domestic Market)c,t                                   [0.023]              [0.024]             [0.032]              [0.032]        [0.032]            [0.033]
Stock Market Liberalization Dummyc,t                                                        0.046               0.031                              -0.066             -0.066
                                                                                          [0.040]             [0.041]                             [0.042]            [0.051]
Log of (1+Value Traded Abroad/Total Value Traded)c,t                                                            0.282 **             0.410 ***      0.440 ***          0.440 ***
                                                                                                              [0.116]              [0.117]        [0.117]            [0.149]
Stock Market Liberalization                                                                                                         -0.190 ***
  Edison and Warnock (2003) Measurec,t                                                                                             [0.029]
Log of GDP per capitac,t                                                                                                                           -0.184 ***         -0.184 ***
                                                                                                                                                  [0.053]            [0.059]
Market Capitalization / GDPc,t                                                                                                                     -0.179 ***         -0.179 ***
                                                                                                                                                  [0.014]            [0.017]

Country Dummies                                                          Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes           Yes                Yes
Year Dummies                                                             Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes           Yes                Yes
Number of Observations                                                 5,879                5,573               5,373                5,510         5,373               5,373
Number of Firms                                                          989                  915                 909                  910           909                 909
Number of Countries                                                       31                   29                  29                   24            29                  29
R-squared                                                               0.39                 0.40                0.40                 0.38          0.42                0.42
                                                                             Table VII
                                                    Liquidity of Domestic Firms: Proportion of Zero Return Days
The dependent variable is the logarithm of one plus the proportion of zero return days of domestic companies. The regressor T I c,t equals the logarithm of one plus the average
domestic turnover of international firms that are traded in major public exchanges abroad. The regressions include country and year dummies, though they are not reported in the
table. Standard errors are in brackets. Columns (1) to (5) report Newey-West standard errors, which are robust to heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation within firms. Column (6)
reports standard errors adjusted for clustering at the firm-level. *, **, *** mean significance at ten, five, and one percent, respectively. The estimated equation is the following:
                                             ZR Dj ,c ,t = φ × A j ,c ,t + β × TcI,t + γ × STcI,t + θ × C c ,t + δ 1 × nc + δ 2 × τ t + ε j ,c,t
                                                                          Dependent Variable:
                                                                 Log (1+Proportion of Zero Return Days)
                                                                         (1)                  (2)                  (3)                  (4)           (5)                (6)
Log of Total Assetsj,c,t                                               -0.020 ***           -0.020 ***           -0.020 ***           -0.021 ***    -0.020   ***        -0.020 ***
                                                                      [0.001]              [0.001]              [0.001]              [0.001]       [0.001]             [0.002]
Log ( 1+ Average Turnover of Public International                      -0.043 ***           -0.049 ***           -0.066 ***           -0.063 ***    -0.047   ***        -0.047 ***
  Firms in the Domestic Market)c,t                                    [0.007]              [0.007]              [0.009]              [0.009]       [0.010]             [0.011]
Stock Market Liberalization Dummyc,t                                                         0.006               -0.006                             -0.025   **         -0.025
                                                                                           [0.013]              [0.012]                            [0.012]             [0.016]
Log of (1+Value Traded Abroad/Total Value Traded)c,t                                                              0.277 ***            0.285 ***     0.303   ***         0.303 ***
                                                                                                                [0.039]              [0.040]       [0.040]             [0.048]
Stock Market Liberalization                                                                                                            0.011
  Edison and Warnock (2003) Measurec,t                                                                                               [0.008]
Log of GDP per capitac,t                                                                                                                             0.000               0.000
                                                                                                                                                   [0.015]             [0.016]
Market Capitalization / GDPc,t                                                                                                                      -0.045 ***          -0.045 ***
                                                                                                                                                   [0.004]             [0.004]

Country Dummies                                                           Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes           Yes                Yes
Year Dummies                                                              Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes           Yes                Yes
Number of Observations                                                  6,380                6,067                5,863                5,999         5,863               5,863
Number of Firms                                                         1,025                  950                  944                  946           944                 944
Number of Countries                                                        31                   29                   29                   24            29                  29
R-squared                                                                0.49                 0.51                 0.51                 0.48          0.52                0.52
                                                                                                                     Appendix Table I
                                                                                                                 Basic Statistics and Means
This table reports summary statistics by country. It displays the total number of firms, the number of international firms, the number of domestic firms, the sample coverage, and the sample average of the trading and liquidity variables used in the regressions.
International companies are the ones that issue a depositary receipt, cross-list, or raise capital in international equity markets.

                                                                                                                                                       Domestic Firms                                              International Firms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Turnover in
                                  No. of Firms in the       No. of Firms in the
                                                                                      Total No. of Firms                      Turnover in             Amihud Illiquidity Proportion of Zero          Turnover in        Domestic
                                     Regressions           Aggregate Measures                                                                                                                                                                    Total Turnover
                Country                                                                                       Sample Period Domestic Market                Ratio            Return Days            Domestic Market    Market/Total
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Turnover
                                   Int'l.       Dom.         Int'l.       Dom.        Int'l.       Dom.
                                                                                                                                 Mean     Std. Dev.    Mean      Std. Dev.    Mean     Std. Dev.    Mean     Std. Dev.    Mean      Std. Dev.    Mean     Std. Dev.
                                   Firms        Firms        Firms        Firms       Firms        Firms
   1       Argentina                  8            9           18            9          22           10         1990-2000         0.40       0.29       1.67       1.57       0.48        0.26       0.27       0.27       0.44        0.40       0.45       0.31
   2       Bahrain                    1           14            1           12           1           14         1999-2000         0.11       0.13         .          .          .           .        0.05         .          .           .          .          .
   3       Brazil                    49           47           29           52          52           52         1989-2000         0.33       0.39       0.61       1.30       0.40        0.27       0.41       0.38       0.78        0.30       0.47       0.45
   4       Bulgaria                   1            0            0           16           1           16         1998-2000           .          .          .          .          .           .        0.03       0.02         .           .          .          .
   5       Chile                     21           33           22           36          24           36         1989-2000         0.09       0.10       1.12       0.88       0.50        0.25       0.13       0.11       0.45        0.32       0.42       0.31
   6       China                     50           78           27          200          54          200         1992-2000         1.59       1.97       0.75       0.80       0.41        0.26       1.40       1.47       0.74        0.23       2.15       1.38
   7       Colombia                   7           21            3           28           7           28         1989-2000         0.10       0.08       1.31       1.00       0.63        0.24       0.12       0.08         .           .          .          .
   8       Croatia                    2            5            1            7           2            7         1997-2000         0.04       0.05         .          .          .           .        0.04       0.04         .           .          .          .
   9       Czech Republic            5            45           3            71           5           71         1995-2000         0.21       0.49       3.08       2.60       0.37        0.21       0.40       0.42         .           .          .          .
   10      Egypt                      6           14            7           72           7           72         1997-2000         0.30       0.41       1.18       1.30       0.20        0.15       0.41       0.29         .           .          .          .
   11      Estonia                    2            8            1           11           2           11         1997-2000         0.26       0.29       2.55       2.10       0.47        0.25       0.30       0.47         .           .          .          .
   12      Ghana                      1           10            1           10           1           10         1996-2000         0.09       0.12         .          .          .           .        0.00       0.00       0.00        0.00       0.49       0.18
   13      Greece                     8           67            9           77          11           77         1989-2000         0.60       0.55       1.02       1.71       0.23        0.20       0.41       0.39       0.98        0.05       0.35       0.25
   14      Hungary                   15            8            9           10          15           10         1992-2000         0.65       0.50       1.21       1.63       0.28        0.26       0.86       1.20       0.75        0.16       0.47       0.33
   15      India                     49          108           28          130          52          130         1990-2000         0.34       1.02       2.07       2.11       0.23        0.15       0.62       1.10       0.90        0.15       1.14       1.83
   16      Indonesia                  8           97            5          129          10          129         1990-2000         0.96       1.67       1.00       1.30       0.55        0.22       0.49       0.38       0.50        0.19       0.68       0.25
   17      Israel                    18           28           17           34          20           34         1997-2000         0.26       0.14       0.27       0.33       0.15        0.06       0.45       0.33       0.58        0.33       0.74       0.46
   18      Jamaica                    2            0            0           17           2           17         1999-2000           .          .          .          .          .           .        0.07       0.06         .           .          .          .
   19      Jordan                     3            4            1           41           3           41         1997-2000         0.13       0.08         .          .          .           .        0.07       0.05         .           .          .          .
   20      Korea                     32          176           18          195          33          196         1989-2000         3.87       6.75       0.24       0.59       0.17        0.06       2.25       4.22       0.88        0.15       1.57       3.85
   21      Latvia                     2           12            2           14           2           14         1997-2000         0.45       0.71       4.12       1.23       0.47        0.19       0.40       0.40         .           .          .          .
   22      Lebanon                    2            0            0            3           2            3         1999-2000           .          .          .          .          .           .        0.08       0.11         .           .          .          .
   23      Lithuania                  4            8            1           40           4           40         1996-2000         0.11       0.18       3.64       2.06       0.66        0.21       0.23       0.26         .           .          .          .
                                                                                                              Appendix Table I (Continued)
                                                                                                               Basic Statistics and Means
This table reports summary statistics by country. It displays the total number of firms, the number of international firms, the number of domestic firms, the sample coverage, and the sample average of the trading and liquidity variables used in the regressions.
International companies are the ones that issue a depositary receipt, cross-list, or raise capital in international equity markets.

                                                                                                                                                       Domestic Firms                                              International Firms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Turnover in
                                  No. of Firms in the       No. of Firms in the
                                                                                      Total No. of Firms                      Turnover in             Amihud Illiquidity Proportion of Zero          Turnover in        Domestic
                                     Regressions           Aggregate Measures                                                                                                                                                                    Total Turnover
                   Country                                                                                    Sample Period Domestic Market                Ratio            Return Days            Domestic Market    Market/Total
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Turnover
                                   Int'l.       Dom.         Int'l.       Dom.        Int'l.       Dom.
                                                                                                                                 Mean     Std. Dev.    Mean      Std. Dev.    Mean     Std. Dev.    Mean     Std. Dev.    Mean      Std. Dev.    Mean     Std. Dev.
                                   Firms        Firms        Firms        Firms       Firms        Firms
   24      Malaysia                  13          174            3          183          13          188         1989-2000         1.29       4.24       0.57       0.85       0.25        0.10       0.30       0.41         .           .          .          .
   25      Mexico                    51           13           41           38          61           38         1989-2000         0.32       0.32       0.26       0.48       0.27        0.18       0.46       0.38       0.52        0.33       1.17       0.91
   26      Morocco                    1           11            1           20           1           20         1997-2000         0.11       0.07       0.09       0.05       0.33        0.11       0.21       0.11         .           .          .          .
   27      Nigeria                    1            0            0           27           1           27         1999-2000           .          .          .          .          .           .        0.05       0.03         .           .          .          .
   28      Pakistan                   4            0            0           56           4           56         1997-2000           .          .          .          .          .           .        3.32       3.17         .           .          .          .
   29      Peru                       8           22            5           34           8           34         1992-2000         0.75       0.70       1.33       1.10       0.51        0.25       0.32       0.28       0.60        0.30       0.49       0.35
   30      Philippines               15           58            6           63          16           63         1989-2000         0.71       1.06       1.41       1.52       0.46        0.22       0.28       0.23       0.69        0.30       0.62       0.45
   31      Poland                    17           23            8           27          18           27         1992-2000         0.78       0.75       1.21       1.21       0.27        0.21       0.77       0.88         .           .          .          .
   32      Portugal                   8           28            3           39           8           39         1989-1998         0.27       0.21       1.19       1.26       0.43        0.20       0.61       0.52       0.84        0.16       0.53       0.43
   33      Romania                    1           12            1           32           1           34         1999-2000         0.24       0.18       1.26       1.43       0.75        0.21       0.05         .          .           .          .          .
   34      Russia                    14           11            5           23          16           23         1996-2000         0.28       0.37       1.67       1.49       0.69        0.26       0.33       0.48       0.63        0.30       0.88       0.84
   35      Slovak Republic            2            0            0           18           2           18         1997-2000           .          .          .          .          .           .        0.21       0.27         .           .          .          .
   36      Slovenia                   2           14            2           15           2           16         1996-2000         0.34       0.30       0.52       0.87       0.14        0.10       0.39       0.22         .           .          .          .
   37      South Africa              46           37           25           41          48           41         1992-2000         0.22       0.32       0.44       0.65       0.37        0.25       0.23       0.28       0.91        0.24       0.46       0.35
   38      Sri Lanka                  1            0            0           65           1           65         1994-2000           .          .          .          .          .           .        0.24       0.08         .           .          .          .
   39      Taiwan                    29          115           13          113          29          118         1989-2000         3.85       3.69       0.04       0.10       0.17        0.04       3.15       3.36       0.96        0.08       4.06       3.13
   40      Thailand                  13            0            0          112          13          112         1989-2000           .          .          .          .          .           .        0.65       0.87         .           .          .          .
   41      Tunisia                    1           11            1           17           1           17         1996-2000         0.09       0.08         .          .          .           .        0.15       0.07         .           .          .          .
   42      Turkey                    13           55            6           64          14           64         1990-2000         2.09       3.21       0.30       0.52       0.42        0.26       1.98       4.10       0.64          .        0.38         .
   43      Ukraine                    4            0            0           14           4           14         1997-2000           .          .          .          .          .           .        0.16       0.14         .           .          .          .
   44      Venezuela                 13           7            4            10          13           10         1989-2000         0.13       0.10       0.78       0.64       0.52        0.30       0.32       0.34       0.49        0.39       0.63       0.71
   45      Zimbabwe                   4            8            3           21           4           23         1993-2000         0.13       0.12       1.21       0.78       0.56        0.14       0.22       0.18         .           .          .          .

           Total                    557         1,391         330         2,246         610         2,265                         1.51       3.73       0.79       1.31       0.31        0.22       0.79       1.85       0.63        0.34       0.89       1.43
                                                                                                Appendix Table II
                                                                                    Series Description and Data Sources
This table shows the description of the data used and their coverage and sources.

Series                            Description                                                                                          Source
Variables related to the          Dates of cross-listings, depositary receipts issuances, and capital raisings in international equity Bank of New York, Citigroup, Euromoney, JP Morgan, the London Stock
internationalization of stock     markets. This information is used to classify firms as domestic or international and date the start of Exchange (LSE), the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), and NASDAQ.
markets                           their international activities. International companies are the ones that issue a depositary receipt, cross-
                                  list, or raise capital in international equity markets. Different variables are constructed using these
                                  data. See text for details.
Domestic market capitalization    Market capitalization in domestic stock markets. End-of-year data in current U.S. dollars.           Standard & Poor's Emerging Markets Database (formerly collected by the
                                                                                                                                       International Finance Corporation, IFC)
Domestic value traded             Value traded in domestic stock markets. Annual data in current U.S. dollars.                         Standard & Poor's Emerging Markets Database (formerly collected by the
                                                                                                                                       International Finance Corporation, IFC)
Value traded abroad               Value traded in American Depositary Receipts covering the period 1989-2000. The series are Bank of New York
                                  computed at the firm level by adding the different depositary receipts that belong to each company on
                                  a yearly basis. Data are in current U.S. dollars.
GDP per capita at market prices   Gross domestic product (GDP) in current U.S. dollars divided by mid-year population. The GDP (at World Bank: World Development Indicators
                                  purchaser prices data) is converted from domestic currencies using official exchange rates. For the
                                  cases in which the official exchange rate is different from the market rate, the latter is used.


Stock market liberalization       Dummy that equals one on and after the year of stock market liberalization. The liberalization date Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundbald (2005) and Vinhas de Souza (2005)
dummy                             corresponds to the date of formal regulatory change after which foreign investors officially have the
                                  possibility to invest in domestic equity securities. For the data from Vinhas de Souza (2005), we
                                  consider the first year when a country's stock market is fully liberalized as the liberalization date.


Stock Market Liberalization       Stock market liberalization measure based on S&P/IFC Indexes. The variable used is the smoothed Edison and Warnock (2003)
Edison and Warnock (2003)         measure calculated by Edison and Warnock (2003), which takes into account asymmetric shocks to
Measure                           investable and non-investable stocks. We converted their capital control index into a liberalization
                                  measure by subtracting one from it.
Total assets                      Total assets as reported in Worldscope for each firm-year, in millions of U.S. dollars. The sample Worldscope
                                  covers the period 1989-2000 for all countries.
Daily stock price                 Daily stock price in domestic markets (main stock exchange). Data in current U.S. dollars are used to Datastream
                                  calculated the Amihud illiquidity ratio, so the data are comparable across countries. Similar results are
                                  obtained when calculating the Amihud illiquidity ratio using data in local currency. Data in local
                                  currency are used to calculate the proportion of zero-return days.


Daily volume traded               Daily number of shares traded in domestic markets (main stock exchange). Used to calculate Amihud Datastream
                                  illiquidity ratio.
