                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        IS FINANCIAL GLOBALIZATION BENEFICIAL?

                                          Frederic S. Mishkin

                                         Working Paper 11891
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11891


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2005




JMCB-FDIC Lecture presented at the FDIC, Washington, D.C. on September 22, 2005. This lecture draws
heavily on material in chapters 1-7 of my forthcoming book, The Next Great Globalization: How
Disadvantaged Nations Can Harness Their Financial Systems to Get Rich. I thank for their helpful comments
the following who have commented on this material: Christian Broda, Charlie Calomiris, Jose De Gregorio,
Peter Dougherty, Bill Easterly, Barry Eichengreen, Reuven Glick, Steve Haber, Joon-Ho Hahm, Michael
Klein, Ross Levine, Geraldo Licondro Geraldo Licondro, Dani Rodrick, Maury Obstfeld, Guido Sandleris,
Sergio Schmukler, Alan Taylor, Jane Tufts and participants in seminars at the FDIC, Federal Reserve Bank
of New York, New School, Purdue, University of Scranton, University of Delaware, Columbia, and Penn
State. I also thank Emilia Simeonova for helpful research assistance. Any views expressed in this paper are
those of the author only and not those of Columbia University or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Frederic S. Mishkin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Is Financial Globalization Beneficial?
Frederic S. Mishkin
NBER Working Paper No. 11891
December 2005
JEL No. F02, O10, O16, G20

                                            ABSTRACT

This lecture examines whether financial globalization is beneficial to developing countries by first

examining the evidence on financial development and economic growth and concludes that financial

development is indeed a key element in promoting economic growth. It then asks why if financial

development is so beneficial, it often doesn't occur. It then goes on to examine whether globalization,

particularly of the financial kind, can help encourage financial and economic development and

argues that it can. However, financial globalization does not always work to encourage economic

development because it often leads to devastating financial crises. The issue is thus not whether

financial globalization is inherently good or bad, but whether it can be done right.

Frederic S. Mishkin
Graduate School of Business
Uris Hall 817
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
fsm3@columbia.edu
                                              I.
                                        INTRODUCTION


        The current Age of Globalization in the last fifty years is actually the second great wave of
globalization of international trade and capital flows. The first occurred from 1870 to 1914, when
international trade grew at a 4% rate annually, rising from 10% of GDP in 1870 to over 20% in
1914, while international flows of capital grew annually at 4.8% and increased from 7% of GDP in
1870 to close to 20% in 1914.1 With the coming of World War I, the first Age of Globalization
came to an end, leading to what Rajan and Zingales (2003a) have referred to as the “Great
Reversal.” Given the economic and political nightmares that followed the Great Reversal, in the
fading days of World War II, the victorious allies decided to create a new international system to
promote world trade and prosperity, which resulted in the establishment of two new
international financial institutions, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank,
and also the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) whose successor organization
was the World Trade Organization (WTO).
        These new institutions were created to promote globalization and in this they were extremely
successful. Once world economy returned to normal by the end of the 1950s, globalization
advanced at a rapid pace. From 1973 until today, world trade grew at pace of 11% annually, rising
from just over 22% of world GDP to 42% today (Estevadeordal and Taylor, 2002) Since 1973, the
flows of capital between countries have also exploded, rising from 5% of world GDP to 21% today
(World Bank, 2004) We are clearly in the second wave of globalization.
        Although economic globalization has come a long way, in one particular dimension it is very
far from complete. As is documented in Obstfeld and Taylor (2004), financial globalization is
primarily confined to rich countries. Despite the huge increase in international capital flows in
recent years, they primarily flow North-North, that is from rich to other rich countries which are
mostly in the northern hemisphere, rather than from North to South, from rich to poor countries.
Most international capital flows are just exchanges of assets between rich countries: they primarily
involve diversification, enabling the people in rich countries to not put all their eggs in one basket
by holding assets from other rich countries. On the other hand, most international capital is not
flowing to poor countries to enhance their development.
        As Lucas (1990) has pointed out, this feature of international capital flows is a paradox:
Why hasn’t capital flowed from rich to poor countries? We know that labor is incredibly cheap in
poor countries, and so we might think that capital would be very productive there. Just think of how
hugely profitable a factory might be in a poor country when wages are one-tenth of what they are
in the United States. Capital should, therefore, have extremely high returns in poor countries and
                                                 -1-
we would then expect massive flows of capital from rich countries where the returns on capital
should be far lower to poor countries where it is higher. We sometimes see this happening and it
does explain why there has been a big increase in the amount of capital that has moved to poor
countries in recent years, but most capital instead flows from one rich country to another where the
returns on capital are similar.2
         The amount of capital flowing to emerging market countries, which increased dramatically
in the 1990s, and is now over $300 billion at an annual rate may sound like a lot, but it is only one-
fifth of total international capital flows. When governments are added into the picture, recent
developments are even more surprising. Emerging market countries have actually been sending
capital to rich countries. The United States is currently running enormous trade and current account
deficits of over $600 billion because Americans are buying more goods and services from abroad
than they are selling overseas. These deficits are being financed by loans from foreigners, with
emerging market countries providing on the order of $200 billion per year. The Chinese
government, for example, has accumulated almost $800 billion of foreign assets, and is now one of
the largest holders of U.S. Treasury securities in the world.
         Also remarkable is that capital flows from North to South relative to total capital are far
smaller than they were in the first Age of Globalization in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries. By 1914, around half of the capital in Argentina was supplied by rich foreign countries,
particularly Great Britain. (Taylor, 1992 and Obstfeld and Taylor, 2004). Today, less than 6% of
Argentine capital has been supplied by foreigners.3 This change in the pattern of capital flows was
not just confined to Argentina. In 1913, over one-quarter of the world stock of foreign capital went
to countries which had a per capita income less than one-fifth of the United States, while by 1997,
this figure had fallen to around one-twentieth (Obstfeld and Taylor, 2004).
        Financial globalization is thus far from complete. Although globalization of trade in goods
and services is not controversial among economists – polls of economists indicate that one of few
things they do agree on is that globalization of international trade is desirable,4 financial
globalization is highly controversial even among economists. Joseph Stiglitz, has been very critical
of globalization in his best-selling book, Globalization and its Discontents (Stiglitz, 2002), because
he sees the opening up of financial markets in emerging market economies to foreign capital as
leading to economic collapse. Even Jagdish Bhagwati, one of the most prominent economists
defending globalization who has recently published a book entitled In Defense of Globalization
(Bhagwati, 2004) is highly skeptical of financial globalization, stating: “But the claims of enormous
benefits from free capital mobility are not persuasive.” (Also see Bhagwati, 1998 and 2002.) George
Soros, one of the world’s most prominent financiers, opens his book, On Globalization (Soros,
2002), with an introductory chapter entitled, “The Deficiencies of Global Capitalism.”5,6

                                                 -2-
         Should financial globalization be encouraged so that financial systems in emerging market
economies become more integrated with the rest of the world? Will further financial globalization
be beneficial to these poorer countries?
         This lecture tries to provide some answers to these questions by first examining the evidence
on financial development and economic growth and concludes that financial development is indeed
a key element in promoting economic growth. It then asks why if financial development is so
beneficial, it often doesn’t occur. It then goes on to examine whether globalization, particularly of
the financial kind, can help encourage financial and economic development and argues that it can.
However, financial globalization does not always work to encourage economic development because
it often leads to devastating financial crises. The issue is thus not whether financial globalization
is inherently good or bad, but whether it can be done right.



                                  II.
            FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENT AND GROWTH: THE EVIDENCE


         The important role of the financial system is not well understood by the public or by
some of important our public officials. After all, what are these financial professionals producing?
Nothing concrete comes from their highly-paid work. George Bush’s first U.S. Treasury
Secretary, Paul O’Neill, whose job involved designing policies to deal with financial markets,
displayed this ignorance in an interview shortly after he became the Treasury Secretary when
he belittled the value of participants in currency markets, saying, “The people who benefit from
roiling the world currency markets are speculators, and as far as I’m concerned, they provide
not much useful value.”7 The importance of finance to economic growth has also frequently
been ignored by economists. For example, the leading undergraduate textbook on economic
growth, Weill (2005) does not /discuss the link between finance and growth at all.
         Why is finance so important to economic growth? The answer is that the financial system
is like the brain of the economy: it is a coordinating mechanism that allocates capital to building
factories, houses and roads. If capital goes to the wrong uses or does not flow at all, the economy
will operate inefficiently and economic growth will be very low. No work ethic can compensate for
a misallocation of capital. Working hard will not make a country rich because hard-working
workers will not be productive unless they work with the right amount of capital. Brain is more
important than brawn, and similarly an efficient financial system is more important than hard work
to an economy’s success.
         The evidence that financial development and economic growth are linked is quite strong.8

                                                 -3-
A pioneering study by King and Levine (1993) using a sample of eighty countries found that the
greater was financial development back in 1960, as represented by a larger financial sector (known
as financial deepening),9 the larger the economic growth over the subsequent 30 years.10 Later
studies using more sophisticated techniques have confirmed this finding and indicate that a doubling
of the size of private credit in an average less-developed country is associated with a two percentage
point annual increase in economic growth (e.g., Levine, Loayza and Beck, 2000). Furthermore,
industries and firms which are more dependent on external sources of funds and so would benefit
more from financial deepening are found to grow faster in countries that are more financially
developed (Rajan and Zingales, 1998, Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (1998). Similarly, more
new firms are created in countries with developed financial systems .11 The evidence also suggests
that the way financial development raises growth is more through improvements in the allocation
of capital that produces higher total factor productivity rather than through higher investment (Beck,
Loayza and Levine, 2000 and Levine, 2004). As stated by Honohan (2004), “The causal link
between finance and growth is one of the most striking empirical macroeconomic relationships
uncovered in the last decade.”12
       Although financial deepening improves an economy’s rate of economic growth, it is possible
that poverty will remain the same or increase because the resulting growth could lead to greater
income inequality. However, this is not what research finds. In countries with better financial
development, the income of the poorest fifth of the population actually grows faster than average
GDP per capita (Hongyi, Squire and Zou, 2001, Beck, Demirguc-Kunt and Levine, 2004, Honohan,
2004), indicating clearly that financial development is associated with reductions in poverty and
even with reductions in the use of child labor (Dehejia and Gatti, 2002). This finding is exactly what
economic theory suggests because financial development increases the access of the poor to credit
and they have the disadvantage of having less access to credit than the rich (Banerjee and Newman,
1993, Galo and Zeira, 1993, and Aghion and Bolton, 1997).

                                      III.
                     WHAT IMPEDES FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENT?


         Despite its benefits, financial development often doesn’t happen in poor countries because
their financial systems face severe impediments to solving asymmetric information problems.



The Tyranny of Collateral


                                                 -4-
        Collateral is a crucial tool to help the financial system in general, and financial
intermediaries like banks in particular, to minimize the asymmetric information problems of adverse
selection and moral hazard.
        Adverse selection (that the party most anxious to borrow is the least likely to pay back the
loan) interferes with the functioning of financial markets only if a lender suffers a loss when a
borrower is unable to make loan payments and therefore defaults. Collateral reduces the
consequences of adverse selection because if a borrower defaults on a loan, the lender can sell the
Collateral and use the proceeds to make up for the losses on the loan. For example, when a
household fails to make mortgage payments, the lender can take title to the house, auction it off, and
use the receipts to pay off the loan. Lenders are thus more willing to make loans secured by
collateral, and borrowers are willing to supply collateral because the reduced risk for the lender
makes it more likely they will get the loan in the first place and perhaps a better loan rate.
        Collateral also reduces moral hazard (that the borrower, once she has a loan, may take
actions that make it less likely it will be paid back) by reducing the incentives for borrowers to take
on too much risk. When a borrower has pledged collateral on their loan, she has more to lose if she
can’t pay it back and so she naturally is more reluctant to engage in risky activities that make it more
likely they will default and lose the collateral.
        Although collateral is a prevalent feature of debt contracts for both households and
businesses, in order to use a physical asset such as land or capital as collateral, however, a person
must legally own it. Unfortunately, as originally documented in De Soto (2000), it is extremely
expensive and time consuming for the poor in less developed countries to make their ownership of
capital legal. To obtain legal title to a dwelling on urban land in the Philippines, for example, took
168 bureaucratic steps, 53 public and private agencies, and took thirteen to twenty-five years. For
desert land in Egypt, obtaining legal title took 77 steps, 31 public and private agencies, and five to
fourteen years. To legally buy government land in Haiti, an ordinary citizen had to go though 176
steps over nineteen years.13 These barriers do not mean that the poor do not invest. They still build
houses and buy equipment even if they don’t have legal title to it. Indeed, the amount of this capital
is huge: by De Soto’s calculations, the “total value of the real estate held but not legally owned by
the poor of the Third World and former communist nations is at least $9.3 trillion.” (De Soto, 2000,
page 35.)
        Without legal title, however, none of this property can be used to borrow funds. Because
lenders usually have very little information about the spending and savings habits of the poor, the
only way they would be willing to lend to the poor is if the borrowers had good collateral. But since
most of what poor people have is not legally theirs, there is no way that a legal contract can be
written to take over this capital if the borrower defaults on her loan.

                                                  -5-
        Even when people have legal title to their property, the legal system in most less developed
countries is so inefficient that collateral is often of little value. Typically, creditors must first sue
the defaulting debtor for payment, which takes several years, and then, once a favorable judgment
has been obtained, the creditor has to sue again to obtain title to the collateral. This process often
takes in excess of five years, and by the time the lender acquires the collateral, it is likely to have
been neglected (or looted) and thus have little value. In addition, governments often block lenders
from foreclosing on borrowers in politically powerful sectors such as agriculture.
        Where the financial system is unable to use collateral effectively, the adverse selection
problem will be worse, because the lender will need even more information about the quality of the
borrower in order to distinguish a good loan from a bad one. The result is that little lending will take
place. This effect is particularly striking for lending that involves collateral such as mortgages. In
Peru, for example, the value of mortgage loans relative to the size of the economy is less than one-
twentieth that in the United States (Inter-American Development Bank, 2004).
        The poor have an even harder time getting loans because they have even less access to the
legal system and so have even less collateral to offer, resulting in what Rajan and Zingales (2002)
have called a “tyranny of collateral.” Even when poor people have a good idea for a business and
are willing to work hard, they cannot get the funds to finance it, making it hard for them to escape
poverty. The tyranny of the lack of collateral for the poor is one reason why the rags to riches story
that we talk about so often in Western countries is so much rarer in developing countries.

Inability of the Legal System to Enforce Restrictive Covenants


       A poorly designed legal system also makes it more difficult for lenders to enforce restrictive
covenants which can reduce moral hazard incentives for borrowers to take on excessive risk.
Furthermore, if the judiciary is in the pockets of the rich and politically powerful, judges may be
unwilling to enforce restrictive covenants for those who are less powerful. As a result, creditors may
have a much more limited ability to reduce borrowers’ risk taking and so will be less willing to lend.
In countries where bankruptcy proceedings are not well developed and where creditors rights are
weak, there is strong evidence that less lending to firms take place (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,
Shleifer and Vishny, 1997, 1998, and Claessens and Klapper, 2002). Again the outcome will be less
productive investment and a lower growth rate for the economy.
       The basic design of the legal system also matters to economic growth. The common law
system in which the law is continually reinterpreted by judges ends up protecting property rights far
more than others and makes it easier to enforce restrictive covenants. For example, the rights of
shareholders who actually own corporations, as well as the rights of creditors, are much stronger in

                                                  -6-
the Anglo-Saxon legal system than in the Napoleonic code, first developed in France, which is also
used in many other countries. Countries with legal systems derived from the English common law
outperform those derived from the Napoleonic code in terms of both financial development and
economic growth, while the performance of countries using the German or Swedish systems are
somewhere in between (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny, 1997, 1998, and Beck and
Levine, 2004).
        Even more important to how well a given type of legal system works is the way it was
imposed on a country. Some colonies, for example in the Carribean, Africa and the Indian
subcontinent, could not be settled by large numbers of Europeans because the death rates from
native diseases were so high. In these colonies, legal systems were modified to benefit the small
number of Europeans that ran the country so that they could exploit its resources and local
population.14 As a result, legal systems in these countries ended up not being as effective at
protecting the property rights of the average person, and this became a serious handicap to growth.
On the other hand, if larger numbers of Europeans were able to settle in a colony, as in North
America, they were better able to resist exploitation by the home country. (The American
Revolution was a dramatic manifestation of this fact.) Then the legal system ended up more
effectively protecting property rights and promoted high economic growth (Acemoglu, Johnson and
Robinson, 2001).15 Indeed, differences in legal system quality resulting from different patterns of
European settlement can explain three quarters of the differences in income per capita in former
colonies.16
        The difference in how colonies were settled explains why countries whose legal system was
even originally based on the English system (with its emphasis on protection of property rights) have
had such different economic performance. The United States, Canada, Australia and New Zealand,
where so many Europeans settled, ended up with highly effective legal systems and became rich.
On the other hand, ex-British colonies such as Jamaica, India, Pakistan and Nigeria, where the
British settled in only small numbers, had much less effective legal systems and have remained poor.

Government Directed Credit


         Leaders of governments in developing and transition countries often have programs to direct
credit to themselves, to their cronies, or to favored sectors of the economy. Governments can direct
the flow of funds by creating so-called development financial institutions to make specific types
of loans at artificially low rates, or by directing existing institutions to lend to certain entities.
Private institutions have incentives to solve adverse selection and moral hazard problems and to then
lend to borrowers with the most productive investment opportunities: if they do not make good
                                                 -7-
loans, they will not earn any profits. Governments have less incentives to make sure their loans are
going to sound and honest companies because they are not driven by the profit motive, but by
political considerations. Their programs are unlikely to channel funds to sectors that will produce
high growth for the economy (Kane, 1977). The outcome is again likely to result in less efficient
investment and slower growth.
        Governments can also effectively direct credit through ownership of banks, and state-owned
banks are very common in many developing and transition countries. Again, because of the absence
of the profit motive, these state-owned banks have little incentive to allocate their capital to the most
productive uses.17 Indeed, the primary loan customer of these state-owned banks is often the
government, which often does not use the funds wisely. Greater state ownership of banks in 1970,
is associated with less financial development and lower growth, and this effect is found to be larger
for poorer countries (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer, 2002, and Barth, Caprio and Levine,
2001). Greater state ownership also tends to be anticompetitive, resulting in a larger share of credit
going to the largest firms, and it is also associated with a higher likelihood of financial instability
and banking crises (Caprio and Martinez-Peria, 2000, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer, 2002,
and Barth, Caprio and Levine, 2002). The negative features of state-owned banks has led World
Bank (2001, p. 123) to conclude: “whatever its original objectives, state ownership of banks tends
to stunt financial sector development, thereby contributing to slower growth.”

Underdeveloped Regulatory System to Promote Transparency


       Government regulation can promote transparency by increasing the amount of information
available in financial markets. Many developing and transition countries, unfortunately, have an
underdeveloped regulatory apparatus that retards the provision of adequate information to the
marketplace. For example, these countries often have weak accounting standards and disclosure
requirements, making it hard to ascertain the quality of a borrower’s balance sheet. As a result,
asymmetric information problems are more severe, and the financial system is severely hampered
in channeling funds to the most productive uses.
       The institutional environment of weak property rights, a lack of collateral, government
intervention through directed credit programs and state ownership of banks, an inefficient legal
system, and weak government regulation to promote transparency all help explain why many
countries stay poor while others grow richer.

Is China a Counter Example?


                                                  -8-
        However, there is one possible counter example to the importance of institutional
development – China. Despite great strides in improving property rights using the Household
Responsibility System and Township and Village Enterprises after the demise of Mao Zedong in
1976, China’s property rights, legal system and transparency are quite weak by advanced country
standards. Yet China has had one of the highest growth rates in the world over the last twenty years.
How has China been able to be so successful given its weak institutions and a banking sector which
is primarily state owned?
        It is important to remember that China is still in an early stage of development, with a per
capita income in PPP terms that is still only one eighth that in the United States.18 With an
extremely high savings rate averaging 39% over the last two decades, it has been able to rapidly
build up its capital stock and shift a massive pool of underutilized labor in the subsistence
agriculture sector into higher productivity activities using capital. Even if the available savings have
not been allocated to the most productive uses, the huge increase in capital when combined with the
gains in productivity by moving labor out of the subsistence agriculture sector have been enough
to produce high growth (Honohan, 2003).
        As China gets richer, however, this strategy will no longer work.19 The Soviet Union
provides a graphic example. In the 1950s and 60s, the Soviet Union had many similarities to China.
It also had very high growth fueled by a high savings rate, a massive buildup of capital and shifts
of a large pool of underutilized labor from subsistence agriculture to manufacturing (Weitzman,
1970). During this high growth phase, the Soviet Union was unable to develop the institutions to
allocate capital efficiently. Once the pool of subsistence laborers was used up, the Soviet Union’s
growth slowed dramatically and it was unable to keep up with the West. Today no one considers the
Soviet Union to have been an economic success story, and its inability to develop the institutions
to sustain growth was an important reason for the demise of this former superpower.
         Although there are parallels between the former Soviet Union and China, we should be
careful not to take them too far. In contrast to the Soviet Union, China, has a vibrant manufacturing
export industry and innovative approaches to property rights such as the Household Responsibility
System or Township and Village Enterprises. It is far from clear that China will face the same
problems that the Soviet Union did. The Soviet Union’s experience, however, does suggest that
China is not out of the woods yet and that some of the enthusiasm for China’s prospects should be
tempered.
         The Chinese example suggests that in the early stages of development, economic growth can
be rapid even in the face of weak institutional development. To reach the next stage of development
and eventually enter the rich countries’ club, China will require better allocation of its capital, which
can only come from improvement in institutions that leads to a financial system which allocates
                                                  -9-
capital to its most productive uses. The Chinese leadership is well aware of this challenge, but
whether they will succeed is an open question.

                                                  IV.
                         WHO CAUSES FINANCIAL REPRESSION?


        We have now seen that a severe impediment to economic growth and the reduction of
poverty in poorer countries is the underdevelopment of the financial system, referred to as financial
repression. Why does this occur? After all if there are such tremendous benefits to financial
development, why doesn’t every country have its financial house in order and jump on the path to
growth and prosperity?
        One answer is that it is not easy to build the legal and regulatory institutions that facilitate
the flow of information which in turn allows financial markets to function well. The development
of these institutions took hundreds of years in the advanced countries of the West.20
         Although this answer provides part of the story, it is not very satisfactory. Since successful
legal and regulatory institutions have already been developed in the advanced countries, why can’t
a country just borrow them? Indeed, this was what the Japanese did after the Meiji Restoration in
the late nineteenth century, and it has also been a feature of the development path in countries in
East Asia such as Taiwan, Singapore and Hong Kong. Technical assistance in establishing these
institutions is also available from the developed countries, and from institutions like the World Bank
and the IMF.
         One explanation is that the benefits of financial development are dispersed over a wide range
of the population, while the costs are focused on narrower groups who are able to impede the
development process. The benefits of an efficient financial system are spread widely: to the young
couple who can now buy a house with the help of a mortgage, to the new car owner who is able to
finance its purchase with an automobile loan, to the entrepreneur who can get capital to start her
new business, and to the corporation that can finance its investment in a new manufacturing plant.
However, on the other side, there are powerful, concentrated groups who lose from financial
development and so try to impede its progress.
         One such group is the government, often the primary source of financial repression.
Although strong property rights are a crucial element in financial development, they severely
constrain a government’s ability to expropriate property and ideas whenever it wants to profit from
them. Rapacious governments whose rulers treat their countries as personal fiefdoms are not
uncommon: from Sadaam Hussein’s Iraq, to Robert Mugabe’s Zimbabwe, to Suharto’s Indonesia.
Government officials, even in more democratic governments, often use the power of the state to get
                                                 -10-
rich. Not surprisingly, then, many governments pay lip service to property rights, but do not
encourage a rule of law to protect them.
        Although state-ownership of financial institutions results in a less efficient financial system,
it enables politicians and government officials to channel funds, either to their families, their cronies
or to business interests that support their political campaigns. They therefore have strong incentives
to establish and support state-owned banks. Politicians often couch their support for state-owned
banks by saying that these institutions will direct funds where they can do the most public good, but
the reality is that they know that state-owned financial institutions enhance both their wealth and
their power.

The Principal-Agent Problem: A Special Type of Moral Hazard


         To understand why politicians and governments are more likely to act less in the public
interest in poorer countries, we apply a particular form of the moral hazard problem, the principal-
agent problem. In theory, politicians and government officials (the agents) are supposed to work
on behalf of the public (the principals). However, politicians have incentives to act in their own
interests which often differ from, or are sometimes in direct opposition, to the public’s. The
government and politicians can get away with this behavior as long as the public cannot tell whether
the politicians are acting in their own self-interest or in the public interest, i.e., as long as there is
asymmetric information. In addition, even if the public can monitor politicians, so that there is little
asymmetry in information, they may not have the ability to get the politicians to act in their interest
if the state is too powerful.
         The existence of the principal-agent problem in the political sphere helps explain why
governments in poorer countries are less likely to act in the public interest and support financial
repression. Many of these countries have very uneducated populations and no tradition of
institutions to promote transparency, that is, the free flow of information that reduces asymmetric
information problems. In countries without a free press – and many emerging, transition and
impoverished countries unfortunately fall into this category – the public has a hard time monitoring
what politicians are up to and are less likely to constrain them from acting in their own interest
rather than the public’s. Given the incentives to enhance their own wealth and power, it is no
surprise that politicians in these countries are not strong supporters of property rights and support
state-ownership of financial institutions.
         The principal-agent analysis also explains why corruption is endemic in poorer countries.
An active free press helps keep corruption in check. Here in America, the press is always looking
for the slightest hint of corruption because uncovering corruption sells newspapers and wins

                                                  -11-
reporters Pulitzer prizes. In poorer countries, the press is more likely to be government controlled
or influenced and so has little incentive to expose government corruption. Also since the population
is often less literate, fewer newspapers can be sold, making the revenue from exposing corruption
less. This makes it easier for those who are enriching themselves through corruption to buy off the
press and keep their dishonesty hidden.21

Repressive Incumbents


         As has been emphasized in Rajan and Luigi Zingales (2003b), the second group that often
supports financial repression are “incumbents”, entrenched special interests who are threatened by
free markets.22,23 Large established business firms often finance new investment projects out of their
previous earnings and so do not need funds from external sources in the financial markets. Such
firms have less to gain from financial liberalization and development, and frequently have much to
lose. Increased transparency through better accounting standards and disclosure requirements is
required to foster financial development because it reduces asymmetric information problems.
However, increased transparency may make it harder for incumbent businesses to exploit their
connections and conduct business as usual, and so they will often oppose it. Incumbents also are
likely to oppose improvements of the legal system that would promote financial development when
these improvements would weaken their ability to sway the legal system to their own interests. If
judges can be easily influenced, incumbents will be able to get favorable rulings that increase their
power and wealth. Financial development also allows capital to flow to entrepreneurs who might
now be able to compete with the incumbents. Incumbents thus are often perfectly happy to see the
financial system remain repressed because this subjects them to less competition.
         Incumbents are likely to encourage barriers to setting up legal businesses. These barriers
can be prohibitive for all but the very rich in most less-developed countries and can discourage and
prevent new businesses from becoming established and perhaps growing to a large scale. Any new
and large-scale businesses would eat into the incumbents monopoly profits. The so-called “license-
Raj” in India, which existed until the reforms of Rajiv Ghandi started to dismantle these regulations
in the 1980s is one notorious example.24 New businesses had to obtain hard–to-get licenses before
opening their doors, and incumbents frequently spent more time lobbying government officials to
prevent entrepreneurs from setting up competing business than they spent on making their
businesses more productive.
         Incumbent financial institutions have incentives to repress the financial system.25 Through
their connections they may have the ability to collect information not available to the public that
enables them to screen good from bad credit risks. Increasing transparency, which reduces

                                                -12-
asymmetric information and is so necessary to the development of the financial system, may not be
in their interest because their best customers may then be able to bypass their services and go to
other financial intermediaries or instead use direct finance by issuing their own securities.
Incumbent financial institutions also discourage development of the legal system to enforce financial
contracts fairly because they already have methods of enforcement through their influence over
corrupt judges or by outright physical threats. Improving the legal system would then not help them
very much, but would enable competitors to enter the financial business and take away their
customers.
        Incumbent financial institutions often discourage effective prudential regulation and
supervision over their activities. A government safety net, which insulates these firms from market
discipline, enables them to take on risk, with most of the cost borne by taxpayers if their loans go
sour. Thus if financial institutions are poorly supervised they can exploit the financial safety net
to pursue risky strategies such as rapidly expanding high risk lending on which they make a lot of
money if they bet right and lose only a small amount if they bet wrong. Rigorous prudential
regulation and supervision would stop incumbent financial institutions from doing this, so naturally
they would oppose it. Indeed, opposition by financial institutions to rigorous prudential regulation
and supervision occurs in rich as well as poor countries, but because poor countries have less
transparency, this opposition is far more successful in poor countries, with the result that the quality
of prudential regulation and supervision is typically very low.

                                 V.
         CAN GLOBALIZATION ENCOURAGE FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENT?


        How can the obstacles to financial development posed by politicians and incumbents that
support financial repression be overcome? One solution, advocated by Rajan and Zingales (2003b)
and World Bank (2001) is globalization, the opening up of domestic markets to foreign goods and
direct investment, as well as to foreign capital and foreign financial institutions. Globalization,
particularly financial globalization, can encourage financial development indirectly, by decreasing
the incentives for financial repression outlined above. We will consider these first, but as we shall
see, financial globalization has direct benefits, too.

Indirect Benefits


        Allowing entry of foreign goods and investment produces a more competitive environment
that will drive down revenue of incumbent firms and reduce their cash flow (revenue minus outlays)

                                                 -13-
so that they will have to seek out external sources of finance. Because these sources of finance will
only be available if the financial system has the wherewithal to solve asymmetric information
problems, incumbent firms will now be more likely to support the necessary institutional reforms
to make the financial system work better. In turn, the increase in the size of the financial sector will
foster economic growth.26 Greater openness to trade is indeed found to be linked to a larger
financial sector (Rajan and Zingales 2003b, and Svalaeryd and Vlachos, 2002), and the increased
competition from foreigners stimulates domestic firms to become more productive in order to
survive.
         Financial globalization, opening up to foreign capital and foreign financial institutions, is
a particularly strong force for institutional reform that promotes financial development as long as
it is extensive enough so that the entry of foreign capital and foreign institutions increase
competition in domestic financial markets. When domestic businesses can borrow from abroad or
from foreign financial institutions that establish affiliates in the less-developed country, domestic
financial institutions will start to lose many of their old customers. In order for the domestic
financial institutions to stay in business they will have to seek out new customers and lend to them
profitably. And to accomplish this, they will need to have the information to screen out good from
bad credit risks and monitor borrowers to make sure they don’t take on excessive risk. Domestic
financial institutions will thus find that they need to encourage institutional reforms, such as better
accounting standards and disclosure requirements, that will make it easier for them to acquire the
information that they need to make profitable loans. Domestic financial institutions will see the
need to improve the legal system so they can enforce restrictive covenants or be able to take title to
collateral if a borrower defaults. With globalization, domestic financial institutions will support
legal reform because it will not only help them make profits, but will also strengthen property rights
that directly encourage investment directly.

Direct of Benefits of Financial Globalization


         Entry of foreign financial institutions into domestic markets plays a direct role in promoting
financial development. When foreign financial institutions enter a country, domestic financial
institutions have to become more efficient in order to survive, and this is exactly what happens.
(E.g., see Levine, 1996 and Claessens and Jansen, 2000, Claessens, Demiriguc-Kunt and Huizinga,
2000, 2001, Barajas, Steiner and Salazar, 2000, Clarke, Cull, D’Amato and Molinari, 2000, and
Unite and Sullivan, 2003). Foreign financial institutions bring to domestic financial markets best
practices, that is, expertise that has been learned from their past experience, and are likely to
promote technology transfer to domestic financial institutions (Goldberg, 2004). Entry of foreign

                                                 -14-
financial institutions helps improve domestic prudential supervision because supervisors are now
able to see what risk management practices are successfully used in foreign institutions and insist
that they be adopted by domestic institutions (Mishkin, 2003). Foreign financial institutions also
act as a constituency for institutional reform aimed at improving the quality of information in
financial markets because, as outsiders, they do not have access to the same inside information that
domestic institutions do.
        Financial globalization has additional direct benefits for domestic financial markets.
Allowing foreign capital to enter domestic financial markets increases the availability of funds and
thus should necessarily increase liquidity and lower the cost of capital, which stimulates investment
and economic growth.27 This is indeed what happened when countries have opened up their stock
markets to foreign capital: on average dividend yields fall by 2.4 percentage points, the growth rate
of investment increases by 1.1 percentage points and the growth rate of output per worker increases
by 2.3 percentage points.28

                                  VI.
           WHY FINANCIAL GLOBALIZATION DOESN’T ALWAYS WORK:
                           FINANCIAL CRISES


         Given the benefits of financial globalization discussed so far, it seems as though opening up
domestic financial markets to international capital should have an unambiguously positive impact
on economic growth. However, evidence using aggregate data on the benefits of financial
globalization are mixed: there is no clear cut relationship between international financial openness
and economic growth.29
         Why doesn’t opening up financial markets always work? The answer is that opening up an
economy to international capital flows, particularly if it is not managed properly, can lead to
financial crises that are disastrous to the economy.30 This is why financial globalization is so
controversial.
         The geneses of all financial crises are found in the good times that precede the collapse.
During the early phases of the globalization process, the economic performance of emerging market
countries is quite good: economic growth is high and inflation has come down to low levels,
particularly by the standards of past history in these countries. But the good times often have a dark
side. There are two basic routes through which emerging market countries can find themselves in
a crisis: a financial liberalization/globalization process gone wrong or a severe fiscal imbalance. We
focus first on the a financial liberalization/globalization process gone wrong because it is the most
common culprit behind financial crises and this is what precipitated the crises in Mexico in 1994 and

                                                -15-
many East Asian countries in 1997.31



Stage One: Mismanagement of Financial Liberalization/Globalization


        The seeds of a “globalization-gone-wrong” financial crisis are sown several years before the
crisis hits when countries liberalize their financial systems by lifting the regulations that restrict
domestic banking institutions from lending their funds at market rates and borrowing funds from
abroad. Indeed, eighteen of twenty-six crises in the last twenty years occurred after the financial
sector was liberalized in the preceding five years,32 and countries that have been hit with this type
of crisis often start out with solid fiscal policy: in the years before their crises hit, the countries in
East Asia were running budget surpluses, and Mexico was running a budget deficit of only 0.7% of
GDP, a number that most advanced countries would be thrilled to have.33
         Although the process of financial globalization has the potential to be highly beneficial, it
often leads to excessive risk taking by banks. With restrictions lifted, and the presence of a
government safety net which makes it easier for banks to take on risk because the market has little
incentive to discipline the banks, banks go on a lending spree and expand their lending by 15 to 30%
per year, which is more than double the typical lending growth rate.34 Not only do banks increase
their lending, they give out more loans to firms in industries of which they have little knowledge.
Because the managers of the banking institutions in these emerging market countries typically do
not have the required expertise to manage risk appropriately in these new lines of business and are
unable to cope with the rapid growth of lending that typically follows a financial liberalization,
problems are bound to arise. Even if the required managerial expertise were available initially, the
rapid lending growth would likely outstrip the information resources available to banking
institutions. Increased lending to industries about which banks know little results in excessive risk
taking on the bank’s part.
         The moral hazard incentives to take on excessive risk arising from the government safety net
are even more likely to be the source of bad loans than lack of expertise of bank managers.35 Even
in countries with well-developed banking sectors, financial liberalization has often led to lending
booms and banking crises, as the experience in the 1980s and 1990s in Japan and the United States
suggest.
         Because of lack of expertise in screening and monitoring borrowers and moral hazard
incentives to take on excessive risk, losses on the loans begin to mount. These losses mean that the
balance sheets of banks deteriorates because the drop in the value of a their loans (on the assets side
of the balance sheet) falls relative to the banks’ liabilities, thereby driving down the net worth

                                                  -16-
(capital) of the bank. With less capital, banks become riskier and so depositors and other potential
lenders to the banks are less willing to supply banks with funds. Fewer funds then mean fewer loans
and lending. The lending boom will turn into a lending crash.
        Banks play a crucial role in financial markets because they are well suited to collect
information about businesses and industries. This ability, in turn, enables banks to distinguish good
loan prospects from bad ones. When banks cut back on their lending, no one else can step in to
collect this information and make these loans, so the ability of the financial system to cope with the
asymmetric information problems of moral hazard and adverse selection is severely hampered. As
loans become scarcer, firms are no longer able to fund their attractive investment opportunities; they
decrease their spending and economic activity contracts.
        If the deterioration in bank balance sheets is severe enough, a bank panic may ensue in which
there are multiple, simultaneous failures of banking institutions. There is some possibility that one
bank failure can cause another to fail and so on. Such contagion can cause even healthy banks to
fail. The failure and subsequent closing of a large number of banks in a short period of time means
that there is further loss of information collection in financial markets and a direct loss of financial
intermediation done by the banking sector . The ultimate outcome of the bank panic is an even
greater worsening of asymmetric information problems, a sharper decline in lending to facilitate
productive investments and a resulting sharp contraction in economic activity.36
         The solution to preventing a lending boom and bust is prudential regulation and
supervision of the banking system to prevent banks from taking on excessive risk. However,
financial liberalization is often undertaken with completely inadequate prudential regulation and
supervision. (In contrast to the East Asian countries that suffered crises, for example, Singapore,
Hong Kong and Taiwan all had strong prudential regulatory and supervisory systems and did not
suffer crises from financial globalization.)
         Not only do the new lines of business and rapid credit growth stretch the managerial
resources of banks, they also similarly stretch the resources of the government’s bank supervisors.
After a financial liberalization, bank supervisors frequently find themselves without the expertise
or the additional resources needed to appropriately monitor the banks’ new lending activities.
Without this monitoring, excessive risk taking by banks cannot be prevented.
         The balance sheet/net worth deterioration can get even worse if regulators and supervisors
practice regulatory forbearance, that is, they knowingly allow financial institutions that are broke
to continue to operate. Regulatory forbearance is very common in advanced and emerging market
economies and it dramatically increases moral hazard problems because it creates incentives for
banks to take on even more risk because they have almost nothing to lose.37 If they get lucky and
their risky loans pay off, they become solvent again. If, as is likely, the risky loans don’t pay off,

                                                 -17-
the banks’ losses will mount, further weakening the financial system.

Adding Fuel to the Fire: Opening up to Foreign Capital


        The financial globalization process that allows domestic banks to borrow abroad also adds
fuel to the fire. The banks pay high interest rates to attract foreign capital so they can rapidly
increase their lending, and because foreign deposits that fund the bank’s lending activities are
viewed as likely to be protected by a government safety net (either from the government of the
emerging market country or from international agencies such as the IMF), foreign capital flows into
the domestic banks. The capital inflow is further stimulated by government policies that keep
exchange rates pegged to the dollar, which probably gave foreign investors a sense of lower risk.
        Capital inflows were very high across Mexico and east Asia, averaging from 5 to 14% of
GDP in the three years leading up to the crisis and were an important factor leading to the expansion
of bank lending, especially in the Asian-Pacific region (Folkerts-Landau, Schinasi, Cassard, Ng,
Reinhart and Spencer, 1995). The capital inflows fueled the lending boom which led to excessive
risk-taking on the part of banks, which in turn led to huge loan losses and a subsequent deterioration
of balance sheets in banks and other financial institutions.

Perversion of the Financial Liberalization/Globalization Process


         The story that we have told so far suggests that a lending boom and crash are inevitable
outcomes of financial globalization, but this is not the case. They only occur when there is an
institutional weakness that prevents the nation from successfully handling the globalization process.
More specifically, if prudential regulation and supervision to limit excessive risk-taking were strong,
the lending boom and bust would not happen. Why is the financial liberalization in some emerging
market countries undertaken with prudential regulatory and supervisory structure that are completely
inadequate? Why are more resources not devoted to prudential supervision when it is clear that the
rapid growth in bank lending requires it?
         The answer is that the principal-agent problem encourages powerful domestic business
interests to pervert the financial globalization process. Politicians and prudential supervisors are
ultimately agents for voters-taxpayers (principals), implying a goal of protecting the taxpayers’
interest because taxpayers bear the cost of any losses if the banking sector eventually must get
bailed out. To act in the taxpayer’s interest, prudential regulators and supervisors have several
tasks: they set restrictions on holding assets that are too risky, impose sufficiently high capital
requirements, and close down insolvent institutions (not engage in regulatory forbearance).
                                                 -18-
        Powerful business interests that own banks will want to prevent the supervisors from doing
their job properly. After all, if they can grow the bank rapidly, they stand to make a fortune, but
if the bank gets in trouble, it is likely to get bailed out and the taxpayer foots the bill. Because
powerful business interests contribute heavily to politicians’ campaigns, they are often able to
persuade politicians to weaken regulations that restrict their banks from engaging in high risk/high
payoff strategies. In addition, these business interests can also make sure that the supervisory
agencies are starved for resources, so that even in the presence of tough regulations, the supervisory
agency does not have the capability to effectively monitor banking institutions or to close them
down.
        A particularly graphic example of how powerful business interests perverted the financial
liberalization/globalization process occurred in South Korea (Hahm and Mishkin, 2000).. Because
of the chaebols’ (the large conglomerates that dominate the Korean economy) massive size – sales
of the top five chaebols are nearly 50% of GDP38 – the chaebols were politically powerful and
exerted great influence over the ruling party. In the 1990s, the chaebols were in trouble: they
weren’t making any money. From 1993 to 1996, the return on assets for the top 30 chaebols was
never much more than 3% (a comparable figure for U.S. coporations is 15-20%.) Indeed, in 1996
right before the crisis hit, the rate of return on assets had fallen to 0.2%. Furthermore, it was only
the top 5 chaebols that had any profits: the 6th to 30th chaebols never had a rate of return on assets
much above 1% and in many years had negative rates of returns. With this kind of profitability and
the already high leverage, any banker in his right mind would pull back on lending to these
conglomerates if there was no government safety net. But because the banks knew the government
would make good on the chaebol’s loans if they were to default, the opposite occurred: banks
continued to lend to the chaebols, evergreened their loans, and in effect, threw good money after
bad, knowing that the government would throw money at the chaebols to enable them to pay off
their creditors if the chaebols got into trouble.39
        Even though the chaebols were getting substantial financing from commercial banks, it was
not enough to feed their insatiable appetite for more credit. The chaebols decided that the way out
of their troubles was to go for growth, and they needed massive amounts of funds to do it. Even
with the vaunted Korean savings rates of over 30%, there just were not enough loanable funds to
finance the chaebols’ planned expansion. Where could they get it? The answer was in the
international capital markets.
        To enable them to get the cash they needed to grow, the chaebols encouraged the government
to accelerate the process of opening up Korean financial markets to foreign capital as part of the
liberalization process. In 1993, the Korean government expanded the ability of domestic banks to
make the loans denominated in foreign currency by expanding the types of loans for which this was

                                                -19-
possible. At the same time, the Korean government effectively allowed unlimited short-term
foreign borrowing by financial institutions, but maintained quantity restrictions on long-term
borrowing as a means of managing capital flows into the country. Opening up short-term but not
long-term to foreign capital flows made no economic sense because it is short-term capital flows that
make an emerging market economy financially fragile: short-term capital can fly out of the country
extremely rapidly if there is any whiff of a crisis. This policy did, however, make complete political
sense because the chaebols needed the money and it is much easier to borrow short-term funds at
lower interest rates in the international market because long-term lending is much riskier for foreign
creditors. Keeping restrictions on long-term international borrowing, however, allowed the
government to say that they were still engaged in restricting foreign capital inflows and so could
claim that they were opening up to foreign capital in a prudent manner. In the aftermath of these
changes, Korean banks opened 28 branches in foreign countries which gave them access to foreign
funds.
        Although Korean financial institutions now had access to foreign capital, the chaebols still
had a problem. The Bank of Korea, which was the regulator of the commercial banks and was
somewhat independent of the government, did not allow chaebols to own commercial banks and so
the chaebols might not get all of the bank loans that they needed. What was the answer? The
chaebols needed to get their hands on financial institutions that they could own, that were allowed
to borrow abroad, and that were subject to very little regulation. This way the financial institution
could borrow foreign funds and then lend them to the chaebols who owned the institution, that is,
it could engage in connected lending.
        There was a type of existing financial institution in Korea that perfectly met the chaebols
requirements: institutions that are called merchant banks. Merchant banking corporations are
wholesale financial institutions which engaged in underwriting securities, leasing, and short-term
lending to the corporate sector. They obtained funds for these loans by issuing bonds and
commercial paper and by borrowing from inter-bank and foreign markets. Merchant banks were
not only allowed to borrow abroad, but they were almost virtually unregulated. The chaebols saw
their opportunity. They got the government to allow many finance companies (some already owned
by the chaebols) which were not allowed to borrow abroad, to be converted into merchant banks,
which could. In 1990 there were only six merchant banks and all of them were foreign affiliated –
by 1997 after the chaebols had worked their political magic, there were 30 merchant banks, 16 of
which were owned by chaebols, two of which were foreign owned but in which chaebols were major
stock holders, and 12 of which were independent of the chaebols, but Korean owned (Hahm, 2003).

Stage One: Severe Fiscal Imbalances

                                                -20-
         The second route through which emerging market countries end up experiencing a financial
crisis is through government fiscal imbalances which entail substantial budget deficits that need to
be financed. The recent financial recent financial crisis in Argentina in 2001-2002 is of this type,
but other recent crises, for example in Russia in 1998, Ecuador in 1999, and Turkey in 2001 also
have some elements of this type of crisis.40
         In contrast to Mexico and the East Asian crisis countries, Argentina had a well-supervised
banking system and a lending boom did not occur before the crisis. Thus, the banks were in
surprisingly good shape before the crisis, despite the fact that a severe recession had begun in 1998.
It was this recession, however, that led to tax revenue falling well below the revenue collected from
taxes, leading to severe fiscal imbalances that were so large that the government now had trouble
getting both domestic residents and foreigners to buy enough of its bonds. It then had to look for
other sources to finance its deficits.
         When governments face large fiscal imbalances and can’t finance their debt, they often cajole
or force banks to purchase government debt. This is exactly what the Argentine government did in
the runup to its financial crisis in 2001. When investors lose confidence in the ability of the
government to repay this debt, they unload the bonds, which causes their prices to plummet. Now
the banks that are holding this debt have a big hole on the asset side of their balance sheets, with a
huge decline in their net worth. The deterioration in bank balance sheets then causes a decline in
bank lending and can even lead to a bank panic, and this is exactly what happened in Argentina.
Severe fiscal imbalances hence spill over into weakening of the banking system which leads to a
worsening of adverse selection and moral hazard problems, which, in turn, causes an economic
contraction.

Stage Two: Runup to the Currency Crisis


         The deterioration in bank balance sheets that results from mishandled financial liberalization
that occurs with globalization or from large fiscal imbalances sets the stage for a full-scale financial
crisis because it increases adverse selection and moral hazard in financial markets well before the
crisis starts, but other factors also come into play shortly before the crisis hits.


Higher Interest Rates and their Effects on Cash Flow. Another precipitating factor in the some
crises (e.g., the Mexican but not East Asian crises) is a rise in interest rates that comes not from
domestic sources, but rather from events abroad such as a tightening of U.S. monetary policy. When


                                                 -21-
interest rates rise, firms that are good credit risks (because they are likely to be making more
conservative investments) cannot make enough to cover the very high interest payments. While
good risks may stop seeking out loans, the poorer risks are all to eager to ask for money. For
example, firms with speculative investments, like building mammoth skyscrapers, are more than
happy to continue to take on loans, because if they get lucky, they will have more than enough to
pay the high interest rate and still have a big profit.41 Banks and other lenders, on the other hand,
will now be leery of making loans because more of the firms seeking loans are likely to be bad credit
risks. Therefore, when there is an increase in interest rates, there is now more adverse selection in
financial markets and lenders will want to make fewer loans. A sharp upward spike in interest rates,
can then lead to a steep decline in the supply of loans which, in turn, will lead to a substantial
decline in investment and aggregate economic activity.42
         If a firm is borrowing, a rise in interest rates also leads to higher interest payments and
therefore a decline in a firm’s cash flow, the difference between its cash receipts and cash it must
pay out to cover its costs, including its borrowing. With plenty of cash flow, a firm can finance its
projects internally, and there is no asymmetric information because it knows how good its projects
are. With less cash flow, the firm has fewer internal funds and has to get funds from someplace else,
say a bank, who does not know the firm as well as its owners or managers do. The bank will not be
sure if the firm has good safe projects or whether it might take on big risks and then be unlikely to
pay the loan back. The outcome is that lower cash flow for healthy, low-risk firms increases both
adverse selection (only poor risks will be actively seeking loans) and moral hazard (once even a
healthy firm gets the loan it is more likely to take on higher-risk, higher-return projects because it
will not bear the full costs if the projects turn out badly). Because of increased adverse selection and
moral hazard, then, the bank may not lend the good risk the money to undertake the investment even
though it would have been profitable both for the firm and the bank. When cash flow drops as a
result of an increase in interest rates, adverse selection and moral hazard problems become more
severe, again curtailing lending and investment.43


Increases in Uncertainty and the Decline in Lending. When a prominent firm fails, when the
economy is in a recession, or when the political system is in disarray, people become more uncertain
about the returns on investment projects. When uncertainty increases, as in Mexico in 1994 when
Luis Donaldo Colosio, the ruling party’s presidential candidate, was assassinated and there was an
uprising in the southern state of Chiapas, or as in Thailand and Korea when there were failures of
major financial and nonfinancial firms just before their crises, it becomes harder for lenders to
screen out good from bad credit risks and to monitor the activities of firms they’ve loaned money


                                                 -22-
to. They become less willing to lend, and as lending declines, investment, and then aggregate
economic activity decline as well.


Declining Asset Prices and the Decline in Net Worth. A decline in asset prices, whether stocks,
real estate or something else will cause firms’ net worth to decline. When the stock market crashes
for example, for example, firms’ share prices decline. Since share prices reflect the valuation of a
corporation’s shares, a market crash means that the net worth of most corporations has fallen. Since
net worth plays a similar role to collateral when a firm is seeking a loan, a lower net worth tells
lenders that a firm’s value will provide less protection if the firm’s investments go sour. Because
lenders are now less protected against the consequences of adverse selection, they decrease their
lending not only to risky firms but also to healthy, conservative firms whose net worth has declined.
As a result, investment and, in turn, aggregate output decline.44
         In addition, because corporate net worth has declined, risky firms have less to lose and thus
may take out riskier investments. The resulting increase in moral hazard gives lenders another
reason not to lend. This is another path by which a collapse in asset prices leads to decreased
lending and economic activity.45
        High interest rates, increases in uncertainty and stock market crashes did occur shortly before
and contributed to full-blown crises in Mexico, Thailand, South Korea and Argentina. (The stock
market crashes in Malaysia, Indonesia and the Philippines occurred simultaneously with the onset
of the crisis.) All these factors increased asymmetric information problems; they made it harder for
lenders to distinguish bad borrowers from good ones and increased the incentives for borrowers to
make risky investments because they had less to lose given the decline in their net worth if their
investments were unsuccessful. High interest rates, increases in uncertainty and stock market
declines, along with the deterioration in banks’ balance sheets, worsen adverse selection and moral
hazard problems and made these economies ripe for a serious financial crisis.

Stage Three: Currency Crisis


        As the effects of any or all of the factors build on each other, participants in the foreign
exchange market start to smell blood. Currencies in these countries that are fixed against the U.S.
dollar, now become subject to a speculative attack as speculators engage in massive sales of these
currencies. As the sale of these currencies flood the market, supply far outstrips demand, the value
of these currencies collapses, and a currency crisis ensues. Although high interest rates abroad,
increases in uncertainty and asset price declines play a role, the two key factors that trigger the


                                                 -23-
speculative attacks and plunge the economies into a full-scale, vicious circle of currency crisis,
financial crisis and meltdown are the deterioration in bank balance sheets or severe fiscal
imbalances.
        When banks and other financial institutions are in trouble, it is not as easy for governments
to raise interest rates to encourage capital inflows in order to defend their currencies. If the
government raises interest rates, banks must pay more to obtain funds. This increase in costs
decreases bank profitability which may lead them to insolvency. Thus when the banking system is
in trouble, the government and central bank are now between a rock and a hard place: If they raise
interest rates too much they will destroy their already weakened banks, and if they don’t they can’t
maintain the value of their currency.
        Once the speculators in the market for foreign currency recognize the troubles in a country’s
financial sector and realize that the government’s ability to defend the currency is limited, they know
that they are presented with an almost sure thing because the currency only can decline in value.
Speculators engage in a feeding frenzy of selling the currency. These sales rapidly use up the
country’s holdings of reserves of foreign currency because it has to sell these to buy the domestic
currency to keep it from falling in value. Once the government (central bank) has exhausted its
holdings of foreign currency reserves, the jig is up. It no longer has the resources to intervene in the
foreign exchange market and must let the value of the domestic currency fall, that is, the government
must allow a devaluation.
        In December 1994, even though the Mexican central bank intervened in the foreign exchange
market and raised interest rates sharply, it was unable to stem the speculators’ attack and was forced
to devalue the peso on December 20, 1994. In Thailand, three events culminated in a suscessful
speculative attack that forced the Thai central bank to allow the baht to float downward in July 1997:
concerns about the country’s large current account deficit, concerns about weakness in its financial
sector, and the failure of a major finance company, Finance One. Soon after the baht’s devaluation,
speculative attacks developed against the other countries in the region, leading to the collapse of the
Philippine peso, the Indonesian rupiah, the Malaysian ringgit, and the South Korean won.
        We have seen that severe fiscal imbalances, as in Argentina, can lead to a deterioration of
bank balance sheets, and so can also help produce a currency crisis along the lines described above.
However, fiscal imbalances can trigger a currency crisis more directly.46 When government budget
deficits spin out of control, investors (both foreign and domestic) begin to suspect that the country
may not be able to pay back its government debt and so will start pulling money out of the country,
selling the domestic currency. Recognition that the fiscal situation is out of control thus results in
a speculative attack against the currency, which eventually results in its collapse, as occurred in
Argentina on January 6, 2002.

                                                 -24-
        Most currency and financial crises are initiated by poor fundamentals: weak supervision and
regulation of the banking system or large fiscal imbalances. However, asset prices such as stock
prices and exchange rates have huge swings that are often hard to explain. Speculative attacks on
currencies that set off a currency crisis can occur spontaneously even for the best run economies.
Speculative bubbles in the real estate and stock markets also appear frequently almost everywhere
and when they burst, they too can lead to financial instability. Strong fundamentals, therefore, do
not completely insulate an economy from financial crises. Poorly managed economies, nevertheless,
are especially vulnerable to currency and financial crises.



Final Stage: Currency Crisis Triggers a Full-Fledged Financial Crisis


         A key characteristic that distinguishes emerging market economies from advanced
economies is the structure of their debt markets. In advanced economies inflation has tended to be
moderate and so debt contracts are typically of fairly long duration with fixed interest rates. Around
half of residential mortgages in the United States, for instance, have fixed rates and come due in
around thirty years time, and corporate bonds with maturities of thirty years or longer are common.
         In contrast, emerging market countries have experienced very high and variable inflation
rates in the past, with accompanying wide swings in the value of the domestic currency. One result
of their experience is that debt contracts are of very short duration in order to minimize the inflation
risk. In many emerging market countries, for example, almost all bank lending is very short-term
with variable rate contracts that are adjusted on a monthly, or sometimes daily basis. In addition,
because of the likelihood that their currency’s value will change for the worse, many nonfinancial
firms, banks and governments in emerging market countries find it much easier to issue debt
denominated in foreign currencies, often U.S. dollars.47 That is, a shoe manufacturer in Mexico
might need to borrow 100 million pesos, but because the bank is unsure what the value of the peso
will be next year, it prefers to lend the shoe manufacturer the same amount in dollars, say $10
million if the exchange rate is10 pesos per dollar. This phenomenon is called liability
dollarization.48
        When debt contracts are denominated in foreign currency (dollars), an unanticipated
depreciation or devaluation of the domestic currency (pesos) causes the debt burden of domestic
firms increases in terms of domestic currency because it takes more pesos to pay the dollarized debt
back. Since the goods and services produced by most firms are priced in the domestic currency, the
firms’ assets do not rise in value in terms of pesos, while the debt does. The depreciation of the


                                                 -25-
domestic currency increases the value of debt relative to assets, and the firm’s net worth declines.
The decline in net worth then increases adverse selection and moral hazard problems described
earlier which, leads in turn, to a decline in investment and economic activity.
        To see how this works, consider what happened in 1997 when Indonesia experienced its
currency crisis in 1997 and experienced a 75% depreciation of its currency, the rupiah. Debt that
was denominated in dollars now became four times as expensive in terms of rupiah. In this
situation, almost every Indonesian firm with a substantial amount of dollar debt was insolvent. The
moral hazard and adverse selection problems of lending to an insolvent firm were so severe, that
even if an Indonesian firm in this situation had a good balance sheet, was run well, and had superb
investment opportunities, no one would lend to it. Investment and spending collapsed as did the
entire economy.
        For firms that export most of their production (generally priced in foreign currency), the
impact of a depreciation on the balance sheet is far less severe. The depreciation leads to a rise in
the prices of the goods and services the exporter produces, thereby raising the value of its assets in
terms of the domestic currency. The increase in asset values helps to offset the rise in the value of
the exporter’s debt. This outcome suggests that the larger is the export sector in an emerging market
economy, the less severe are the consequences of a currency collapse on balance sheets and the
overall economy, and this is what empirical evidence finds.49
         We now see how the institutional structure of debt markets in emerging market countries
interacts with the currency devaluations to propel the economies into full-fledged financial crises,
producing what has been referred to by economists as “twin crises” (Kaminsky and Reihnart, 1999),
that is, a concurrent currency and financial crisis. Because so many firms in these emerging market
countries had debt denominated in foreign currency like the dollar and the yen, depreciation of their
currencies resulted in increases in their indebtedness in domestic currency terms, even though the
value of their assets remained unchanged. When the Mexican peso lost half its value by March
1995, and the Thai, Philippine, Malaysian, and South Korean currency lost 30%-50% of their value
by the beginning of 1998, firms’ balance sheets took a big negative hit, causing a dramatic increase
in adverse selection and moral hazard problems.. This negative shock was especially severe for
Indonesia, as we have seen, which saw its currency fall by over 75%, resulting in insolvency for
almost all firms with substantial amounts of debt denominated in foreign currencies.
         If an economy is almost completely dollarized, that is, if most of its debts are denominated
in dollars, as the Argentine economy was,50 the currency collapse is truly devastating because the
destruction of balance sheets is so total. In the aftermath of its crisis, Argentina entered the worst
depression in its history from 2001-2002, with the unemployment rate climbing to nearly 20%, a
level comparable to what we in the United States experienced during the Great Depression of the

                                                -26-
1930s.
        The collapse of a currency also can lead to higher inflation. The central banks in most
emerging market countries have little credibility as inflation fighters. Thus, a sharp depreciation of
the currency after a currency crisis leads to immediate upward pressure on import prices, which is
likely to lead to a dramatic rise in both actual and expected inflation. This happened in Mexico and
Indonesia, where inflation surged to over a 50% annual rate after the currency crisis. The rise in
expected inflation after the currency crises in Mexico and Indonesia led to a sharp rise in interest
rates which now had to compensate for inflation risk. The resulting increase in interest payments
caused reductions in firms’ cash flow, which led to increased asymmetric information problems
since firms were now more dependent on external funds to finance their investment. The resulting
increase in adverse selection and moral hazard problems made domestic and foreign lenders even
less willing to lend.
        Further deterioration in the economy occurred because the collapse in economic activity, the
deterioration of cash flow and balance sheets of firms and household meant that many of them were
no longer able to pay off their debts, resulting in substantial losses for banks. Sharp rises in interest
rates also had a negative effect on banks’ profitability and balance sheets. Even more problematic
for the banks was that the value of their foreign-currency-denominated liabilities increased sharply
after the devaluation. Thus, bank balance sheets were squeezed from both the assets and liabilities
side – the value of their assets was falling as the value of their liabilities was rising.51 Moreover,
many of the banks’ foreign-currency-denominated debt was very short term, so that the sharp
increase in the value of the debt led to immediate problems for the banks because this debt needed
to be paid back quickly.
        Under these circumstances, the banking system will suffer a bank panic and collapse in the
absence of a government safety net. In many cases, however, the International Monetary Fund, will
help emerging market nations protect depositors and avoid a bank panic. (Indonesia, on the other
hand, did experience a banking panic in which numerous banks were forced out of business.)
However, given the loss of bank capital and the need for the government to intervene to prop up the
banks, even with the IMF’s help, banks’ ability to lend is sharply curtailed. A banking crisis that
does not develop into a banking panic, still hinders the ability of the banks to lend and worsens
adverse selection and moral hazard problems in financial markets because banks are less capable
of playing their financial intermediation role. The banking crisis and the other factors that increase
adverse selection and moral hazard problems in the credit markets explain the collapse of lending
and economic activity in the aftermath of the crisis.

Contagion

                                                  -27-
         So far, we have been looking at shocks to the financial system that come from actions or
events inside an individual emerging market economy, but not all financial crises are homegrown:
a currency or financial crisis in one country can spread to another, a process called contagion.
Research on crisis contagion suggests that it is particularly virulent after there has been a large surge
of capital flows which come to a “sudden stop”,52 the crisis in the initiating country came as a
surprise, and there is a highly leveraged common creditor, like banks, mutual funds or hedge funds,
who have been lending to the countries that experience contagion.53 The 1997 East Asian financial
crisis, for example, began in Thailand, with the devaluation of the Thai baht in July. Once
participants in the financial markets recognized that something was rotten in the financial sector in
Thailand, they realized that the rest of East Asia might be in a similarly precarious financial state.
 Speculative attacks then began against the currencies in other countries of the region. As it became
clear that South Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines and Indonesia had also experienced lending booms
that weakened their banking systems, the selling pressure became so great that their currencies
collapsed as well. Although the speculative pressure on these other currencies might have been
triggered by the successful speculative attack on the Thai baht, the reason that the speculative attacks
were successful against these other currencies was that they had similar problems in their domestic
banking sectors. Speculators also began to sell the currencies of Singapore, Hong Kong and Taiwan,
but these countries were able to survive the attacks because strong prudential regulation and
supervision had kept their banking systems in good shape. Their governments were able to
successfully defend their currencies and keep them from devaluing, and financial crises did not
occur. The East Asian financial crises, then, were primarily home grown, although the exact timing
was probably influenced by contagion from Thailand.



                                              VII.
                                           CONCLUSION


        Financial globalization can play an important role in encouraging development of institutions
so that financial markets can effectively perform the crucial function of getting capital to its most
productive uses which is key to generating growth and reducing poverty. However, as we have
seen, although financial globalization can be a strong force for good, it can also go very wrong if
a country doesn’t manage the process properly.54 The increased likelihood that countries will
experience financial crises when they open up their financial markets to foreign capital explains
why there is no clear cut relationship between financial globalization and economic growth.

                                                  -28-
Botched financial globalization also poses a danger because it may create a backlash against
globalization. We have seen this backlash particularly in countries such as Argentina where support
for globalization has become particularly weak after their financial crisis.55
        Bad policies are the reason that financial development does not occur and why financial
globalization often leads to harmful financial crises Instead of rejecting financial globalization, we
can greatly improve the environment for economic growth if we develop policies that promote
successful financial development and financial globalization. The analysis in this lecture provides
important clues as to how this might be done. However, getting good policies is by no means
straightforward and discussing them would have to be the subject of another lecture.56




                                                -29-
                                       REFERENCES


Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A Robinson ( 2001), “The Colonial Origins of
Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review, vol. 91,
no. 5 (December), pp. 1369-1401


Abiad, Abdul, Nienke Oomes and Kenichi Ueda (2005), “The Quality Effect: Does Financial
Liberalization Improve the Allocation of Capital?” paper presented at the Journal of Banking and
Finance/World Bank Conference on Globalization and Financial Services in Emerging Market
Countries, June 20-21.


Aghion, Philippe and Patrick Bolton, (1997), “A Trickle-Down Theory of Growth and
Development with Debt Overhang,” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 64, pp. 151-72.


Aghion, Philippe, Howitt, Peter and David Mayer-Foulkes, (2005) “The Effect of Financial
Development on Convergence: Theory and Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics vol. 120
(February): 173-222.


Aizenman, Joshua (2003), “On the Hidden Links Between Financial and Trade Opening,”
University of Santa Cruz, mimeo.


Albouy, David (2005) “The Colonial Origins of Comparative Develoment: A Reexamination Based
on Improved Settler Mortality Data” University of California, Berkeley, February.
Alden, A Edward and Alan Beattie (2002), “Comment and Analysis – Keeping the Faith,”
Financial Times, London Edition, May 6th, 2002.


Alejandro, “Carlos Diaz (1985),”Goodbye Financial Repression: Hello Financial Crisis,” Journal
of Development Economics vol 19, no. 1-2, pp. 1-24.


Alesina, Alberto, Vittorio Grilli and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, (2004), “The Political Economy
of Capital Controls,” in Leonardo Leiderman and Assaf Razin (eds.) Capital Mobility: The Impact
on Consumption, Investmetn and Growth (Cambridge University Press: Cambridge).


Alfaro, Laura, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Vadym Volosovych (2003) “Why Doesn’t Capital

                                             -30-
Flow from Rich to Poor Countries? An Empirical Investigation,” Harvard Business School mimeo.
(December)


Alfaro, Laura, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Vadym Volosovych ( 2004) “Capital Flows in a
Globalized World: The Role of Policies and Institutions,” Harvard Business School mimeo.
(November).


Arteta, C., Barry Eichengreen and Charles Wyplosz (2001), “When Does Capital Account
Liberalization Help More Than it Hurts?” NBER Working Paper No. 8414 (August);


Bailliu, Jeannine (2000), “Private Capital Flows, Financial Development, and Economic Growth
in Developing Countries,” Bank of Canada Working Paper No. 2000-15 (July).


Banerjee, Abhijit and Andrew Newman (1993), “Occupational Choice and the Process of
Development,” Journal of Political Economy vo. 101, pp. 274-98.


Barajas, Adolfo, Roberto Steiner and Natalia Salazar (2000), “The Impact of Liberalization and
Foreign Investment in Colombia’s Financial Sector,” Journal of Development Economics 63(1),
pp. 157-96;


Barth, James R., Gerard Caprio and Ross Levine (2001), “Banking Systems Around the Globe:
Do Regulation and Ownership Affect Performance and Stability?” in Frederic S. Mishkin, ed.,
Prudential Regulation and Supervision: What Works and What Doesn't (University of Chicago
Press: Chicago, 2001), pp. 31-95.

Barth, James R., Gerard Caprio, Jr. and Ross Levine (2002), "Bank Regulation and Supervision:
What Works Best?” World Bank Policy Research Paper 2733, forthcoming Journal of Financial
Intermediation


Beck, Thorsten, Ross Levine and Norman Loayza (2000). ”Finance and the Sources of Growth,”
Journal of Financial Economics, vol 58, no. 1-2, pp. 261-300.


Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirguc-Kunt and Ross Levine, (2004), “Finance, Inequality and Poverty:
Cross-Country Evidence,” World Bank, mimeo. April.


                                            -31-
Beck, Thorsten and Ross Levine (2004), “Legal Institutions and Financial Development,” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 10417 (April)..


Bekaert, Geert, and Campbell R. Harvey (2000), “Foreign Speculators and Emerging Equity
Markets,” Journal of Finance, vol. 55 (April), pp. 562-613,



Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey and Robin L. Lumsdaine (1998), “Dating the Integration of
World Equity Markets,” NBER Working Paper 6724 (September).


Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey and R. Lundblad (2001), “Does Financial Liberalization Spur
Growth?” NBER Working Paper No. 8245 (September);


Berkowitz, David, Katharina Pastor and Jean-Francois Richard (2000), “Economic Development,
Legality and the Transplant Effect,” Working Paper 39, Harvard University, Center for
International Development (March).


Bernanke, Ben S. and Mark Gertler (1989), “Agency Costs, Net Worth and Business Fluctuations,”
American Economic Review, vol. 79, no. 1, (March), pp. 14-31,


Bernanke, Ben S. and Mark Gertler (1995), “Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of Monetary
Transmission”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 9, no. 4, (Fall), pp. 27-48.

Bhagwati, Jagdish (1998), “The Capital My: The Difference between Trade in Widgets and
Dollars,” Foreign Affairs 77 (May/June 1998)


Bhagwati, Jagdish (2002) The Winds of the Hundred Days: How Washington Mismanaged
Globalization (MIT Press: Cambridge, Mass.)


Bhagwati, Jagdish (2004). In Defense of Globalization (Oxford University Press: New York).


Boyreau-Debray, Genevieve and Shang-Jin Wei (2004), “Pitfalls of a State-Dominated Financial
System: The Case of China,” CEPR Discussion Papers 4471 (July).


Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo (2001), “On the Fiscal Implications of Twin

                                             -32-
Crises,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 8277 (May).


Calomiris, Charles (2002), A Globalist Manifesto for Public Policy (Institute of Economic Affairs:
London).


Calomiris, Charles W. and R. Glenn Hubbard (1989), “Price Flexibility, Credit Availability and
Economic Fluctuations: Evidence from the United States, 1894-1909,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, vol. 54 (August), pp. 429-52,


Calomiris, Charles W. and R. Glenn Hubbard (1990), “Firm Heterogeneity, Internal Finance, and
‘Credit Rationing’” Economic Journal, (March).


Calvo, Guillermo A., Alejandro Izquierdo and Ernesto Talvi (2003), “Sudden Stops, the Real
Exchange Rate, and Fiscal Sustainability: Argentina’s Lessons,” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper No. 9828 (July).


Calvo, Guillermo and Carmen Reinhart (2000), “When Capital Inflows Come to a Sudden Stop:
Consequences and Policy Options,” in Peter Kenen and Alexander Swoboda, eds., Reforming the
International Monetary and Financial System, (International Monetary Fund: Wash. D.C.): 175-
201.


Caprio, Gerard and Maria Soledad Martinez-Peria (2000), “Avoiding Disaster: Policies to Reduce
the Risk of Banking Crises,” World Bank mimeo. And Egyptian Center for Economic Studies
Working Paper No. 47.

Claessens, Stijn, Asli Demiriguc-Kunt and Harry Huizinga (2000), “The Role of Foreign Banks
in Domestic Banking Systems,” in Stijn Claessens and Marion Jansen, eds. The
Internationalization of Financial Services: Issues and Lessons for Developing Countries (Kluwer
Academic Press: Boston);


Claessens, Stijn , Asli Demiriguc-Kunt and Harry Huizinga (2001), “How Does Foreign Bank
Entry Affect Domestic Banking Markets,” Journal of Banking and Finance, vol. 25., no. 5, pp.,
891-911.


Claessens, Stijn, Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Yung Chul Park (2001) “Contagion, Why Crises

                                              -33-
Spread and How This Can Be Stopped,” in Stijn Claessens and Kristin J. Forbes, eds.,
International Financial Contagion (Kluwer Academic Publishers: Boston): 9-41.



Claessens, Stijn and Marion Jansen (2000), The Internationalization of Financial Services: Issues
and Lessons for Developing Countries (Kluwer: Dordrecht, Holland).


Claessens, Stijn and Leora Klapper (2002), “Bankruptcy around the World: Explanations of its
Relative Use,” World Bank mimeo., June, forthcoming in American Law and Economic Review.


Clarke, George, Robert Cull, Laura D’Amato and Andrea Molinari (2000), “The Effect of Foreign
Entry on Argentina’s Banking System,” in Stijn Claessens and Marion Jansen, eds. The
Internationalization of Financial Services: Issues and Lessons for Developing Countries (Kluwer
Academic Press: Boston)


Cole, Harold L., Lee E. Ohanian, Alvara Riascos and James A. Schmitz, Jr. (2004), “Latin
America in the Rearview Mirror,” NBER Working Paper No. 11008 (December).


Dehejia, Rajeev H. and Roberta Gatti, (2002) “Child Labor: The Role of Income Variability and
Access to Credit in a Cross Section of Countries,” World Bank Policy Research Paper 2767
(January).


Demirguc-Kunt, Asli and E. Detragiache (1998a), “Financial Liberalization and Financial
Fragility,” International Monetary Fund Working Paper no. 98/83 (June).

Demirguc-Kunt, Asli and Enrica Detragiarche (1998b), “The Determinants of Banking Crises:
Evidence from Developed and Developing Countries,” IMF Staff Papers, vol 45, no. 1 (March),
pp. 81-109.


Demirguc-Kunt, Asli and Vojislav Maksimovic (1998). “Law, Finance and Firm Growth,”
Journal of Finance 53 (December): 2107-37.


De Soto, Hernando (2000), The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and
Fails Everywhere Else (Basic Books; New York).


                                              -34-
Dooley, Michael (2000) “A Model of Crises in Emerging Markets,” Economic Journal vol. 110
(January), pp. 256-72.


Easterly, William and Ross Levine (2003) “Tropics, Germs and Crops: How Endowments Influence
Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary Economics 50(1) (January): 3-40


Edison, Hali, Ross Levine, Luca Ricci and Torsten Slok (2002), “International Financial
Integration and Economic Growth,” Journal of International Money and Finance vol. 21, pp. 749-
76.


Edison, Hali J., Michael W. Klein, Luca Antonio Ricci and Torsten Slok (2004), “Capital Account
Liberalization and Economic Performance: Survey and Synthesis,” IMF Staff Papers vol. 51, no.
2 , pp. 26-62.


Edwards, Sebastian (2001), “Capital Mobility and Economic Performance: Are Emerging
Economies Different?” NBER Working Paper No. 8076 (January).


Eichengreen, Barry (2001), “Capital Account Liberalization: What Do Cross-Country Studies Tell
Us,” The World Bank Economic Review, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 341-65 (October).


Eichengreen, Barry and Ricardo Hausmann (1999) “Exchange Rates and Financial Fragility,” in
New Challenges for Monetary Policy (Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City: Kansas City): 329-
368.

Eichengreen, Barry, Hausmann, Ricardo and Ugo Panizza (20xx), “The Mystery of Original Sin,”
in Barry Eichengreen and Ricardo Hausmann, eds., Debt Denomination and Financial Instability
in Emerging-Market Economies (University of Chicago Press: Chicago).

Eichengreen, Barry, Rose, Andrew, and Charles Wyplosz (1996) “Contagious Currency Crises:
First Tests,” Scandanavian Journal of Economics, 98: 463-84.


Estevadeordal, Fanz and Alan Taylor (2002) “The Rise and Fall of World Trade 1870-1939" NBER
Working Paper W 9318 (November).


Fazzari, Steven M., R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C. Petersen (1988), “Financial Constraints and

                                             -35-
Corporate Investment: New Evidence on Financing Constraints,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 1, pp. 141-95.


Fischer, Stanley (2003). “Globalization and Its Challenges,” American Economic Review vol. 93:
1-30.


Fisher, Irving (1933), "The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions", Econometrica, Vol. 1,
pp. 337-57.


Folkerts-Landau, David, Gary J. Schinasi, M. Cassard, V.K. Ng, Carmen M. Reinhart and M.G.
Spencer (1995), “Effect of Capital Flows on the Domestic Financial Sectors in APEC Developing
Countries,” in Capital Flows in the APEC Region, in Moshin S. Khan and Carmen M. Reinhart,
eds. (International Monetary Fund: Washington, D.C), pp. 31-57.


Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz (1963), A Monetary History of the United States 1867-
1960 (Princeton: Princeton University Press)


Galor, Oded and J. Zeira, (1993) “Income Distribution and Macroeconomics,” Review of Economic
Studies, vol. 60 (January), pp. 35-52,


Gertler Mark, and Simon Gilchrist (1994), “Monetary Policy, Business Cycles, and the Behavior
of Small Manufacturing Firms,       Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 109 (May), pp. 309-40,


Glaeser, Edward, La Porta, Rafael and Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio, and Andrei Shleifer (2004) “Do
Institutions Cause Growth?” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 10568 (June).

Glick, Reuven and Michael Hutchison (1999), “Banking and Currency Crises: How Common
are Twins?” in Financial Crises in Emerging Markets, eds. Reuven Glick, F. Moreno and M.
Spiegel (Cambridge University Press: New York)


Goldberg, Linda (2004), “Financial Sector FDI and Host Countries: New and Old Lessons,”
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports No. 183 (April).


Goldstein, Morris and Philip Turner (2004). Controlling Currency Mismatches in Emerging Markets
(Institute for International Economics: Washington, D.C.).

                                              -36-
Haber, Stephen (1997), How Latin America Fell Behind: Essays on the Economic Histories of
Brazil and Mexico, 1800-1914 (Stanford University Press, Stanford, California)



Haber, Stephen (2004), “Political Competition and Economic Development: Evidence from the
Banking Systems of the United States and Mexico,” Stanford University mimeo. (December).


Hahm, Joon-Ho (2003), “The Government, the Chaebol and Financial Institutions Before the
Economic Crisis,” in Stephan Haggard, Wonhyuk Lim and Euysung Kim, eds., Economic Crisis
and Corporate Restructuring in Korea (Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK), pp. 79-101.


Hahm, Joon-Ho and Frederic S. Mishkin (2000) "The Korean Financial Crisis: An Asymmetric
Information Perspective," (with Joon-Ho Hahm) Emerging Markets Review, Vol.1, #1: 21-52.


.
Henry, Peter Blair (2000), “Equity Prices, Stock Market Liberalization, and Investment,” Journal
of Financial Economics 58(1-2), pp. 301-34.


Henry, Peter Blair (2000), “Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging Market
Equity Prices,” Journal of Finance 55, pp. 529-64.


Henry, Peter Blair (2003), “Capital Account Liberalization, the Cost of Capital and Economic
Growth,” American Economic Review vol 93, no. 2 (May) pp. 91-96.

Hongyi, Li, Lyn Squire and Heng-fu Zou (2001),“Explaining International and Intertemporal
Variations in Income Inequality,” Economic Journal, 108(1), pp. 26-43 (December).


Honohan, Patrick, (2004) “Financial Development, Growth and Poverty: How Close are the
Links?” World Bank Policy Working Paper No. 3203. (February)


Hubbard, R. Glenn (1995), “Is There a ‘Credit Channel’ for Monetary Policy?” Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis Review, vol. 77, (May/June), pp. 63-74/


Inter-American Development Bank, (2005) Unlocking Credit: The Quest for Deep and Stable Bank
Lending, 2005 Report, Economic and Social Progress in Latin America (Inter-American

                                             -37-
Development Bank and Johns Hopkins University Press, Wash. D.C. 2005).


International Monetary Fund (2001), World Economic Outlook (IMF: Washington, D.C. October).


Jeong, Hyeok and Robert M. Townsend, (2005), “Sources of TFP Growth: Occupational Choice
and Financial Deepening,” University of Chicago mimeo. (April)



Jewsiewicki, B. (1983) , “Rural Society and the Belgian Colonial Economy,” in D. Birmingham
and P.M. Martin, eds. The History of Central Africa, Volume II (Longman, New York).


Kaminsky, Graciela L., Reinhart, Carmen M. (1999), “The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking
and Balance of Payments Problems,” American Economic Review, vol 89, pp. 473-500.


Kaminsky, Graciela L., Reinhart, Carmen M. and Carlos A Vegh (2003) “The Unholy Trinity
of Financial Contagion,” National Bureau of Economic Research WorkingPaper 10061 (October).



Kaminsky, Graciela and Sergio Schmuckler (2002), “Short-Run Pain, Long-Run Gain: The
Effects of Financial Liberalizations,” World Bank Working Paper 2912 (October).


Kane, Edward (1977), “Good Intentions and Unintended Evil: The Case Against Selective Credit
Allocation,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 9, no. 1 (1977) pp. 55-69.

Kearl, James R., Clayne L. Pope, Gordon C. Whiting and Larry T. Dimmer (1979) “A Confusion
of Economists,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings vol. 69 No. 2 (May 1979)
pp. 28-37.


Kim, E. Han, and Vijay Singal (2000), “Stock Market Opening: Experience of Emerging Market
Economies,” Journal of Business, vol. 73 (January), pp. 25-66.


King, Robert and Ross Levine, (1993), “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics vol. 108, pp 717-737.


Klein, Michael (2005) “Capital Account Liberalization, Institutional Quality and Economic

                                           -38-
Growth: Theory and Evidence,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
11112 (February).


Klein Michael and Giovanni Olivei (1999), “Capital Account Liberalization, Financial Depth and
Economic Growth,” NBER Working Paper No. 7384 (October).


Kraay, Art, (1998), “In Search of the Macroeconomic Effects of Capital Account Liberalization,”
World Bank, Development Research Group, Washington, D.C.


Krugman, Paul, (1998) “What Happened to Asia?” M.I.T. mimeo.


La Porta, Rafael Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny, (1997)
“Legal Determinants of External Finance,” The Journal of Finance 52(3), pp. 1131-50


La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny, (1998),
“Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy 106 (6), pp. 1113-55



La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer (2002), “Government
Ownership of Banks,” Journal of Finance, 57 (1), pp. 265-301


Levine, Ross (1996), “Foreign Banks, Financial Development and Economic Growth,” in Claude
E. Barfield, ed., International Financial Markets: Harmonization versus Competition (AEI Press:
Washington, D.C.)

Levine, Ross (1997), “Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and Agenda,”
Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 688-72.


Ross Levine, (2004), “Finance and Growth,” National Bureau Working Paper 10779 (September
2004), forthcoming in in Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf eds. Handbook of Economic
Growth (North Holland).


Levine, Ross, Norman Loayza and Thorsten Beck, (2000), “Financial Intermediation and Growth:
Causality and Causes,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol 46 (1), (August) pp. 31-77


                                             -39-
Levine, Ross and Sara Zervos, (1998), “Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth,” American
Economic Review vol. 88, no. 3 (June), pp. 537-58


Levine, Ross, and Sara Zervos (1998), “Capital Control Liberalization and Stock Market
Development,” World Development 26, pp. 1169-84;


Lucas, Robert (1990) “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?” American
Economic Review 80, 2 (May), pp. 92-96.


Maddison, Angus (2001) The World Economy: A Millenial Perspective (Paris: Development Centre
of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development).


Makoto, Abe, and Mamoko Kawakami (1997), “A Distributive Comparison of Enterprise Size in
Korea and Taiwan,” The Developing Economies, XXXV-4 (December), pp. 382-400.


Mankiw, N. Gregory (1986), "The Allocation of Credit and Financial Collapse.", Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 101, pp. 455-70.


Mishkin, Frederic S. (1999), “Global Financial Instability: Framework, Events, Issues,” Journal
of Economic Perspectives, vol. 13 (4) (Fall), pp. 3-20.


Mishkin, Frederic S. (2003), "Financial Policies and the Prevention of Financial Crises in
Emerging Market Countries," in Martin Feldstein, ed., Economic and Financial Crises in Emerging
Market Countries (University of Chicago Press: Chicago): 93-130.

Mishkin, Frederic S. (2005), “Getting Financial Globalization Right,” paper prepared for the World
Bank/Journal of Banking and Finance conference Globalization and Financial Services in Emerging
Market Countries, Washington, D.C. June 20-21-2005.


Mishkin, Frederic S. (Forthcoming), The Next Great Globalization: How Disadvantaged Nations
Can Harness Their Financial Systems to Get Rich (Princeton University Press: Princeton, N.J.)


Morck, Randall, Daniel Wolfenzon, and Bernard Yeung (2004), “Corporate Governance,
Economic Entrenchment and Growth,” NBER WP 10692 (August) forthcoming in the American
Economic Association’s Journal of Economic Literature

                                              -40-
Obstfeld, Maurice and Taylor, Alan M., (2002), “Globalization and Capital Markets,” NBER
Working Paper No. 8846 (March).


Obstfeld, Maurice and Alan M. Taylor (2004). Global Capital Markets: Integration, Crisis and
Growth (Cambridge University Press: Cambridge).


Pew Research Center For The People & The Press (2003) Views of a Changing World: June 2003
(Pew Research Center For The People & The Press: Wash. D.C. 2003)


Prasad, Eswar, Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei and M. Ayhan Kose (2003), “Effects of Financial
Globalization on Developing Countries: Some Empirical Evidence.” International Monetary
Fund, mimeo. (March 17).


Prasad, Eswar, Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei and M. Ayhan Kose (2004), “Financial
Globalization Growth and Volatility in Developing Countries,” NBER Working Paper No. 10942
(December).


Rodrik, Dani, Subramanian, Arvind, and Francesco Trebbi (2002), “Institutions Rule: The Primacy
of Institutions over Geography and Integration in Economic Development,” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 9305 (November).


Quinn, Dennis P. (1997), “The Correlates of Change in International Financial Regulation,”
American Political Science Review vol. 91 (September), pp, 531-51,

Rajan, Raghuram ad Luigi Zingales, (1998), “Financial Dependence and Growth,” American
Economic Review 88(3) (June) pp. 559-586.


Rajan Raghuram and Luigi Zingales (2003a), “The Great Reversals: the Politics of Financial
Development in the 20th Century,” Journal of Financial Economics, 69, pp. 5-50.


Raghuram G. Rajan and Luigi Zingales, (2003b), Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists:
Unleashing the Power of Financial Markets to Create Wealth and Spread Opportunity (Crown
Business: New York)


Rodrik, Dani (1998), “Who Needs Capital-Account Convertibility?” in Stanley Fischer et al,

                                             -41-
Should the IMF Pursue Capital-Account Convertibility? Essays in International Finance No. 207,
Department of Economics, Princeton University (May).


Schmuckler, Sergio L. (2004) “Financial Globalization: Gain and Pain for Developing Countries,”
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Review (Second Quarter):. 39-66.


Stiglitz, Joseph (2002), Globalization and its Discontents (W.W. Norton: New York, 2002).


Stiglitz, Joseph E. and Andrew Weiss (1981), "Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect
Information", American Economic Review, Vol. 71 (1981), pp. 393-410.


Soros, George (2002) On Globalization (Public Affairs: New York).


Svalaeryd, H. and J. Vlachos, (2002), “Market for Risk and Openness to Trade: How Are They
Related?” Journal of Public Economics 57 (2) (2002), pp. 364-95.


Taylor, Alan M. (1992) “External Dependence, Demographic Burdens and Argentine Economic
Decline after the Belle Poque,” Journal of Economic History 52 (December), pp. 907-36.


Taylor, Alan (2002), “Globalization, Trade and Development: Some Lessons from History”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 9326 (November).


Tornell, Aaron, Frank Westermann and Lorenza Martinez (2004), “The Positive Link Between
Financial Liberalization, Growth and Crises,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper No. 10293 (February)


Tornell, Aaron, Frank Westermann and Lorenza Martinez ( 2004), “The Positive Link Between
Financial Liberalization, Growth and Crises,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper No. 10293 (February),

Unite, Angelo and Michael Sullivan (2003), “The Effect of Foreign Entry and Ownership
Structure on the Philippine Domestic Banking Market” , Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol.
27. Issue 12, (December 2003).


Weil, David N. (2005), Economic Growth (Addison-Wesley: Boston)

                                             -42-
Weitzman, Martin (1970), "Soviet Postwar Economic Growth and Capital Labor Substitution,"
American Economic Review vol. 60, no. 4 (September), pp. 676-92


Williamson, John and M. Mahar (1998), A Survey of of Financial Liberalization, Princeton Essays
in International Finance no. 211 (Princeton University: Princeton N.J. November).


Wolf, Martin (2004), Why Globalization Works? (Yale University Press: New Haven, 2004).


World Bank (2001), Finance for Growth: Policy Choices in a Volatile World (World Bank and
Oxford University Press: Oxford).


World Bank (2004) World Development Indicators (World Bank, Washington DC,)


World Bank (2005) Doing Business in 2005: Removing Obstacles to Growth (World Bank,
International Finance Corporation and Oxford University Press: Washington, D.C.).




                                             -43-
Is Financial Globalization Beneficial?
Frederic S. Mishkin
JEL Nos. F02, O10, O16, G20



                                           ABSTRACT



         This lecture examines whether financial globalization is beneficial to developing countries
by first examining the evidence on financial development and economic growth and concludes that
financial development is indeed a key element in promoting economic growth. It then asks why if
financial development is so beneficial, it often doesn’t occur. It then goes on to examine whether
globalization, particularly of the financial kind, can help encourage financial and economic
development and argues that it can. However, financial globalization does not always work to
encourage economic development because it often leads to devastating financial crises. The issue
is thus not whether financial globalization is inherently good or bad, but whether it can be done
right.




                                               -44-
                                          ENDNOTES



1. The international trade data are from Taylor (2002) while the GDP data are from Maddison
(2001). The capital flow data is from Obstfeld and Taylor (2002).

2. As we will see the main reason why capital doesn’t flow from rich to poor countries is
because of the weaker institutional environment in poor countries. Empirical evidence supports
this view: Alfaro, Kalemli-Ozcan, and Volosovych (2003) and Alfaro, Kalemli-Ozcan, and
Volosovych (2004).

3. The figure is the percent of gross capital formation supplied by foreigners for 2002 from the
World Bank (2004).

4. For example, in Kearl, Pope, Whiting and Dimmer (1979), 97 percent of economists agreed
(generally or with some provisions) with the statement that “Tariffs and import quotas reduce
general economic welfare.”

5. George Soros is often viewed by the media as being hostile to financial globalization.
However, reading Soros (2002) closely suggests that he is supports financial globalization if
steps are taken to make it work well, a theme that is consistent with the views expressed in this
book.

6. An exception to popular books which criticize financial globalization is Martin Wolf’s superb
book, (Wolf, 2004) Also see Calomiris (2002).

7. Quoted from by Alden and Beattie (2002) p. 16.

8. An excellent nontechnical survey of the extensive empirical evidence on this topic can be
found in World Bank, (2001) See also Ross Levine (2004)Schmuckler (2004), pp. 39-66. For
a recent paper that also finds that financial deepening is crucial to economic growth for
developing countries, see Aghion, Howitt and Mayer-Foulkes (February 2005).

9. In some research, financial deepening is characterized as an expansion of the financial sector.
Here I am using the term financial deepening more generally to refer to financial development
which includes not only an expansion in the financial sector but an improvement in its
institutions so that it can allocate capital to its more productive uses more efficiently. Abiad,
Oomes and Ueda (2005) finds that financial liberalization, which improves the institutional
framework of the financial sector, does lead to higher economic growth, and is far more
important to economic growth than just expansion of the financial sector.

10. One concern with this result is that high economic growth before 1960 could have led to
high financial development and to further high economic growth, so that causality might not run
from financial development to growth. To rule this out, later papers have used instrumental
variables techniques in which the origin of the legal system (English, French, German or
Scandinavian) which was determined typically hundreds of years ago, well before recent
growth, is used as an instrument for financial development at the beginning of the period. The
result is the same, economic growth is positively related to financial development. For example,
see Levine, Loayza and Beck (2000), Levine and Zervos (1998) and Beck, Levine and Loayza,
(2000).

                                              -45-
11. And this is particularly true in industries that depend more on external finance. See
Raghuram Rajan and Luigi Zingales, (1998).

12. Honohan (2004), page 2. Case studies such as Jeong and Townsend (2005) also support the
importance of financial deepening to economic growth.

13. The World Bank in its annual publication Doing Business in 2005, (World Bank, 2005)
updates De Soto’s numbers on the time and cost of registering property using a somewhat
different methodology. The World Bank’s numbers are substantially lower than De Soto’s, but
they still show that the cost of registering property in poor countries is much longer than in rich
countries and at a much higher cost.

14.One notorious example was how the Belgian Congo was run under King Leopold of Belgium
as is discussed in Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001) and Jewsiewicki (1983). Belgian
policy in the Congo was so exploitive and ruthless that it led to an international protest
movement in the early twentieth century.

15.Albouy (2005), questions the strength of Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson’s (AJR’s) results on
methodological grounds, arguing that the settler mortality data used by them is flawed. However,
other papers, using very different methodological approaches which do not make use of settler
mortality data do support AJR’s conclusion that institutional development is a key driving factor
behind economic development. E.g., see Easterly and Levine (2003), Rodrik, Subramanian, and
Trebbi (2002) and Glaeser, La Porta and Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2004).

16. In addition, when legal systems were transplanted to a country with an unreceptive
environment, they also do not seem to work very well: Berkowitz, Pastor and Richard (2000).

17. Inter-American Development Bank (2005) Chapter 10 finds that state-owned banks are less
efficient, have higher nonperforming loans, higher overhead and lower returns than private
sector banks.

18. In PPP adjusted terms, per capita GDP in China was 13% of that in the United States (World
Bank, 2004)

19. Boyreau-Debray and Wei (2004) shows that the state-dominated financial system in China
has favored inefficient state firms, has resulted in low capital mobility across regions and has
allocated capital away from more productive regions toward the less productive ones.

20. See Chapter Six, “The Taming of the Government” in Rajan and Zingales (2002), pp. 129-
156, for a description of this process in England.

21. The principal-agent analysis also explains the result found in La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,
and Shleifer (2002)that the negative effect of state ownership of banks on financial development
and growth is found to be larger for poorer countries. In poorer countries where there is less
transparency, it is easier for politicians to get state-owned banks to channel funds to themselves,
their cronies or to business interests that support them. In rich countries with a strong free
press, this is far more difficult because the press is more likely to expose such practices.

22. The history of Latin America illustrates many examples of incumbents encouragement of
financial repression. For example, see Haber (1997, 2004).


                                               -46-
23.The Rajan and Zingales (2003b) view is backed up by a substantial body of research. The
survey by Morck, Wolfenzon, and Yeung (2004) summarizes this literature as follows: “In
many countries, large pyramidal groups effectively entrust the corporate governance of
substantial parts of their corporate sectors to a few extremely wealthy families. This can
potentially magnify the poor governance of a few family patriarchs into inefficient economy-
wide capital allocation, reduced investment in innovation, and retarded economic growth.
Moreover, to preserve the status quo, these elite families sometimes appear to influence public
policies so as to curtail private property rights development, capital market development and
economic openness. We dub this situation economic entrenchment. We argue that much existing
work points to economic entrenchment as a significant issue in many countries.”

24. These restrictive regulations were actually not fully eliminated until the 1990s.

25. Rajan and Zingales (2003b) provides a graphic example in which incumbent financial
institutions in Japan were able to repress the financial system with government help. In 1933,
the Japanese banks were able to get the approval of the Ministry of Finance to set up a Bond
Committee which decided which firms could issue corporate bonds and on what terms. As a
result the Japanese banks were able to limit the issuance of corporate bonds to small amounts.
With the opening up of the global financial markets in the late 1970s, this system broke down
and corporate bond issuance skyrocketed.

26. Trade openness also weakens the effectiveness of capital controls because firms engaged
in international trade can avoid them by over and under-invoicing of exports and imports. With
less effective capital controls due to openness of trade, it is more likely they will be abandoned,
thereby promoting financial globalization. See Aizenman (2003).

27. Financial development also helps promote competition because it enables new firms to
acquire firms so that they can compete with established firms. Increased competition is also a
critical element in producing growth because it encourages efficiency and adoption of superior
technology. Indeed an important reason why developing countries like those in Latin America
have done so poorly are their barriers to competition, among which is financial repression. For
a discussion of how barriers to competition have stunted economic growth, see Cole, Ohanian,
Riascos and Schmitz, Jr. (2004).

28. These figures are from Henry (2003). For additional evidence see Levine and Zervos
(1998), Bekaert and Harvey (2000), Bekaert, Harvey and Lumsdaine (1998), Bekaert, Harvey
and Lundblad (2001), Henry (2000), Henry (2000), International Monetary Fund (2001), and
Kim and Singal (2000). Klein and Olivei (1999) and Bailliu (2000) however find that these
benefits are less clear for the poorest countries.

29. For example, see the surveys in Levine (1997), Eichengreen (2001), Fischer (2003), Edison,
Klein, Ricci and Slok,(2004), and Prasad, Rogoff, Wei and Kose (2003). Prasad, Rogoff, Wei
and Kose page 31 summarize this literature by saying: “Table 3 summarizes the 14 most recent
studies on this subject. Three out of the fourteen papers report a positive effect of financial
integration on growth. However, the majority of the papers tend to find no effect or a mixed
effect for developing countries. This suggests that, if financial integration has a positive effect
on growth, it is probably not strong or robust.” In a later paper, Prasad, Rogoff, Wei and Kose
(2004), they have a more positive slant on financial globalization stating that “we do find that
financial globalization can be beneficial under the right circumstances. Empirically, god
institutions and quality of governance are crucial in helping developing countries derive the
benefits of globalization.”Some of the most cited papers in this literature are Alesina, Grilli and
Milesi-Ferretti, (2004), Quinn (1997), Kraay (1998), Rodrik (1998), Tornell, Westermann and

                                               -47-
Martinez (2004), Arteta, Eichengreen and Wyplosz (2001), Edwards (2001) and Edison,
Levine, Ricci and Slok (2002). More recent evidence in Klein (2005) however, finds that
capital account liberalization in countries with better institutions does indeed lead to higher
growth.

30. Tornell, Westermann and Martinez (2004) documents the empirical relationship between
financial liberalization and the increased incidence of financial crises.

31. Although, not as well known, Chile went through a similar crisis in 1982-83. GDP declined
almost 14% in 1982 and 3% in 1983, with inflation increasing to above 20%. See Alejandro
(1985).

32.See Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999). Similar findings are found in Glick and Hutchison ( 1999)
and Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache (1998a) and Williamson and Mahar (1998).

33. See Table 2, page 11 of Mishkin (1999).

34. Table 2, page 11 of Mishkin (1999)

35. Krugman (1998) and Dooley (2000) emphasize that the government safety net was a key factor
in producing lending booms and subsequent financial crises.

36. As Friedman and Schwartz (1963) have emphasized, another negative effect on the economy
can occur through the effect of a banking panic on the money supply. Because a banking panic
also results in a movement from deposits to currency, the usual money multiplier analysis
indicates that the money supply will fall. The resulting decline in the money supply then leads
to higher interest rates, which increase adverse selection and moral hazard problems in financial
markets and cause a further contraction in economic activity.

37. Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiarche (1998b) find that greater competition from financial
liberalization also lowers bank franchise value and hence bank net worth, which increases
bank’s incentives to take on excessive risk. This provides another reason why financial
liberalization may promote a lending boom

38. Makoto and Kawakami (1997). The same top five chaebols produced value added of 8.4%
of GDP.

39. This tendency was even stronger for the bigger and older commercial banks such as Korea
First, Seoul, Hanil and Commercial Bank of Korea. Naturally they were the worst hit by the
1997 crisis and had to be taken over by the government.


40. Although Brazil did undergo a fiscal and currency crisis in 1999, it did not undergo a
financial crisis because its banking system was hedged against foreign exchange rate risk, in
contrast to the other countries discussed here.

41. This analysis here is the same as that used by Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) to explain credit
rationing in which some borrowers are denied loans even when they are willing to pay a higher
interest rate. The Stiglitz-Weiss model was first applied to explaining how interest rate rises can
lead to a financial collapse in Mankiw (1986).


                                               -48-
42. Note that this effect of higher interest rates is due to a contraction of the supply of loans, and
operates over and above the usual demand story of why higher interest rates lead to an economic
contraction. In that story, the demand for investment and borrowing falls when interest rates
rise because the cost of financing investment projects has risen.

43. For empirical evidence that cash flows affect investment, see Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen
(1988), Gertler and Gilchrist (1994), and the surveys in Hubbard (1995), Bernanke and Gertler
(1995).


44. For a theoretical treatment and empirical evidence on net worth effects on investment and output
fluctuations, see Bernanke and Gertler (1989), Calomiris and Hubbard (1989), Calomiris and
Hubbard (1990), and the surveys mentioned in the previous footnote.

45.     One factor that helps lead to financial instability in industrialized economies, but not in
emerging market economies, and so is not discussed above, is the debt-deflation phenomenon
described in Fisher (1933). In economies in which inflation has been moderate, which
characterizes most industrialized countries, many debt contracts are typically of fairly long
duration. In this institutional environment, an unanticipated decline in the price level leads to a
decrease in the net worth of firms. When the price level falls it lowers the value of the assets, but
since debt payments are contractually fixed in nominal terms, an unanticipated decline in the price
level lowers firms’ net worth. (Alternatively, you could think of the result of the price level falling
as raising the value of firms’ liabilities in real terms – increases the real burden of the debt, but
does not raise the real value of the assets. The result is that net worth in real terms – the
difference between assets and liabilities in real terms declines,) An unanticipated deflation
therefore causes a substantial decline in real net worth and an increase in adverse selection and
moral hazard problems facing lenders. The resulting increase in adverse selection and moral
hazard problems (of the same type that were discussed in assessing the effect of net worth declines
earlier) will thus also work to cause a decline in investment and economic activity. The debt-
deflation phenomenon is what the United States experienced during the Great Depression and it
is what Japan has been experiencing recently, though to a lesser extent.

46. Burnside, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2001) point out that banking crises also can create fiscal
imbalances because the government bailout of the banking system requires the government to
run future budget deficits. This provides an additional channel for how deterioration of bank
balance sheets can lead to speculative downward pressure on the domestic currency, and thus
lead to a currency crisis.

47. Eichengreen and Hausmann (1999),Eichengreen, Hausmann and Panizza (20xx) argue that
an additional reason countries are unable to issue debt denominated in domestic currency is the
lack of liquidity for markets in this type of debt. They call this phenomenon “original sin”. It
is however, highly controversial (e.g. see Goldstein and Turner (2004).

48. The percentage of liabilities that are dollarized is close to 40% in both Latin America and
low and middle income countries. See Inter-American Development Bank (2005). Figurue 4.1,
p. 50. Fig 4.7 on page 53 shows that firms in nontradable sectors are highly leveraged in
foreign currency debt in countries with high levels of dollarization.

49. See Calvo, Izquierdo and Talvi (2003), which documents that countries are more
vulnerable to sudden stops if they have 1) low openness, 2) a high degree of liability
dollarization, or 3) high debt levels.

                                                 -49-
50. The share of liabilities denominated in dollars in Argentina in 2001 was over 70%. See
Inter-American Bank, Unlocking Credit, op. cit, Figure 4.1, page 50.

51. An important point is that even if banks have a matched portfolio of foreign-currency
denominated assets and liabilities and so appear to avoid foreign-exchange market risk, a
devaluation can nonetheless cause substantial harm to bank balance sheets. The reason is that
when a devaluation occurs, the offsetting foreign-currency denominated assets are unlikely to
be paid off in full because of the worsening business conditions and the negative effect that
these increases in the value in domestic currency terms of these foreign-currency denominated
loans have on the balance sheet of the borrowing firms. Another way of saying this is that when
there is a devaluation, the mismatch between foreign-currency denominated assets and liabilities
on borrowers balance sheets can lead to defaults on their loans, thereby converting a market risk
for borrowers to a credit risk for the banks that have made the foreign-currency denominated
loans.

52. For a discussion of the sudden stop phenomenon in which capital inflows abruptly switch
to capital outflows, see Calvo and Reinhart (2000), pp. 175-201.

53. One of the earliest papers to test for contagion is Eichengreen, Rose and Wyplosz (1996).
For surveys which discuss the extensive theoretical and empirical literature on contagion see
Kaminsky, Reinhart and Vegh (2003) and Claessens, Dornbusch and Park (2001).

54. However, Kaminsky and Schmuckler (2002) take the view that the short-run pain from
financial crises resulting from financial globalization may still result in long-run gains in
growth.

55. See the surveys in Pew Research Center (2003).

56. See Mishkin (2005) and chapters 8-13 of my forthcoming book, (Mishkin, forthcoming) for
my views on policies to promote successful financial globalization.




                                              -50-
