NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REMEDYING EDUCATION:
EVIDENCE FROM TWO RANDOMIZED EXPERIMENTS IN INDIA
Abhijit Banerjee
Shawn Cole
Esther Duflo
Leigh Linden
Working Paper 11904
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11904
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2005

The authors are respectively from MIT (Department of Economics and Poverty Action Lab), Harvard
Business School, MIT( Department of Economics and Poverty Action Lab), and Columbia University
(Department of Economics, School of International and Public Affairs, and Poverty Action Lab). This project
is a collaborative exercise involving many people. Foremost, we are deeply indebted to the Pratham team,
who made the evaluation possible and put up with endless requests for new data: Pratima Bandekar, Rukmini
Banerji, Lekha Bhatt, Madhav Chavan, Shekhar Hardikar, Rajashree Kabare, Aditya Natraj, and many others.
We thank Jim Berry and Marc Shotland, Mukesh Prajapati and Nandit Bhatt for their excellent work
coordinating the fieldwork, and for their remarkable work in developing and improving the CAL program.
Kartini Shastry provided superb research assistance. Joshua Angrist, Angus Deaton, Rachel Glennerster,
Michael Kremer, Alan Krueger, Victor Lavy, and Caroline Minter-Hoxby provided very helpful comments.
For financial support, we thank the ICICI corporation, the World Bank, the Alfred E. Sloan Foundation and
the MacArthur Foundation Network on the Costs of Inequality. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Abhijit Banerjee, Shawn Cole, Esther Duflo, and Leigh Linden. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Remedying Education: Evidence from Two Randomized Experiments in India
Abhijit Banerjee, Shawn Cole, Esther Duflo, and Leigh Linden
NBER Working Paper No. 11904
December 2005
JEL No. O11, I21
ABSTRACT
Many efforts to improve school quality by adding school resources have proven to be ineffective.
This paper presents the results of two experiments conducted in Mumbai and Vadodara, India,
designed to evaluate ways to improve the quality of education in urban slums. A remedial education
program hired young women from the community to teach basic literacy and numeracy skills to
children lagging behind in government schools. We find the program to be very effective: it
increased average test scores of all children in treatment schools by 0.14 standard deviations in the
first year, and 0.28 in the second year, relative to comparison schools. A computer-assisted learning
program provided each child in the fourth grade with two hours of shared computer time per week,
in which students played educational games that reinforced mathematics skills. The program was
also very effective, increasing math scores by 0.35 standard deviations the first year, and 0.47 the
second year. These results were not limited to the period in which students received assistance, but
persisted for at least one year after leaving the program. Two instrumental variable strategies suggest
that while remedial education benefited the children who attended the remedial classes, their
classmates, who did not attend the remedial courses but did experience smaller classes, did not post
gains, confirming that resources alone may not be sufficient to improve outcomes.
Abhijit Banerjee
MIT
50 Memorial Drive, E52-252d
Cambridge, MA 02142
banerjee@mit.edu
Shawn Cole
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 271
Boston, MA 02163
scole@hbs.edu

Esther Duflo
MIT
50 Memorial Drive, E52-252g
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
eduflo@mit.edu
Leigh Linden
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, Mail Code 3323
New York, NY 10025
leigh.linden@columbia.edu

1

Introduction

The recent World Development Report on “Making Services Work for Poor People" (World
Bank, 2004) illustrates well the essential tension in the public conversation about primary education in developing countries. On the one hand the report embraces the broad agreement, now
enshrined in the Millennium Development Goals, that primary education should be universal.
On the other hand, it describes in detail the dismal quality of the educational services that
developing countries o¤er to the poor.
In rural India, for example, 25% of teachers were absent during random visits to schools
throughout the country, and only 50% were actually teaching (Michael Kremer, Karthik Muralidharan, Nazmul Chaudhury, Je¤rey Hammer, 2004). In Uttar Pradesh (a large Indian State),
a recent survey found that 41% of the children of primary school age cannot read a simple paragraph, 56% cannot write, and 63% cannot do simple additions (Abhijit Banerjee, Rukimini
Banerji, Esther Du‡o, Rachel Glennerster, Sendhil Mullainathan and Marc Shotland, 2005).
Even in urban India, where widespread absenteeism by students and teachers is not an issue,
the learning levels are very low: in Vadodara, a major Indian city and a site for the study in
this paper, only 19.5% of the students enrolled in grade1 three can correctly answer questions
testing grade one math competencies.
In these conditions, policies that promote school attendance may not be in children’s best
interests. And indeed, the recent evidence suggests that many interventions which increase
school participation do not improve test scores for the average student.2 Students simply did
not learn anything in the additional days that they spent at school.3
It is therefore clear that e¤orts to get children into school must be accompanied by signi…cant improvements in the quality of schools that serve these children. The problem is that while
we now know a reasonable amount about how to get children into school, much less is known
about how to improve school quality in a cost-e¤ective way. Worse still, a number of rigorous,
randomized, evaluations have con…rmed that spending more on resources like textbooks (Paul
1
2

In India, the term "standard" is used instead of the U.S. term "grade". We use grade throughout the paper.
These include giving children deworming drugs (Edward Miguel and Kremer, 2004) and providing school

meals for children (Kremer and Christel Vermeersch, 2004).
3
This is true even if we restrict our attention to children who were enrolled before the intervention, suggesting
this result is not due to a change in the composition of the children.

2

Glewwe, Kremer, and Sylvie Moulin 2002), ‡ip charts (Glewwe, Kremer, Moulin and Eric Zitzewitz, 2004), or additional teachers (Banerjee, Kremer and Suraj Jacob, 2004) has no impact
on children’s test scores (see Kremer, 2003 for discussions and more references ). These results
have led to a general skepticism about the ability of interventions focusing on inputs to make
a di¤erence (echoing Hanushek’s (1986 and 1995) earlier assessment of both the US and developing countries), and have led many to advocate more systemic reforms designed to change the
incentives faced by teachers, parents and children. The World Development Report, once again,
embraces this view, and proceeds to propose various ways to improve incentives (most of which
have either not been rigorously tested or when tested, have also proven rather disappointing).4
It is not clear, however, that we know enough to entirely give up on inputs. Based on the
existing evidence it seems possible that the problem is rather that we are not providing inputs
that address speci…c unmet needs in the school.
Ironically the di¢ culty in improving the quality of education may in part be a by-product
of the success in getting more children to attend school. Neither the infrastructure, nor the
curriculum, has been adapted to take into account the in‡ux of children and their characteristics:
many of these children are …rst generation learners whose parents are not in a position to follow
what is happening in school or react if their child falls behind. For example, in the Uttar Pradesh
survey mentioned previously, it was found that while 41% of the children cannot read a simple
paragraph, only 21% of the parents think that their children cannot read.
Meanwhile, in many countries, the school system continues to operate as if it were catering
to the elite. This may explain why just providing more inputs to the existing system, or more
school days, is often ine¤ective. For many children, neither more inputs nor an extra day makes
much of a di¤erence, because what is being taught in class is too hard for them. For example,
Glewwe and Kremer (1997) found that new textbooks make no di¤erence for the test scores of
the average child, but do help those who had already done well on the pretest. The authors
suggest that this is because the textbooks were written in English (the language of instruction,
in theory), which most children do not speak very well at all. Similarly, disappointing results
from programs that attempt to give more power to parents may be attributable to a lack of
4

See, for example, Banerjee et. al., 2005. An important exception is an incentive program for children (Kremer,

Edward Miguel, and Rebecca Thornton, 2005).

3

understanding of parents of what is supposed to happen in school.
Taken together, these results suggest the possibility that inputs speci…cally targeted to helping weaker students learn may potentially have large e¤ects.
This paper reports the results from randomized evaluations of two programs that provide
supplementary inputs to children at the bottom of the class. The …rst intervention is speci…cally
targeted to the weakest children: it is a remedial education program, where a young woman
(“balsakhi”) from the community works on basic skills with children who have reached grade
three or four without having mastered them. These children are taken out of the regular classroom to work with this young woman for 2 hours per day (the school day is about 4 hours).
The second intervention could potentially bene…t all children, but is adapted to a child’s current
level of achievement: it is a computer-assisted learning program, where children in grade four
are o¤ered two hours of shared computer time per week, during which they play games that
involve solving math problems at varying levels of di¢ culty. Both programs are provided by
Pratham, a very large NGO operating in conjunction with government schools in India.
The programs that we evaluated were run in Mumbai (formerly known as Bombay) and
Vadodara (formerly known as Baroda), two of the most important cities in Western India. Both
cities have a reputation for having relatively well-run government school systems by Indian
standards. Teacher attendance was not seen as a big problem and most children come to school
regularly. Nevertheless, the state of education when the evaluation began was rather abysmal:
as we noted, only 19.5% of third grade children in Vadodara pass the grade one competencies
in math (33.7% do so in Mumbai). These poor results occur despite the fact that both teachers
and children were coming to school. Improvements therefore require changing what children
learn while in school.
In contrast to the disappointing results of the earlier literature, we …nd that both programs
had a substantial positive e¤ect on children’s academic achievement. This is true in all years
and cities, despite the instability of the environment (notably a major riot in one of the cities in
2003). The remedial education program increased average test scores in the treatment schools
by 0.14 standard deviations in the …rst year, and 0.28 in the second year. Moreover, the weaker
students, who are the primary target of the program, gained the most. In the second year,
children in the bottom third of the initial distribution gained over 0.40 standard deviations. The

4

computer-assisted learning increased math scores by 0.35 standard deviations the …rst year, and
0.47 the second year, and was equally e¤ective for all students. These results persist over time:
one year after leaving the program, initially low scoring students who were in balsakhi schools
still do better than their untreated counterparts, though the di¤erence is smaller. Students of all
levels perform better in math if they were in schools where the math computer-assisted learning
program was implemented.
Moreover, using the assignment rules for the remedial education program to form instruments, we are able to separately identify the direct e¤ect of attending the remedial education
classes, and the indirect e¤ect on children whose weakest peers were removed from the classroom
for part of the day. The results suggest that the remedial education program bene…ted only the
children who went to the balsakhi and that the e¤ect on those students is very high (0.6 to
1 standard deviation). Since this was a pull-out program, the children who remained in class
could have also bene…ted from a reduced student teacher ratio. The striking fact that they did
not suggests that reducing class size without changing pedagogy may not help, a conclusion that
…ts with the view that inputs, per se, are not su¢ cient.
Our con…dence in these results is bolstered by the way the evaluation was carried out. We
had the opportunity to implement an evaluation design that is often recommended but rarely
utilized. First, both programs were allocated using random assignment across the same set of
schools, in a way that allowed us to separately estimate the e¤ects of the two programs as well
as compare their impacts. Second, the programs were run on a very large scale (over 15,000
students were included in the study over 3 years). In addition, the remedial education program
in particular had already been taken to scale in a number of cities. Third, we simultaneously
carried out randomized evaluations of the remedial education program in two di¤erent cities, each
of which had its own management team, and got similar results. This reinforces our con…dence
in the external validity of these results. Fourth, we conducted each evaluation over two years,
using several tests to assess learning, making it less likely that the results are a consequence of
the newness of the program, or the e¤ect of implementing an evaluation. In other words, there
is little risk that what we are evaluating cannot be reproduced elsewhere. Finally, we measure
not only the short term e¤ect, but the persistence of the program as well.
Taken together, these results suggest that it is possible to substantially improve the qual-

5

ity of education in developing countries with cheap interventions, and without a fundamental
transformation of the system. Computers provided children some relief from the indi¤erent
teaching they have come to expect, but did not raise the ire of the teacher’s union. Indeed, no
teachers objected to the program, and many believed it was bene…cial . Even the balsakhis, who
pose a more obvious threat to teachers, and did meet some initial resistance, became more and
more welcome as the teachers realized that they were actually taking some of the more di¢ cult
children o¤ the teachers hands.
The fact that both interventions had an e¤ect but the reduction in class size did not, suggests
that we cannot simply stick with the conventional educational production function approach.
It is not the number of teachers that seems to matter but how they are deployed, and what
they do. Our results are therefore consistent with the earlier literature, which found no e¤ects
of additional inputs. The computer-assisted learning program illustrates this point even better.
As we will see below, the program took advantage of computers that were already in the schools,
but were not used. The program found a way to make these computers pedagogically useful
in the treatment schools, without placing additional demands on the teachers’ time. It is the
utilization in this speci…c way and not the possession of the computers that had an impact.
In other words, we read the evidence as saying that resources can make a di¤erence. But
to improve the quality of education for the children brought into school by “education for all”
campaigns, resources must target students’needs, rather than be used to just provide more of
what the schools already have.
Our paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the remedial education and
computer-assisted learning interventions in detail.

Section 3 describes the evaluation design.

Section 4 checks for pre-existing di¤erences between the treatment and comparison groups and
discusses attrition patterns. In Section 5, we present the results of the evaluation and in Section
6, we distinguish the direct e¤ects of being taught by a remedial education instructor from the
indirect e¤ects of being left behind in a smaller, more homogenous class. Section 7 evaluates
the cost-e¤ectiveness of the interventions.

6

2

The Programs

The interventions evaluated in this study were implemented in conjunction with Pratham, a
network of India-based NGO’s.

Pratham was established in Mumbai in 1994, with support

from UNICEF, and has since expanded to several other cities in India. Pratham now reaches
over 300,000 children in 13 States in India, employing thousands. It works closely with the
government: most of its programs are conducted in the municipal schools, and Pratham also
provides technical assistance to the government.

2.1

Remedial Education: The Balsakhi Program

One of Pratham’s core programs at the time of this study was a remedial education program,
called the Balsakhi Program (balsakhi means “the child’s friend”). This program, in place
in many municipal schools, provides government schools with a teacher (“balsakhi,” usually a
young woman, recruited from the local community, who has herself …nished secondary school)
to work with children identi…ed as falling behind their peers. While the exact details vary
according to local conditions, the instructor typically meets with a group of approximately 1520 children in a class for two hours a day during school hours (the school day is about 4 hours
long). Instruction focuses on the core competencies the children should have learned in the …rst
and second grades, primarily basic numeracy and literacy skills. The instructors are provided
with a standardized curriculum that was developed by Pratham. They received two weeks of
training at the beginning of the year and ongoing reinforcement while school is in session. The
program has been implemented in twenty Indian cities, reaching tens of thousands of students.
It was started in Mumbai in 1994, and expanded to Vadodara in 1999.
According to Pratham, the main bene…t of the program is to provide individualized, nonthreatening attention to children who are not capable of following the standard curriculum.
Children may feel more comfortable with women from their own communities than the teachers,
who are often from di¤erent backgrounds. As the balsakhi works with a relatively small class,
she may tailor the curriculum to the children’s speci…c needs. Furthermore, because Pratham’s
program takes children out of the classroom, it may even bene…t children who were not directly
targeted for intervention. Removing children from the classroom for two hours means the e¤ec-

7

tive student-teacher ratio in the main classroom drops, and may allow the teacher to focus on
more advanced material with the other children. Finally, if the balsakhis are indeed e¤ective,
when children return to the main classroom, the teacher may not need to re-teach remedial
material.
An important characteristic of this program is the ease which with it can be scaled up.
Because Pratham relies on local personnel, trained for a short period of time, the program is
very low-cost (each teacher is paid 500-750 rupees, or 10-15 dollars, per month) and is easily
replicated. There is rapid turnover among the balsakhis (each stays for an average of one year,
typically until they get married or get another job), indicating that the success of the program
does not depend on a handful of very determined and enthusiastic individuals. Finally, since the
balsakhis use whatever space is available (free classrooms, playground, or even hallways when
necessary), the program has very low overhead and capital costs.

2.2

Computer-Assisted Learning

The Computer-Assisted Learning (CAL) program takes advantage of a policy put in place by
the government of Gujarat and the established infrastructure of the Balsakhi program. In 2000,
the government delivered four computers to each of the 100 municipal primary schools in the
city (80% of the public schools). A survey conducted by Pratham in June 2002 suggested that
very few of these computers were actually used by children in elementary grade levels. While
some schools may have run programs for older students or allowed teachers to use the computers
for administrative tasks, most computers remained in their boxes, for want of anyone capable
of operating them.
This situation is not unique to Gujarat. Many in India see computer-assisted learning as a
supplement to regular instruction, that is, as a way to improve the quality of education. Good
educational software can be reproduced at nominal cost, and well-designed educational games
can sustain interest and curiosity in an otherwise dull school environment. The excitement seems
to be particularly strong in India, where the high-tech sector is both successful and visible.
Many local governments have started providing computers in schools, but without guidance
about how the schools should use them. The idea of using computers is particularly attractive
in areas where the number of quali…ed teachers is limited and the quality of existing teachers is
8

notoriously poor. Computers have the potential to both directly improve learning and indirectly
increase attendance by making school more attractive.
Unfortunately, despite this general excitement, there exists very little rigorous evidence on
the impact of computers on educational outcomes and no reliable evidence for India or other
developing countries. Moreover, the little evidence available is not encouraging. For example,
Joshua Angrist and Victor Lavy (2002) evaluate a computer-assisted learning program in Israeli
schools with disappointing results. Among the fourth and eighth grade students evaluated with
math and Hebrew exams, the data show no bene…ts for computer-assisted instruction and provide
some evidence that children who received such instruction are actually at a disadvantage. Alan
Krueger and Cecilia Rouse (2004) report a randomized evaluation of the language software “Fast
ForWord" commonly used in US classrooms, and …nd no impact.
It is not clear, however, that these results apply to the use of computers in schools in
developing countries: in Israel and in the US, computer-assisted learning replaces time spent in
well equipped classrooms with high quality instructors. It is easy to imagine that computers can
make a signi…cant improvement in schools in developing countries even if they are not useful in
the developed world.
Pratham had previous experience with computer-assisted learning, having run a small computerassisted learning program in Mumbai for several years. In particular, they had developed instructional software in the local language, Gujarati. After consultation with the Vadodara Municipal
Corporation (VMC), they introduced a computer-assisted learning program in half of the VMC
schools, using the computers already present when possible and replacing or adding computers
where necessary.
Pratham hired a team of instructors from the local community and provided them with
…ve days of computer training. These instructors provided children with two hours of shared
computer time per week (two children shared one computer) - one hour during class time and
one hour either immediately before or after school. During that time, the children played a
variety of educational computer games selected because they emphasized basic competencies in
the VMC mathematics curriculum. In the second year of the program, Pratham teamed up with
Media-pro, a company that develops instructional software, to create a suite of programs that
more closely followed the curriculum. Children also completed simple worksheets designed to

9

track their progress at the beginning of each session.
Pratham designed the program to allow the children to learn as independently as possible. The instructors encouraged each child to play games that challenged the student’s level
of comprehension, and when necessary, they helped individual children understand the tasks
required of them by the game. All interaction between the students and instructors was driven
by the child’s use of the various games, and at no time did any of the instructors provide general
instruction in mathematics.
Schools at which the CAL program was not implemented were free to use the computers on
their own, but we did not observe those schools employ them for instructional purpose.

3

Evaluation Design

3.1

Sample: Vadodara

Balsakhi
In 2000, Pratham expanded their remedial education program (Balsakhi) with a view to
progressively cover the entire city of Vadodara, taking advantage of the expansion, which a¤ected
98 schools, to evaluate the e¢ cacy of the program. In November, 2000, they administered an
academic test (designed by the Pratham team) to all children in the third grade. They then
hired and trained balsakhis, who were sent to half of the schools in Vadodara. Assignment was
random, with schools strati…ed by language (“medium”in the o¢ cial terminology) of instruction,
gender, and pupil-teacher ratios. Unfortunately, the school year was disrupted by an earthquake
in Gujarat, and children received only a few weeks of instruction between November and March.
This year of the program is best understood as a pilot program.5
In July, 2001 (the beginning of “year 1”), the group of schools that had received a balsakhi
in the previous year of the program received the balsakhi in the fourth grade, and the remaining
schools received a balsakhi in the third grade.
The program continued during the school year 2002-2003, with the addition of the 25 remaining primary schools. Schools where the balsakhi was assigned in grade three in the year
5

Throughout the paper, we will refer to the academic year 2001-2002 as “year 1”, year 2002-2003 as “year 2”

and year 2003-2004 as “year 3.”

10

2001-2002 were now assigned a balsakhi in grade four, so that by the end of year 2, grade four
children in the treatment had group bene…ted from two years of the Balsakhi program (if they
stayed in the same school). Schools where the balsakhi was assigned to grade four in year 1
received balsakhi assistance for grade three in year 2. The 25 remaining primary schools were
added by randomly assigning them to the research groups with equal probability in the same
way that the original schools were assigned. The number of schools and divisions in the two
groups are given in Table 1.
Given this design, children in grade three in schools that received the program for grade four
form the comparison group for children that receive the program for grade three, and vice versa.
While the assignment strategy ensures treatment and comparison groups are comparable, the
estimates of the program e¤ect would be biased downwards if the schools reassigned resources
from one grade to the other in response to the program. In practice, the way schools are
organized in urban India (and in particular in Vadodara) makes this extremely unlikely: schools
have only one class (a group of students and a teacher) per grade. All students are automatically
promoted, so that the principals have no discretion in the number of students per class or the
number of teachers per grade. Most schools have just enough class rooms for each class, and
the balsakhi class typically met outside, under a tree. There are essentially no other resources
to speak of that the head teacher could allocate to the grade that did not receive the balsakhi.
Thus, we are con…dent that there was no reallocation of resources to the grade that did not
receive the balsakhi, which makes these students a good comparison group.
Computer-Assisted Learning
The CAL program was implemented in half of the municipal primary schools in Vadodara in
2002-2003, focusing exclusively on children in grade four. The sample was strati…ed according to
treatment or comparison status for the grade four Balsakhi program, as well as gender, language
of instruction of the school, and average math test scores in the posttest in the previous year.
Table 1 summarizes the allocation of schools across di¤erent groups in the program. In some
schools, computers could not physically be installed, either because of space constraints or lack
of electricity to run the computers. These schools were excluded from the randomization. Thus,
in the …nal sample for the study, 55 schools received the CAL program and 56 serve as the
comparison group. The program was continued in 2003-2004, after switching the treatment and

11

comparison groups.

3.2

Sample: Mumbai

To ensure the results from the Vadodara study would be generalizable, the Balsakhi program
was also evaluated in Mumbai, in 2001-2002 and 2002-2003. Mumbai was Pratham’s birthplace,
and Pratham is currently operating various programs throughout the city. We selected one ward
(the L-ward) to implement a design similar to the design in Vadodara, including all Gujarati,
Hindi, Urdu, and Marathi schools. In total, 77 schools were included in the study. Schools were
strati…ed according to their scores in a pretest, as well as by the medium of instruction. Half
the schools were randomly selected to receive a balsakhi in grade two, and half the schools were
randomly selected to receive a balsakhi in grade three. Unfortunately, students in grade two
were not accustomed to taking standardized exams and no satisfactory test could be developed
for them,6 obliging us to remove them from the evaluation immediately after the initial pretest.
In 2001-2002, data were collected only for grade three children, while in 2002-2003, we expanded
the study to include students in grade four. As in Vadodara, children kept their treatment
assignment status as they moved from grade two to three (or three to four).
In the second year of the study, the Mumbai program experienced some administrative
di¢ culties. A decision to require balsakhis to pass a competency test resulted in the …ring of
many balsakhis. Hiring new recruits was complicated by the fact that the administrative sta¤
in L-Ward turned over between year 1 and year 2, and the new sta¤ lacked community contacts
necessary for recruitment. Finally, the principals of a couple of schools, hearing that the study
was being conducted by a group of Americans, refused balsakhis. Thus, only two-thirds of the
schools assigned balsakhis actually received them7 . Throughout the paper, the schools that were
assigned balsakhis but did not get them are included in the “intention to treat” group. The
analysis then adjusts for the fraction of the treatment group that was e¤ectively treated.
6

Students did have experience with exams administered by the teachers, but in these cases the teacher often

gave substantial assistance (including writing answers on the board).
7
All the children were tested, however: Schools could not refuse testing, because Pratham had obtained written
permission for testing from the city administration

12

3.3

Outcomes

The main outcome of interest is whether the interventions resulted in any improvement in
learning levels.
In the Vadodara pilot year, children were given a pretest in November, 2000, and posttest
in March, 2001. In the …rst full year, a pretest was given at the beginning of the school year
(August 2001), a midtest in October 2001, and a posttest in March 2002. In the second full
year, children were tested at the beginning of the school year (August 2002), in November 2002,
and again in March, 2003. In the …rst year in Mumbai, children were tested in October, 2001
and March, 2002; in the second year tests were given in August, 2002, and February 2003.
In Vadodara, the same test was used for grade three and four children, so that the scores can
be directly compared across grades. Scores on the pre- and posttest can also be directly compared
within a given year, as the format of the questions and the competencies tested were the same8 .
The exam contains a math and a language section. In Vadodara, both sections focused on
competencies that the Vadodara Municipal Corporation (VMC) prescribe for children in grades
one through four. On the math exam, for example, tasks ranged from basic number recognition,
counting, and ordering of single digit numbers to ordering of two digit numbers, addition of
single and two digit numbers, and basic word problems. Testing was similar in Mumbai. In the
…rst year, tests focused on competencies in grades one through three, while in the second year
they included grades one through four. In the second year, the same test was used for third and
fourth grade children.
The “pilot”year of the program (2000-2001) allowed Pratham to make signi…cant progress in
developing a testing instrument (the initial test was too di¢ cult) and e¤ective testing procedures
to prevent cheating and exam anxiety. The test was administered in both cities by Pratham,
with the authorization of the municipal corporation. At least three Pratham employees were
present in the classroom during each test to minimize cheating. To minimize attrition, the
testing team returned to the schools multiple times, and children who still failed to appear were
tracked down at home and, if found, were administered a make-up test outside of school.
Another outcome of interest is attendance and dropout rates. These were collected weekly
by Pratham employees who made randomly timed visits to classrooms to take attendance with
8

The tests did, however, change between years.

13

a roll call.
Finally, in the second year of the program, in both cities, data were collected on which
speci…c children were sent to the balsakhi. (balsakhis work with, on average, about 20 children
in a session).

4

Results: Pre-Intervention Di¤erence and Attrition Patterns

4.1

Descriptive Statistics: Level of Competencies and Pre-Intervention Differences

Tables 2 through 4 present descriptive statistics of the test scores for all samples used in this
analysis (year 1 and 2 in Vadodara and Mumbai). The scores are normalized relative to the
distribution of the pretest score in the comparison group in each city, grade, and year.9 The
appendix Tables 1 to 4 show the raw scores as well as the percentage of children who correctly
answered the questions in the test relating to the competencies in each grade.
The randomization appears to have been successful: with the exception of the CAL program
in year 3 in Vadodara, none of the di¤erences between the treatment and comparison groups
prior to the implementation of the program are statistically distinguishable from zero. The point
estimates are also very small, with each di¤erence less than a tenth of a standard deviation.
Table 5 implements bootstrap tests of equality of distributions proposed by Alberto Abadie
(2002).10 The …rst row in Table 5 reports the p-value for the hypothesis that the two distributions are equal, while the second row reports the p-value for the hypothesis that the treatment
distribution stochastically dominates the comparison distribution. The third line presents the
p-value for the hypothesis that the comparison distribution stochastically dominates the treatment distribution. For the pretest scores, the distributions between treatment and comparison
can never be statistically distinguished from each other, except in the case of the CAL program
9

Scores are normalized for each grade, year, and city, such that the mean and standard deviation of the

comparision group in the pretest is zero and one, respectively. (We subtract the mean of the control group in the
pretest, and divide by the standard deviation.) This allows for comparison across samples, as well with results
from other studies.
10
The test uses the Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistic to measure the discrepancy between the hypothesis of equality
of distributions and the data.

14

in year 2. Figure 1 shows an illustrative example of the cumulative distributive function of the
test score in the …rst year (Vadodara, year 2): the distributions are clearly on top of each other.
The raw scores (presented in appendices), and the percentage of children correctly answering
the questions relating to the curriculum in each grade give an idea of how little these children
actually know. In the grade three pretest in Vadodara in year 2, for example, the average
student in math scores about 16%, both in the comparison and treatment groups. Since one
of the math questions is multiple-choice, on average a student who picks a random answer to
that question will score 1.8%. If a student can consistently order two numbers and add two
single digit numbers, she earns the additional 14% needed to achieve the average third grade
performance. Only 19.5% of third grade children in Vadodara pass the grade one competencies
in math in grade three in Vadodara (and 33.7% in Mumbai). Grade one competencies cover
number recognition, counting and one digit addition and subtraction.
The results are somewhat more encouraging in verbal competencies: 20.9% of the grade
three children pass the grade one competencies in Vadodara (reading a single word, choosing
the right spelling among di¤erent possible spellings for a word), and 83.7% do so in Mumbai.

4.2

Attrition and Transfers

Di¤erential attrition between the treatment and comparison groups could potentially bias the
results. The testing procedure (the survey team visited children who were not present at the
posttest in their home, and administered the test then) was designed to minimize attrition, and
was largely successful.
Table 6A and 6B present the levels of attrition in Mumbai and Vadodara for both programs.
We present attrition that occurred between the pretest and posttest for both cities in both years,
as well as the two-year attrition (in Mumbai, for grade four only), broken down by treatment
status.
Attrition was generally very low, except for Vadodara in year 1. The high attrition in that
year is likely attributable to civil unrest (severe riots a¤ected the city in 2002). The posttest
was conducted after the riots and while the research team attempted to track down all of the
children who had not appeared for the exam, many families had left Vadodara for their native
villages. Nevertheless, the attrition rates did not vary by treatment status in that year or any
15

other: in year 1 in Vadodara, attrition was 18% in the balsakhi treatment group, and 17% in
the comparison group. In year 2, attrition was 4% in both the balsakhi and non balsakhi group.
In Mumbai year 1, attrition was 7% in the treatment group, and 7.5% in the comparison group,
while in year 2 it was 7.7% in the treatment group and 7.3% in the comparison group. In the
CAL program, attrition was 3.8% in the treatment group and 3.4% in the comparison group in
year 1, and 7.3% and 6.9% respectively in year 2.
The fact that there was no di¤erential attrition in the treatment and comparison groups
suggests that the estimate of the treatment e¤ects will not be biased, unless di¤erent types of
people drop out from the sample in the treatment and the comparison groups (Angrist, 1996).
This does not seem to occur in our study: the second row in each panel presents di¤erences in
pretest scores of children who were not present at the posttest, by treatment status. The third
column of each sample group presents the estimated di¤erences-in-di¤erences. Children who will
eventually leave the sample tend to be at the bottom of the distribution. However, the di¤erence
is very similar in the treatment and comparison groups. In Mumbai in the second year, there
is some evidence that the attritors may have had lower pretest scores than the stayers in the
treatment group, compared to the comparison group. In the CAL program in year 2 and year 3,
we …nd the opposite, with the attritors in the treatment group seeming to perform better than
the non-attritors (which is di¤erent from the other results in the tables). This latter di¤erence
may bias the results obtained from simple di¤erences upwards (the e¤ect on the di¤erence-indi¤erence estimate and the lagged dependent variables speci…cation is unclear), although since
the attrition is very low, this is unlikely to have a large e¤ect.
Finally, both the attrition and the di¤erence in test scores are also similar among the bottom
20 children in each school, the group of children who were the most likely to be assigned to a
balsakhi (these results are not reported here to save space).
In what follows, the treatment status of a child will be assigned based upon the school in
which the child took the pretest. Student transfer could theoretically introduce two sources of
bias. First, if students were able to transfer prior to the pretest, then treatment schools may have
gained students likely to experience a signi…cant improvement in test scores over the following
year, generating an upward bias. Second, if motivated students transferred during the academic
year, then some of the comparison group would have experienced the treatment causing us to

16

underestimate the treatment e¤ect.
These biases are not a concern in our setting. The program was not announced prior to the
start of the school year. In addition, parents rarely inquire about programs o¤ered through the
school. And even if they were interested, school transfers are very unlikely in both Vadodara and
Mumbai. Administrators provide them only reluctantly, and parents have a limited number of
alternative schools. Most areas have only a few schools of the same medium within a large radius.
Finally, since we were sensitive to the potential problems that could arise due to transfers, we
checked for students that took the pretest in a comparison school and the posttest in a treatment
school and found none.

5

E¤ects of the Balsakhi and the CAL Programs

5.1

Attendance

Part of the goal of the Balsakhi program was to make it easier for parents to play a role in their
children’s education, by allowing the balsakhis to serve as an intermediary between parents and
the school environment. One could therefore have expected the program to a¤ect attendance.
In practice, it did not seem to: Table 14 shows the e¤ect of the program of attendance in both
cities (attendance was not collected in year 1 in Vadodara). In no city and no grade do we see
any impact of the program on attendance.11 The CAL program could have a¤ected attendance
as well, by making school more attractive for students, at least on days where they are scheduled
to go to the CAL program. In year 2 (the …rst year of the program), CAL appears to have no
e¤ect on attendance. In year 3, we see a small, positive e¤ect, signi…cant at the 10 percent level
(the e¤ect 2.5 percentage points, with a standard error of 1.5 percent). This may indicate a
small e¤ect of the CAL program on attendance, but the fact that the treatment schools scored
slightly higher on test scores before the program warrants a cautious interpretation.
The low impact of both of these programs on attendance may be due to the relatively high
attendance levels of children before the program. This makes the result on learning, to which
11

The data on attendance was obtained by roll calls during unannounced visits. In Mumbai, we also collected

attendance from rosters …lled out by the teachers. The rosters generally show a higher attendance rate than
Pratham roll calls, but there is no di¤erence in the measure between treatment and comparison schools.

17

we now turn, easier to interpret: the results are entirely attributable to what happens in the
school when children are already attending.

5.2

Test Scores: Balsakhi Program

Tables 2 and 3 present the …rst estimates of the e¤ect of the Balsakhi program as simple di¤erences between the posttest scores in the treatment and comparison groups.
The Balsakhi program appears to be successful: in all years and grades, for both tests, and
in both cities, and for all subgroups, the di¤erence in posttest scores between treatment and
comparison groups is positive.
In the …rst year in Vadodara (Table 2), the di¤erence in posttest scores between treatment
and comparison groups in grade three was 0.18 standard deviations in grade three for math,
0.16 for language. In grade four the corresponding di¤erences for math and language were 0.16
and 0.09. Note that between the midtest and the posttest in year 1, scores actually declined.
This is likely due to the riots, which severely disturbed the schools and the children. The results
in Mumbai (Table 3) are remarkably similar, with the math and language test scores improving
by 0.16 and 0.15 standard deviations, respectively.
In the second year of the program, the e¤ects are larger. In Vadodara (Table 2), the di¤erence
in grade three total test scores is .44 for math and .25 for language; in grade four the di¤erences
are .35 and .31 for math and language respectively. To obtain the estimate for Mumbai in year
2, because one third of treatment schools did not get a balsakhi, the simple di¤erence according
to initial treatment status (intention to treat) is divided by the probability of treatment: in
other words, this is an IV (or Wald) estimate where the initial treatment assignment is used
as an instrument for the actual treatment status. In Mumbai in year two (Table 3), the Wald
estimates (presented in the last column) of the impact of the program on test score di¤erences
for math and language respectively are .28 and .11 in grade three and .49 and .20 in grade four.
In year two in Vadodara, all of the di¤erences between treatment and comparison groups are
statistically signi…cant, while for Mumbai, the grade four results are signi…cant.12
12

All standard errors reported in the paper are adjusted for clustering at the school-grade level. Using nested

random e¤ects (classroom e¤ects nested within school e¤ects) yields very similar point estimates and generally
higher t-statistics.

18

Table 5 compares the entire distribution of scores. The hypothesis that the treatment and
comparison posttest distributions are equal can be rejected at the one percent level in year 2
for both grades in Vadodara, and at the 1.4% level for grade four in Mumbai in year two, and
at the 11% level in year 1 grade three in Vadodara. (Equality cannot be rejected for grade
three in Mumbai years 1 and 2, or Vadodara grade four in year 1.) The hypothesis that the
comparison group distribution stochastically dominates the distribution of the treatment group
can be rejected at the 10% level or better for all groups except Vadodara grade four in year
1, while the hypothesis that the distribution in the treatment group dominates that of the
comparison group can never be rejected. Figure 2 illustrates this result in one case (Vadodara,
year 2). The contrast with Figure 1 is striking: while the two curves were on top of each other in
the pretest, the distribution of test scores in year 2 has clearly shifted to the left in the treatment
schools, relative to the comparison schools.
Because test scores have a strong persistent component, the precision of the estimated program e¤ect can be increased substantially by controlling for a child’s pretest score or employing
a di¤erence-in-di¤erence estimator. Since the randomization appeared to be successful, and
attrition was low in both the treatment and comparison groups, the point estimates should be
similar to the simple di¤erences in these two speci…cations, but the con…dence interval around
these point estimates should be much tighter.
Table 7 presents the results, for various years, cities, grades, and sub-groups, from the
estimation of a di¤erence-in-di¤erences (columns 1 to 3) and value added (column 4 to 6)
speci…cation.
The value added speci…cation simply regresses the posttest score on the treatment status,
controlling for the pretest score of child i in grade g and school j.

yigjP OST =

+ Djg + yigjP RE +

igjP OST ;

(1)

where Djg is a dummy equal to 1 if the school received a balsakhi in the child’s grade g, and
0 otherwise.
This speci…cation asks whether children improved more, relative to what they would have
been expected to on the basis of their pretest score, in treatment schools than in comparison
schools.
19

For all years and samples except Mumbai year 2, equation (1) is estimated with OLS. However, for Mumbai in year two (and when both cities are pooled), Equation 1 is estimated by two
stage least squares, using the initial treatment status as an instrument (to take into account
that not all schools that should have received a balsakhi received one).
Second, we stack the pre and post data and use the following di¤erence-in-di¤erence speci…cation, letting k index the individual tests (pre and post):

yigjk =

+ Djg + P OSTk + (Dig

P OSTk ) +

igjk ;

(2)

where P OSTk is a dummy indicating whether the test is the post test.
For Mumbai in year two (and when both cities are pooled), equation 2 is estimated with
instrumental variables, with the initial assignment to the treatment group and its interaction
with the posttest dummy serving as instruments. We also present a speci…cation check where
we include only schools that received the balsakhi in the grade for which she was assigned, and
estimate the regression using OLS. The estimates using either speci…cation are very similar.
In accord with the simple di¤erence results, the point estimates from both speci…cations
suggest a substantial treatment e¤ect. Pooling both cities and grades together (in the …rst two
rows of Table 7), the impact of the program was 0.14 standard deviations overall in the …rst
year, and 0.27 standard deviations in the second year (0.28 using the value added speci…cation).
All estimates for total score are signi…cant at the 1% level.
The impact is bigger in the second year than the …rst, for both math (0.34 vs. 0.19) and
verbal (0.17 vs 0.06); all but …rst-year verbal scores are signi…cant at the 1% level. For both
years and both subjects pooled, the e¤ects are a little larger in Vadodara than in Mumbai (with
a total-score e¤ect of 0.14 standard deviations versus 0.12 in the …rst year (grade three), and
0.31 versus 0.18 in the second year (both grades). The di¤erence is the weakest for language,
where there is a signi…cant impact in both years for Vadodara (0.10 and 0.23 standard deviations
respectively), but no signi…cant impact in either year in Mumbai for grade three (0.06 standard
deviations in year 1, and 0.051 standard deviations in year 2). For both cities and both subjects,
the e¤ects are very similar in grade three and grade four.

13

Results are also very similar when

the analysis is conducted separately for girls or boys (results not reported).
13

Mumbai year 1 results, and results disaggregated by grade, are shown in Appendix, Table 5.

20

In the last two rows of the table, we present an estimate of the impact of two years of exposure
to the program. These are estimates of the di¤erence between the year 1 (2001-02) pretest and
year 2 (2002-03) posttest for students that were in the third grade during the 2001-02 academic
year.14 Table 6a also shows that there was more attrition in this group, due to the movement
of children across schools during the summer (33% in both Mumbai and Vadodara, though the
di¤erences between treatment and comparison groups are again small and insigni…cant). In
Mumbai, the e¤ect of two years of treatment (from year 1 pretest score to year 2 posttest score)
is substantially larger than that of either individual year (0.60 standard deviations in math, for
example, versus 0.40 for year 2 in grade 4). It seems possible that the foundation laid in the …rst
year of the program helped the children bene…t from the second year of the program. The same,
however, is not true for the two-year e¤ect estimates in Vadodara where the two year e¤ect is
slightly smaller than the one year e¤ect in the second year of the program, but larger than the
one-year e¤ect for the …rst year of the program. One possible explanation for this di¤erence is
the riots at the end of year 1, which were a severe disturbance.
Compared to the other educational interventions, this program thus appears to be quite
e¤ective. The Tennessee STAR experiment, for example, for which class size was reduced by
7 to 8 children (from 22 to about 15), improved test scores by about 0.21 standard deviations
(Krueger and Diane Whitmore, 2001). The Balsakhi program improved test scores by 0.27
standard deviations in the second year, by reducing e¤ective class size from 40 to 20 children
for part of the day. However, the balsakhis were paid less than one tenth the teacher’s salary
(a starting teacher earned about Rs. 7,500 at the time, while balsakhi’s were paid between Rs.
500 and Rs. 750). Section 7 o¤ers a more detailed cost-bene…t analysis.

5.3

Test Scores: Computer-Assisted Learning

Table 4 shows the simple di¤erence in the mid and post test in the CAL program. In the posttest,
the math test scores are signi…cantly greater in the treatment schools than in comparison schools
in both years. In year 2, the math posttest score is on average 0.32 standard deviations higher
in the CAL schools (with a standard deviation of 0.087). In year 3, it is 0.58 standard deviations
14

Only children who were in grade 3 in year 1 can be exposed for 2 years. Thus, the two-year e¤ect is estimated

using substantially fewer students than the one-year e¤ect.

21

higher, but this does not account for the fact that pretest scores were already 0.13 higher in
the treatment group in year 3. Table 8 addresses this problem, by showing the di¤erence-indi¤erence and value added speci…cations of the e¤ect of the CAL program. The CAL program
has a strong e¤ect on math score (0.35 standard deviations in the …rst year, and 0.47 standard
deviations in the second year, using the value added speci…cation). It has no discernible impact
on language scores (the point estimates are also very close to zero). This is not surprising, since
the software targeted exclusively math skills, although one could have expected some spillover
e¤ects on language skills (through increased attendance, the practice of reading instructions,
or if the teachers had reallocated time away from math to reading). The e¤ect on the sum of
language and math test scores is 0.21 standard deviations in year 2, and 0.23 standard deviations
in year 3. Panel B of Table 10 compares the Balsakhi and the CAL e¤ects, and examines their
interactions, in the year where they were implemented at the same time (the randomization was
strati…ed). When not interacted, CAL has a larger e¤ect on math test scores than the Balsakhi
program (although this di¤erence is not signi…cant) and a smaller e¤ect on overall test scores
(although again the di¤erence is not signi…cant). The programs appear to have no interaction
with each other: the coe¢ cients on the interaction on the math and overall test score are small,
insigni…cant, and negative

5.4

E¤ect on Speci…c Competencies and Distributional E¤ects

The Balsakhi program was primarily intended to help children at the lower end of the ability
distribution, by providing targeted instruction to them. However, it could still help the higher
scoring children, either because they are assigned to the balsakhi, or because they bene…t from
smaller classes when their classmates are with the balsakhi.
The program could also have, perversely, harmed children at the bottom of the distribution
(by sending them to a less-quali…ed teacher) while bene…ting children at the top of the distribution (by removing the laggards or trouble-makers). While this could result in an improvement
in average test score, it should probably not be construed as a success of the program. It is
therefore important to check at what level children are a¤ected. In practice, the program appears to have helped children who were initially lagging behind. As we discussed earlier, Table 5
shows that the distribution of the test scores in the treatment schools stochastically dominates
22

the distribution of the test scores in the comparison schools in all cases for which the di¤erence
in simple averages was signi…cant. Figures 1 and 2 show one example of how the distributions
transformed, for Vadodara year 2. While the distributions are not distinguishable in year 1, they
are very di¤erent in year 2, with the distribution in the treatment schools clearly dominating
the distribution in year 2.
Table 9 provides estimates of changes in the probability of a student mastering individual
competencies.15 Estimates in this table suggest that, for math, the biggest e¤ect of the Balsakhi
program was on grade one and two competencies: in Vadodara, for example, the program
increased the fraction of children who mastered the competencies of the …rst grade in math by
3.8 percentage points in the …rst year, and 7.4 percentage points in the second year. In Mumbai
the e¤ect was 4.5 percentage points and 13.1 percentage points, respectively, in year 1 and 2.
This last number represents a 40% increase in the number of children who are able to pass the
grade one competencies (the fraction of children who can pass the competencies of grade one in
the posttest in year 2 is 34%). The e¤ect on the fraction of children demonstrating knowledge
of grade three competencies is substantially smaller, though still statistically signi…cant.
In language, the most important e¤ect seems to have been to help children master the
competencies of grade two. This is not surprising, since many children had already demonstrated
knowledge of grade one competencies. The program e¤ect thus appears greatest on the easiest
competencies not already mastered by many pupils. These results correspond well with a stated
goal of the program, to work with children on basic competencies they had not yet acquired.
The CAL program a¤ected only math competencies, and seems to have had an equal effect on the number of children able to pass grade one and grade two competencies (about 13
percentage points for each in year 2). It also a¤ected grade three competencies, especially in
year 3 (it increased the fraction of students that had achieved grade three competencies by 7.7
percentage points, when only 1.3% of fourth-grade students passed these competencies in the
pretest. Among the comparison schools in the posttest, only 8.2% passed these competencies).
The CAL program, unlike the Balsakhi program, demonstrates e¤ectiveness in helping children
at all levels.
15

To save space, these estimates are presented only for the lagged dependent variable speci…cation. The di¤er-

ence in di¤erences speci…cation delivers very similar results.

23

To illustrate the size of the gains throughout the distribution, Figure 3 plots the posttest
scores as a function of the pretest score rank in the overall distribution (using a Fan (1992)
locally weighted regression), for treatment and comparison schools in year 2 (both cities and
grades are pooled). Children, on average, do better on the posttest in treatment schools than
in comparison schools for any level of pretest achievement. However the di¤erence is largest for
children who were initially doing poorly, and the two curves seem to join for children with high
initial test scores.
Poor initial scorers registered the largest gains, and were also most likely to be sent to the
balsakhi. Figure 4 plots, for the distribution of pretest scores, the di¤erence in test-score gain
between treatment and comparison students (the solid line) and the probability of a treatment
child being sent to the balsakhi in year 2 (the dashed line)16 . The treatment e¤ect estimates are
obtained as the di¤erence between the functions presented in Figure 3. Assignment probability
is estimated using a locally weighted regression.
Table 10 (panel A for Balsakhi, and C for CAL) summarizes these patterns by showing
results for year 2 broken into three groups, to measure test score gains for children who scored
in the top, middle, and bottom third of the pretest.17 For the balsakhi program, the e¤ect is
about twice as large for the bottom third than for the top third (0.42 standard deviations, versus
0.22 standard deviations). The probability of assignment to a balsakhi is respectively 0.22 and
0.09 in these two groups. For the CAL program, the impact is also a little bit higher for the
bottom third, but the di¤erence is much smaller (0.42 versus 0.32 standard deviations in math
for the bottom versus top groups).
The magnitude of the e¤ect of the Balsakhi program at various levels of the pretest score
distribution follows closely the probability of being assigned to the balsakhi. This result leads
to our next question: How much of the program e¤ect is directly attributable to the children
who visited the balsakhi, and how much is indirect (i.e., bene…tting children whose classmates
visited the balsakhi)? The fact that both the program impact and the probability of being
assigned to a balsakhi decline with a child’s position in the test score distribution suggests that
the impact of the program may be due to those who were actually assigned to the balsakhi
16
17

Unfortunately, we have no data on assignment to the balsakhi in year 1.
We present results for year 2 Vadodara, because these children were tested in the following year as well. The

results are very similar for other years and cities, and are available from the authors.

24

(otherwise, one would see a positive treatment e¤ect even for children with very low assignment
probability). However, an alternative explanation for this pattern is that the direct (or indirect)
e¤ects of the Balsakhi program are lower for children with higher pretest scores, in ways that
track the decrease in the probability of assignment. This question is investigated further in the
next section.

5.5

Long Run Impacts

An important consideration in the evaluation of educational interventions is whether or not
the changes generated by the interventions last beyond the period in which the intervention
is administered. In Vadodara, we were able to track and test students one year beyond the
end of the program. We administered a …nal test in March 2004 to students who had been in
the third and fourth grade during the second year of the study. The students who were third
graders in year 2 participated in one year of the Balsakhi study. They were in the fourth grade
when we administered the test, but since the program was suspended for one year after the
study, did not bene…t from Balsakhi’s in their fourth grade year. Students who had been fourth
graders in year 2 had participated in both the Balsakhi and CAL studies. We are able to
track a substantial fraction of children, (see table 6A: the attrition rates is only 20%, both for
treatment and comparison children). The attrition rate remains comparable in grades 3 and 4
and the characteristics of the students who attrited are not di¤erent that of those who did not
attrit.
Panels B and D of table 10 show the treatment e¤ect estimates using the di¤erence between
the August 2002 pretest and a posttest administered to students in March of 2004, one year
after exposure to the study. For the balsakhi program, the average e¤ect becomes insigni…cant.
However, the e¤ect for the bottom third of the children, who were most likely to have visited
the balsakhi, remains signi…cant, and is around 0.10 standard deviations both for math and for
language. For the CAL program, the e¤ect on math also falls, but is still signi…cant, on average
for all ability groupings.
These results are very important, since they gives us some indication that the e¤ect we
obtained at the end of the enrollment in the program are not arti…cial or temporary. The gains
erode relatively quickly over time (after a year, they are still non trivial – a 0.10 standard
25

deviation would be a substantial impact for a program even in its …rst year). This suggests that
it is may be important to provide interventions over long horizons.

6

Inside the Box: Direct and Indirect E¤ects

Estimating equations (1) and (2) generates estimates of the average impact of the program on
all children whose school-grade received a balsakhi. The program may impact the children in a
treated school in two ways: directly, for children who were assigned to work with the balsakhi,
or indirectly, because the weakest children are removed from the classroom for part of the day
and this may a¤ect other children. This indirect e¤ect could potentially work through two
mechanisms: through a reduced number of students in the class (class size e¤ect), and through
the higher average quality of their classmates (peer e¤ect).

6.1

Statistical Framework

The ideal experiment to separate the direct and indirect e¤ects of remedial education would have
identi…ed the children who would work with the balsakhi in all schools, before randomly assigning
treatment and comparison groups (and not allowed substitution after the initial allocation). The
balsakhi e¤ect could then be estimated by comparing children designated for the balsakhi in the
treatment group with their peers in the comparison group. The indirect e¤ect would have been
estimated by comparing the children who were not at risk of working with the balsakhi in the
treatment and the comparison group. Unfortunately, this design was not feasible in this setting,
since teachers were not prepared to assign the children in the abstract, without knowing whether
or not they were going to get a balsakhi.
We do know, however, that the assignment to the balsakhi group was based in part on pretest
score, and that a maximum of twenty children per school in Vadodara, and twenty per class in
Mumbai were assigned to a balsakhi. We use these facts to implement two di¤erent empirical
strategies to disentangle direct and indirect e¤ects.

26

6.1.1

Exploiting Assignment Probabilities

The …rst strategy is directly inspired by Figure 4, which suggests that the e¤ect of the program
closely tracks the probability of assignment to the balsakhi.
We start by predicting assignment probability in the treatment schools as a ‡exible function
of the rank in the pretest score distribution.
Pijg = (

1

+

2 Qij

+

2
2 Qij

+

3
3 Qij

+

4
4 Qij )

Dijg + ! ijg

(3)

where Pijg is a dummy indicating that the child was assigned to the program (i.e., worked with
the balsakhi) and Qij is the child’s rank in the initial test score distribution.18
Denote by Mij the vector [1; Qij ; Q2ij ; Q3ij ; Q4ij ].
We then estimate the treatment e¤ect as a function of the same variables, interacted with
the treatment status of the schools.
yijgP OST = yijgP RE + Mij + (Dij

Mij ) +

ijg

(4)

Equation 3 and 4 form the …rst stage and the reduced form, respectively, of the following
structural form equation:
yijgP OST = yijgP RE + Dijg + Pijg + Mij +
The four instruments allow us to estimate

ijg

and . The identi…cation assumption is that

are both constant. Under the maintained assumption that the indirect treatment e¤ect

(5)
and
is

constant, an overidenti…cation test allows us to test whether the remedial education treatment
e¤ect

is indeed constant.

This strategy relies on the assumptions that the indirect treatment e¤ect of the program does
not vary with the initial test score of the child. The posttest score can be related to the pretest
score in any way, but the treatment e¤ect cannot vary with pretest score in an unrestricted
way. If, for example, the indirect treatment e¤ect declined in a way that exactly tracked how
the assignment probability changes with the test score, we would mistakenly conclude that the
program has no indirect e¤ect.
18

We use class rank in Vadodara, as each treatment classroom received a balsakhi, and school-grade rank in

Mumbai, as balsakhis were assigned to treatment school-grades.

27

Since this assumption could be violated, to complement the …rst strategy, we implement
another strategy which does not rely on this assumption.
6.1.2

Exploiting the Non-Linearity in Assignment Rules

This strategy exploits the discrete change in assignment probability at rank 20 in a given class.
It estimates the direct remedial education e¤ect and indirect class size or tracking e¤ects for
children whose test scores could place them either below rank 20 or above rank 20, depending
on their class size. Estimating these parameters does not require any assumption about the
constancy or the regularity of the direct and indirect e¤ect at rank 20. The e¤ect is estimated
for children who are close to rank 20.
In schools in the treatment group, we start by predicting assignment to the balsakhi as a
function of the number of students (in the school in Vadodara, in the class in Mumbai), the
sum of the math and verbal score at the pretest, the rank in the class, and a variable indicating
whether the child is among the bottom 20 children in his class.
Pijg =

1

+

2 Sijg

+

3 yijgP RE

+

4 Rijg

+

5 Zijg

+ ! ijg

(6)

where Sijg is the number of students in the class or the school, yijgP RE is the score of the child
at the pretest, Rijg is the rank of the child in the class (starting from the bottom), and Zijg is
a dummy indicating whether the child is among the bottom 20 children in the class. We will
show that, even after controlling linearly for the class rank, the dummy Zijg predicts whether
or not the child was assigned to the balsakhi.
Denoting Xijg the vector [Sijg

yijgP RE

Rijg ], the following equation (which interacts the

variables in equation 6 with a dummy for whether the child is in a treatment school) predicts
assignment to the balsakhi in the whole sample.
Pijg = (

1

+

2 Zijg

+ Xijg

3)

Dijg +

(7)

ijg

We can then regress the posttest scores on the same variables (controlling for pretest score),
and examine whether being one of the bottom 20 children is associated with a bigger e¤ect for
those whose school is in the treatment group:
yijgP OST =

4

+

5 Zijg

Dijg +

6 Dijg

+
28

7 Zijg

+ Xijg

8

+ (Xijg

Dijg )

9

+ ijg

(8)

Equation 7 and 8 form the …rst stage and the reduced form of an instrumental variables
estimation of the following equation:
yijgP OST =

+ Pijg + Dijg + Zijg + Xijg + (Xijg

Dijg ) +

ijg

where Pijg and yijgP OST are the independent variables of interest and Dijg and Zijg

(9)
Dijg are

the excluded instruments. The identi…cation assumption underlying this estimation strategy is
that the only reason the treatment e¤ect varies with the variable Zijg is because Zijg makes it
more likely that the child is sent to the balsakhi group. However, the e¤ect of the treatment
is allowed to vary with class size, test score, and the rank of the child. The only identi…cation
assumption is therefore that the treatment e¤ ect does not vary discontinuously at rank 20. Under
this assumption, this equation allows us to estimate the direct and indirect e¤ect of the program
for children whose test scores place them in the neighborhood of rank 20 in the class.

6.2

Results

Columns 1 to 3 in Table 11 show the …rst stage and the reduced form for the second estimation
strategy (equations 7 and 8).
The fact that a child has a rank lower than 20 in his class predicts assignment to the balsakhi
remedial education group, even after controlling continuously for his rank, score at the pretest
and the number of students in his class. Not surprisingly, because some schools in Mumbai were
not assigned a balsakhi, all coe¢ cients are smaller in Mumbai. In columns 4 to 6, we present
the reduced form estimates for test score gain. The coe¢ cient on the interaction between the
dummy for being among the bottom 20 children in the class and belonging to a treatment
school is signi…cant in all of these columns, which indicates that, conditional on being in a
school assigned to the treatment group, the treatment e¤ect is bigger if the child is more likely
to be assigned to the balsakhi.
In Table 12, we present instrumental variables estimates of the direct and indirect impact
of being in a balsakhi group, using the two strategies described above. The …rst three columns
use the treatment dummy (equal to 1 for every child assigned to the treatment group) and this
dummy interacted with the pretest score, its square, cube and quartic, as instruments for the
balsakhi school and balsakhi assignment. The last lines in the table show the F statistic for
29

the excluded interactions, which are highly signi…cant, and the p-value for the overidenti…cation
test.19
Based on these results, we cannot reject the hypothesis that being in a balsakhi school has
no e¤ect for children who were not themselves sent to the balsakhi: the e¤ect of the program is
concentrated on children who were indeed assigned. The e¤ect on these children is large: they
gain 0.6 standard deviations in overall test scores (which is over half of the test score gain a
comparison child realizes from one year of schooling). The overidenti…cation test indicates that
we cannot reject the hypothesis that the treatment e¤ect is constant: the fact that the Balsakhi
program a¤ects mostly children at the bottom of the test score distributions simply re‡ects the
fact that the children at the bottom of the test score distribution are more likely to be assigned
to the balsakhi group.
Columns 4 to 6 present the estimate of the program e¤ect using the discontinuity in the
assignment rule at rank 20. Once again, based on these estimates, we cannot reject the hypothesis that the program had no e¤ect on children who were not sent to the balsakhi. The point
estimates of the direct e¤ect (the e¤ect of visiting a balsakhi) are even larger than above (1
standard deviation), but they are also less precise and cannot be statistically distinguished from
the estimate in columns 1 to 3.
Both strategies lead to the same conclusion: the direct e¤ect of the Balsakhi program is very
large, and the reduction in class size induced by the program had no indirect e¤ect on children
who stayed in the regular class. The second strategy shows that this is true for middle-ranked
children, who bene…t from a Balsakhi program but not from a reduction in class size with the
regular teacher. This helps rule out the possibility that our results are explained by the fact
that a reduction in class size is bene…cial to a low-scoring child, but not a high-scoring child.
Since the average class size is 45 (though the average student has 63 students in his class),
the Balsakhi program e¤ectively halved class size. We can therefore compare the e¤ect of doing
more of the same in the schools— represented by the group of twenty students who worked with
the regular teacher–with that of providing focused remedial education. The results suggest that
class size reductions would be much more e¤ective if done through a balsakhi type program,
involving separating children of di¤erent levels, than by simply dividing a large class into two
19

We do not report the results from the …rst stage regression, since it is graphically presented in Figure 4.

30

smaller classes. What these estimates do not tell us is whether the same impact on the scores
of the low scoring children could be obtained by hiring a regular teacher to work with the low
scoring children.
Table 13 investigates whether the direct and indirect impacts of the Balsakhi program vary
with school characteristics, using both instrumental varaibles strategies.
The …rst characteristic we consider is class size. While the size of the balsakhi group is
always 20, the size of the class that remains with the teacher depends on the original class size.
The reduction in the class size for balsakhi–attenders is thus larger in big schools, while the
proportional reduction in the size of the class for the children who do not attend the Balsakhi
program is smaller in big schools. We divide the schools into two groups, those with more than
40 students and those with fewer. In small schools, the balsakhi group is actually larger than the
size of the group that remains in the regular classroom. We may therefore expect a larger e¤ect
of the Balsakhi program in large schools. The prediction on the indirect e¤ect is ambiguous, as
it depends on the functional form of the class size e¤ect.
As expected, the e¤ect of the Balsakhi program appears to be about twice as large in large
schools than in small schools, though the estimates are noisy. (Columns 1, 4, and 7 of both
Panel A and B). The e¤ect of the program on unassigned children is smaller in large schools.
The coe¢ cient on (balsakhi school * big school) is negative, and signi…cant in panel A. There is
some evidence that non-attending children in small schools may have bene…ted from the class
size reduction (an estimated e¤ect of .19 may be found in column (7) of panel B, signi…cant
a the 10 percent leve. Perhaps class size reduction may are e¤ective if it results in very small
classes (fewer than 20) for the regular teacher. In such small classes, teachers may be able to
change the way in which they teach.
The two other characteristics we consider, variance in initial test score and average test score
of the bottom 20 children, are meant to capture possible bene…ts of tracking. However, neither
the variance in initial test score nor the average test score of the bottom 20 children appears to
in‡uence either the direct or indirect e¤ects.

31

7

Cost Bene…t Analysis

In seeking to improve the academic performance of schoolchildren, governments could potentially
hire additional teachers, hire balsakhis or put computers in classrooms.
Since we do not detect any e¤ect of reducing class size on test scores, hiring new teachers (who
are paid at least 10 times more than balsakhis) does not appear to be a cost-e¤ective strategy.
Even using the most optimistic estimate of reduced class size of a 0.2 standard deviations gain,
hiring balsakhis would be several times more cost-e¤ective than hiring new teachers.20
A more interesting exercise is to compare the cost of one year of the Balsakhi program with
one year of the CAL program. The cost per student per year of the Balsakhi program is 107
rupees, or approximately 2.25 dollars. The recurring expenditures of the CAL program are
367 rupees, but once the start-up costs of the computers and software are included (assuming
…ve-year depreciation), the program costs 722 rupees. Thus, using the estimates from Table 8,
we can calculate the relative cost-e¤ectiveness of each program. CAL increases the math score
by 0.41 standard deviations and the overall test score by 0.25 standard deviations whereas the
Balsakhi program increases the math score by 0.32 and the total score by 0.28. Since CAL costs
6.7 times as much as the Balsakhi program per student, the Balsakhi program is 5 times more
cost-e¤ective for math and 7.5 times more cost-e¤ective for the total score.
The cost per student of the remedial education program is about $2.25 per child per year.
The computer-assisted learning program (including the cost of the computers) costs about $15
per child per year. In terms of cost per standard deviation, the remedial education program
appears extremely cost-e¤ective. Kremer, Miguel and Rebecca Thornton (2004) provide cost
per standard deviation for a range of programs. The cost of the most cost-e¤ective program
they consider (an incentive programs for children) was between $1.77 and $3.53 per 0.1 standard
deviations (depending on the region). Using the same assumptions (and the …gure of the average
e¤ect for a child in the treatment school), the remedial education program cost between $0.67
and $1.77 per 0.1 standard deviations (depending on the year). The Balsakhi program thus
stands out as the most cost-e¤ective program for learning improvement.
Moreover, the true costs of the Balsakhi programs (as well as a girls’scholarship program in
20

Of course, we need to remember that this is an argument only about the marginal teacher. The Pratham

model is easy to replicate precisely because it takes advantage of the existing government machinery.

32

Kremer, Miguel and Thornton (2004)) are mainly due to payment to teachers (or students), and
these transfers should therefore probably not be considered real costs. This is not the case for the
CAL program, whose main cost is computers. Moreover, the cost would be higher in places which
do not have reliable electricity supply. When doing this comparison, we must keep in mind that,
in the Balsakhi program, the e¤ect is stronger at the bottom of the distribution, while the other
programs (including Computer-Assisted Learning) have an equal a¤ect on the entire distribution,
or a¤ect primarily children at the top. The overall assessment of the program therefore depends
on how improvements at di¤erent places in the distribution are valued. Despite its popularity,
and the e¤ectiveness that we demonstrate in this study, computer-assisted learning may not be
the most cost-e¤ective intervention to improve the quality of education in India at this stage.
However, turning computers already in the schools to productive use, as Pratham did in this
program, is clearly a very cost-e¤ective proposition and, according to our results, would lead to
improvements in learning.

8

Conclusion

This paper reports the results of a remedial education and a computer-assisted learning program.
The remedial education program has already shown that it can be brought to scale, since it has
already reached tens of thousands of children across India. Evaluations conducted in two cities
over two years suggest that this is a remarkably e¤ective and cost-e¤ective program: test scores
of children whose schools bene…ted from the program improved by 0.14 standard deviations in
the …rst year, and 0.28 in the second year, at a cost of about two dollars per child per year. We
also estimate that children who were directly a¤ected by the program improved their test scores
by at least 0.6 standard deviations in the second year, while children remaining in the regular
classroom did not bene…t.
A computer-assisted learning program provided each child in the fourth grade with two hours
of shared computer time per week, in which students played educational games that reinforced
mathematics skills. Contrary to what has been found in developed-country settings, the program
was also very e¤ective, increasing math scores by 0.36 standard deviations the …rst year, and
0.54 the second year.

33

These results show that it is possible to dramatically increase the quality of education in
urban India, a very important result since a large fraction of Indian children cannot read when
they leave school. However, we also …nd that education is not likely to improve if schooling
resources are simply increasing without changing the way teaching is conducted.

References
Abadie, Alberto. “Bootstrap Tests for Distributional Treatment E¤ects in Instrumental Variables Models.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 2002, (97) pp. 284-292.
Angrist, Joshua D. “Conditioning on the Probability of Selection to Control Selection Bias.”
NBER Technical Paper: No. 181, 1996.
Angrist, Joshua, et. al. “Vouchers for Private Schooling in Colombia: Evidence from a Randomized Natural Experiment.” American Economic Review, 2002, (92) pp. 1535-1558.
Angrist, Joshua and Victor Lavy. “New Evidence on Classroom Computers and Pupil Learning” The Economic Journal, 2002, October (112) pp. 735-765.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Rukimini Banerji, Esther Du‡o, Rachel Glennerster, Stuti Khemani, Sendhil
Mullainathan and Marc Shotland. “The Impact of Information, Awareness, and Participation on Learning Outcomes.” Manuscript, MIT Department of Economics, 2005.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Suraj Jacob and Michael Kremer. “Promoting School Participation in Rural
Rajasthan: Results from Some Prospective Trials.”MIT Department of Economics Working Paper, 2004.
Fan, Jianqing. “Design-Adaptive Non-Parametric Regression.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 1992, 87 (420) pp. 998-1004.
Glewwe, Paul, Michael Kremer and Sylvie Moulin. “Textbooks and Test Scores: Evidence
from a Prospective Evaluation in Kenya.”Manuscript, Harvard University Department of
Economics, 2002.

34

Glewwe, Paul, Michael Kremer, Sylvie Moulin and Eric Zitzewitz. “Retrospective vs. Prospective Analyses of School Inputs: The Case of Flip Charts in Kenya.”Journal of Development
Economics, 2004, 74 (1) pp. 251-268.
Hanushek, Eric A. “The Economics of Schooling: Production and E¢ ciency in Public Schools.”
Journal of Economic Literature, 1986, 24 (3) pp. 1141-1177.
Hanushek, Eric A. “Interpreting Recent Research on Schooling in Developing Countries.”World
Bank Research Observer, 1995, 10 (2) pp. 227-246.
Kremer, Michael. “Randomized Evaluations of Educational Programs in Developing Countries:
Some Lessons.” American Economic Review, 2003, 93 (2) pp. 102-106.
Kremer, Michael and Ted Miguel. “Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and Health in
the Presence of Treatment Externalities.” Econometrica, 2003, 72 (1) pp. 159-217.
Kremer, Michael, Edward Miguel, and Rebecca Thornton. “Incentives to Learn.”Manuscript,
Havard University Department of Economics, 2004.
Kremer, Michael, Karthik Muralidharan, Nazmul Chaudhury, Je¤rey Hammer, and F. Halsey
Rogers. “Teacher Absence in India: A Snapshot." Journal of the European Economic
Association (forthcoming).
Krueger, Alan and Cecilia Rouse. “Putting Computerized Instruction to the Test: A Randomized Evaluation of a “Scienti…cally-based”Reading Program.”NBER Working Paper: No.
10315, 2004.
Krueger, Alan and Diane M. Whitmore. “The E¤ect of Attending Small Class in Early Grades
on College Test-Taking and Middle School Test Results: Evidence from Project STAR.”
The Economic Journal, 2001, January (111) pp. 1-28.
Vermeersch, Christel and Michael Kremer.

“School Meals, Educational Achievement, and

School Competition: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper: No. 3523, 2004.

35

World Bank. World Development Report 2004: Making Services Work for the Poor. New York,
NY: Oxford University Press, 2004.

36

Table 1: Sample Design
Grade
(1)

Study Group
(2)

Number of Schools
(3)

Number of Divisions
(4)

Number of Children
(5)

Number of Schools
Assigned a Balsakhi
(6)

Number of Children
With Balsakhi
(7)

32
35
39
38
38
39

70
65
74
79
77
71

2592
2182
2530
2943
2812
2460

28
27
-

636
688
-

61
28
26
7
-

951
454
445
111
-

A. Mumbai
Year 1

Three

Year 2

Three1
Four2

Balsakhi
No Balsakhi
Balsakhi
No Balsakhi
Balsakhi
No Balsakhi

B. Vadodara
Year 1

Three

Balsakhi
48
78
2595
No Balsakhi
48
80
2539
Four
Balsakhi
48
72
2395
No Balsakhi
49
77
2669
Year 2
Three
Balsakhi
61
101
3146
No Balsakhi
61
93
2906
Four
Balsakhi and CAL
28
44
1415
Balsakhi; no CAL
26
42
1457
CAL; no Balsakhi
27
44
1435
No CAL, no Balsakhi
30
47
1638
Balsakhi, not in CAL study
7
9
293
No Balsakhi, not in CAL study
4
4
125
Year 3
Four
CAL
56
82
3131
No CAL
55
81
2814
Notes: This table gives the number of treatment and comparison schools, classrooms (or "division"), and children in the study.

1. The number of schools in column 3 is the number of schools that were intended to be treated. 28 schools were actually treated in year 2 in standard 3.
2. The number of school in column 3 is the number of schools that were intended to be treated. 27 schools were actually treated in year 2 in standard 4.

Balsakhi
(1)

Table 2: Summary Statistics, Vadodara, Balsakhi Program
PRE TEST
MID TEST
No Balsakhi Difference
Balsakhi No Balsakhi Difference
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

Vadodara, Year 1
Grade 3
Math

0.028

0.000

Verbal

0.088

0.000

Observations

2595

2539

Grade 4
Math

-0.044

0.000

Verbal

-0.044

0.000

Observations

2395

2669

Vadodara, Year 2
Grade 3
Math

0.039

0.000

Verbal

0.025

0.000

Observations

3146

2906

Grade 4
Math

0.053

0.000

0.028
(0.085)
0.088
(0.091)
56

0.666

0.541

0.962

0.851

2285

2174

-0.044
(0.081)
-0.044
(0.080)
-274

0.363

0.259

0.763

0.674

2175

2402

0.039
(0.074)
0.025
(0.082)
240

1.386

0.932

1.450

1.027

2843

2608

Balsakhi
(7)

POST TEST
No Balsakhi Difference
(8)
(9)

0.125
(0.092)
0.110
(0.102)
111

0.434

0.254

0.874

0.715

2122

2108

0.104
(0.096)
0.089
(0.101)
-227

0.254

0.092

0.707

0.621

1962

2234

0.454
(0.120)
0.422
(0.107)
235

1.695

1.256

1.245

0.998

3027

2792

0.181
(0.102)
0.159
(0.106)
14

0.162
(0.096)
0.086
(0.108)
-272

0.439
(0.116)
0.247
(0.103)
235

0.053
1.005
0.594
0.411
1.201
0.856
0.346
(0.077)
(0.069)
(0.085)
Verbal
0.084
0.000
0.084
1.132
0.710
0.422
0.919
0.614
0.305
(0.082)
(0.082)
(0.087)
Observations
3165
3198
-33
2953
2969
-16
3053
3078
-25
Notes: This table gives the mean normalized test score for pre-, and posttest scores for treatment and comparison students in Vadodara. Standard errors of the
difference, corrected for clustering, are given in parentheses. The normalized test score is obtained by subtracting the mean pretest score of the comparison
group, and dividing by the standard deviation of scores of the the pretest comparison group.

Table 3: Summary Statistics, Mumbai
PRE TEST
POST TEST
Treatment Comparison Difference Treatment Comparison Difference
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Mumbai, Year 1
Grade 3
Math

0.002

0.000

Verbal

0.100

0.000

Observations

2592

2182

Mumbai, Year 2
Grade 3
Math

-0.070

0.000

Verbal

0.025

0.000

Observations

2530

2943

Grade 4
Math

0.053

0.000

0.002
(0.108)
0.100
(0.108)
410

0.383

0.227

0.359

0.210

2417

2027

-0.070
(0.087)
0.025
(0.082)
-413

1.509

1.333

0.898

0.831

2337

2731

IV
(7)

0.156
(0.126)
0.149
(0.102)
390

0.176
(0.155)
0.067
(0.091)
-394

0.276
(0.240)
0.105
(0.142)

0.053
0.995
0.678
0.317
0.494
(0.076)
(0.111)
(0.154)
Verbal
0.083
0.000
0.083
0.641
0.513
0.127
0.198
(0.071)
(0.069)
(0.097)
Observations
2812
2460
352
2635
2290
345
Notes: This table gives the mean normalized test score for pre-, and posttest scores for treatment and comparison
students in Mumbai. Standard errors of the difference, corrected for clustering, are given in parentheses. The normalized
test score is obtained by subtracting the mean pretest score of the comparison group, and dividing by the standard
deviation of the scores of the the pretest comparison group.

CAL
(1)

Table 4: Summary Statistics: Vadodara
PRE TEST
MID TEST
No CAL Difference
CAL
No CAL Difference
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

Vadodara, Year 2
Math

-0.054

0.000

Verbal

-0.009

0.000

Observations

2850

3095

Vadodara, Year 3
Math

0.125

0.000

-0.054
(0.076)
-0.009
(0.083)
-245

0.765

0.707

0.867

0.872

2671

2886

0.058
(0.081)
-0.006
(0.095)
-215

CAL
(7)

POST TEST
No CAL Difference
(8)
(9)

1.129

0.810

0.719

0.709

2741

2991

0.319
(0.087)
0.010
(0.093)
-250

0.125
0.304
0.065
0.239
0.813
0.232
0.581
(0.073)
(0.077)
(0.089)
Verbal
0.116
0.000
0.116
0.047
-0.014
0.061
0.118
0.014
0.104
(0.079)
(0.082)
(0.080)
Observations
2814
317
2641
318
2904 p
2619
285
g 3131
p 2959
,
p
Vadodara for the CAL program. Standard errors of the difference, corrected for clustering, are given in parentheses. The normalized
test score is obtained by subtracting the mean pretest score of the comparison group, and dividing by the standard deviation of the
scores of the pretest comparison group.

Table 5: Tests for First Order Stochastic Dominance Among Test-score Distributions
Year 1
Year 2
Grade 3
Grade 4
Grade 3
Grade 4
Pre
Post
Pre
Post
Pre
Post
Pre
Post
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Vadodara: Balsakhi v Non-Balsakhi
Test of Equality: p-value
0.9035
Test for FOSD: p-value
0.7145
Check: Test Whether Comparison
0.4735
FOSD Treatment: p-value

0.1090
0.9235
0.0585

0.6040
0.3035
0.7250

0.2315
0.8055
0.1130

0.6790
0.7130
0.3160

0.0035
0.9535
0.0010

Vadodara: CAL v Non-CAL
Test of Equality: p-value
Test for FOSD: p-value
Check: Test Whether Comparison
FOSD Treatment: p-value
Mumbai
Test of Equality: p-value
Test for FOSD: p-value
Check: Test Whether Comparison
FOSD Treatment: p-value

0.6785
0.5295
0.3275

0.1645
0.6895
0.0800

0.9915
0.6250
0.6500

0.3150
0.7315
0.1490

Note: The test for FOSD tests the hypothesis that the treatment distribution first order stochastically dominates the comparison distribution.

0.2345
0.7980
0.1155

0.0000
0.9715
0.0000

0.8310
0.4395
0.5305

0.0735
0.8265
0.0385

0.5095
0.9665
0.2540

0.0135
0.8745
0.0080

Year 3
Grade 4
Pre
(9)

Post
(10)

0.1850
0.9335
0.0865

0.0000
0.9690
0.0000

Year 1

Table 6A : Attrition Patterns-Balsakhi
Year 2

Balsakhi No Balsakhi Difference
(1)
(2)
(3)
A. Vadodara
Grade 3, All
Percent Attrition

0.182

0.170

-0.131

-0.260

0.181

0.163

Difference in Score at Pretest
Attriters-Stayers
B. Mumbai
Grade 3, All
Percent Attrition

-0.190

-0.168

0.070

0.075

Difference in Score at Pretest
Attriters-Stayers

-0.146

-0.274

Difference in Score at Pretest
Attriters-Stayers
Grade 4, All
Percent Attrition

Grade 4, All
Percent Attrition

0.013
(0.020)
0.129
(0.096)

0.018
(0.021)
-0.022
(0.080)

-0.004
(0.015)
0.128
(0.169)

Balsakhi No Balsakhi Difference
(4)
(5)
(6)

0.038

0.039

-0.045

-0.059

0.035

0.038

-0.281

0.046

0.077

0.073

-0.330

-0.193

0.063

0.070

-0.001
(0.008)
0.014
(0.134)

2 Years (pre year 1-post year 2)
Student matched
Balsakhi No Balsakhi Difference
(7)
(8)
(9)

0.321

0.345

-0.056

-0.079

-0.025
(0.024)
0.022
(0.072)

-0.002
(0.008)
-0.327
(0.118)

0.005
(0.010)
-0.137
(0.129)

0.336

0.327

-0.140

-0.239

One year out (pre year 2-post year 3)

(10)

(11)

(12)

0.206

0.196

0.048

0.009

0.010
(0.015)
0.039
(0.069)

0.193

0.207

-0.120

0.034

-0.014
(0.028)
-0.154
(0.081)

0.009
(0.030)
0.099
(0.074)

-0.006
(0.010)
Difference in Score at Pretest
-0.180
-0.427
0.247
Attriters-Stayers
(0.139)
Note: This table describes the attrition patterns and test score results of attriters and stayers for the Balsakhi program. The standard error (corrected for clustering) of differences is given in
parentheses. Columns (7)-(9) give attrition rates for the two-year span of the program.

Table 6B: Attrition, CAL Program
Vadodara, Year 2
Vadodara, Year 3
CAL
No CAL Difference
CAL
No CAL Difference
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Grade 4, All
Percent Attrition

0.038

0.034

Vadorara Year 2 pre, year 3 post
CAL
No CAL Difference
(7)
(8)
(9)

0.005
0.0725
0.0693
0.00320
0.209
0.214
-0.004
(0.008)
(0.01010)
(0.019)
Difference in Score at
-0.198
-0.025
-0.173
-0.188
0.022
-0.210
-0.141
0.039
-0.180
Pretest Attriters-Stayers
(0.127)
(0.112)
(0.073)
Note: This table describes the attrition patterns and test score results for the CAL program. The standard error (corrected for clustering) of differences is given in
parentheses.

Table 7: Estimates of the Impact of the Balsakhi Program, by City and Sample
Difference in Difference
Number of
Observations
(1)
Mumbai and Vadodara Together Year 1

12855

Mumbai and Vadodara Together Year 2

21936

Pooling Both Grades
Vadodara Year 1

8426

Vadodara Year 2

11950

Vadodara Year 2 Oral Test

1286

Mumbai Year 2

9986

Mumbai Year 2 Specification Check

9986

Two Year 01-03
Mumbai Pretest Year 1 to Posttest Year 2

3188

Dependent Variable: Test Score
Improvement

Math
(2)

Verbal
(3)

Total
(4)

Math
(5)

Verbal
(6)

Total
(7)

0.187
(0.047)
0.341
(0.071)

0.063
(0.057)
0.163
(0.053)

0.135
(0.047)
0.267
(0.062)

0.182
(0.046)
0.353
(0.069)

0.076
(0.056)
0.187
(0.050)

0.138
(0.047)
0.284
(0.060)

0.195
(0.060)
0.347
(0.077)
0.261
(0.073)
0.327
(0.145)
0.285
(0.112)

0.104
(0.059)
0.226
(0.065)
0.169
(0.077)
0.038
(0.089)
0.063
(0.067)

0.161
(0.058)
0.312
(0.073)
0.240
(0.071)
0.175
(0.115)
0.173
(0.088)

0.189
(0.057)
0.371
(0.073)
0.267
(0.062)
0.324
(0.145)
0.287
(0.113)

0.109
(0.057)
0.246
(0.061)
0.177
(0.061)
0.069
(0.081)
0.086
(0.062)

0.161
(0.057)
0.331
(0.070)
0.247
(0.060)
0.188
(0.112)
0.184
(0.087)

0.629
0.136
0.394
0.612
0.185
0.407
(0.162)
(0.134)
(0.133)
(0.141)
(0.094)
(0.106)
Vadodara Pretest Year 1 to Posttest Year 2
3425
0.271
0.150
0.229
0.282
0.181
0.250
(0.117)
(0.093)
(0.104)
(0.094)
(0.079)
(0.088)
Notes: This table gives the difference in difference and value added specification for the Balsakhi program, for different groups and years. Standard errors
(corrected for clustering) are given in parentheses. The dependent variable is the normalized test score.

Table 8: Differences in Differences Estimate of the Impact of the CAL Program, by Year
Difference in Differences
Value Added Specification
Number of
Observations
Math
Language
Overall
Math
Language
Overall
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A. Effect of the CAL Program
Vadodara Both Years

11255

0.378
-0.040
0.179
0.394
-0.025
0.191
(0.080)
(0.085)
(0.086)
(0.074)
(0.082)
(0.083)
Vadodara Year 2
5732
0.366
0.014
0.215
0.347
0.013
0.208
(0.083)
(0.073)
(0.078)
(0.076)
(0.069)
(0.074)
Vadodara Year 3
5523
0.443
-0.026
0.209
0.475
-0.005
0.225
(0.070)
(0.044)
(0.051)
(0.068)
(0.042)
(0.051)
B. Balsakhi and Computer Assisted Learning Program: Main Effects and Interactions (Vadodara, Year 2)
CAL
5732
0.412
0.023
0.246
0.408
0.017
0.242
(0.096)
(0.083)
(0.090)
(0.087)
(0.084)
(0.087)
Balsakhi
0.319
0.199
0.281
0.371
0.229
0.315
(0.121)
(0.111)
(0.118)
(0.112)
(0.104)
(0.112)
CAL*Balsakhi
-0.110
-0.029
-0.077
-0.144
-0.020
-0.086
(0.161)
(0.144)
(0.153)
(0.141)
(0.134)
(0.141)
Notes: Panel A gives the difference in difference and value added specification for the CAL program, for different years.
Panel B gives the main effects and interactions of the Balsakhi and CAL programs. Standard errors (corrected for clustering)
are given in parentheses. The dependent variable is the normalized test score.

Table 9: Lagged Dependent Variable Specification for Competencies by Grade, by City and Year
Math Competencies for
Verbal Competencies for
Grade 1
Grade 2
Grade 3
Grade 4
Grade 1
Grade 2
Grade 3
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A. Balsakhi Program
Vadodara
Year 1
Both Grades
Grade Three
Grade Four
Year 2
Both Grades
Grade Three
Grade Four
Mumbai
Year 1
Grade Three
Year 2
Both Grades
Grade Three
Grade Four
B. CAL Program, Vadodara
Year 2
Grade Four
Year 3
Grade Four

0.038
(0.023)
0.048
(0.029)
0.035
(0.029)

0.013
(0.007)
0.016
(0.008)
0.011
(0.011)

0.026
(0.017)
0.029
(0.017)
0.028
(0.027)

0.034
(0.023)
0.015
(0.032)
0.059
(0.029)

0.028
(0.022)
0.031
(0.027)
0.032
(0.030)

0.012
(0.017)
0.018
(0.017)
0.013
(0.025)

0.074
(0.021)
0.072
(0.030)
0.080
(0.026)

0.065
(0.019)
0.064
(0.023)
0.070
(0.028)

0.023
(0.009)
0.022
(0.010)
0.027
(0.013)

0.022
(0.015)
0.035
(0.026)
0.012
(0.015)

0.068
(0.020)
0.017
(0.028)
0.118
(0.027)

0.032
(0.015)
0.023
(0.021)
0.043
(0.021)

0.045
(0.032)

0.023
(0.031)

-0.003
(0.021)

0.021
(0.015)

0.049
(0.028)

0.030
(0.030)

0.131
(0.040)
0.136
(0.062)
0.119
(0.050)

0.077
(0.057)
0.003
(0.081)
0.141
(0.077)

0.093
(0.031)
0.060
(0.034)
0.108
(0.046)

0.023
(0.021)
0.003
(0.034)
0.028
(0.019)

0.067
(0.031)
0.019
(0.043)
0.099
(0.039)

0.045
(0.040)
0.011
(0.049)
0.055
(0.053)

0.125
(0.025)

0.128
(0.027)

0.038
(0.013)

-0.005
(0.015)

0.010
(0.029)

0.014
(0.022)

0.116
(0.039)
0.058
(0.038)
0.139
(0.049)

0.150
0.111
0.077
0.002
-0.090
0.011
(0.020)
(0.019)
(0.012)
(0.023)
(0.026)
(0.019)
Notes: This table presents the lagged dependent variable specification for the math and verbal portions of th exam. The dependent variable is the
fraction of students who have mastered the competencies associated with the given grade. Standard errors, corrected for clustering, are given in
parentheses.

Table 10: Results by initial level--persistence of results
Difference in Difference

Number of
Observations
(1)

Probability of
assignment to balsakhi

PANEL A Balsakhi, Year 2
All Children

11950

0.159

Bottom Third

4053

0.217

Middle Third

3874

0.176

Top Third

4023

0.086

PANEL B: Balsakhi, After one year
All Children

9925

0.165

Bottom Third

3356

0.227

Middle Third

3226

0.182

Top Third

3343

0.086

PANEL C: CAL, Year 2
All Children

5732

Bottom Third

1962

Middle Third

1844

Top Third

1926

PANEL C CAL: After one year
All Children

4688

Bottom Third

1586

Middle Third

1511

Top Third

1591

Dependent Variable: Test Score
Improvement

Math
(2)

Verbal
(3)

Total
(4)

Math
(5)

Verbal
(6)

Total
(7)

0.348
(0.077)
0.468
(0.087)
0.407
(0.093)
0.214
(0.082)

0.227
(0.065)
0.317
(0.074)
0.213
(0.073)
0.187
(0.085)

0.313
(0.073)
0.427
(0.084)
0.340
(0.083)
0.217
(0.081)

0.371
(0.073)
0.469
(0.088)
0.374
(0.082)
0.229
(0.076)

0.246
(0.061)
0.317
(0.074)
0.240
(0.069)
0.174
(0.076)

0.331
(0.070)
0.425
(0.084)
0.339
(0.080)
0.216
(0.077)

0.030
(0.051)
0.088
(0.045)
0.050
(0.063)
-0.005
(0.072)

0.014
(0.047)
0.104
(0.041)
-0.049
(0.059)
0.024
(0.071)

0.023
(0.045)
0.102
(0.040)
0.002
(0.052)
0.007
(0.064)

0.053
(0.047)
0.096
(0.045)
0.021
(0.056)
0.015
(0.069)

0.033
(0.041)
0.097
(0.038)
-0.024
(0.054)
0.006
(0.062)

0.040
(0.041)
0.103
(0.040)
0.001
(0.052)
0.009
(0.061)

0.366
(0.083)
0.417
(0.107)
0.341
(0.088)
0.319
(0.086)

0.014
(0.073)
0.081
(0.090)
-0.023
(0.082)
-0.026
(0.089)

0.215
(0.078)
0.277
(0.102)
0.183
(0.082)
0.169
(0.085)

0.347
(0.076)
0.425
(0.106)
0.316
(0.081)
0.266
(0.073)

0.013
(0.069)
0.086
(0.089)
0.005
(0.081)
-0.033
(0.081)

0.208
(0.074)
0.278
(0.102)
0.183
(0.082)
0.146
(0.078)

0.097
(0.053)
0.085
(0.050)
0.103
(0.061)
0.111
(0.079)

-0.078
(0.054)
-0.008
(0.053)
-0.127
(0.073)
-0.100
(0.074)

0.008
(0.050)
0.037
(0.047)
-0.015
(0.058)
0.004
(0.072)

0.092
(0.045)
0.107
(0.046)
0.085
(0.055)
0.073
(0.072)

-0.072
(0.048)
0.004
(0.047)
-0.105
(0.069)
-0.105
(0.064)

0.008
(0.045)
0.046
(0.046)
-0.015
(0.058)
-0.013
(0.068)

Table 11: Disentangling Balsakhi and Class Size Effects
Improvement in Test Scores
Balsakhi Assignment
Pre to Post
Mumbai Vadodara
Both
Mumbai Vadodara
Both
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A. First Stages and Reduced Form
Treatment School

0.185
(0.075)
0.078
(0.024)
-0.007
(0.003)
-0.062
(0.024)
0.004
(0.003)

0.476
(0.046)
0.181
(0.023)
0.000
(0.001)
-0.087
(0.014)
-0.004
(0.001)

0.463
(0.037)
0.146
(0.020)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.090
(0.012)
-0.003
(0.001)

0.404
0.615
0.232
(0.242)
(0.177)
(0.129)
Treatment * Rank <20
0.128
0.157
0.179
(0.073)
(0.078)
(0.060)
Treatment * Rank
-0.004
0.003
0.001
(0.008)
(0.005)
(0.004)
Treatment * Pretest Score
-0.016
-0.093
-0.056
(0.094)
(0.086)
(0.062)
Treatment * Number of Students
-0.007
-0.007
-0.002
(0.008)
(0.004)
(0.003)
Rank <20
-0.079
-0.029
-0.120
(0.050)
(0.057)
(0.042)
Rank
0.008
0.004
0.003
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.003)
Pretest Score
-0.338
-0.342
-0.332
(0.074)
(0.060)
(0.047)
Number of Students
0.007
-0.002
-0.003
(0.005)
(0.003)
(0.003)
Notes: Columns (1)-(3) present the first stage for the estimation strategy to measure balsakhi and class size
effects. The dependent variable is a dummy for whether a child visited a balsakhi. Columns (4)-(6) present the
reduced form for this strategy. The dependent variable is normalized test scores. In both specifications, standard
errors (corrected for clustering) are given in parentheses.

Table 12: Estimation of the Direct and Indirect Effect of the Balsakhi Program
Improvement in Test Score: 2SLS Regressions

Balsakhi School
Saw a Balsakhi

Using f(Pre-Test Score)*Balsakhi as
Instrument
Mumbai
Vadodara
Both
(1)
(2)
(3)

Using Rank<20*Treatment as
Instruments
Mumbai Vadodara
Both
(4)
(5)
(6)

-0.029
(0.085)
0.574
(0.240)

0.220
(0.623)
1.477
(0.803)
0.007
(0.016)
0.164
(0.190)
-0.019
(0.014)

0.133
(0.106)
0.614
(0.292)

0.056
(0.068)
0.606
(0.189)

78.037
0.000

87.586
0.000

Treatment * Rank
Treatment * Pre-test score
Treatment * Number of students
F-stat (first stage)
p-value

29.491
0.000

0.193
(0.307)
0.880
(0.456)
0.002
(0.005)
-0.016
(0.099)
-0.003
(0.004)

-0.127
(0.236)
1.102
(0.333)
0.001
(0.004)
0.060
(0.093)
0.000
(0.004)

Over Id Test 2: p-value
0.598
0.477
0.476
Notes: This table presents instrumental variables estimates of the direct and indirect effect of the Balsakhi
program. The dependent variable is the difference between normalized posttest and normalized pretest
scores. Standard errors, corrected for clustering, are given in parentheses.

Table 13: Disentangling Balsakhi and Class Size Effects: Instrumental Variable Estimates with Interactions
Dependent Variable:
Improvement in Test scores: Pre to Post
Mumbai
Vadodara
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Panel A: Using (Rank<20)*Balsakhi as Instrument
Saw a Balsakhi
Saw Balsakhi*Big School

1.615
(0.868)
0.824
(0.487)

Saw Balsakhi*Variance in Pretest Score

0.277
(1.638)

Balsakhi School*Big School

0.008
(0.799)
-0.384
(0.351)

Balsakhi School*Variance in Pretest Score

0.547
(0.990)

-1.405
(1.327)

0.464
(0.335)
-0.433
(0.353)

0.102
(0.102)
-0.287
(0.149)

Balsakhi School*Variance in Pretest Score

0.366
(0.517)

0.213
(0.629)

0.918
(0.430)

0.694
(0.327)
0.034
(0.489)

3.217
(1.894)

0.296
(0.589)
-0.009
(0.108)

3.208
0.015

-0.585
(0.641)
0.351
(0.386)

0.056
(0.244)
-0.575
(0.229)

1.123
(0.409)

0.045
(0.483)

0.302
(0.213)
-0.245
(0.241)

-0.790
(0.766)

0.681
(0.423)

0.015
(0.264)
0.403
(0.260)
0.380
(0.358)

0.831
(1.288)

3.028
0.018

0.818
(0.290)

-0.209
(1.326)
-0.082
(0.628)
0.241
(0.219)

0.191
(0.103)
-0.216
(0.130)

-0.096
(0.474)

0.155
(0.413)
0.074
(0.102)

0.161
(0.493)
0.186
(0.268)

91.894
0.000

0.252
(0.413)
-0.069
(0.265)

-0.194
(0.468)

0.929
(0.767)

11.098
0.000

0.616
(0.907)

0.542
(0.927)

-2.595
(1.851)

0.081
(0.149)
22.098
0.000

0.633
(0.346)
0.911
(0.403)

(9)

0.366
(0.378)

-0.427
(0.552)

Balsakhi School*Average Pretest Score of Bottom 20

0.539
(0.558)

-0.007
(0.585)

2.177
(1.435)

Saw Balsakhi*Average Pretest Score of Bottom 20

F-stat (First Stage)
p-value

1.153
(0.604)
0.096
(0.635)

-0.585
(0.373)

Panel B: Using Balsakhi*f(Test Score) as Instruments
Saw a Balsakhi
0.422
(0.327)
Saw Balsakhi*Big School
0.335
(0.435)
Saw Balsakhi*Variance in Pretest Score

Balsakhi School*Big School

0.868
(1.170)

-0.013
(1.152)

-0.335
(0.746)

Balsakhi School*Average Pretest Score of Bottom 20

Balsakhi School

0.455
(0.482)
0.477
(0.618)

1.294
(1.376)

Saw Balsakhi*Average Pretest Score of Bottom 20
Balsakhi School

1.996
(0.846)

Both
(8)

110.202
0.000

0.061
(0.132)
39.076
0.000

5.164
0.000

46.311
0.000

Over Id Test 1: p-value
0.990
0.638
0.749
0.032
0.364
0.239
0.183
0.211
0.198
Over Id Test 2: p-value
0.390
0.182
0.685
0.009
0.114
0.319
0.002
0.338
0.295
Notes: This table tests whether the direct and indirect effects of the Balakhi program vary by school characteristics. The dependent variable is the difference between
pretest and posttest score. Each column within a panel represents a separate regression. Standard errors, corrected for clustering, are given in parentheses.

Treatment
(1)

Table 14: Attendance
Year 1
Year 2
Comparison Difference Treatment Comparison Difference
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

A. Mumbai
Grade 3
RA Attendance

0.861

0.870

RA Attendance

0.915

0.925

Observations

2463

1786

0.854

0.850

0.893

0.895

2499

2836

Grade 4
RA Attendance

0.859

0.867

RA Attendance

0.886

0.900

Observations

2742

2388

-0.019
(0.012)
-58

0.735

0.739

3131

2892

0.010
(0.013)
206

0.752

0.743

3155

3172

0.749

0.743

B. Vadodara, Balsakhi Program
Grade 3
RA Attendance

0.745

0.764

Observations

2593

2535

Grade 4
RA Attendance

0.769

0.759

Observations

2389

2595

C. Vadodara, CAL program
RA Attendance

-0.009
(0.014)
-0.010
(0.011)
-677

Year 3
Treatment Comparison Difference
(7)
(8)
(9)

0.007
(0.022)
-0.004
(0.018)
337

-0.012
(0.017)
-0.023
(0.015)
-354

-0.005
(0.013)
-239

0.009
(0.011)
17

0.006
0.708
0.683
0.025
(0.011)
(0.015)
Observations
2826
3082
256
3127
2801
-326
Note: This table reports the effect of the Balsakhi and CAL program on classroom attendance. The dependent variable is the fraction (from 0 to 1) of days the
child is recorded as present by a Pratham research assistant.

Balsakhi
(1)

Appendix Table 1: Summary Statistics: Vadodara Year 1, Balsakhi
PRE TEST
MID TEST
No Balsakhi Difference
Balsakhi
No Balsakhi
Difference
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

Balsakhi
(7)

POST TEST
No Balsakhi
(8)

Difference
(9)

GRADE 3
A. OBSERVATIONS
B. SCORES (PERCENTAGE)
Math

2595

2539

56

2285

2174

111

2122

2108

14

0.263

0.257

0.407

0.379

0.314

0.234

0.217

0.402

0.381

0.028
(0.021)
0.021
(0.020)

0.355

Verbal

0.006
(0.019)
0.017
(0.017)

0.385

0.354

0.041
(0.023)
0.031
(0.020)

C. NORMALIZED TEST SCORES
Math

0.028

0.000

0.028
0.666
0.541
0.125
0.434
0.254
0.181
(0.085)
(0.092)
(0.102)
Verbal
0.088
0.000
0.088
0.962
0.851
0.110
0.874
0.715
0.159
(0.091)
(0.102)
(0.106)
D. PERCENTAGE OF CHILDREN PASSING ALL COMPETENCIES FOR EACH GRADE
Math Grade 1
0.214
0.195
0.019
0.406
0.350
0.056
0.327
0.273
0.053
(0.027)
(0.031)
(0.032)
Math Grade 2
0.012
0.015
-0.003
0.045
0.043
0.002
0.036
0.020
0.016
(0.005)
(0.009)
(0.008)
Math Grade 3
0.043
0.032
0.011
0.133
0.109
0.024
0.092
0.062
0.030
(0.010)
(0.019)
(0.017)
Verbal Grade 1
0.237
0.209
0.028
0.531
0.524
0.007
0.520
0.497
0.024
(0.028)
(0.033)
(0.035)
Verbal Grade 2
0.158
0.142
0.017
0.332
0.317
0.015
0.284
0.246
0.037
(0.023)
(0.028)
(0.031)
Verbal Grade 3
0.038
0.028
0.010
0.131
0.133
-0.003
0.095
0.073
0.022
(0.011)
(0.022)
(0.020)
GRADE 4
A. OBSERVATIONS
2395
2669
-274
2175
2402
-227
1962
2234
-272
B. SCORES (PERCENTAGE)
Math
0.441
0.451
-0.010
0.535
0.511
0.024
0.510
0.473
0.037
(0.019)
(0.022)
(0.022)
Verbal
0.343
0.352
-0.009
0.516
0.497
0.019
0.504
0.486
0.019
(0.017)
(0.022)
(0.023)
C. NORMALIZED TEST SCORES
Math
-0.044
0.000
-0.044
0.363
0.259
0.104
0.254
0.092
0.162
(0.081)
(0.096)
(0.096)
Verbal
-0.044
0.000
-0.044
0.763
0.674
0.089
0.707
0.621
0.086
(0.080)
(0.101)
(0.108)
D. PERCENTAGE OF CHILDREN PASSING ALL COMPETENCIES FOR EACH GRADE
Math Grade 1
0.405
0.447
-0.041
0.561
0.537
0.024
0.506
0.486
0.019
(0.030)
(0.034)
(0.034)
Math Grade 2
0.061
0.053
0.008
0.106
0.095
0.011
0.085
0.072
0.013
(0.010)
(0.016)
(0.013)
Math Grade 3
0.109
0.106
0.003
0.224
0.195
0.029
0.173
0.144
0.029
(0.022)
(0.027)
(0.027)
Verbal Grade 1
0.441
0.458
-0.017
0.684
0.631
0.053
0.725
0.670
0.056
(0.028)
(0.031)
(0.033)
Verbal Grade 2
0.278
0.315
-0.037
0.488
0.449
0.039
0.450
0.437
0.013
(0.029)
(0.035)
(0.038)
Verbal Grade 3
0.114
0.122
-0.008
0.264
0.251
0.013
0.217
0.209
0.007
(0.022)
(0.034)
(0.031)
Notes: This table presents summary statistics for the various testing rounds. Standard errors of differences (corrected for clustering) are given in parentheses. The normalized test score is
obtained by subtracting from the raw score the mean of the normalized comparison group score, and then dividing this difference by the standard deviation of the pretest scores of the
comparison group. "SCORES (PERCENTAGE)" indicates the share of possible points a child scored on the exam.

Balsakhi
(1)

Appendix Table 2: Summary Statistics: Vadodara Year 2, Balsakhi
PRE TEST
MID TEST
No Balsakhi Difference
Balsakhi
No Balsakhi
Difference
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

Balsakhi
(7)

POST TEST
No Balsakhi
(8)

Difference
(9)

GRADE 3
A. OBSERVATIONS
B. SCORES (PERCENTAGE)
Math

3146

2906

240

2843

2608

235

3027

2792

235

0.167

0.160

0.420

0.335

0.395

0.221

0.216

0.463

0.391

0.085
(0.022)
0.072
(0.018)

0.478

Verbal

0.007
(0.014)
0.004
(0.014)

0.428

0.386

0.082
(0.022)
0.042
(0.018)

C. NORMALIZED TEST SCORES
Math

0.039

0.000

0.039
1.386
0.932
0.454
1.695
1.256
0.439
(0.074)
(0.120)
(0.116)
Verbal
0.025
0.000
0.025
1.450
1.027
0.422
1.245
0.998
0.247
(0.082)
(0.107)
(0.103)
D. PERCENTAGE OF CHILDREN PASSING ALL COMPETENCIES FOR EACH GRADE
Math Grade 1
0.258
0.249
0.009
0.591
0.475
0.117
0.616
0.542
0.075
(0.025)
(0.031)
(0.032)
Math Grade 2
0.016
0.018
-0.002
0.140
0.081
0.059
0.183
0.119
0.063
(0.005)
(0.019)
(0.023)
Math Grade 3
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.021
0.009
0.013
0.056
0.034
0.023
(0.001)
(0.004)
(0.010)
Verbal Grade 1
0.508
0.500
0.008
0.813
0.698
0.115
0.776
0.740
0.036
(0.035)
(0.027)
(0.028)
Verbal Grade 2
0.073
0.088
-0.014
0.323
0.236
0.087
0.331
0.319
0.013
(0.016)
(0.028)
(0.029)
Verbal Grade 3
0.016
0.009
0.007
0.135
0.120
0.014
0.145
0.120
0.025
(0.005)
(0.019)
(0.021)
GRADE 4
A. OBSERVATIONS
3165
3198
-33
2953
2969
-16
3053
3078
-25
B. SCORES (PERCENTAGE)
Math
0.309
0.297
0.012
0.530
0.435
0.095
0.576
0.496
0.080
(0.018)
(0.016)
(0.020)
Verbal
0.348
0.331
0.017
0.560
0.475
0.085
0.517
0.456
0.062
(0.017)
(0.017)
(0.018)
C. NORMALIZED TEST SCORES
Math
0.053
0.000
0.053
1.005
0.594
0.411
1.201
0.856
0.346
(0.077)
(0.069)
(0.085)
Verbal
0.084
0.000
0.084
1.132
0.710
0.422
0.919
0.614
0.305
(0.082)
(0.082)
(0.087)
D. PERCENTAGE OF CHILDREN PASSING ALL COMPETENCIES FOR EACH GRADE
Math Grade 1
0.470
0.448
0.022
0.739
0.641
0.098
0.779
0.692
0.087
(0.030)
(0.020)
(0.028)
Math Grade 2
0.055
0.051
0.004
0.231
0.144
0.087
0.292
0.220
0.072
(0.010)
(0.021)
(0.028)
Math Grade 3
0.015
0.012
0.003
0.052
0.040
0.012
0.110
0.082
0.028
(0.003)
(0.009)
(0.013)
Verbal Grade 1
0.749
0.739
0.010
0.898
0.811
0.087
0.859
0.846
0.014
(0.025)
(0.017)
(0.016)
Verbal Grade 2
0.186
0.181
0.005
0.440
0.323
0.117
0.481
0.361
0.120
(0.020)
(0.026)
(0.028)
Verbal Grade 3
0.082
0.079
0.003
0.256
0.194
0.063
0.224
0.179
0.045
(0.015)
(0.024)
(0.024)
Notes: This table presents summary statistics for the various testing rounds. Standard errors of differences (corrected for clustering) are given in parentheses. The normalized test score is obtained by
subtracting from the raw score the mean of the normalized comparison group score, and then dividing this difference by the standard deviation of the pretest scores of the comparison group.
"SCORES (PERCENTAGE)" indicates the share of possible points a child scored on the exam.

Appendix table 3: Summary Statistics: Mumbai Year 1, Balsakhi
PRE TEST
Balsakhi
No Balsakhi Difference
Balsakhi
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

POST TEST
No Balsakhi
(5)

Difference
(6)

GRADE 3
A. OBSERVATIONS
B. SCORES (PERCENTAGE)
Math

2592

2182

410

2417

2027

390

0.470

0.470

0.571

0.530

Verbal

0.596

0.569

0.001
(0.029)
0.027
(0.029)

0.666

0.626

0.041
(0.033)
0.040
(0.028)

C. NORMALIZED TEST SCORES
Math

0.002

0.000

0.002
0.383
0.227
0.156
(0.108)
(0.126)
Verbal
0.100
0.000
0.100
0.359
0.210
0.149
(0.108)
(0.102)
D. PERCENTAGE OF CHILDREN PASSING ALL COMPETENCIES FOR EACH GRADE
Math Grade 1
0.326
0.337
-0.012
0.397
0.357
0.040
(0.038)
(0.039)
Math Grade 2
0.126
0.147
-0.021
0.211
0.195
0.017
(0.025)
(0.036)
Math Grade 3
0.024
0.023
0.001
0.089
0.091
-0.003
(0.007)
(0.022)
Verbal Grade 1
0.856
0.837
0.019
0.937
0.913
0.025
(0.025)
(0.018)
Verbal Grade 2
0.486
0.473
0.013
0.577
0.526
0.050
(0.045)
(0.042)
Verbal Grade 3
0.517
0.470
0.047
0.631
0.584
0.047
(0.039)
(0.039)
Notes: This table presents summary statistics for the various testing rounds. Standard errors of differences (corrected for clustering) are given in
parentheses. The normalized test score is obtained by subtracting from the raw score the mean of the normalized comparison group score, and then
dividing this difference by the standard deviation of the pretest scores of the comparison group. "SCORES (PERCENTAGE)" indicates the share of
possible points a child scored on the exam.

Appendix table 4: Summary Statistics: Mumbai Year 2, Balsakhi
PRE TEST
POST TEST
Balsakhi
No Balsakhi Difference
Balsakhi
No Balsakhi
Difference
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

Implied Difference
(7)

GRADE 3
A. OBSERVATIONS
B. SCORES (PERCENTAGE)
Math

2530

2943

-413

2337

2731

-394

0.221

0.233

0.502

0.470

Verbal

0.351

0.344

-0.012
(0.016)
0.007
(0.022)

0.588

0.569

0.031
(0.028)
0.018
(0.025)

0.049
(0.043)
0.028
(0.039)

C. NORMALIZED TEST SCORES
Math

-0.070

0.000

1.509

1.333

0.898

0.831

0.176
(0.155)
0.067
(0.091)

0.276
(0.240)
0.105
(0.142)

0.421

0.339

0.412

0.412

0.136

0.099

0.123

0.088

0.820

0.817

0.388

0.363

0.317

0.307

0.082
(0.043)
0.001
(0.053)
0.037
(0.023)
0.035
(0.024)
0.004
(0.022)
0.024
(0.033)
0.010
(0.034)

0.128
(0.064)
0.001
(0.083)
0.058
(0.035)
0.054
(0.038)
0.006
(0.034)
0.038
(0.052)
0.015
(0.053)

2635

2290

345

0.642

0.564

0.721

0.683

0.079
(0.027)
0.038
(0.021)

0.122
(0.038)
0.059
(0.029)

0.995

0.678

0.641

0.513

0.317
(0.111)
0.127
(0.069)

0.494
(0.154)
0.198
(0.097)

0.474

0.387

0.554

0.464

0.241

0.171

0.335

0.242

0.923

0.900

0.576

0.512

0.532

0.485

0.087
(0.036)
0.090
(0.055)
0.069
(0.033)
0.093
(0.035)
0.023
(0.014)
0.064
(0.034)
0.047
(0.033)

0.136
(0.053)
0.140
(0.081)
0.108
(0.047)
0.144
(0.050)
0.035
(0.020)
0.099
(0.049)
0.074
(0.050)

-0.070
(0.087)
Verbal
0.025
0.000
0.025
(0.082)
D. PERCENTAGE OF CHILDREN PASSING ALL COMPETENCIES FOR EACH GRADE
Math Grade 1
0.137
0.167
-0.030
(0.025)
Math Grade 2
0.082
0.090
-0.008
(0.015)
Math Grade 3
0.003
0.006
-0.003
(0.003)
Math Grade 4
0.007
0.013
-0.006
(0.004)
Verbal Grade 1
0.653
0.648
0.005
(0.036)
Verbal Grade 2
0.165
0.147
0.017
(0.022)
Verbal Grade 3
0.137
0.131
0.005
(0.021)
GRADE 4
A. OBSERVATIONS
2812
2460
352
B. SCORES (PERCENTAGE)
Math
0.409
0.396
0.013
(0.019)
Verbal
0.555
0.530
0.025
(0.021)
C. NORMALIZED TEST SCORES
Math
0.053
0.000
0.053
(0.076)
Verbal
0.083
0.000
0.083
(0.071)
D. PERCENTAGE OF CHILDREN PASSING ALL COMPETENCIES FOR EACH GRADE
Math Grade 1
0.300
0.240
0.060
(0.031)
Math Grade 2
0.245
0.243
0.003
(0.023)
Math Grade 3
0.042
0.041
0.001
(0.010)
Math Grade 4
0.074
0.063
0.011
(0.013)
Verbal Grade 1
0.825
0.796
0.029
(0.022)
Verbal Grade 2
0.338
0.333
0.005
(0.027)
Verbal Grade 3
0.355
0.317
0.038
(0.031)

Notes: This table presents summary statistics for the various testing rounds. Standard errors of differences (corrected for clustering) are given in parentheses. The
normalized test score is obtained by subtracting from the raw score the mean of the normalized comparison group score, and then dividing this difference by the
standard deviation of the pretest scores of the comparison group. "SCORES (PERCENTAGE)" indicates the share of possible points a child scored on the exam.

Appendix Table 5: Estimates of the Impact of the Balsakhi Program, by City and Sample
Difference in Difference
Number of
Observations
(1)
Grade 3
Vadodara Year 1

4230

Vadodara Year 2

5819

Mumbai Year 1

4429

Mumbai Year 2

5063

Mumbai Year 2 Specification Check

5063

Grade 4
Vadodara Year 1

4196

Vadodara Year 2

6131

Mumbai Year 2

4923

Mumbai Year 2 Specification Check

4923

One Year Out
Vadodara Pretest Year 2 to Posttest Year 3 Grade 3

4834

Dependent Variable: Test Score
Improvement

Math
(2)

Verbal
(3)

Total
(4)

Math
(5)

Verbal
(6)

Total
(7)

0.179
(0.092)
0.399
(0.111)
0.163
(0.072)
0.369
(0.195)
0.276
(0.149)

0.082
(0.090)
0.224
(0.095)
0.060
(0.072)
0.051
(0.128)
0.073
(0.097)

0.142
(0.089)
0.343
(0.104)
0.118
(0.067)
0.193
(0.158)
0.168
(0.121)

0.179
(0.086)
0.418
(0.107)
0.161
(0.075)
0.348
(0.197)
0.259
(0.152)

0.102
(0.085)
0.233
(0.089)
0.086
(0.066)
0.071
(0.118)
0.076
(0.092)

0.152
(0.085)
0.354
(0.100)
0.127
(0.067)
0.193
(0.155)
0.162
(0.121)

0.201
(0.075)
0.280
(0.087)
0.435
(0.125)
0.403
(0.099)

0.121
(0.074)
0.213
(0.073)
0.098
(0.087)
0.104
(0.066)

0.173
(0.073)
0.265
(0.080)
0.269
(0.104)
0.257
(0.081)

0.190
(0.072)
0.307
(0.078)
0.456
(0.124)
0.429
(0.101)

0.114
(0.076)
0.240
(0.068)
0.140
(0.074)
0.149
(0.058)

0.166
(0.073)
0.289
(0.074)
0.299
(0.097)
0.291
(0.078)

0.027
0.007
0.017
0.042
0.010
0.024
(0.082)
(0.076)
(0.073)
(0.079)
(0.065)
(0.068)
Vadodara Pretest Year 2 to Posttest Year 3 Grade 4
5091
0.027
0.024
0.028
0.058
0.055
0.053
(0.055)
(0.056)
(0.053)
(0.046)
(0.049)
(0.046)
Notes: This table gives the difference in difference and value added specification for the Balsakhi program by standard, for different groups and years. Standard errors
(corrected for clustering) are given in parentheses. The dependent variable is the normalized test score.

