                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    INTERNATIONAL STOCK RETURN COMOVEMENTS

                                            Geert Bekaert
                                           Robert J. Hodrick
                                            Xiaoyan Zhang

                                         Working Paper 11906
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11906


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2005




We are very grateful to Tim Vogelsang who provided code for the linear time trend test. Correspondence
Address: Geert Bekaert, Columbia Business School, Uris Hall 802, 3022 Broadway, New York, NY 10027.
Tel.: 212-854-9156. E-mail: gb241@columbia.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Geert Bekaert, Robert J. Hodrick, Xiaoyan Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
International Stock Return Comovements
Geert Bekaert, Robert J. Hodrick, Xiaoyan Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 11906
December 2005
JEL No. C52, G11, G12

                                           ABSTRACT

We examine international stock return comovements using country-industry and country-style

portfolios. We first establish that parsimonious risk-based factor models capture the covariance

structure of the data better than the popular Heston-Rouwenhorst (1994) model. We then establish

the following stylized facts regarding stock return comovements. First, we do not find evidence for

an upward trend in return correlations, excpet for the European stock markets. Second, the increasing

imporatnce of industry factors relative to country factors was a short-lived, temporary phenomenon.

Third, we find no evidence for a trend in idiosyncratic risk in any of the countries we examine.

Geert Bekaert
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
gb241@columbia.edu

Robert J. Hodrick
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
rh169@columbia.edu

Xiaoyan Zhang
Johnson Graduate School of Management
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
xz69@cornell.edu
1. Introduction

    The study of comovements between stock returns is at the heart of finance and has recently
received much interest in a variety of literatures, especially in international finance. First, recent ar-
ticles, such as Cavaglia, Brightman and Aked (2000), have challenged the classic result from Heston
and Rouwenhorst (1994) that country factors are more important drivers of volatility and comove-
ments than are industry factors. If true, there are important implications for asset management
and the benefits of international diversification. Second, it is generally believed that increased cap-
ital market integration should go hand in hand with increased cross-country correlations. Whereas
there has been much empirical work in this area, such as Longin and Solnik (1995), it is fair to say
that there is no definitive evidence that cross-country correlations are significantly and permanently
higher now than they were, say, 10 years ago. Clearly, the first and second questions are related, but
few articles have actually made the link explicitly. Third, the study of correlations was also given a
boost by well-publicized crises in emerging markets, which seem to create “excessive” correlations
between countries that some have termed “contagion.” The literature is too wide to survey here,
but see the survey article by Karolyi (2003) or Dungey and Martin (1998). In a domestic context,
Barberis, Shleifer and Wurgler (2005) suggest that behavioral factors (for instance, a style clientele
for large stocks) may induce excessive correlation between stocks and Kallberg and Pasquariello
(2004) test for “contagion” in US domestic portfolios. Finally, in an influential article, Campbell,
Lettau, Malkiel and Xu (2001) argue that the idiosyncratic risk of individual firms has markedly
increased in the US. This is an important fact for the study of comovements, because everything
else equal, it would lower correlations between firm returns.
   Motivated by these issues, we study the comovements between the returns on country-industry
portfolios and country-style portfolios for 23 countries, 26 industries and 9 styles during 1980 —2003.
During this period, markets may have become more integrated at a world level through increased
capital and trade integration. Also, a number of regional developments have likely integrated stock
markets at a regional level. These developments include NAFTA, the emergence of the Euro,
and the increasing economic and financial integration within the European Union. Given such a
background, we want to allow for maximum flexibility in the modeling of return comovements. We
view stock return comovements from the perspective of a linear factor model with time-varying
factor exposures (betas), time-varying factor volatilities, and potentially time-varying idiosyncratic



                                                    2
volatilities. While flexibility in the modeling of betas is essential in a framework where the degree of
market integration is changing over time, this may not suﬃce to capture the underlying structural
changes in the various markets. Therefore, in addition to standard models of risk like the CAPM
and the Fama-French (1993) model, we consider an arbitrage pricing theory (APT) model where
the identity of the important systematic factors may change through time. Surprisingly, much of
the literature on stock return comovement imposes strong restrictions of constant and unit betas
with respect to a large number of country and industry factors, as in the Heston and Rouwenhorst
(1994) model. We contrast the predictions of these models for stock return comovements with our
risk-based models.
   We examine how well the various factor models fit the stock return comovements of our port-
folios. We find that risk-based models fit stock return comovements much better than the Heston-
Rouwenhorst model. We then select the best model to answer several salient questions.
   First, we examine whether there are time trends in stock return comovements, focusing primary
on country return correlations. We also characterize the behavior of country return correlations
over time, decomposing them into betas, factor covariances and idiosyncratic covariances. We only
find a significant upward trend for stock return correlations within Europe. Second, we revisit the
industry-country debate by examining the relative evolution of correlations across country portfolio
returns versus correlations across industry portfolio returns. While industry correlations seem to
have decreased in relative terms over the 90’s, this evolution has been halted and reversed, and we
find no evidence of a trend. Third, we also examine the correlation between portfolios of similar
styles across countries. We detect a pattern that large growth stocks are more correlated across
countries than are small value stocks, and that the diﬀerence has increased over time. Finally, we
detect no evidence at all of a trend in firm-level idiosyncratic variances over our sample period,
including the US.
   The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the data. Section 3 discusses the various
factor models we consider. We choose the best model for comovements in section 4. Section 5
provides the salient empirical results using country-industry and country-style portfolios, whereas
section 6 focuses on firm level returns. Section 7 concludes.




                                                   3
2. Data

        We study weekly portfolio returns from 23 developed markets. We choose to study returns at
a weekly frequency as a balance between data availability and non-synchronous trading around the
world. All returns are US dollar denominated, and we calculate excess returns by subtracting the
US weekly T-bill rate, which is obtained from the CRSP riskfree file2 . The selection of developed
countries is obtained from the Morgan Stanley Developed Country Index. Data for the US are from
Compustat and CRSP. Data for the other countries are from DataStream. The sample period is
1980:01 to 2003:12, for 1253 weekly observations.
       Table 1 provides summary statistics for our data. The starting point is usually the beginning of
1980, except for Finland, Greece, New Zealand, Portugal and Spain, which mostly start in 19863 .
We require that firms have a market capitalization of more than $ 1million. We examine the average
firm annual return, the average firm size, and the average firm book-to-market ratio (denoted by
BM). There are large diﬀerences across countries. For instance, the average firm size is $181 million
for Austria and $1543 million for Japan. The average BM is 0.69 for Japan and 1.46 for Belgium.
These diﬀerences motivate portfolio construction within each country.
       Our basic assets are value-weighted country-industry and country-style portfolio returns. For
the country-industry portfolios, we first need a uniform industry classification. DataStream provides
FTSE industry identifications for each firm. Because we use CRSP data for US firms, the U.S.
industry identification is from SIC. Since we want to look at industries at a relatively aggregate
level that also preserves cross-sectional diﬀerences, we use the FTSE level 4 classification, which
has 40 industries, and we match these to the SIC 30 industries classification. The main issue with
SIC coding is that it does not have a separate technology industry, whereas the issue with respect
to FTSE coding is that it has relatively too many industries, some of which are closely related.
We therefore group the SIC and FTSE classifications to have a smaller number of industries that
approaches the number of countries in our sample, resulting in 26 industries. Table 2 shows the
reconciliation between the SIC system and the FTSE system. To form country-industry portfolios,
   2
       The T-bill rates in CRSP are reported as annualized numbers per month. We convert the rates to weekly numbers
by deviding the rate by 52 (number of weeks in one year).
   3
     DataStream’s coverage within various markets is time-varying. For instance, the dataset tends to cover larger
firms at the beginning of our sample period. Since we use value-weighted index returns throughout the paper, the
possible omission of smaller firms should not significantly aﬀect our results.




                                                           4
we group firms within each country into these 26 industry groups and calculate a value-weighted
return for the portfolio for each period.
       The style of a portfolio, value vs. growth or small vs. big, is a main organizing principle
in the US asset management industry. The behavioral finance literature has also stressed the
potential importance of style classification for stock return comovements. Hence, we also sort
firms into diﬀerent styles according to their size (market capitalization) and their BM ratio. To
form country-style portfolios, we use the following procedure. Every six months, we independently
sort firms within each country into three size groups and three BM groups. Firm size and BM
are calculated at the end of the last six-month period4 . We then form nine portfolios using the
intersections of the size groups and the BM groups. We use a three-by-three approach because
of the small number of firms in the smaller countries. The style portfolio level returns are the
value-weighted returns on firms in the portfolio. All portfolios are required to have at least 5 firms.
       A preliminary investigation of the raw data reveals that quite a few country portfolios have
higher volatilities over the last five years in our sample, 1998-2003. Later in this article, we will
formally investigate whether these higher levels represent a trend. In addition, the TMT industries
(info tech, media, and telecom) witnessed a tremendous increase in volatility during 1998-2003,
which is consistent with findings of Brooks and Del Negro (2003). This increase in volatility is also
noticeable for the style portfolios, especially for the small firms.



3. Models and Empirical Design

        This section presents the various models that we will estimate. We begin with a general model,
and then we introduce diﬀerent model specifications within the general model framework.


3.1. General Model

        All of our models are a special case of the following data generating process for the excess
return on asset j at time t, Rj,t ,

                                Rj,t = E(Rj,t ) + (β glo  0 glo
                                                     j,t ) Ft   + (β reg  0 reg
                                                                     j,t ) Ft   + ²j,t                           (1)
   4
       DataStream reports firm book value monthly, while Compustat reports firm book value at each firm’s fiscal year
end, which can be any time during the year. For US firms, we take the book value that is available at the end of the
last six-month period.



                                                           5
where E(Rj,t ) is the expected excess return for asset j, β glo
                                                            j,t is a k
                                                                       glo × 1 vector of asset j’s loadings


on global shocks, Ftglo is a k glo × 1 vector of global shocks (zero-mean factors), β reg
                                                                                      j,t is a k
                                                                                                 reg × 1


vector of loadings on regional shocks, and Ftreg is a kreg × 1 vector of zero-mean regional shocks
at time t. Because the focus in this article is on second moments, we do not further explore the
implications of the factor model for expected returns. Many articles (see for instance, Bekaert
and Harvey 1995 and Baele 2005) have noted that the process towards market integration may
not be smooth. Maximum flexibility in the model with regard to the importance of global versus
country-specific factors is necessary. The above general model allows exposure to global factors
and regional factors, consistent with full market integration, partial world market integration or
regional integration.
   We define a factor to be global if it is constructed from the global capital market, and we define
a factor to be regional if it is constructed only from the relevant regional market. In this paper,
we consider three regions: North America, Europe and the Far East. We choose to use regional
factors rather than country factors as local factors because Brooks and Del Negro (2003) show
that within-region country factors can be mostly explained by regional factors. By using regional
factors, we also reduce the number of factors included in each model. Empirically, we re-estimate
all the models every six months, allowing idiosyncratic volatilities, factor volatilities and the betas
to vary over time.
   While the implications of a linear factor model for covariances and correlations are well known, it
is instructive to review how they relate to the current debate on the time-variation in cross-country
correlations and the industry-country debate. Let Ft = {(Ftglo )0 , (Ftreg )0 }0 be the (kglo + kreg ) × 1
factor vector for time t, let ΣF = cov(Ft , Ft ) be a (kglo + kreg ) × (kglo + kreg ) factor covariance
matrix, and let Bj = {(β glo 0    reg 0 0
                         j ) , (β j ) } be a (k
                                                glo + k reg ) × 1 loading vector. The covariance of


two returns, Rj1 , Rj2 (j1 6= j2), can be written as function of the factor loadings, and a residual
covariance:
                                                 0
                              cov(Rj1 , Rj2 ) = Bj1 ΣF Bj2 + cov(²j1 , ²j2 ).                          (2)

   If the factor model fully describes stock return comovements, the residual covariance cov(²j1 , ²j2 )
should be zero. In small samples, this may not necessarily be the case even if the model is true, but
in the APT model, the residual covariances should tend to zero asymptotically (see Chamberlain
1983, Chamberlain and Rothschild 1983).
   Let us assume these covariances to be zero for now. From equation (2), covariances between two


                                                    6
assets estimated in diﬀerent periods can increase through the following two channels: an increase in
the factor loadings B and/or an increase in factor covariances ΣF . If the increase in covariance is due
to increased exposure to the world market (β glo ), the change in covariance is much more likely to be
associated with the process of global market integration (and thus to be permanent or at least very
persistent), than when it is due to an increase in factor volatilities (ΣF ). Analogously, correlations
are covariances divided by the product of the volatilities of the asset returns involved. Correlations
are increasing in betas and factor volatilities, but are decreasing in idiosyncratic volatility. Because
the volatility of the market portfolio, while varying through time, shows no long-term trend (see
Schwert 1987), it is very important to control for the level of market volatility when assessing
changes in correlations. As we will show below, many of the empirical results in the literature
fail to account for the likely temporary increase in factor volatilities occurring at the end of the
previous century. We now consider several special cases of the general factor model.


3.2. CAPM Models

        The first asset pricing model we consider is the world CAPM (WCAPM hereafter), which
contains one factor, W M KT . The factor return, W M KT , is calculated as the demeaned value-
weighted sum of returns on all country-industry (or country-style) portfolios. Under the WCAPM,
we have:
                                    Rj,t = E(Rj,t ) + β W
                                                        j
                                                          MKT
                                                              W M KTt + ²j,t ,                                  (3)

where β W
        j
          MKT
              is firm j’s loading on the world market portfolio5 . This model only holds if the
world capital market is perfectly integrated.
       The second model still uses market portfolio returns as the only relevant factors, but the model
also allows for exposure to a regional or local market factor, LM KT :

                         Rj,t = E(Rj,t ) + β W
                                             j
                                               MKT
                                                   W M KTt + β LMKT
                                                               j    LM KTt + ²j,t .                             (4)

The local factor LM KT is calculated in two stages. First, we compute the demeaned value-weighted
sum of returns on all country-industry (or country-style) portfolios within the region. Then, this
return is orthogonalized with respect to W M KT , using an ordinary least square regression on
W M KT . The error term of the regression is the new region-specific LM KT . This regression is
   5
       We drop the subscript t of β for simplicity. We estimate β every six-month period, during which it is assumed
constant.



                                                          7
conducted every six months to allow for time-varying factor loadings. Note that the orthogonal-
ization simplifies the interpretation of the betas, but it does not otherwise aﬀect the model. This
partial integration model is designated the WLCAPM.


3.3. Fama-French Models

        Stock return comovements may also be related to the style of the stocks involved, that is
whether they are small versus large, or value versus growth stocks. Whether these comovements
are related to their cash flow characteristics or the way these stocks are priced remains an open
question6 . We use the parsimonious factor model proposed by Fama and French (1998) to capture
style exposures in an international context. The world Fama-French model, WFF, has three factors,
a market factor (W M KT ), a size factor (W SM B) and a value factor (W HM L)7 :


             Rj,t = E(Rj,t ) + β W
                                 j
                                   MKT
                                       W M KTt + β W
                                                   j
                                                     SMB
                                                         W SM Bt + β W
                                                                     j
                                                                       HML
                                                                           W HM Lt + ²j,t .                  (5)

To calculate W SM B, we first compute SM B(k) for each country k, which is the diﬀerence between
the value-weighted returns of the smallest 30% of firms and the largest 30% of firms within country
k. Factor W SM B is the demeaned value weighted sum of individual country SM B(k)s. Factor
W HM L is calculated in a similar way as the demeaned value weighted sum of individual country
HM L(k)s.
       The fourth model, the world-local Fama-French model (WLFF), incorporates regional factors
in addition to global factors, with returns determined by



              Rj,t = E(Rj,t ) + β W
                                  j
                                    MKT
                                        W M KTt + β W
                                                    j
                                                      SMB
                                                          W SM Bt + β W
                                                                      j
                                                                        HML
                                                                            W HM Lt

                         +β LMKT
                            j    LM KTt + β LSMB
                                            j    LSM Bt + β LHML
                                                            j    LHM Lt + ²j,t .                             (6)

The local factors (LM KT, LSM B, LHM L) are all orthogonalized relative to the global factors
(W M KT, W SM B, W HM L). Among the local factors or global factors, we do not conduct further
orthogonalization, so it is possible that for instance, LM KT has a nonzero correlation with LSM B.
   6
       Campbell, Polk and Vuolteenaho (2005) find that for US stocks, the systematic risks of stocks with similar
accounting characteristics are primarily driven by the systematic risks of their fundamentals.
   7
     The model in Fama and French (1998) only has the market factor and the value factor. Here we incorporate a
size factor, as in Fama and French (1996).




                                                         8
3.4. APT Models

        The APT models postulate that pervasive factors aﬀect returns. To find comprehensive fac-
tors relevant for the covariance structure, we extract APT factors from the covariance matrix of
individual portfolio returns, using Jones’s (2001) methodology. Jones (2001) modifies the empiri-
cal procedure of Connor and Korajczyk (1986) to incorporate time-series heteroskedasticity in the
residuals8 . We denote the global version of the model by WAPT, with returns determined by

                Rj,t = E(Rj,t ) + β W
                                    j
                                      P C1
                                           W P C1t + β W
                                                       j
                                                         P C2
                                                              W P C2t + β W
                                                                          j
                                                                            P C3
                                                                                 W P C3t + ²j,t .                (7)

where W P C1, W P C2, W P C3 are the first three principal components from the factor analysis.
We estimate the covariance matrix, and extract the principal components (factors) every half year,
using the 26 weekly returns for all individual portfolios. By construction, the factors have zero
means and unit volatilities, and they are orthogonal to each other. This procedure allows the
factor structure to change every half year, implicitly accommodating time-varying risk prices and
time-varying risk loadings (betas). We use the first three factors to be comparable with the Fama-
French model, and we find that the three factors explain a substantial amount (50-60%) of the
time-series variation of returns.
       The partial integration version of the WAPT is called the WLAPT:

                  Rj,t = E(Rj,t ) + β W
                                      j
                                        P C1
                                             W P C1t + β W
                                                         j
                                                           P C2
                                                                W P C2t + β W
                                                                            j
                                                                              P C3
                                                                                   W P C3t

                             +β LP
                                j
                                   C1
                                      LP C1t + β LP
                                                 j
                                                    C2
                                                       LP C2t + β LP
                                                                  j
                                                                     C3
                                                                        LP C3t + ²j,t ,                          (8)

where LP C1, LP C2, LP C3 are the first three principal components for the relevant region. The
regional factors are first extracted using portfolios within each region, and then the LP Cs are
orthogonalized with respect to the W P Cs.
   8
       The asymptotic principal components procedure described in Conner and Korajczyk (1986) allows non-Gaussian
returns and time-varying factor risk premia. However, Conner and Korajczyk’s approach assumes that the covariance
matrix of the factor model residuals is constant over time. Jones (2001) generalizes Conner and Korajczyk’s procecure
by allowing the covariance matrix of the factor model residuals to be time-varying. This generalization complicates
the estimation of the principal components. Jones (2001) solves the estimation problem by using Joreskog’s (1967)
iterative algorithm.




                                                         9
3.5. Heston and Rouwenhorst Model

    Heston and Rouwenhorst (1994) propose a dummy variable model, which is widely used in
the country-industry literature. The model postulates that a portfolio j (belonging to country c
and industry i) receives a unit weight on the market return, a unit weight on country c and a unit
weight on industry i. Thus, returns for period t are determined by

                                             0           0
                                Rj,t = αt + DC,j ∗ Ct + DI,j ∗ It + ²i,t .                         (9)

The variable DC,j is a ncou × 1 country dummy vector, with the c-th element equal to one and ncou
is the number of countries, the variable Ct is a ncou × 1 country eﬀect vector, the variable DI,j
is a nind × 1 industry dummy vector, with the i-th element equal to one and nind is the number
of industries, and the variable It is a nind × 1 industry eﬀect vector. To estimate this model, one
                                       Pncou              Pnind
must impose additional restrictions:     l=1 wC,l Cl = 0,  l=1 wI,l Il = 0, where wC,l is the market-

capitalization-based country weight for the l-th country and wI,l is the market-capitalization-based
industry weight on the l-th industry. With the above restrictions, the intercept αt is the return
on the value-weighted market return at t, W M KTt . A cross-sectional regression for each period
suﬃces to extract Ct and It .
   We denote this model by DCI (dummy for country and industry). It is also interesting to
examine a restricted version of the DCI model. For instance, if we restrict all industry eﬀect, It ,
to be zero, then we have a country-eﬀect-only model, and we denote it the DC model (dummy for
country). Similarly, if we restrict all country eﬀect, Ct , to be zero, then we have an industry-eﬀect-
only model, and we denote it the DI model (dummy for industry). We can derive analogous models
for country-style portfolios, and we call them the DCS model (dummy for country and style), the
DC model (dummy for country) and the DS model (dummy for style).
   The DCI model is essentially a linear factor model with a large number of factors (a world factor
and industry and country factors) and unit exposures to the risk factors. The model is designed
to determine whether country or industry eﬀects dominate the variance of international portfolios
and diversification benefits. The advantage of the model is that it intuitively separates returns into
country and industry eﬀects, and the relative importance of country and industry factors can vary
through time as factor realizations change.
   The DCI model’s major disadvantage is that it assumes all the portfolios within the same
country or industry have the same (unit) loadings on the country and industry factors. Because

                                                   10
of this, the model seems ill-suited to adequately capture and interpret the time-variation in stock
return comovements over the last 20 years. The process of global and regional market integration
that has characterized global capital markets in the last few decades should naturally lead to time-
varying betas with respect to the world market return and/or country specific factors. If this
time-variation is not allowed, it will end up aﬀecting the industry or factor realizations spuriously.
Moreover, the prediction of the dummy variable model for the covariance between asset j1 and j2
is empirically quite restrictive:

              cov(Rj1 , Rj2 ) = cov(W M KT + Cj1 + Ij1 , W M KT + Cj2 + Ij2 ) + cov(²j1 , ²j2 ).                     (10)

Assuming zero residual covariances, the covariances across firms only depend on country or industry
membership. Hence, if we have another firm j3 that belongs to the same country and same industry
as firm j1, then we would have cov(Rj1 , Rj2 ) = cov(Rj3 , Rj2 )9 .



4. Model Estimation and Selection

        In this section, we provide estimation results for our various models and determine which
model provides the best fit for the sample covariance structure.


4.1. Factor Model Estimation

        In general, the parameters are re-estimated every six month period, but diﬀerences exist for
both the APT models and the dummy variable models. The dummy variable models are estimated
cross-sectionally every week. For the APT models, we first extract the global and regional factors
using Jones’s (2001) approach from each six-month period, then factor loadings are estimated.
       Table 3 presents estimation results for the country-industry and country-style portfolios. We
first examine the explanatory power of the various models for returns using the adjusted R2 . On
average, for country-industry portfolios, the WCAPM explains 23% of the total variance, while
together with region-specific market factors, the R2 goes up to 37%. The WFF model explains
27% of the total variance, and together with region-specific Fama-French factors, the R2 increases
to 44%. The WAPT model explains 39% by itself, and with the addition of region-specific factors,
   9
       The restrictiveness of this approach becomes very apparent if we further assume, as often is done, that the country
and industry factors are orthogonal. Then the covariances between stocks are the (partial) sum of the world market
variance, the country and/or industry variances.


                                                             11
the R2 increases to 54%. The numbers are similar for country-style portfolios. Since the global
factors and region-specific factors are orthogonal, the diﬀerence in R2 between models with both
global and local factors and models with only global factors approximately indicates how much
local factors explain. The numbers are not exact because we use adjusted R2 s rather than raw R2 s.
For instance, the diﬀerence in R2 for the WLFF model and the WFF model goes from 25% for
1980-1985 to 11% for 1998-2003. The fact that local factors explain less of the total return variance
over time suggests that the world capital market has become more integrated over time.
   We use a cross-sectional regression with weekly data to estimate the DCI/DSI model. Then
we use the model to compute a time-series R2 , comparable to the R2 ’s computed for the various
risk-based models. The average adjusted R2 for the DCI model is about 38% for country-industry
portfolios, and 40% for country-style portfolios.
   To help interpret the APT factors, Panel B explores the relation between the APT factors and
the FF factors. If we regress the first three global APT factors on the global Fama and French
factors every six-month, the time-series average of the adjusted R2 s are respectively 67%, 26% and
19%. This indicates that the global APT factors are related to the global Fama-French factors. The
regional APT factors are less related to the regional Fama-French factors, because the time-series
averages of the adjusted R2 ’s when regressing regional APT factors on regional Fama-French factors
are only around 10-20%. We also examine the relation in the opposite direction, where we use the
APT factors to explain the Fama-French factors. The APT factors have stronger explanatory power
for the Fama-French factors. For the global Fama-French factors, the adjusted R2 s are 81%, 23%
and 29%. For the regional Fama-French factors, the R2 s are between 10%-40%. The significant
relation between APT factors and Fama-French factors might explain why we usually obtain similar
empirical results using the two models, in the later part of the paper.


4.2. Model Selection Outline

    Subsections 4.3 through 4.5 investigate how well our models fit the covariance structure of the
base portfolio returns. To this end, we first estimate the sample covariance matrix for every half
year in the sample,




                                                    12
                                                                                    
                                  var(R1 )      cov(R1 , R2 )     ... cov(R1 , Rn ) 
                                                                                    
                                  cov(R1 , R2 )   var(R2 )        ... cov(R2 , Rn ) 
                                                                                    
                  COVsample,t   =                                                   .                 (11)
                                      ...            ...          ...      ...      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                   cov(R1 , Rn ) cov(R2 , Rn )     ...   var(Rn )
Given our factor model set up, we can decompose the sample covariance into two components. The
first component represents the covariances between portfolios driven by their common exposures to
risk factors, and the second component represents residual or idiosyncractic comovements. Based
on our general factor model in equation (1), we can decompose the sample covariance as
                                                                                            
                                                       0                       0
                                   var(R1 ) β 1t ΣF,t β 2t ... β 1t ΣF,t β nt 
                                                                                            
                                   β 0 ΣF,t β         var(R      )   ...    β 0
                                                                                  Σ     β    
                                   2t             1t           2              2t   F,t   nt 
                 COVsample,t =                                                              
                                          ...             ...        ...          ...       
                                                                                            
                                                                                            
                                       0               0
                                     β nt ΣF,t β 1t β nt ΣF,t β 2t ... var(Rn )
                                                                                             
                                               0        cov(²1 , ²2 ) ... cov(²1 , ²n ) 
                                                                                             
                                     cov(²2 , ²1 )            0         ... cov(²2 , ²n ) 
                                                                                             
                                  +                                                          
                                              ...            ...        ...         ...      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         cov(²n , ²1 ) cov(²n , ²2 ) ...               0
                                 = COVmodel,t + COV²,t .                                                (12)

The factor models only have testable implications for covariances, so we make the diagonal ele-
ments in COVmodel,t contain sample variances. If the factor model is true, the common factors
should explain as much as possible of the sample covariance matrix and the residual covariance
components should converge to zero asymptotically. We can define CORRsample,t , CORRmodel,t
and CORR²,t analogously, by dividing each element of all the components in the covariance matrix
by [var(Ri )var(Rj )]0.5 .
   From the decomposition, it is straightforward to derive test statistics of model fit. For example,
in section 4.3, we investigate the time-series average of a weighted average of the correlation errors:
                          n ORT nPX
                 1 PT   1 PX      ORT

ABSECORR =            (               wj1,t wj2,t |CORRsample,t (Rj1,t , Rj2,t ) − CORRmodel,t (Rj1,t , Rj2,t )|),
                 T t=1 Wt
                           j1=1 j2>j1
                                                                                                        (13)
                                                                          PnP ORT PnP ORT
where t = 1, ..., T refers to diﬀerent six-month periods, and Wt =           j1=1      j2>j1   wj1,t wj2,t , a
scalar that makes the weights add up to one, where individual portfolio weights are determined by

                                                    13
the portfolio’s market capitalization from the previous month. The ABSECORR statistic intuitively
measures the magnitude of the average deviation from the sample correlation. We choose to present
statistics for correlations rather than covariances for ease of interpretation, but our results for
covariances are qualitatively similar. Section 4.3 gives an idea of how well the various models fit
the correlation matrix and how various features of our factor models aﬀect their ability to match
the sample covariance matrix.
       In section 4.4, we formally test the performance of each model relative to the other models
using a root mean squared error criterion, which is the time series mean of a weighted average of
squared errors,


                       T     n ORT nPX
                    1 X 1 PX         ORT

RM SECORR        ={      (               wj1,t wj2,t [CORRsample,t (Rj1,t , Rj2,t )−CORRmodel,t (Rj1,t , Rj2,t )]2 )}0.5 .
                    T t=1 Wt
                              j1=1 j2>j1
                                                                                                   (14)
Using ABSECORR for this purpose gives identical results.
       Finally, section 4.5 examines how well the best model fits the covariance structure of various
subsets of our test portfolios.


4.3. Correlation Errors and the Role of Beta Variation

        The average portfolio level correlation in the data is 0.36 for country-industry portfolios and
0.44 for country-style portfolios10 . Table 4 presents ABSECORR , for the diﬀerent models under
diﬀerent assumptions on the time-variation and cross-sectional variation in betas. In the first
column of Panel A in Table 4, we start with a unit-beta world CAPM model as a benchmark.
That is, we take equation (3), and we assume β W MKT = 1. On average, the unit beta model
generates a correlation of only 0.075, leading to an average error of as large as 0.284, since the data
correlation is 0.359. We then let the β W MKT take on the cross-sectional average beta value within
each period. The results are presented in the first row of the second and third columns. Restricting
all the portfolios to have the same market risk exposure within each period does not improve the
model’s ability to match the sample correlations. The magnitude of ABSECORR is still 93% of
that of the unit beta model. The next experiment allows β W MKT to equal the time-series average
  10                                                       Pn Pn
   This is calculated as the time-series average of W1      i=1   j>i wit wjt CORRdata,t (Rit , Rjt ), where Wt =
                                                         t
Pn Pn
 i=1   j>i wit wjt , wit and wjt represent weights based on market capitalizations. Using equally-weighted corre-

lations does not aﬀect any of our empirical results.


                                                       14
beta for the individual portfolios. The numbers are presented in the first row of the fourth and fifth
columns. Now, with cross-sectional diﬀerences across portfolios but no time-series variation, the
model slightly improves on the unit beta model (89% of unit beta model’s error), but the average
error is still as large as 0.251. If we allow the β W MKT to vary both cross-sectionally and over time,
as in the first row of the sixth and seventh columns, the ABSECORR statistic drops to 0.162, only
57% of the error predicted by the unit beta case.
   The third through sixth rows explore whether other factors (such as FF factors and APT factors,
or local factors) help in matching the sample correlations. For the Fama-French type models and
APT models, fixing the factor loadings to their time-series or cross-sectional averages also makes
it diﬃcult for the models to match the sample correlations. If we allow the betas to vary through
time and cross-sectionally, as in the sixth and seventh columns, the ABSECORR measure decreases
to 0.133 for the WFF model and 0.132 for the WAPT model. If we include regional (local) factors,
the ABSECORR measure drops down to 0.081 for the WLFF model and to 0.076 for the WLAPT
model. Hence, the Fama-French and the APT models featuring regional factors, miss the correlation
on average by around 0.08.
   In comparison, the Heston-Rouwenhorst model’s ABSECORR is 0.123, which is lower than the
WCAPM’s error of 0.162, but higher than that of the WLCAPM model. In conclusion, allowing free
loadings on the market portfolios and the regional factors is more eﬀective than including country
and industry dummies for matching the correlations. More generally, the Heston-Rouwenhorst
model on average produces an error, which is better than any risk model with only world factors,
but worse than any parsimonious risk model with regional factors.
   While our results suggest that the Heston-Rouwenhorst model does not provide the best fit with
stock return comovements, it has dominated the important industry-country debate. It therefore
remains an important reference point. Moreover, it is interesting to view the recent country-
industry debate from the correlation perspective we are taking, especially since there appears to
be much disagreement about what the data tell us. As a brief review, while it was long believed
that country factors dominated international stock return comovements (see Heston-Rouwenhorst
1994, Griﬃn and Karolyi 1998), a number of relatively recent articles argue that industry factors
have become more dominant (see Cavaglia, Brightman and Aked 2000, Baca et al. 2000). The
most recent articles provide a more subtle but still conflicting interpretation of the data. Brooks
and Del Negro (2004) find that the TMT sector accounts for most of the increasing importance of


                                                  15
industry factors and argue that the phenomenon is likely temporary. However, Ferreira and Gama
(2005) argue that country risk remained relatively stable over their sample period but industry
risk rose considerably while correlations between industry portfolios decreased. They claim this
phenomenon is not simply due to the TMT sector11 . Finally, Carrieri, Errunza and Sarkissian
(2004) claim that there has been a gradual increase in the importance of industry factors. From
Table 4, we learn that over the full sample, shutting down country dummies leads to an average
correlation error of 0.239 (as for the DI model), while shutting down industry dummies leads to an
average error of only 0.195 (as for the DC model). Clearly, from the perspective of their fits with
international stock return comovements, country factors are more important than industry factors.
We explore the time-series properties of the two models in a later section.
       On a technical level, it is interesting to interpret the relative contributions of the various features
of the risk models to the steep improvement in fit between a global CAPM with unit betas (a 0.284
error) to a Fama-French or APT model with global and local factors and time-varying betas (an
error of 0.076). For example, recently a few papers have modified the Heston-Rouwenhorst approach
to allow for non-unitary but time-invariant betas (see Brooks and DelNegro 2003, Marsh and
Pfleiderer 1997). In the context of our risk models, the fourth and fifth columns clearly show that
having a beta diﬀerent from one in cross-section provides only a limited improvement. Similarly,
the improvement of having the same cross-sectional betas with time variation is also limited. The
last column makes it clear that we need both time-varying and cross-sectionally diﬀerent betas to
improve on the simpler models.
       Panel B performs the same computations for country-style portfolios. The results are quite
similar. The WLAPT model has the best overall fit and fits the correlations better than a dummy
style model. The largest relative contribution comes from allowing both time-variation and cross-
sectional variation in betas. In the context of the dummy variable model, style dummies alone
produce a very bad fit to the correlations, but of course the number of style factors here is rather
limited. Nevertheless, it is striking that a unit beta global CAPM model fits the correlations about
as well as the style dummy model.
  11
       de Roon, Eiling and Gerard (2005) and de Roon, Gerard and Hillion (2005) look at the industry-country debate
from the perspective of mean variance spanning tests and style analysis. They find that country factors remain
dominant. Catao and Timmerman (2005), using the Heston-Rouwenhorst model, argue that the relative importance
of country factors is related to global market volatility.




                                                             16
4.4. Minimizing RMSE

       In this section, we conduct statistical tests to choose the best model for matching the sample
correlation matrix over time. Table 5 reports the model comparison results using RM SECORR .
Every cell of the matrix presents the t-stat testing the significance of RM SE(model i)−RM SE(model
j). Standard errors are adjusted using the Newey and West (1987) approach with four lags. Panel
A presents results for country-industry portfolios. For example, between WCAPM (model j) and
WLCAPM (model i) (third row, second column), the t-stat is -5.00, which indicates that WL-
CAPM has a significantly lower RMSE than WCAPM. We find the same pattern between WFF
and WLFF, and between WAPT and WLAPT. Hence, the data indicate that partial integration
models with regional factors better match the sample covariance structure than perfect integration
models. Comparing the diﬀerent factor specifications, we find that WLFF is significantly better
than WLCAPM (t = −2.28), indicating that including the Fama-French factors significantly im-
proves upon the market model. The WLAPT model is significantly better than the WLCAPM
(t = −2.35), and it is also better than WLFF (t = −0.31), but the improvement is not significant.
      The last three rows provide results for the dummy variable models. The dummy variable models
are always worse than the factor models with one exception. The DCI model is significantly better
than WCAPM. We confirm the previous finding that the dummy variable approach cannot generate
the covariance structure observed in the data. We also examine the relative importance of country
versus industry dummies by comparing the DC and DI models. For country-industry portfolios,
DCI (with both country and industry eﬀects) is significantly better than DI (t = −3.34), but only
marginally better than DC (t = −1.92). DC has a lower RMSE than DI, but the diﬀerence is
insignificant. We find that country dummies are slightly more important in fitting the covariance
structure of country-industry portfolios than are industry dummies.
      For country-style portfolios in Panel B, the results are qualitatively and quantitatively similar
to the results for country-industry portfolios, except that the DC model is now significantly better
than the DS model (t = −3.15). This is reasonable, given that we have 23 countries, but only nine
diﬀerent styles.
      One caution about the results in Table 5 is in order. Since we estimate the covariance matrix
(ncountry × nindustry ) × (ncountry × nindustry ) using six months of weekly data (26 observations),
we encounter a degrees of freedom problem12 . To mitigate this problem, we choose subsets of
 12
      We estimate sample covariance matrix each period. Since we have 23 countries and 26 industries, the covariance


                                                         17
the country-industry (or country-style) space to examine whether we obtain the same inference.
The results are presented in Table 6. The first subset we examine is country-industry portfolios,
within the G5 countries, using the most volatile and least volatile industries. This gives us at most
20 portfolios per six-month period. Results presented in Panel A of Table 6 are consistent with
our findings using all country-industry portfolios. We next use the country-industry portfolios for
the G5 countries, but only for the largest and smallest industries in terms of market capitalization.
Panel B presents the results. While the results are generally robust, the WLFF model now becomes
better than every other model. However, the improvement of WLFF on WLAPT is neither large
nor significant. The last subset we choose for country-industry portfolios are the TMT industries
in the G5 countries. Brooks and Del Negro (2002) show that the TMT industries are important in
explaining the increase in world market volatility at the end of 1990s. The results are presented in
Panel C, and WLAPT is still the best model across the board.
    We also conduct the subset experiment for the country-style portfolios. In Panel D, we inves-
tigate the G5 countries, and four extreme portfolios (small growth, small value, big growth and
big value). WLAPT has a smaller RM SE than all the other models, but the diﬀerence is not
significant for WLFF and WLCAPM. The second subset experiment, reported in Panel E, uses the
Far East countries (Australia, Hong Kong, New Zealand, and Singapore), and four extreme port-
folios (small growth, small value, big growth and big value). This sample contains mostly smaller
countries that are possibly less well integrated with the world capital market. This subset allows us
to see if the covariance structure is possibly diﬀerent in segmented markets. There are two inter-
esting findings. First, the WLAPT is still the best model, but the diﬀerence between WLAPT and
WLFF is now significant. This indicates that WLAPT better captures relevant (global/regional)
market-wide forces than WLFF for less integrated markets. The second interesting finding is that
the dummy variable model DCI beats the other models except for the APT-type models. When
markets are possibly segmented, the dummy variable approach manages to capture country-specific
or style-specific factors relatively well.
    Since the WLAPT model provides the best match with the sample covariance matrix, we select
WLAPT to be the benchmark model for subsequent analysis. The WLFF model is only slightly
matrix dimension is (23*26)*(23*26)=598*598. This means that we have 598*599/2=179101 diﬀerent elements for
each covariance matrix. Meanwhile, the data points we have are (26 weeks)*(23 countries)*(26 industries)=15548,
which is far less than the number of statistics we estimate.




                                                         18
worse than the WLAPT model, so we use it as a robustness check.


4.5. How Good is the Best Model?

    In this section, we examine the fit of the WLAPT model over meaningful subsets of the portfolio
space, namely countries, industries and styles. To this end, we calculate the covariance ratio
matrix, where element (i, j) is calculated as COVmodel,t (i, j)/COVsample,t (i, j). The covariance ratio
represents the proportion of the covariance driven by the common factors. If portfolio covariances
are fully explained by common exposures to risk factors, the elements of the covariance ratio matrix
should approach one. Table 7 reports these covariance ratios averaged within countries, industries
and styles.
   Let’s first focus on country results. For instance, for the industry portfolios and style portfolios
in Canada, the WLAPT model accounts for 93% of the covariances on average. Thus, most of the
covariances among Canadian portfolios can be explained by portfolio exposures to common risk
factors, and idiosyncratic covariances account for only about 7% of the covariances on average.
The same findings apply to most of the developed countries. For the less developed or smaller
countries, the percentage of covariances explained by the WLAPT model is around 70-80%. The
lowest covariance ratio is recorded by Portugal, a small market that until recently was part of the
MSCI Emerging Markets Database.
   Industry results are presented in the third and fourth columns. Similar to findings sorted
by countries, the covariance between portfolios within one industry can mostly be explained by
WLAPT, even for the volatile TMT industries. For 11 of 24 industries, the covariance ratio is
90% or higher; only one industry features a covariance ratio of less than 70% (oil and gas). The
last three columns report covariance ratios for the diﬀerent styles. The covariance ratios here are
invariably very high, always exceeding 90%. There is no particular style dimension for which the
WLAPT model performs poorly.



5. Implications for Comovements

    We have now derived a simple risk model that captures the stock return comovements of
country-industry and country-style portfolios remarkably well. In this section, we use our time-
varying estimates of correlations to address several salient empirical questions in the international



                                                  19
finance literature. We start, in section 5.1, with a discussion of the general methodology, which
we apply to our base portfolios. In section 5.2, we consider the long-run behavior of correlations
between country returns, addressing the question whether globalization has indeed caused inter-
national return correlations to increase over the 1980-2003 period. In Section 5.3, we consider the
implications of our analysis for the country-industry debate. In Section 5.4, we further investi-
gate the role of “style” as a driver of international return correlations. In Section 5.5 we link our
framework briefly to the contagion literature, and the recent debate about trends in idiosyncratic
variances.


5.1. Trends in comovements

        We define the following comovement measures for average portfolio level covariances,
                    n ORT nPX
                  1 PX      ORT

γ COV
  sample,t =                    wj1,t wj2,t cov(Rj1,t , Rj2,t )
                  Wt j1=1 j2>j1
                    n ORT nPX                                           n ORT nPX
                  1 PX      ORT
                                                  0         0         1 PX      ORT

             =                  wj1,t wj2,t cov(β j1 Ft , β j2 Ft ) +               wj1,t wj2,t cov(²j1,t , ²j2,t )
                  Wt j1=1 j2>j1                                       Wt j1=1 j2>j1
             = γ COV        COV
                 risk,t + γ idio,t ,                                                                           (15)

              PnP ORT PnP ORT
with Wt =        j1=1      j2=1,j16=j2 wj1,t wj2,t ,   a scalar that makes the weights add up to one. We can
examine the time series properties of γ COV
                                        sample,t to understand whether there is a permanent increase

or decrease in the sample covariances. We can also decompose γ COV             COV          COV
                                                               sample,t into γ risk,t and γ idio,t ,

and examine whether a possible trend is driven by the risk or idiosyncratic components (or model
misspecification). Analogously, we can define the same decomposition for correlations, where

                                          γ CORR         CORR       CORR
                                            sample,t = γ risk,t + γ idio,t .                                   (16)

      Figure 1 presents the time-series of γ CORR       CORR and γ CORR for both country-industry and
                                             sample , γ risk       idio

country-style portfolio correlations13 . Panel A of Figure 1 reports the sample correlations, γ CORR
                                                                                                sample .

On average, country-style portfolios have slightly higher (by 0.05-0.10) correlations, especially over
recent years, than country-industry portfolios. Neither sample correlations display any obvious
trends. We present γ CORR
                     risk and γ CORR
                                idio decomposition in Panels B and C. The benchmark model
for the decomposition is the WLFF model. The graphs look nearly identical if we use the WLAPT
model. However, using the WLFF model, we can disentangle the sources of the time variation
 13
      We choose to present the γ CORR rather than γ COV measures because they are more easily interpretable.


                                                            20
in comovements in terms of time variation in betas versus time-variation in factor covariances.
Overall, the model closely matches the time-series of average portfolio level correlation. The residual
correlations at the bottom of each figure are small in terms of magnitude (less than 0.10), and
visually there are no obvious time trends. Because of the close fit between model and data, we do
not further report statistics regarding idiosyncratic comovements.
       Vogelsang (1998) introduces a simple linear time trend test, which has been widely used in the
literature14 . The benchmark model is defined to be

                                                  yt = α0 + α1 t + ut ,                                             (17)

where yt is the variable of interest, and t is a linear time trend. Vogelsang (1998) provides a PS1-
stat for testing the hypothesis of α1 = 0. The test statistic is robust to I(0) and I(1) error terms.
Vogelsang (1998) also provides a 90% confidence interval for α1 .
       Table 8 contains our main results. We report statistics for both country-industry portfolios
in Panel A and country-style portfolios in Panel B for the correlation measure. Results for the
covariance measures are qualitatively identical. We investigate the sample and model comovement
measures and two alternative measures, computed by either setting the loadings Bjt or the factor
covariance matrix, ΣF t to their sample means, denoted as TSA (time-series average) B and TSA
Σ, respectively. We implement this restriction both in the numerator (covariance) and in the
denominator (variance). Factor volatilities show substantial time-variation, but permanent trend
changes in comovements are likely to come from changes in betas (for instance, relative to global
factors). This decomposition sheds light on the sources of potential trend behavior. For all these
comovement measures, we report five statistics: the sample average, the sample standard deviation,
the correlation between the particular (restricted model or unrestricted model) measure and the
data measure and the upper and lower bounds of the 90% confidence intervals for Vogelsang’s
sample time trend coeﬃcient.
       Let’s start with the trend results. Whenever we consider all country-industry portfolios or all
country-style portfolios, the lower bounds of the 90% confidence interval for both the sample and
model correlation measures are always negative, and the upper bounds are always positive. Thus,
we do not find a significant time trend in correlations for the base portfolios. There are no trends
  14
       Before the trend test, we conduct unit root tests following Dickey and Fuller (1979). Our null hypothesis includes
both a drift and a time trend. We strongly reject the null hypothesis that our covariance and correlation measures
contain a unit root.


                                                            21
for the restricted models with constant betas or constant factor variances either. Consequently,
at least for our base set of portfolios, we do not detect evidence of significant long-run changes in
comovements. We will re-examine this long-term behavior for meaningful sub-groups of portfolios
in the next few sub-sections.
   The table reveals that the average country-industry correlation is 0.36, but it shows relatively
large time-variation, as its volatility is 0.14. The model perfectly mimics this time variation as
the model correlation measure shows a 100% correlation with the sample correlation measure.
When we restrict the factor covariances to be at their unconditional means, we tend to over-predict
correlations. One source for this phenomenon is that variances tend to exhibit positively skewed
distributions, so that the sample average variance is higher than the median. Because correlations
and covariances are increasing in factor variances, this tends to bias comovements upwards.
   The most important evidence regarding the restricted measures is their correlation with the
sample measures. When factor variance dynamics are kept constant, the correlation measure shows
negative correlations with its sample counterpart; whereas time-invariant betas lead to correlations
of 92% for the correlation measure. Clearly, though we have demonstrated time-series variation
in betas to be an important dimension in the fit of comovements, factor variance dynamics are
relatively more important.
   The evidence for country-style portfolios is qualitatively similar.


5.2. Long-run Trends in Country Correlations

    Correlations are an important ingredient in the analysis of international diversification benefits
and international financial market integration. Of course, correlations are not a perfect measure
of either concept. Correlations can increase because of changes in discount rate correlations and
changes in cash flow correlations and only the former are likely related to pure financial market
integration. Diversification benefits, even in a mean-variance setting, depend on the covariance
matrix and on expected returns.
   Nevertheless, it has long been recognized that the globalization process, both in financial and
real economic terms, would lead to increased correlations across the equity returns of diﬀerent
countries, thus eroding potential diversification benefits. Bekaert and Harvey (2000) show that
emerging markets correlations with and betas relative to world market returns increase after stock
market liberalizations. An extensive empirical literature focuses on the time-variation of correla-


                                                 22
tions between various country returns. One of the best known papers is Longin and Solnik (1995)
who document an increase in correlation between seven major countries for the 1960-1990 period.
While many of these articles use parametric volatility models to measure time-variation, our ap-
proach can be viewed as non-parametric. We simply test for a trend in the time series of correlations
our model generates. Moreover, our parametric factor model permits a useful decomposition of the
results. As we argued before, return correlations across countries can increase because of increased
betas with respect to common international factors, increased factor volatilities or a decrease in
idiosyncratic volatilities. With our risk model, it is straightforward to decompose the temporal
evolution of correlations in these separate components. Because factor volatilities show no long-
term trend, permanent changes in correlation induced by globalization must come through betas.
In fact, Fratscher (2002) and Baele (2005) focus on time-variation in betas directly to measure
financial market integration.
   Table 9 contains our main empirical results. We consider diﬀerent country groupings: the
G7 countries as in Longin and Solnik (1995); Europe, which witnessed various structural changes
towards financial and economic integration in the context of the European Union; and the Far East,
where no regional measures were taken to promote integration but some individual countries, such
as New Zealand and Japan, liberalized their capital markets. Finally, we consider correlations with
those two regions and all countries from the perspective of a US investor.
   First of all, the trend tests in Panel A reveal that only the European country group experiences
a significant upward trend in correlations. The trend coeﬃcients are positive for all groupings not
involving the Far East, but they are far from statistically significant.
   Second, we examine the sources of the trends by either fixing the betas or covariances at their
sample averages. We present the results for all countries in Panel B, and for European countries
in Panel C. It is unsurprising not to see any significant trends for all countries. Nevertheless,
for European decompositions, the trend coeﬃcient is slightly negative when the betas are fixed.
Consequently, the upward trend in within-Europe correlations is likely caused by changes in be-
tas, confirming results in Baele (2005) and suggesting the increase in correlations may well be
permanent.
   Because the risk model incorporates both global and regional factors, it is interesting to inves-
tigate whether it is general globalization (global betas) or regional integration within the European
Union (regional betas) that caused the trend in European correlations. In unreported results, we


                                                  23
find that by fixing only local betas, the correlation of the restricted model measure with the data
is still as high as 0.85 with a positive trend, while by fixing only global betas, the correlation drops
to 0.75 and the positive trend disappears. Even though both trend tests do not yield significance,
this analysis suggests that the global betas account for the positive trend in the unrestricted model.
This is somewhat surprising as the European structural changes were mostly aimed at promoting
regional, financial and economic integration. Nevertheless, when we investigate a time-series plot
of the correlations (unreported), the trend seems to start around 1986, which coincides with the
abolition of capital controls in a number of major countries in Europe, such as France and Italy.
   In Table 10, we use the risk model to construct a country-specific measure of integration: the
proportion global factors explain of the total explained variance (both global and local factors).
Averaged over the whole sample, the proportion varies between 49% for New Zealand and 84% for
the Netherlands. That the Netherlands is one of the more “integrated” countries is not surprising
given that its stock market is dominated by a few large multi-national companies. The rather
segmented status of New Zealand, and also Australia and Canada may have something to do with
the industrial composition of those stock markets, in particular the large weight on resources. We
will see later that mining and oil and gas are among the least integrated industries. That smaller
countries, such as Greece and Singapore, show a low degree of integration is not surprising, but the
low value for the US definitely is. Of course, it is the case that the North-America regional factor
is completely dominated by the US market.
   Finally, the time-variation in the measure is also inconsistent with a smooth globalization
process. For some countries, such as France and Greece, the integration measure steadily in-
creases over time but for Japan and Denmark, it steadily decreases and for many countries there
is no clear trend at all.


5.3. The Industry-Country Debate

     The industry-country debate has clear implications for stock return comovements. For ex-
ample, one obvious interpretation of the potentially growing relative importance of industry ver-
sus country factors is that globalization increased country return correlations while causing more
distinct pricing of industry-specific factors, lowering the correlations between industry portfolios.
Because the number of countries (23) and industries (26) that we consider is about the same, ag-
gregating our data into either country or into industry portfolios leads to equally well-diversified


                                                  24
portfolios. Hence, country and industry return correlations can be meaningfully compared.
   Table 11 contains the empirical results. The left-hand side panel of Panel A aggregates the
country-industry portfolios into 26 industry portfolios. The average correlation between industries
is 0.62, which is substantially higher than the average correlation between countries. Nevertheless,
there is absolutely no evidence of a trend in industry return correlations, with the trend coeﬃcient
only slightly negative. The model decomposition reveals no permanent changes in betas of industry
portfolios with respect to the risk factors. The right-hand side panel of Panel A reports the results
without the TMT industries, showing similar implications.
   Panel B produces statistics for the diﬀerence between country and industry portfolio return
correlations. The time variation in this statistic permits a direct test of the assertions in the recent
literature regarding the relative importance of the industry versus country factors. While the
trend coeﬃcient is slightly positive, it is not significantly diﬀerent from zero. The decomposition
suggests that the positive coeﬃcient is likely due to changing factor variances. Again, excluding
the TMT sector does not alter these conclusions. The most important conclusion is that there
simply is no trend and the Heston-Rouwenhorst conclusions continue to hold: country return
correlations are lower than industry return correlations and country factors dominate industry
factors. Globalization has not yet changed this fact.
   Why did previous articles produce diﬀerent results? Recall that most articles in the literature
use the Heston-Rouwenhorst model with time-invariant unit betas. However, our decomposition
reveals that this is not likely to drive the results. Figure 2 (Panel A) graphs the correlation diﬀerence
statistic and shows the main reason for the disparate results. Most articles focus on a short sample
starting in the early 90’s, ending before 2000. During this period, there was a marked increase in
the correlation diﬀerence, and it became briefly positive during 2000. To show how such a short
sample aﬀects inference, we report our trend test for the 1991-2000 period, in Panel C of Table 11.
For the short period, we do find a positive and significant trend. We also investigate whether the
TMT sector played an important role during this period by excluding the TMT sector from the
industry portfolios. The right-hand side panel shows that excluding the sector does not remove the
positive and significant trend. The decomposition also reveals the main reason behind the trend:
it comes from an increase in factor volatilities during the short sample period. We know factor
volatilities do not exhibit trends over longer periods.
   Finally, Table 12 examines whether the degree of integration varies across industries by com-


                                                   25
puting the variance explained by global factors relative to the total explained variance. The least
integrated industry is mining followed by oil and gas. While these are industries aﬀected by global
commodity prices, they also may be more likely to be regulated by local authorities. Surprisingly,
the utility sector is not less integrated than the TMT sector. The most integrated industries over
the whole sample were machinery and construction. Overall, the diﬀerences in the degree of integra-
tion between diﬀerent industries are much less marked than the diﬀerence between countries. This
is simply a reflection of the fact that industry portfolios represent portfolios that are well-diversified
across countries, and as we saw above, country factors still dominate. A number of industries have
become less integrated over time, including chemicals, construction, steel machinery, food, health,
retail, transport, and defense. The opposite is not really observed.


5.4. Styles and International Return Correlations

    Kang and Stulz (1997) show that international investors in Japanese stocks buy large, well-
known stocks. If this investor behavior is reflected in pricing, it is conceivable that correlations of
large stock returns across countries are larger than those of small stocks. It is also possible that
globalization has led correlations of large stocks to be increasingly higher across countries while
correlations for small stocks remain relatively low. Our methodology allows simple tests of this
conjecture. In addition, we examine if there is a systematic diﬀerence between growth and value
stocks in terms of international return correlations. The results are reported in Table 13. Panel
A demonstrates that the correlations among small stocks are indeed lower than those among large
stocks, by about 0.08. Panel B of Figure 2 shows that the diﬀerence in correlations has changed
signs a few times and was actually positive in the early 1990s. However, we do not see any evidence
of a trend over time, and the estimated trend coeﬃcient is slightly negative. Panel B of Table 13
shows that the correlation among growth and value stocks is about the same at 0.34. However,
the trend coeﬃcient for the correlation diﬀerence, while not statistically significantly diﬀerent from
zero, is rather large and positive. The decomposition shows that this is primarily driven by changes
in betas. Panel C of Figure 2 confirms that the correlations among growth stocks have become
relatively larger, compared to value stock correlations during the 1990’s. In Panel C of Table 13,
we look at the extremes: large growth firms versus small value stocks. Not only is the correlation
among the former significantly larger than among the latter, the diﬀerence has increased over
time. In this case, the trend coeﬃcient is positive and significantly diﬀerent from zero. While both


                                                   26
changes in beta and factor covariances contribute to the positive trend, the dominant eﬀect appears
to come from betas. Panel D in Figure 2 shows that the trend starts in the late 1980s to early
1990s.


5.5. Contagion and Idiosyncratic Risk

       This issue of increased correlation arises in the contagion literature that built up very quickly
following the Mexican and Southeast Asian crises. Contagion mostly refers to excessive correlation.
While it was quickly understood that merely looking at correlations in crisis times may be problem-
atic (see, for instance, Forbes and Rigobon 2001), defining “excessive” would imply that one takes
a stand on a model, (see for instance Bekaert, Harvey and Ng 2005, Pindyk and Rotemberg 1990
and Kallberg and Pasquariello 2005). In the context of our framework, the factor model defines
the expected correlation and what is left over could be called contagion (if it is positive). Thus,
our γ CORR                                                    15
      idio,t can be viewed as a time-varying contagion measure . Within our data set and with

respect to our best fitting model, we essentially do not observe any contagion. Of course, a more
powerful application would be to apply our methodology to emerging markets with a sample period
encompassing crises.
      Our model also has implications for variances as it decomposes the sample variance for any
portfolio (or firm) into explained variance and idiosyncratic variance.                              We define the following
measures for average portfolio (or firm) level variances,
                                                n
                                                X
                              σ 2sample,t   =         wj,t var(Rj,t )                                                   (18)
                                                j=1
                                                Xn                           n
                                                                             X
                                            =         wj,t var(β 0j Ft ) +         wj,t var(²j,t )
                                                j=1                          j=1

                                            =   σ 2risk,t   + σ 2idio,t ,

where n is the number of portfolios (or firms).
      Campbell et al (2001) suggest the existence of a trend in firm-specific variances. When we do
this decomposition for our country-industry and country-style portfolios, we find no evidence of a
trend at all. This is also clear from a plot of the diﬀerent variance measures in Figure 3. Of course,
our portfolios are well diversified and the idiosyncratic component does not constitute firm level
idiosyncratic variance, which was the focus of Campbell et al (2001). In the following section, we
 15
      For this application, using the APT is less desirable as one of the factors may be a “contagion” factor.


                                                                27
revisit the issue with firm level data.



6. Firm Level Evidence

    While thus far our results use country-industry and country-style portfolios, we now investigate
our model’s implication for individual firms. In section 6.1, we examine whether the model implies
a realistic correlation structure for several representative firms. In section 6.2, we examine the
time-series properties of idiosyncratic volatility at the firm level.


6.1. Model Implied Correlation for Example Firms

    We choose four firms as examples: Novartis (a large phamaceutical firm headquartered in
Switzerland), Merck (a large phamaceutical firm headquartered in the US), IBM (a large info tech
firm headquartered in the US) and Nihon Unisys (a mid-size info tech firm headquartered in Japan).
We select the four firms from diﬀerent countries, diﬀerent industries and diﬀerent styles, with the
emphasis on country and industry eﬀects. To calculate the WLAPT model implied correlation
for every six-month period, we first estimate the factor loadings for the four firms. The implied
covariance is then calculated as in equation (2). To calculate the dummy variable models implied
correlation for every six-month period, we first identify each firm’s country, industry and style,
and the model implied covariance is calculated as in equation (10). Consequently, we apply the
model, derived for country-industry portfolios or country-style portfolios, in an “out-of-sample”
experiment with firm level data.
   Table 14 reports the sample covariances and correlations of the firm returns, and the implied
covariances and correlations from the WLAPT model and the dummy variable models DCI and
DCS. The first pair is Novartis and Merck, which are from the same industry/style but from diﬀerent
countries. The WLAPT model generates a covariance that is low and reaches about 71% of the
sample covariance on average. The DCI and DCS models on average still underestimate the sample
covariance but reach about over 82% of the sample covariance. However, the covariances generated
by the WLAPT model correlate over time much more highly with the sample covariances than the
covariances produced by the DCI and DCS models. Hence, the WLAPT model better matches
comovement dynamics between Novartis and Merck. The statistics for correlation measures show
a similar pattern.



                                                   28
       We also examine another three pairs, Nihon Unisys and IBM, Merck and IBM, and Novartis and
IBM. The advantage of the WLAPT model over the DCI/DCS models is now dramatic in terms
of matching both the magnitude and the time-series dynamics of comovements. The correlation
between the model and sample comovements is at least 73% for the WLAPT model but never
reaches 50% for the dummy variable models. For example, the DCI model strikingly over-predicts
the comovements between the two info tech firms and the two American firms, whereas the WLAPT
produces a very realistic correlation and covariance number. The above exercises indicate that the
dummy variable approach is not flexible enough to capture firm level comovements, while the
WLAPT model performs very well for this set of firm returns.


6.2. Is there a trend in firm level volatility measure?

        Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel and Xu (2001, CLMX16 hereafter) explore the time-series dynamics
of idiosyncratic risk at the firm level in the United States. To estimate idiosyncratic risk, CLMX
perform the following decomposition for firm j’s return,

                          Rj,t = RMKT,t + (RIN D,t − RMKT,t ) + (Rj,t − RIN D,t )                                   (19)

                                 = RMKT,t + ²IND,t + ²j,t ,

where RMKT,t is the excess return on the market portfolio, RIND,t is the excess return of the
industry portfolio to which firm j belongs. CLMX refer to the term ²IN D,t as the industry-specific
return, and to ²j,t as the firm-specific return. The advantage of equation (19) is that it leads to the
following simple variance decomposition for an average firm:


          nFX
            IRM                                           nX
                                                           IN D                             nFX
                                                                                              IRM

                  wj var(Rj,t ) = var(RMKT,t ) +                  wIND,k var(²IND,k,t ) +           wj var(²j,t )   (20)
            j=1                                           k=1                                j=1

                                 =    σ 2MKT,t   + σ IND,t + σ 2F IRM,t ,
                                                     2



where nF IRM is the number of firms within the US, wj is the weight for firm j, nIN D is the
number of industries within the US, wIND,k is the weight for industry k, σ 2MKT,t is the variance
for the market portfolio, σ 2IN D,t is the industry specific variance and σ 2F IRM,t is the firm specific
or idiosyncratic variance. Obviously, the disadvantage of the CLMX model is that it assumes the
  16
       The PS1 stat reported in Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel and Xu (2001) is mislabelled. The numbers are actually the
parameter estimate of α1 .


                                                            29
loadings of all firms on the market portfolio and the relevant industry portfolios to be one. CLMX’s
article has generated much attention because it documents a positive and significant trend in the
firm level variance17 .
       Here we re-examine the CLMX evidence using weekly firm-level returns from 23 diﬀerent coun-
tries for our 1980-2003 period. To conserve space, we only report the results for the G7 countries
in Panel A of Table 15. We calculate the variance decomposition as in equation (20) for CLMX
approach and equation (18) from our WLAPT model. We then compare the average firm level vari-
ance measures, CLMX’s σ 2f irm and our σ 2idio , and examine whether there is a time-trend in these
two measures. Table 15 provides the results for Vogelsang’s linear trend test. Panel A presents the
time trend estimate and its 90% confidence interval for σ 2f irm and σ 2idio . Over the sample period
1981-2003, only France’s firm level idiosyncratic variances show a positive time trend for σ 2f irm .
The positive trend in France’s idiosyncratic variance measure disappears and there is no trend for
any other countries, when we switch to σ 2idio . Consequently, there is no strong statistical evidence
in favor of a trend in idiosyncratic variances. Nevertheless, the trend coeﬃcient is positive for all
7 countries. However, when we investigate trends in the 16 other countries, not only do we never
reject the null of no trend, the trend coeﬃcient is negative in 9 out of the 16 cases. The assumption
of a unit beta turns two out of the negative coeﬃcients into positive coeﬃcients.
       In Panel B, we restrict our sample period to be consistent with CLMX’s original sample period,
1964-1997, using only US firms daily returns. We find a significant and positive trend over CLMX’s
sample period of 1964-199718 . However, for any other combinations such as 1981-1997, 1981-2003,
1964-2003, we fail to find a trend. While it is striking that the trend coeﬃcient increases in every
case when going from σ 2f irm to σ 2idio , it seems clear that the CLMX result is simply due to the
particular sample period. Consequently, our results are consistent with recent results for the US
stock market by Brandt et al (2005) and cast doubt on the many eﬀorts to “explain” the trend in
idiosyncratic behavior.
  17
       Ferreira and Gama (2005) adopt CLMX’s methodology and apply it to country-industry portfolios. They find
no evidence of a trend in the idiosyncratic variance at the local industry portfolio level.
  18
     CLMX uses daily returns, so we also replicate their results using daily returns. The results are very similar to
what we find for weekly returns.




                                                         30
7. Conclusions

    In this article, we adopt a simple linear factor model to capture international asset return
comovements. The factor structure is allowed to change every half year, so it is general enough to
capture time-varying market integration and allowing risk sources other than the market. We also
allow the risk loadings on the factors to vary cross-sectionally and over time.
   Using country-industry and country-style portfolios as benchmarks, we find that an APT model,
accommodating global and local factors, best fits the covariance structure. However, a factor
model that embeds both global and regional Fama-French (1998) factors comes pretty close in
performance. The standard Heston-Rouwenhorst (1994) dummy variable model does not fit stock
return comovements very well, and we demonstrate that the unit beta assumption it implicitly
makes is quite damaging. We use time-varying correlation measures and the factor model to re-
examine several salient issues in the international finance literature.
   First, aggregating to country portfolios, we find little evidence of a trend in country return
correlations, except within Europe. Even there, we cannot ascribe the risk in comovements with
much confidence to an increase in betas with respect to the factors, which would make it more
likely that the increase is permanent.
   Second, by comparing within country and within industry stock return comovements, we can re-
examine the industry-country debate from a novel perspective. We demonstrate that the increasing
relative importance of industry factors appears to have been temporary. In all, the globalization
process has not yet led to large, permanent changes in the correlation structure across international
stocks. It is possible that a more detailed analysis of the international dimensions (such as foreign
sales, used in Diermeier and Solnik 2001, and Brooks and Del Negro 2002) leads to diﬀerent
conclusions.
   Finally, we show that the intriguing evidence in CLMX (2001), suggesting that the idiosyncratic
variance of firm-level returns has trended upward, is specific to the sample period used and does
not extend to 22 other countries.




                                                  31
   References
   Baca, S., B. Garbe, R.Weiss, 2000, The Rise of Sector Eﬀects in Major Equity Markets, Financial
Analysts Journal, September/October, 35-40.
   Baele, L., 2005, Volatility spillover eﬀects in European equity markets, Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 40 (2), 373-401.
   Barberis, N., A. Shleifer and J. Wurgler, 2005. Comovement, Journal of Financial Economics,
75, 283-317.
   Bekaert, G., and Harvey, C. R.1995, Time-VaryingWorld Market Integration, Journal of Fi-
nance, 50 (2), 403-444.
   Bekaert, G., and Harvey, C.R. 2000, Foreign Speculators and Emerging Equity Markets, Journal
of Finance, 55(2) 565-613.
   Bekaert G., C.R. Harvey and A. Ng. 2005, Market Integration and Contagion, Journal of
Business, 39-69.
   Brandt, M.W., A. Brav and J.R.Graham. 2005, The Idiosyncratic Volatility Puzzle: Time
Trend or Speculative Episodes?, working paper, Duke University.
   Brooks, R., and M. Del Negro, 2002, International diversification strategies, working paper,
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.
   Brooks, R., and M. Del Negro, 2004, Country Versus Region Eﬀects in International Stock
Returns, Journal of Portfolio Management, 31 (4), 67+.
   Brooks, R., and M. Del Negro, 2004, The rise in comovement across national stock markets:
market integration or IT bubble? Journal of Empirical Finance, 11, 649-680.
   Campbell, J.Y, M. Lettau, B. Malkiel and Y. Xu, 2001. Have individual stocks become more
volatile? An empirical exploration of idiosyncratic risk. Journal of Finance, 56, 1-43.
   Campbell J.Y., C. Polk and T. Vuolteenaho. 2005, Growth or Glamour? Fundamentals and
Systematic Risks in Stock Returns, forthcoming Review of Financial Studies.
   Carrieri, F., V. Errunza and S. Sarkissian, 2004. The Dynamics of Geographic versus Sectional
Diversification: Is there a link to the Real Economy?, working paper,
   Catao, L. and A. Timmerman. 2005, Country and Industry Dynamics in Stock Returns, CEPR
Discussion Papers, 4368, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers
   Cavaglia, S., C. Brightman and M. Aked, 2000, The increasing importance of industry factors,
Financial Analyst Journal, 2000, 41-54.


                                                 32
   Chamberlain, G., 1983, Funds, factors, and diversification in arbitrage pricing models, Econo-
metrica 51, 1305-1324.
   Chamberlain, G. and M. Rothschild, 1983, Arbitrage, factor structure, and mean-variance analy-
sis on large asset markets. Econometrica 51, 1281-1304.
   Conner, G., and Korajczyk, R. 1986, Performance measurement with the arbitrage pricing
theory. Journal of Financial Economics 15, 373-394.
   De Roon, E. Eiling and B. Gerard. 2004, Asset Allocation in the Euro Zone: Industry or
Country Based?, working paper,
   De Roon, B. Gerard, and P. Hillion. 2005, International Portfolio Diversification: Industry,
Country, and Currency Eﬀects Revisited, working paper
   Dickey, D., Fuller, W., 1979, Distribution of the estimators for autoregressive time series with
a unit root. Journal of the American Statistical Association 74, 427—431.
   Diermeier, J. and B. Solnik, 2001, Global pricing of equity, Financial Analyst Journal 57, 37-47.
   Dungey, M., R. Fry, B. Gonzalez-Hermosillo and V.L. Martin, 2004, Empirical Modeling of
Contagion: A review of Methodologies, working paper.
   Fama, E.F., and K.R. French, 1996. Multifactor Explanation of Asset Pricing Anomalies,
Journal of Finance 51, 55-84.
   Fama, E.F. and K.R. French, 1998, Value Versus Growth: The International Evidence, Journal
of Finance, 53 (6), 1975-1999.
   Ferreira, M. and P. Gama, 2005, Have world, country and industry risks changed over time?
An investigation of the developed stock market volatility, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis, 40.
   Forbes, K. and R. Rigobon, 2001, No Contagion, Only Interdependence: Measuring stock Mar-
ket Comovements, Journal of Finance, 57 (5), 2223-2261.
   Fratzscher, M., 2002, Financial market integration in Europe: on the eﬀects of EMU on stock
markets, International Journal of Finance & Economics 7, 165-193.
   Griﬃn, J. and A. Karolyi, 1998, Another Look at the Role of the Industrial Structure of Markets
for International Diversification Strategies, Journal of Financial Economics 50, 351-373.
   Griﬃn, J. and R.M. Stulz, International competition and exchange rate shocks: a cross-country
industry analysis of stock returns, Review of Financial Studies, 2001, 215-241.
   Heston, S. and K. G. Rouwenhorst, 1994, Does industrial structure explain the benefits of


                                                33
international diversification? Journal of Financial Economics 46, 111-157.
   Jones, C., 2001, Extracting factors from heteroskedastic asset return. Journal of Financial
Economics 62, 293-325.
   Joreskog, K., 1967, Some contributions to maximum likelihood factor analysis. Psychometrica
34, 183-202.
   Kallberg, J. and P. Pasquariello, 2004, Time-Series and Cross-Sectional Excess Comovement in
Stock Indexes, UMBS Working Paper.
   Kang, J.K. and R.M. Stulz, 1997, Why is There Home Bias? An Analysis of Foreign Portfolio
Equity Ownership in Japan, Journal of Financial Economics, 46 (1), 3-28
   Karolyi, A., 2003, Does International Finance Contagion Really Exist, International Finance 6,
179-199.
   Longin, F. and B. Solnik, 1995, Is the correlation in international equity returns constant:
1960-1990? Journal of International Money and Finance 14, 3-26.
   Marsh, T. and P. Pfleiderer, 1997, The Role of Country and Industry Eﬀects in Explaining
Global Stock Returns. Mimeo, U.C. Berkeley and Stanford University.
   Newey, W.K. and K.D. West, 1987, A Simple, Positive Semidefinite, Heteroskedasticity and
Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance-Matrix, Econometrica 55 (3), 703-708
   Phillips, P. and P. Perron, 1988. Testing for a Unit Root in Time Series Regression, Biometrika
75, 335-346.
   Pindyck, R.S. and J.J. Rotemberg, 1990, The Excess Co-Movement of Commodity Prices,
Economic Journal, 100 (403), 1173-1189
   Roll, R., 1992, Industrial Structure and the Comparative Behavior of International Stock Market
Indices, Journal of Finance 47, 3-41.
   Schwert, G.W., 1989, Why does Stock Market Volatility Change Over Time, Journal of Finance,
44 (5), 1115-1153
   Vogelsang, T., 1998, Trend function hypothesis testing in the presence of serial correlation,
Econometrica 66, 123-148.




                                                34
Table 1. Summary statistics for the firm returns

The sample period is January 1980 to December 2003. For US firms, return and accounting data
are obtained from CRSP and CompuStat; for other countries, return and accounting data are
obtained from DataStream. All the returns are denominated in US dollars. BM stands for the
book to market ratio. The numbers reported are time-series average relevant statistics.

                                average    average     average    average    average total   average %
                     starting     firm    firm size      firm    number of    market cap      of global
                       date      return    ($ mil)       BM        firms        ($ bil)      market cap
     CANADA          198001     18.09%       621        1.00        379          247            2.1%
     FRANCE          198001     17.62%       841        1.07        380          422            2.6%
    GERMANY          198001     10.71%       944        0.72        438          450            3.3%
      ITALY          198001     18.95%      1056        1.04        169           205           1.3%
      JAPAN          198001     14.67%      1543        0.69       1426          2308          23.7%
 UNITED KINDOM       198001     16.76%       799        0.93       1069          981            8.3%
 UNITED STATES       198001     16.45%       940        0.82       3977          5482          50.1%
   AUSTRALIA         198001     18.68%       596        1.02        299           166           1.3%
    AUSTRIA          198001     13.10%       181        1.29         57            14           0.1%
    BELGIUM          198001     16.80%       489        1.46         78            53           0.3%
    DENMARK          198001     17.20%       232        1.22        129           36            0.2%
    FINLAND          198701     15.69%       651        0.73         88           79            0.4%
     GREECE          198801     26.39%       183        0.78        173            40           0.2%
   HONG KONG         198001     21.13%       785        1.27        240          195            1.4%
    IRELAND          198001     21.30%       464        1.14         38            23           0.1%
  NETHERLANDS        198001     16.34%      1586        1.27        115          229            1.6%
  NEW ZEALAND        198601     14.62%       386        0.99         46           14            0.1%
    NORWAY           198001     18.15%       285        0.96         94           28            0.2%
   PORTUGAL          198801     11.47%       419        1.24         58           30            0.2%
   SINGAPORE         198001     17.91%       360        0.93        118           51            0.3%
      SPAIN          198601     16.66%      1579        0.96        105          182            1.1%
     SWEDEN          198001     17.45%       524        0.99        167          111            0.6%
  SWITZERLAND        198001     10.42%      1013        1.12        172          251            1.5%




                                                      35
Table 2. Match SIC industry classification with FTSE industry classification

DataStream provides FTSE level 4 industries, and French website provides SIC 30 industries.

merged   FTSE level 4 industries                      SIC 30 industries
                                                                          Precious Metals, Non-Metallic, and
   1      1   mining                                    17     Mines      Industrial Metal
   2      2   oil and gas                               19     Oil        Petroleum and Natural Gas
                                                        18     Coal       Coal
   3     3    chemicals                                  9     Chems      Chemicals
   4     4    construction                              11     Cnstr      Construction and Construction Materials
   5     5    forestry and paper                        24     Paper      Business Supplies and Shipping Containers
   6     6    steel and other metals                    12     Steel      Steel Works Etc
   7     9    electronics and electrical equipments     14     ElcEq      Electrical Equipment
   8     10   engineering and machinery                 13     FabPr      Fabricated Products and Machinery
   9     11   automobiles                               15     Autos      Automobiles and Trucks
   10    12   household goods and textiles               6     Hshld      Consumer Goods
                                                         7     Clths      Apparel
   11    13   beverages                                  2     Beer       Beer & Liquor
         14   food producers and processors              1     Food       Food Products
         27   food and drug
                                                                          Healthcare, Medical Equipment,
   12    15   health                                       8   Hlth       Pharmaceutical Products
         17   personal care
         18   pharmaceuticals
   13    19   tobacco                                    3     Smoke      Tobacco Products
   14    20   distributors                              26     Whlsl      Wholesale
   15    21   retailers                                 27     Rtail      Retail
   16    22   leisure, entertainment and hotesl          4     Games      Recreation
         24   restaurants, pubs and breweries           28     Meals      Restaraunts, Hotels, Motels
   17    23   media and photography                      5     Books      Printing and Publishing
   18    26   transport                                 25     Trans      Transportation
   19    28   telecom services                          21     Telcm      Communication
   20    29   electricity                               20     Util       Utilities
         30   gas distribution
         31   water
   21    34   banks                                     29     Fin        Banking, Insurance, Real Estate, Trading
         35   insurance
         36   life assurance
         37   investment companies
         38   real estate
         39   specialty and other finance
   22    7    aerospace and defence                     16     Carry      Aircraft, ships, and railroad equipment
   23    8    diversified industrials                   10     Txtls      Textiles
   24    16   packaging                                 22     Servs      Personal and Business Services
         25   support services
         33   software and computer services
   25    32   information technology hardware           23     BusEq      Business Equipment
   26    40   ineligible                                30     Other      Everything Else



                                                      36
Table 3. Factor model estimation results

The sample period is January 1980 to December 2003. For US firms, return and accounting data
are obtained from CRSP and CompuStat; for other countries, return and accounting data are
obtained from DataStream. All the returns are denominated in US dollars. Model WCAPM is the
global CAPM, in which the only factor is the global market portfolio return (WMKT). Model
WFF is the global Fama-French three factor model, in which the factors are global market
portfolio return (WMKT), global SMB (WSMB), and global HML (WHML). Model WAPT is
the global APT model with three factors. Models WLCAPM, WLFF and WLAPT include both
local factors and global factors, with the local factors constructed over regional markets and
orthogonalized to relevant global factors. Model DCI/DCS is the dummy variable approach from
Heston and Rouwenhorst (1994). In Panel A, for the risk-based models, the adjusted R2’s are
first averaged across portfolios (equally weighted), and then averaged over different time
periods. For the DCI/DSI models, we first estimate them over weekly data in cross-section. Then
we use the model to compute a time-series R², comparable to the R²'s computed for the various
risk-based models. Panel B provides statistics for relating APT factors to the Fama-French
factors. The left half of Panel B reports the time-series average of the adjusted R-square of
regressing individual APT factors on the Fama-French factors from the relevant regions. The
right half of Panel B reports time-series average of the adjusted R-square of regressing individual
Fama-French factors on different APT factors.

Panel A. Adjusted R2’s

                WCAPM WLCAPM          WFF     WLFF     WAPT     WLAPT    DCI/DCS
Country-industry portfolios
whole sample       23%      37%       27%      44%      39%      54%       38%
   80-85           31%      51%       35%      60%      54%      69%       43%
   86-91           25%      40%       28%      47%      41%      57%       36%
   92-97           16%      28%       17%      33%      30%      44%       35%
   98-03           21%      28%       26%      37%      32%      44%       37%
Country-style portfolios
whole sample       21%      33%       27%      45%      41%      56%       40%
   80-85           28%      46%       34%      60%      53%      70%       43%
   86-91           21%      33%       26%      44%      41%      57%       37%
   92-97           14%      25%       17%      36%      34%      49%       39%
   98-03           21%      29%       30%      42%      38%      50%       42%

Panel B. APT factors vs. Fama-French factors
              Independent     Dependent variables      Independent     Dependent variables
               Variables    PC1   Variables     PC3     Variables    MKE     SMB        HML
   global        WFF        67%     26%         19%      WAPT        81%     23%        29%
   North         WFF        12%     16%         15%      WAPT        33%      9%        10%
  America         LFF       21%     11%         11%       LAPT       30%     11%        12%
  Europe         WFF        11%      8%         7%       WAPT        45%      7%         6%
                  LFF       13%     14%         11%       LAPT       16%      9%        10%
  Far East       WFF        9%       7%         7%       WAPT        41%     11%         9%
                  LFF       20%     16%         12%       LAPT       23%     11%        10%


                                                37
Table 4. Model fit: the role of betas and multiple factors

The sample period is January 1980 to December 2003. All returns are denominated in US
dollars. Model WCAPM is the global CAPM, in which the only factor is the global market
portfolio return (WMKT). Model WFF is the global Fama-French three factor model, in which
the factors are global market portfolio return (WMKT), global SMB (WSMB), and global HML
(WHML). Model WAPT is the global APT model with three factors. Models WLCAPM, WLFF
and WLAPT include both local and global factors, with the local factors constructed over
regional markets and orthogonalized to the relevant global factors. Model DCI/DCS uses the
dummy variable approach from Heston and Rouwenhorst (1994). Model DI (DS) is the restricted
dummy variable model with only industry (style) dummies. Model DC is the restricted dummy
variable model with only country dummies. The ABSE measure is defined in equation (13). Unit
beta means the global market beta is set to be one. Cross-sectional average beta means that all
the betas in each model are set to the cross-sectional average of betas within each six-month
period. Time-series average beta means that all the betas in each model are set to the time-series
average for each country-industry (or style) portfolios. Free beta means there are no restrictions.

Panel A: Country-industry portfolios

                         Cross-section average
             Unit beta           beta            Time-series average beta         Free beta
                                     % of unit                  % of unit                 % of unit
              ABSE       ABSE       beta ABSE     ABSE         beta ABSE    ABSE         beta ABSE
WCAPM         0.284      0.262         93%        0.251           89%       0.162           57%
WLCAPM                   0.263         93%        0.220           78%       0.108           38%
WFF                      0.263         93%        0.253           89%       0.133           47%
WLFF                     0.265         93%        0.221           78%       0.081           28%
WAPT                     0.270         95%        0.370           131%      0.132           47%
WLAPT                    0.274         96%        0.364           128%      0.076           27%
DCI                                                                         0.123           43%
DI                                                                          0.239           84%
DC                                                                          0.195           69%

Panel B: country-style portfolios

                         Cross-section average
             Unit beta           beta            Time-series average beta         Free beta
                                     % of unit                  % of unit                 % of unit
              ABSE       ABSE       beta ABSE     ABSE         beta ABSE    ABSE         beta ABSE
WCAPM         0.292      0.295        101%        0.273           93%       0.171           58%
WLCAPM                   0.289         99%        0.218           75%       0.090           31%
WFF                      0.280         96%        0.276           94%       0.146           50%
WLFF                     0.276         94%        0.218           75%       0.064           22%
WAPT                     0.289         99%        0.435           149%      0.126           43%
WLAPT                    0.288         99%        0.428           146%      0.062           21%
DCS                                                                         0.099           34%
DS                                                                          0.286           98%
DC                                                                          0.123           42%




                                                 38
Table 5. Model fit: matching the sample portfolio correlation matrix

The sample period is January 1980 to December 2003. All the returns are denominated in US
dollars. Model WCAPM is the global CAPM, in which the only factor is the global market
portfolio return (WMKT). Model WFF is the global Fama-French three factor model, in which
the factors are the global market portfolio return (WMKT), global SMB (WSMB), and global
HML (WHML). Model WAPT is the global APT model with three factors. Models WLCAPM,
WLFF and WLAPT include both local factors and global factors, with the local factors
constructed over regional markets and orthogonalized to the relevant global factors. Model
DCI/DCS uses the dummy variable approach from Heston and Rouwenhorst (1994). Model DI is
the restricted dummy variable model with only industry dummies. Model DC is the restricted
dummy variable model with only country dummies. Every cell (i,j) reports the t-stat for
RMSE(model i)-RMSE(model j). The statistic RMSE is defined in equation (14). The standard
errors accommodate 4 Newey-West (1987) lags.

Panel A: country-industry portfolio correlation matrix

  t-stat    Model j
 Model i    WCAPM     WLCAPM        WFF      WLFF        WAPT    WLAPT   DCI     DI
WLCAPM       -5.00
  WFF        -2.80       0.93
 WLFF        -3.78       -2.28      -5.00
 WAPT        -3.36       1.31       -0.03     2.79
WLAPT        -3.97       -2.35      -5.42     -0.31      -3.07
   DCI       -2.05       2.81       1.47      2.77       1.86     2.90
    DI       3.17        3.78       3.57      3.93       3.67     4.00   3.53
   DC        1.69        2.12       1.86      2.15       2.02     2.17   1.92   -0.34

Panel B: country-style portfolio correlation matrix

  t-stat    Model j
 Model i    WCAPM     WLCAPM        WFF      WLFF        WAPT    WLAPT   DCI     DI
WLCAPM       -5.37
  WFF        -3.91       5.44
 WLFF        -5.14       -3.77      -5.44
 WAPT        -2.90       2.50       -1.59     3.70
WLAPT        -5.64       -3.68      -6.03     -0.17      -4.66
  DCS        -2.00       1.74       -0.40     2.19       0.78     2.44
   DS        2.88        3.43       3.15      3.54       3.31     3.59   3.34
   DC        -0.25       1.87       0.62      2.16       1.43     2.31   1.92   -3.15




                                                39
Table 6. Model fit: robustness check using subsets of test portfolios

The sample period is January 1980 to December 2003. All the returns are denominated in US
dollars. Model WCAPM is the global CAPM, in which the only factor is the global market
portfolio return (WMKT). Model WFF is the global Fama-French three factor model, in which
the factors are the global market portfolio return (WMKT), global SMB (WSMB), and global
HML (WHML). Model WAPT is the global APT model with three factors. Models WLCAPM,
WLFF and WLAPT include both local factors and global factors, with the local factors
constructed over regional markets and orthogonalized to the relevant global factors. Model
DCI/DCS uses the dummy variable approach from Heston and Rouwenhorst (1994). Model DI is
the restricted dummy variable model with only industry dummies. Model DC is the restricted
dummy variable model with only country dummies. Every cell (i,j) reports the t-stat for
RMSE(model i)-RMSE(model j). The statistic RMSE is defined in equation (14). The standard
errors accommodate 4 Newey-West (1987) lags.

Panel A: Correlation matrix for G5 countries, least volatile industries (food and utility) and most
volatile industries (info tech and electronics)

  t-stat    Model j
 Model i    WCAPM      WLCAPM       WFF       WLFF      WAPT     WLAPT       DCI        DI
WLCAPM       -4.10
  WFF        -5.67       0.98
 WLFF        -6.77       -7.21      -5.39
 WAPT        -3.17       1.35       0.20      6.00
WLAPT        -6.58       -4.56      -4.83     -0.25     -7.56
  DCI        -0.99       2.96       1.95      5.11      1.85       6.44
    DI       3.57        3.93       4.47      4.79      3.99       4.87      3.35
   DC        4.01        5.46       4.79      6.14      5.02       6.51      4.70       0.97

Panel B: Correlation matrix for G5 countries, smallest industries (household and recreation) and
biggest industries (finance and oil and gas)

  t-stat    Model j
 Model i    WCAPM      WLCAPM       WFF       WLFF      WAPT     WLAPT       DCI        DI
WLCAPM       -3.97
  WFF        -5.44       1.45
 WLFF        -6.38       -4.46      -3.98
 WAPT        -1.49       1.81       0.36       4.19
WLAPT        -4.97       -1.84      -2.88      0.38     -6.18
  DCI        -2.98       0.52       -0.60      1.75     -0.79      1.71
    DI       4.85        5.09       5.66       5.77     4.29       5.29      5.10
   DC        1.27        3.38       2.10       3.85     2.46       4.34      2.57      -2.19




                                                40
Panel C: Correlation matrix for G5 countries, TMT industries (Telecom, Media and Info Tech)

  t-stat    Model j
 Model i    WCAPM     WLCAPM       WFF      WLFF      WAPT     WLAPT       DCI       DI
WLCAPM       -3.08
  WFF        -3.92      1.84
 WLFF        -3.78      -3.82      -2.90
 WAPT        -1.10      3.02       0.57      4.18
WLAPT        -3.80      -2.60      -3.01     -0.56    -5.73
  DCI        -2.12      2.38       -0.79     3.72     -1.82      4.52
    DI       5.04       5.78       6.97      6.57     4.51       6.08     5.20
   DC        0.90       3.67       1.97      4.18     1.92       4.89     2.96      -1.05

Panel D: Correlation matrix for G5 countries, small growth, small value, big growth and big
value portfolios

  t-stat    Model j
 Model i    WCAPM     WLCAPM       WFF      WLFF      WAPT     WLAPT       DCI       DI
WLCAPM       -5.12
  WFF        -3.32      3.98
 WLFF        -5.95      -4.16      -5.38
 WAPT        -3.51      1.83       -2.30     5.69
WLAPT        -4.90      -1.72      -4.14     -0.33    -5.40
  DCI        -3.90      -0.06      -2.73     1.56     -1.73      3.43
    DI       5.42       6.54       6.56      6.98     6.01       6.34     5.55
   DC        -2.54      0.99       -1.57     2.68     -0.17      5.98     2.88      -4.89

Panel E: Correlation matrix for Far East countries (Australia, Hong Kong, New Zealand,
Singapore), small growth, small value, big growth and big value portfolios

  t-stat    Model j
 Model i    WCAPM     WLCAPM       WFF      WLFF      WAPT     WLAPT       DCI       DI
WLCAPM       -3.53
  WFF        -4.49      -4.00
 WLFF        -4.82      -4.80      -4.07
 WAPT        -4.48      -4.39      -3.75     -1.39
WLAPT        -5.34      -5.46      -5.28     -5.04    -5.19
  DCI        -3.62      -3.49      -3.05     -2.36    -1.99      2.14
    DI       1.85       2.10       2.47      3.09     3.27       3.98     3.41
   DC        -3.43      -3.27      -2.83     -2.09    -1.75      2.09     0.84      -3.34




                                               41
Table 7. Covariance ratios for the WLAPT model

The sample period is January 1980 to December 2003. All the returns are denominated in US
dollar. Presented numbers are average covariance ratio, COVmodel./COVsample, with COVsample to
be the sample covariance, and COVmodel to be the covariance predicted by the WLAPT model,
and the division ./ is conducted element by element. The covariance ratios are averaged over
time, then averaged over styles, industries and countries.

     country        cov ratio      industry    cov ratio     size    BM      cov ratio
    CANADA            93%           mining       72%        small    low      100%
    FRANCE            89%        oil and gas     56%        small   median     93%
   GERMANY            89%         chemical       96%        small    high      96%
     ITALY            86%       construction     98%       median    low       96%
     JAPAN            96%          forestry      75%       median   median     97%
       UK             83%             steel      80%       median    high      97%
       US             93%        electronics     96%         big     low       94%
  AUSTRALIA           87%        machinery       99%         big    median     94%
   AUSTRIA            68%       automobiles      86%         big     high      95%
   BELGIUM            74%        household       92%
   DENMARK            72%             food       90%
   FINLAND            79%            health      81%
    GREECE            82%        wholesale       94%
  HONG KONG           88%            retail      88%
   IRELAND            79%        recreation      98%
 NETHERLANDS          93%           media        95%
 NEW ZEALAND          71%         transport      82%
   NORWAY             70%          telecom       74%
  PORTUGAL            66%            utility     74%
  SINGAPORE           84%           finance      86%
     SPAIN            75%          defense       88%
    SWEDEN            84%        diversified    100%
 SWITZERLAND          81%           service      98%
                                  info tech      87%




                                               42
Table 8. Long-term movements in correlations: base portfolios

The sample period is January 1980 to December 2003. We report characteristics of γ sample
                                                                                   CORR
                                                                                          and
its model counterpart, γ risk
                         CORR
                              , as in equation (16). We examine three versions of γ risk
                                                                                    CORR
                                                                                         . The first
version does not restrict the betas and the factor covariances, the second version allows free betas
but fixes the factor covariances to be at their time-series average (TSA), and the third version
allows free factor covariances but fixes betas to be at their time-series average. For each version
and the data, we report the mean, standard deviation, correlation with data, and the 90%
confidence interval (lower bound and upper bound) from Vogelsang’s trend test.

Panel A. Country-industry portfolio correlations

                  γ sample
                    CORR
                             γ risk
                               CORR
                                      γ risk
                                        CORR
                                                   γ risk
                                                     CORR


 Beta                         Free      Free        TSA
 Factor cov                   Free     TSA          Free
 mean              36%        36%       50%         44%
 std. dev.         13%        13%      18%          12%
 correl(.,data)   100%       100%      -14%         92%
 lower            -0.936     -0.946   -1.782       -0.745
 upper             0.226      0.227    1.054        0.209

Panel B. Country-style portfolio correlations

                  γ sample
                    CORR
                             γ risk
                               CORR
                                      γ risk
                                        CORR
                                                   γ risk
                                                     CORR


 Beta                         Free      Free        TSA
 Factor cov                   Free     TSA          Free
 mean              44%        44%       64%         51%
 std. dev.         14%        14%      21%          13%
 correl(.,data)   100%       100%      -21%         89%
 lower            -1.070     -1.054   -2.210       -0.557
 upper             0.707      0.696    1.611        0.581




                                                43
Table 9. Long term movements in country return correlations

The sample period is January 1980 to December 2003. We aggregate the base portfolios into
several subgroups and also investigate bivariate correlation relative to the US country return. We
report characteristics of γ sample
                            CORR
                                   and its model counterpart, γ risk
                                                                CORR
                                                                     , as in equation (16). In Panel B
and C, we examine three versions of γ risk
                                        CORR
                                             . The first version does not restrict the betas and the
factor covariances, the second version allows free betas but fixes the factor covariances to be at
their time-series average (TSA), and the third version allows free factor covariances but fixes
betas to be at their time-series average. For each version and the data, we report the mean,
standard deviation, correlation with data, and the 90% confidence interval (lower bound and
upper bound) from Vogelsang’s trend test.

Panel A. Correlations

                              γ sample
                                CORR
                                          trend               γ risk
                                                                CORR
                                                                        trend
                              mean       lower     upper      mean     lower    upper
 all countries                37%        -0.763    1.258      37%      -0.730   1.243
 G7                           37%        -0.827    1.272      37%      -0.801   1.265
 Europe                       54%         0.177    0.983      60%       0.039   0.732
 Far East                     30%        -1.377    1.226      34%      -1.374   1.401
 US vs. Far East              27%        -0.662    0.483      27%      -0.643   0.477
 US vs. Europe                39%        -0.978    1.748      39%      -0.991   1.763
 US vs. all other countries   35%        -0.966    1.436      35%      -0.949   1.433

Panel B. All countries

                  γ sample
                    CORR
                              γ risk
                                CORR
                                          γ risk
                                            CORR
                                                    γ risk
                                                      CORR


 Beta                          Free        Free       TSA
 Factor cov                    Free        TSA        Free
 mean               37%        37%         53%        46%
 std. dev.          16%        16%         20%        15%
 correl(.,data)    100%       100%          -6%       91%
 lower             -0.763     -0.730      -1.396     -0.385
 upper              1.258      1.243       1.933      1.023

Panel C. European countries

                  γ sample
                    CORR
                              γ risk
                                CORR
                                          γ risk
                                            CORR
                                                    γ risk
                                                      CORR


 Beta                          Free        Free       TSA
 Factor cov                    Free        TSA        Free
 mean              54%         60%         86%        71%
 std. dev.         16%         14%         26%        12%
 correl(.,data)    100%        98%         13%        72%
 lower             0.177       0.039      -1.791     -0.585
 upper             0.983       0.732       4.282      0.566




                                                   44
Table 10. Country specific measures of capital market integration

The sample period is January 1980 to December 2003. All the returns are denominated in US
dollar. We report the ratio of the variance explained by global factor over the variance explained
by both global and local factors, using the WLAPT model. For the first subperiod 1981-1986, we
only report results for 6 countries, because other countries do not have complete time series data
when we require the country has 9 style portfolios with each portfolio with at least 15 firms.

                    whole sample   1981-1986    1987-1992      1993-1998     1999-2003
CANADA                  61%            70%          49%            57%           70%
FRANCE                  75%            62%          74%            77%           87%
GERMANY                 82%            70%          87%            83%           87%
ITALY                   81%                         78%            80%           86%
JAPAN                   74%            84%          82%            67%           59%
UK                      83%            88%          77%            82%           82%
US                      65%            81%          54%            54%           71%
AUSTRALIA               53%                         47%            60%           57%
AUSTRIA                 75%                         75%            76%           70%
BELGIUM                 82%                         82%            81%           82%
DENMARK                 79%                         84%            78%           73%
FINLAND                 76%                         62%            81%           79%
GREECE                  65%                         53%            58%           73%
HONG KONG               68%                         62%            74%           71%
IRELAND                 68%                         62%            73%           71%
NETHERLANDS             84%                         82%            84%           88%
NEW ZEALAND             49%                         56%            55%           42%
NORWAY                  75%                         73%            74%           78%
PORTUGAL                77%                         72%            76%           77%
SINGAPORE               61%                         57%            62%           61%
SPAIN                   83%                         84%            81%           83%
SWEDEN                  81%                         75%            79%           89%
SWITZERLAND             83%                         89%            77%           83%




                                               45
Table 11. The country-industry debate

The sample period is January 1980 to December 2003. We aggregate the base portfolios into
several subgroups. We report characteristics of γ sample
                                                  CORR
                                                         and its model counterpart, γ risk
                                                                                      CORR
                                                                                           , as in
equation (16). We examine three versions of γ risk
                                                 CORR
                                                      . The first version does not restrict the betas
and the factor covariances, the second version allows free betas but fixes the factor covariances
to be at their time-series average (TSA), and the third version allows free factor covariances but
fixes betas to be at their time-series average. For each version and the data, we report the mean,
standard deviation, correlation with data, and the 90% confidence interval (lower bound and
upper bound) from Vogelsang’s trend test.

Panel A. industry portfolio correlations

                               With TMT industries                             Without TMT industries
                  γ   CORR
                      sample   γ   CORR
                                   risk    γ   CORR
                                               risk   γ    CORR
                                                           risk
                                                                  γ   CORR
                                                                      sample    γ risk
                                                                                  CORR
                                                                                            γ risk
                                                                                              CORR
                                                                                                        γ risk
                                                                                                          CORR


 Beta                           Free        Free       TSA                        Free        Free       TSA
 Factor cov                     Free        TSA        Free                       Free        TSA        Free
 mean              62%          63%         94%        71%         63%            64%         97%        72%
 std. dev.         13%          13%         27%        11%         13%            13%         27%        11%
 correl(.,data)   100%         100%         -7%        89%        100%           100%         -9%        91%
 lower            -0.638       -0.624      -9.589     -0.249      -2.129         -2.391     -94.561     -1.066
 upper            0.518         0.515      10.454      0.360       1.513          1.662      93.022      0.676

Panel B. Country portfolio correlation γ – industry portfolio correlation γ for full sample

                               With TMT industries                             Without TMT industries
                  γ   CORR
                      sample   γ   CORR
                                   risk    γ   CORR
                                               risk   γ    CORR
                                                           risk
                                                                  γ   CORR
                                                                      sample    γ risk
                                                                                  CORR
                                                                                            γ risk
                                                                                              CORR
                                                                                                        γ risk
                                                                                                          CORR


 Beta                            Free        Free      TSA                         Free        Free      TSA
 Factor cov                      Free       TSA         Free                       Free       TSA         Free
 mean              -25%         -25%        -42%       -25%        -26%           -26%        -45%       -26%
 std. dev.         15%          15%         22%        13%         15%            15%         22%        13%
 correl(.,data)   100%         100%         77%        89%        100%           100%         76%        89%
 lower            -3.301       -2.975      -8.135     -1.057      -3.264         -3.425      -6.886     -1.190
 upper             3.922        3.600       8.105      1.575       3.817          4.061       6.718      1.698

Panel C. Country portfolio correlation γ – industry portfolio correlation γ for 1991 - 2000

                               With TMT industries                             Without TMT industries
                  γ   CORR
                      sample   γ   CORR
                                   risk    γ   CORR
                                               risk   γ    CORR
                                                           risk
                                                                  γ   CORR
                                                                      sample    γ risk
                                                                                  CORR
                                                                                            γ risk
                                                                                              CORR
                                                                                                        γ risk
                                                                                                          CORR


 Beta                           Free         Free      TSA                        Free        Free      TSA
 Factor cov                     Free        TSA         Free                      Free       TSA         Free
 mean             -21%         -22%         -45%       -23%       -23%           -23%        -47%       -23%
 std. dev.        20%          20%          30%        17%        20%             20%        31%        17%
 correl(.,data)   100%         100%         87%        92%        100%           100%        87%        91%
 lower            1.160        1.209       -3.925      0.816      1.573          1.474      -4.019      0.673
 upper            4.235        4.132       15.727      2.890      3.694          3.994      15.633      3.158


                                                      46
Table 12. Industry specific measures of integration

The sample period is January 1980 to December 2003. All the returns are denominated in US
dollar. We report the ratio of the variance explained by global factors over the variance explained
by both global and local factors, using the WLAPT model.

               whole sample   1981-1986   1987-1992     1993-1998     1999-2003
mining             55%            57%         48%           55%           61%
oil and gas        61%            57%         65%           61%           57%
chemical           75%            83%         77%           72%           66%
construction       77%            87%         77%           72%           68%
forestry           67%            77%         65%           67%           58%
steel              75%            84%         78%           70%           63%
electronics        71%            70%         76%           65%           73%
machinery          78%            86%         81%           71%           70%
automobiles        71%            74%         73%           66%           69%
household          72%            78%         75%           66%           67%
food               72%            84%         72%           65%           56%
health             68%            77%         69%           61%           57%
wholesale          63%            60%         63%           64%           64%
retail             70%            81%         68%           66%           60%
recreation         71%            83%         71%           61%           67%
media              73%            80%         70%           67%           78%
transport          73%            80%         77%           70%           63%
telecom            67%            71%         65%           65%           65%
utility            70%            79%         76%           64%           50%
finance            73%            76%         76%           68%           68%
defence            69%            86%         65%           63%           56%
diversified        68%            74%         68%           67%           62%
service            72%            76%         73%           68%           71%
info tech          69%            72%         64%           62%           78%




                                                47
Table 13. Long term movements in style return correlations

The sample period is January 1980 to December 2003. We aggregate the base portfolios into
several subgroups. We report characteristics of γ sample
                                                  CORR
                                                         and its model counterpart, γ risk
                                                                                      CORR
                                                                                           , as in
equation (16). We examine three versions of γ risk
                                                 CORR
                                                      . The first version does not restrict the betas
and the factor covariances, the second version allows free betas but fixes the factor covariances
to be at their time-series average (TSA), and the third version allows free factor covariances but
fixes betas to be at their time-series average. For each version and the data, we report the mean,
standard deviation, correlation with data, and the 90% confidence interval (lower bound and
upper bound) from Vogelsang’s trend test.

Panel A. style small versus style big
                small       big                                 small-big
                  γ   CORR
                      sample   γ   CORR
                                   sample   γ   CORR
                                                sample   γ    CORR
                                                              risk     γ risk
                                                                         CORR
                                                                                γ risk
                                                                                  CORR


 Beta                                                     Free          Free     TSA
 Factor cov                                               Free          TSA      Free
 mean              37%          45%           -8%          -8%           9%       -7%
 std. dev.         15%          14%          15%          15%           24%      14%
 correl(.,data)   100%         100%         100%         100%           63%      90%
 lower            -2.194       -1.263       -5.005       -5.081        -4.511   -1.746
 upper            -0.509       -0.240        4.467        4.493         3.290    0.838

Panel B. style growth versus style value
               growth     value                               growth-value
                  γ   CORR
                      sample   γ   CORR
                                   sample   γ   CORR
                                                sample   γ    CORR
                                                              risk     γ risk
                                                                         CORR
                                                                                γ risk
                                                                                  CORR


 Beta                                                     Free          Free     TSA
 Factor cov                                               Free          TSA      Free
 mean              34%          34%           1%           0%            0%       3%
 std. dev.         15%          14%          11%          11%           17%      11%
 correl(.,data)   100%         100%         100%         100%           12%      54%
 lower            -0.873       -0.577       -0.098       -0.063        -0.455   -0.450
 upper            0.150        -0.072        0.543        0.520         1.302    0.340

Panel C. style big growth portfolio γ – style small value portfolio γ
                 big       small
               growth      value              big growth – small value
                  γ sample
                    CORR
                               γ sample
                                 CORR
                                            γ sample
                                              CORR
                                                         γ risk
                                                           CORR
                                                                       γ risk
                                                                         CORR
                                                                                γ risk
                                                                                  CORR


 Beta                                                     Free         Free     TSA
 Factor cov                                               Free         TSA      Free
 mean              33%          23%          10%           9%           3%      10%
 std. dev.         16%          14%         14%           14%          18%      13%
 correl(.,data)   100%         100%         100%          99%          37%      74%
 lower            -0.769       -0.797       0.099         0.144        0.235    0.062
 upper            0.256        -0.240       0.894         0.914        1.413    0.677




                                                         48
Table 14. Firm level comovements

The sample period is January 1980 to December 2003. All the returns are denominated in US
dollars. Model WLAPT is a APT model with factors from both the global and regional markets.
Model DCI/DCS is the dummy variable model from Heston and Rouwenhorst (1994).

                            % of       Correl                                  Correl (sample
            Covariance     sample   (sample cov,                 % of sample   correl ,model
               (in %)        cov     model cov)    correlation     correl         correl)
 Norvatis and Merck
   data        0.0364                                 26%
 WLAPT         0.0259        71%       85%            19%           71%            74%
   DCI         0.0319        88%       74%            23%           87%            62%
   DCS         0.0298        82%       49%            21%           79%            29%
 Nihon Unisys and IBM
   data        0.0199                                  8%
 WLAPT         0.0204       103%       82%             8%          104%            74%
   DCI         0.0759       381%       46%            30%          387%            44%
   DCS         0.014         71%       52%             7%           87%            44%
 Merck and IBM
   data        0.0271                                 24%
 WLAPT         0.0297       110%       82%            25%          105%            80%
   DCI         0.0486       180%       49%            40%          169%            48%
   DCS         0.0554       205%       22%            44%          182%            33%
 Novartis and IBM
   data        0.0126                                 11%
 WLAPT         0.0137       109%       73%            11%          103%            83%
   DCI         0.0196       155%       29%            13%          116%            41%
   DCS         0.0308       244%       23%            19%          177%            42%
 Merck and Nihon Unisys
   data        0.0104                                 6%
 WLAPT         0.0076        73%       67%            5%            77%            63%
   DCI         0.0172       165%       23%            9%           133%            30%
   DCS         0.0160       154%       35%            7%           113%            42%
 Novartis and Nihon Unisys
   data        0.0156                                  9%
 WLAPT         0.0078        50%       81%             6%           68%            81%
   DCI         0.0132        85%       76%            7%           75%             69%
   DCS         0.0210       135%       66%            10%          110%            59%




                                                    49
Table 15. Time series behavior of firm level idiosyncratic variance measures

For Panel A, the sample period is January 1980 to December 2003. For US firms, return and
accounting data are obtained from CRSP and CompuStat; for other countries, return and
accounting data are obtained from DataStream. All the returns are denominated in US dollars.
Firm level variance using the CLMX methodology, CLMX σ2firm, is defined in equation (20),
and the firm level idiosyncratic variance using WLAPT, σ2idio, is defined in equation (18).
Reported are the Vogelsang trend estimates and their 90% confidence interval (all trends are
multiplied by 100)

Panel A. Idiosyncratic variances in the G7 countries

             CA       FR       GE         IT        JP        UK       US       G7
         2
CLMX σ   firm
lower        -0.134   0.086    -0.107      -0.016   -0.375    -0.090   -1.523   -1.020
mean          0.168   0.135     0.175       0.203    0.096     0.103    0.160    0.121
upper        0.469    0.183     0.457       0.421    0.568     0.295    1.843    1.262
σ2idio
lower        -0.271   -0.049   -0.204      -0.010   -0.430    -0.135   -1.113   -0.755
mean          0.138    0.067    0.141       0.235    0.076     0.094    0.129    0.102
upper         0.547    0.184    0.486       0.480    0.582     0.324    1.371    0.959

Panel B: Idiosyncratic variance using US only daily returns

         CLMX σ2firm
         1964-1997   1964-2003          1981-1997    1981-2003
 lower      0.006      -0.002             -0.003       -0.032
 mean       0.011       0.017              0.006        0.036
 upper      0.016       0.036              0.016        0.103
         σ2idio
         1964-1997   1964-2003          1981-1997    1981-2003
 lower      0.003      -0.006             -0.005       -0.042
 mean       0.008       0.014              0.005        0.031
 upper      0.013       0.033              0.014        0.104




                                                         50
Figure 1. Time-series of portfolio level correlation measure

The sample period is January 1980 to December 2003. Data correlation and its decomposition
are defined in equation (16), where DATA refers to γ sample , RISK refers to γ risk , and IDIO
                                                     CORR                      CORR


refers to the difference between the two or γ idio
                                              CORR
                                                   .


Panel A. Data correlations for country-industry portfolios and country-style portfolios
  0.7

  0.6

  0.5

  0.4

  0.3
  0.2

  0.1
    0
    198101          198601         199101          199601      200101

                                 STYLE         INDUSTRY

Panel B. Decomposition for country industry portfolios
   0.7
   0.6
   0.5
   0.4
   0.3
   0.2
   0.1
     0
  -0.1
     198101         198601         199101          199601       200101

                               DATA         RISK        IDIO




                                                   51
Panel C. Decomposition for country style portfolios
   0.7
   0.6
   0.5
   0.4
   0.3
   0.2
   0.1
    0
  -0.1
     198101        198601        199101          199601      200101

                             DATA         RISK        IDIO




                                                 52
Figure 2. Time-series of portfolio correlation differences

The sample period is January 1980 to December 2003. Data correlation and its decomposition
are defined in equation (16), where data refers to γ sample
                                                     CORR
                                                            , and risk refers to γ risk
                                                                                   CORR
                                                                                        . The figure
graphs the difference between γ sample
                                CORR
                                       (or γ risk
                                             CORR
                                                  ) computed using different portfolios.

Panel A. Country portfolios minus industry portfolios

   0.2


     0


  -0.2


  -0.4


  -0.6
     198106         198606          199106         199606          200106

               country-industry data correl      country-industry model correl



Panel B. Style small portfolios minus style big portfolios

   0.4

   0.2

     0

  -0.2

  -0.4

  -0.6
     198106         198606          199106         199606          200106

                      small-big data correl      small-big model correl




                                                  53
Panel C. Style growth portfolios minus style value portfolios
   0.4



   0.2



     0



  -0.2
     198106        198606           199106       199606          200106

                  growth-value data correl     growth-value model correl

Panel D. Style small value portfolios minus style big growth portfolios
   0.6


   0.4


   0.2


     0


  -0.2
     198106        198606           199106       199606          200106

                big gr-small va data correl    big gr-small va model correl




                                               54
Figure 3. Time-series of portfolio level variance measure

The sample period is January 1980 to December 2003. Data correlation and its decomposition
are defined in equation (18), where DATA refers to σ sample , RISK refers to σ risk , and IDIO refers
                                                     2                         2


to the difference between the two or σ idio
                                        2
                                            .


Panel A. Data variance measures for country-industry portfolios and country-style portfolios
    0.2


  0.15


    0.1


  0.05


     0
     198101          198601         199101              199601      200101

                                  STYLE           INDUSTRY

Panel B. Decomposition for country industry portfolios
    0.2


  0.15


    0.1


  0.05


     0
     198101          198601         199101              199601      200101

                                DATA            RISK         IDIO




                                                       55
Panel C. Decomposition for country style portfolios
  0.12



  0.08



  0.04



     0
     198101        198601        199101          199601      200101

                             DATA         RISK        IDIO




                                              56
