                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             THE SCOTS MAY BE BRAVE BUT THEY
                              ARE NEITHER HEALTHY NOR HAPPY

                                              David Bell
                                         David G. Blanchflower

                                          Working Paper 11911
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11911


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2006




We thank Diane Coyle, Geraint Johnes, Karen Norberg, Andrew Oswald, Daniel Kahneman and Bruce
Sacerdote for discussions and to two referees for helpful comments. All errors are ours. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2006 by David Bell and David G. Blanchflower. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
The Scots may be Brave but They are Neither Healthy Nor Happy
David Bell and David G. Blanchflower
NBER Working Paper No. 11911
January 2006
JEL No. J4

                                           ABSTRACT

On almost all measures of physical health, Scots fare worse than residents of any other region of the

UK and often worse than the rest of Europe. Deaths from chronic liver disease and lung cancer are

particularly prevalent in Scotland. The self-assessed wellbeing of Scots is lower than that of the

English or Welsh, even after taking into account any differences in characteristics. Scots also suffer

from higher levels of self-assessed depression or phobia, accidental death and suicide than those in

other parts of Great Britain. This result is particularly driven by outcomes in Strathclyde and is

consistent with the high scores for other measures of social deprivation in this area. On average,

indicators of social capital in Scotland are no worse than in England or Wales. Detailed analysis

within Scotland, however, shows that social capital indicators for the Strathclyde area are relatively

low. We argue that these problems seem unlikely to be fixed by indirect policies aimed at raising

economic growth.

David Bell
Department of Economics
University of Sterling
Scotland
UK
d.n.f.bell@stir.ac.uk

David G. Blanchflower
Department of Economics
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755-3514
and NBER
blanchflower@dartmouth.edu
                                                          1


                                    SCOTLAND THE BRAVE

                                    Hark when the night is fallin, hear, hear the pipes a'callin
                                    Loudly and proudly callin' down thru the glen
                                    There where the hills are sleepin', now feel the blood aleapin'
                                    High as the spirits of the old highland men!

                                    Towering in gallant fame,
                                    Scotland the mountain hame!
                                    High may your proud standards gloriously wave!
                                    Land of the high endeavour, land of the shining river,
                                    Land of my heart, forever, Scotland the brave!1

1. Introduction

         The principal policy objective of the Scottish Executive is to increase Scotland’s rate of

economic growth.2 Yet, as Oswald (1997), points out “economic performance is not intrinsically

interesting. No-one is concerned in a genuine sense about the level of gross national product last

year or about next year’s exchange rate.”                     The proposition that measures of economic

performance are not valued in themselves is very plausible. It is therefore reasonable to ask why

economic growth is elevated above all other policy objectives by the Scottish Executive.

         Economists’ usual response is that growth increases gross national income which in turn

leads to increases in “wellbeing”, “welfare” or “life satisfaction” among the population. Growth

is therefore a means to an end. It permits higher levels of consumption which in turn leads to

higher levels of wellbeing among the population. Put simply, more growth leads to more haggis

(or, better still, more rounds of golf) being consumed, which in turn makes people feel more

satisfied with life.



1
  Click on this link for the rest of the words to '
                                                  Scotland the Brave'and the tune played on the bagpipes!
http://www.cabarfeidh.com/scotland_the_brave.htm
2
 This policy was agreed in May 2003 by the Liberal-Democrat/Labour coalition. At this time, it was believed that
Scotland’s growth rate lagged well behind that of the UK as a whole. But data revisions published in 2004 show that
differences in growth rates between Scotland and the rest of the UK over the last four decades have been negligible.
           Until recently, economists have tended not to question the link from measures of

economic performance to individual wellbeing or happiness. But with the advent of surveys

which question individuals about their views of “life satisfaction” or “happiness”, a substantial

literature on these links has built up. There is even a world database on happiness.3 For a

summary of this literature, see Blanchflower and Oswald (2004a, 2004b). The questions asked

in the Eurobarometer survey are fairly typical. In a majority of the Eurobarometer surveys

respondents have been asked the question: On the whole, are you very satisfied, fairly satisfied,

not very satisfied, or not at all satisfied with the life you lead?      For the years 1975-1986

respondents were also asked about their happiness – Taking all things together how would you

say things are these days, would you say you’re very happy, fairly happy or not too happy these

days? Even though such questions have been asked for a considerable time in Scotland, to our

knowledge there has been no attempt to analyze such data. This paper is the first to examine

these data for Scotland in detail.

           Most of the recent literature has focused on the analysis of subjective measures of

wellbeing. There is however, a wealth of objective indicators of wellbeing in Scotland other than

those that are commonly rehearsed in the economics literature. These relate to issues such as

health, crime and lifestyle. For example, if the self-assessed wellbeing data are meaningful, one

might expect to see correlations between these measures and objective measures of mental

health, at least at an aggregate level, and this is what we find. There is also a growing literature

on social capital and its impact on growth and wellbeing.

           As well as making a broad assessment of its relation to a variety of socio-economic

indicators, this paper extends the previous literature on wellbeing by including information on


3
    http://www1.eur.nl/fsw/happiness/
individuals’ assessments of their own mental health. It also discusses an extreme manifestation

of mental ill-health – suicide. It also extends research on the association between individual

wellbeing and social capital. The geographical context for these developments is Scotland.

           Thus we report how Scotland fares in relation to standard indicators such as the labour

force participation rate, employment and unemployment rates, income inequality, poverty, the

performance of its schools as well as to indicators of health and wellbeing. Our conclusions are

generally pessimistic. The self-assessed wellbeing of Scots is lower than that of the English or

Welsh, even after taking into account the differences in the characteristics of the Scots, Irish and

Welsh. Scots also suffer from higher levels of self-assessed depression or phobia, accidental

death and suicide than those in other parts of Great Britain. This result is particularly driven by

outcomes in Strathclyde4 and is consistent with the high scores for other measures of social

deprivation in this area.

           Crime is lower in Scotland than in the UK as a whole although it does have a higher

homicide rate. The contrast between Scotland and the UK as a whole is also much greater on

these health and wellbeing measures than it is on measures of poverty or income inequality.

Real household incomes in Scotland have risen dramatically over the last decade or so, even for

those at the lowest quintile of the income distribution. Scotland also scores relatively well on

social capital compared with the rest of Great Britain. Scotland’s main problems are its low

levels of health and wellbeing.

           Arthur Herman (2001) argues in his book How the Scots Invented the Modern World that

at the turn of the twentieth century

           “Scotland had finally arrived – at least as far as Great Britain was concerned.
           Glasgow was now the industrial workshop of the empire…Its iron and steel

4
    This is the area of western Scotland centered round Glasgow, Scotland’s largest population centre.
       foundries and shipbuilding yards turned out close to one third of the nation’s total
       output in each industry. It supplied locomotives and boxcars to Canada, South
       America and the rest of Europe as well as India and Asia Shipbuilding firms
       along the Clyde…turned out one fifth of the world’s total shipping tonnage ”
       (2001, p.347-348).

Adam Smith fathered Economics. James Watt invented the steam engine, John Boyd Dunlop the

bicycle, and Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin, while George Stephenson built the first

modern railway. Sir Walter Scott, Robert Louis Stephenson and Arthur Conan Doyle, to name

but a few, had written great literature. In the years before the First World War the Scots had

dominated British politics – from 1894 to the outbreak of WW1 three of the five prime ministers

were Scottish (Rosebery, Balfour and Campbell-Bannerman) and Asquith was married to a

Scotswoman and sat for a Scottish constituency for his thirty-five year career.

This was all to change.

       “As the nineteenth century waned, the intellectual capital of the Scottish
       Enlightenment waned with it. …Scotland’s days as the generator of Europe’s
       most innovative ideas were over. However, she had done her work: the future
       direction of the modern world which Scotland had done so much to chart and
       establish, was now set. What still hung in the balance was the fate of Scotland
       itself.” Herman (2001, p.347)

Herman notes that even at the peak of Scotland’s industrial and intellectual power poverty and

ill-health remained a major problem. Not much has changed in a hundred years. At the start of

the twentieth century infant mortality was high and disease and malnutrition was rampant

particularly in Scotland’s major cities. During the twentieth century Strathclyde experienced

significant industrial decline due to the almost complete demise of heavy manufacturing

including steel-making, engineering, shipbuilding and coal mining.            Housing conditions

continued to be generally poor, leaving a legacy of ill-health. Local authority policies aimed at

improving housing conditions resulted in the creation of large “peripheral estates” of socially

rented housing, particularly around Glasgow. In time these estates themselves became focal
points for unemployment, ill-health and disability. The latest data available at the time of

writing for September 2005, when the unemployment rate in the UK was 4.7%, the

unemployment rate in Scotland was 5.4% and 7.8% in Glasgow City.5

           We begin by reviewing some relevant literature. We then look at some descriptive

statistics which compare how Scotland compares with other areas in respect of subjective

wellbeing and in relation to objective health and welfare-related measures. We estimate some

econometric models to explain these phenomena in the penultimate section, while the final

section draws together some policy lessons from what has gone before.

2. Literature Review

           The simplest way to measure wellbeing is to ask individuals how they feel about their

lives. In the literature on subjective wellbeing, psychologists have traditionally preferred life-

satisfaction questions to most others. It is believed that (compared to questions about happiness

levels, for example) such questions translate more readily across languages and cultures.

Introductions to the psychology literature on the interpretation of wellbeing data are contained in

Campbell (1981) and Argyle (1987).                   An overview paper written from the economist’s

perspective is Oswald (1997), while Easterlin (1974) made an early influential contribution.

           A number of objections have been raised to the use of data on self-reported wellbeing.

One is that such data are unreliable and of no value in discussions of economic welfare. Another

is that they are accurate and reliable guides to comparisons between societies at a single point in

time, but that comparisons through time are invalid because individuals’ understanding of the

language describing happiness or wellbeing changes and evolves. Of course, this assumes that

comparisons across cultures are also meaningful, and there are reasons to be cautious about this –


5
    Source: Office of National Statistics http://www.statistics.gov.uk/statbase/Product.asp?vlnk=14160
for example, the Japanese may view very positive responses to life satisfaction questions as

impolite.

       However, studies which analyze individual’s reports about their level of life satisfaction

have found a number of consistent results – both through time and across countries. These

include:

a) For affluent Western economies, there is a rather weak link between self-reported wellbeing

and income. Income does buy some happiness but much less than most economists would

probably have expected – non-money items such as marriage, sex and employment provide a lot

of happiness (Blanchflower and Oswald, 2004b). Conversely, divorce and unemployment bring

much unhappiness (Blanchflower and Oswald, 2004a).

b) Employment is a key determinant of self-reported wellbeing. The self-employed report higher

levels of wellbeing than the employed and in turn than the unemployed (Blanchflower, 2004).

Although not previously discussed in the literature, we are also able to show here that the

inactive – those of working age who have lost contact with the labour market - also report lower

levels of wellbeing than the employed. This is an important result for our final policy discussion,

bearing in mind that inactivity has grown rapidly in recent years. Bell and Jack (2002) point out

that the number of households where no adult was active in the labour market increased from

241 thousand to 364 thousand between 1991 and 2001. In Strathclyde in 2001, 27 per cent of

households had no adult active in the labour market, while in the Rest of Scotland the proportion

of households with no active adult was only 18 per cent.

c) Relative things matter. Individuals compare themselves to others. In happiness equations

both income and relative income have effects. Individuals appear to get happier the closer their

incomes come to that of rich people around them. There is also some evidence that people do
not want to be far above the poorest people (Blanchflower and Oswald, 2004a). Paterson (2002)

argues that social attitude surveys suggest that Scots’ identity is closely linked to notions of

egalitarianism and equity. Alesina et al (2004) find evidence that inequality adversely affects the

happiness of the European poor. Luttmer (2005) finds for the United States that controlling for

an individual’s own income, higher earnings of neighbors are associated with lower levels of

self-reported happiness.

        The literature on the relationship between economic wellbeing and mental ill-health is

less developed. This is not surprising since a fundamental tenet of conventional economic

analysis is that consumers behave rationally.      Thus, while some studies have attempted to

measure the economic costs of mental illness, very few have considered individual

characteristics, including economic characteristics, which are associated with self-reported

mental ill-health. An exception is Gardner and Oswald (2003), who show that mental wellbeing

has a “U” shaped relationship with education. Those with degrees or relatively low levels of

education experience higher rates of mental stress than those with intermediate qualifications.

However, for those with similar incomes and economic status, more education is associated with

less stress.

        Some may query the subjectivity inherent in analyzing self-reported mental stress data,

again because respondents may interpret such questions differently through space and time.

However, one objectively measurable manifestation of extreme mental ill-health is suicide. The

classic paper on the economic interpretation of the increase in youth suicide is Cutler, Glaeser

and Norberg (2001). Suicide rates in the US among those aged 15-24 have tripled in the last

fifty years. In the past, suicide rates increased with age, but between 1950 and 1990, suicide

rates among the elderly in the US fell by 30 per cent.
       In the US, youth suicide has not been centered on deprived inner cities although social

stresses and drugs appear to be influential. Social interactions are important: teenagers are more

likely to attempt suicide if they know someone else who has attempted suicide. The most

important aggregate variable explaining the increase in youth suicide is the increase in the

numbers of young men staying at home with a divorced parent.             Divorce rates are better

predictors of suicide rates than is the share of children staying in single parent families or with

step-parents. When modeling the factors which might explain unsuccessful suicide attempts

using micro-data, Cutler et al find that poor interaction with parents and activities such as drug-

taking, sex and violence significantly increase the risk that a young person will attempt to

commit suicide (unsuccessfully). But establishing the direction of causation among activities is

problematic.

       Links between health and economic outcomes are also unclear. Poverty and inequality

have long been associated with relatively poor health outcomes (Kawachi et al 1999). However,

recent evidence from Deaton and Paxton (2003) has cast doubt on these arguments, at least as far

as recent US and British history is concerned. Deaton and Paxson use data on age-specific

mortality in Britain and the United States from 1950. Of the decline in these mortality rates, they

argue that

     “neither trends in income nor in income inequality provide plausible explanations.
     Britain and the US had different patterns of income growth but similar patterns of
     mortality decline. Patterns of income inequality were similar in both countries, but adult
     and elderly mortality rates declined most rapidly during the period when inequality
     increased.”

Instead they suggest that improvements in mortality have largely been driven by technical

improvements in treatment. This argument suggests that any assumptions that increased
incomes and/or reduced inequality will have a direct impact on health outcomes are perhaps

misplaced.

       We conclude this section with a discussion of social capital and its relationship to

wellbeing and health. Putnam (1993) defines social capital as “features of social organizations,

such as trust, norms and networks that can improve the efficiency of society by facilitating

coordinated actions”. He argues that it comprises the "networks, norms, and trust that enable

participants to act together more effectively to pursue shared objectives" (Baron et al. 2000).

Measures of social capital tend to focus measures of community organisation, engagements in

public affairs, community volunteerism, informal sociability and trust. There is general

agreement that higher social capital is associated with lower crime rates and better health.

Education is positively related with social capital (Putnam 2000). Helliwell (2003) argues that

individual wellbeing is positively associated with both individual and societal indicators of social

capital. Perhaps poor health, addictive behaviours and high levels of violent crime are associated

with low levels of social capital. Parkes and Kearns (2004), using the Scottish Household

Survey, argue that poor health outcomes are caused by perceptions of adverse neighbourhood

characteristics such as unfriendly or unhelpful neighbours and lack of community involvement.

While causality is more difficult to assign than they suggest, there is value in investigating, as we

shall subsequently, whether social capital indicators align with those from the labour market and

with data on mental and physical health.

3. Descriptive Statistics

       We continue our investigation by establishing some basic social and economic facts

about Scotland. Table 1 includes a series of key comparisons between Scotland and the United

Kingdom as a whole. Scotland’s position at the start of the twenty first century relative to the
rest of the UK is not very different than that described by Herman a hundred years earlier at the

start of the twentieth century. In general Scotland ranks behind most of the rest of the United

Kingdom on wages, incomes and unemployment and, on many measures of health and

wellbeing, below both Wales and Northern Ireland. The gap between Scotland’s unemployment

rate and that of the UK as a whole appears to have widened over the last decade. In 1994 the

unemployment rate in Scotland of those aged 16 and over was 9.9% and in 2004 was 5.9%

(Scottish Economic Statistics, 2004, Table 4.2) compared with rates for the UK as a whole of

9.8% and 4.8% in 1994 and 2004 respectively (Annual Abstract of Statistics, 2005, Table 7.1).

       There are some high points: Scottish schools appear to be of high quality, based on the

proportion that obtain passes at the GCSE level and overall crime rates are lower than in the rest

of the UK. Economic activity and employment rates are about the same as in the rest of the UK.

However, the proportion of those individuals who are out of the labour force (OLF) reporting

that the reason is because of long-term sickness or disability is particularly high in Scotland,

whether such individuals wanted a job or not. Moreover, the proportion saying they wanted a

job but had not looked for work in the last four weeks – the truly discouraged – was especially

high in Scotland (31.7%) than in Wales (21.5%), Northern Ireland 17.6% or England 24.0%.

(Source: Labour Force Survey 2004).

       The percentage of households earning under £150 per week in the UK is only slightly

lower than it is in Scotland (18% and 21% respectively).         There are also relatively small

differences in the proportion of households classified into bottom income quintile before and

after housing costs are included. The proportion of taxpayers with annual taxable incomes less

than £5000 is the same in Scotland as in the UK (2.7%) although the proportion earning over

£30,000 is lower in Scotland (13.9% and 11.2% respectively). There is also evidence that real
incomes in Scotland have increased – “overall median income in Scotland has risen by 3.3% per

annum in real terms since 1996/7, growth has been highest for those in households in the second

quintile of the income distribution (4.2% per annum)” (Scottish Economic Statistics, 2004,

p.157). This group is likely to include households with low income earners, who will mostly

have benefited from income-related benefits such as tax credits.        In 2003, 22 percent of

households in Scotland lived in low-income households – defined as incomes below 60% of the

Great Britain median - down from 24 per cent in 1996/7.

         Overall 17% of the working age population in Scotland, (29% in Glasgow), at February

2004 were in receipt of one or more state benefits.        Moreover, 11% of the working age

population in Scotland reported being sick and disabled compared with 18% in Glasgow City

(Scottish Economic Statistics, 2004, Table 5.3). The Scottish Index of Multiple Deprivation

(2004) shows that deprivation is highly concentrated in Strathclyde and Glasgow. The index

measures deprivation in terms of health, income, education, labour market experience, housing

and access to facilities and telecommunications. Deprivation scores are formed for each of 6500

areas. Of the 500 areas with the highest deprivation scores, 423 are in Strathclyde and 282 of

these lie within Glasgow. By contrast, Scotland'
                                               s other major city, Edinburgh, has only 36 areas

within the 500 highest deprivation scores.6 Now we consider some of these socio-economic

indicators in greater depth.

         Crime against households in Scotland is low compared with the rest of the UK (Table 2).

Data from the relevant British and Scottish Crime Surveys show that, although burglaries are

relatively high in Scotland compared to Wales and Northern Ireland, both vandalism and vehicle

thefts are sharply lower in Scotland than elsewhere. As a result, the rate of offences against
6
    Source: Scottish Executive http://www.scotland.gov.uk/library5/society/simd04-00.asp
households in Scotland, at 2,374 per 10,000 households, is 44 per cent lower than in England and

Wales. Table 2 provides further information on the crime rate. Although it has the lowest

overall crime rate of 2,374 per 10,000 households, Scotland has a very high prison population.

Individuals are slightly more likely to be put in jail in Scotland than in the rest of the UK. There

were 6.4 thousand individuals locked up in Scotland in 2002 out of a total of 66 thousand in the

UK as a whole.

          Although the Scottish population comprises only 8.6 per cent of the UK population

(Table 1), the number of prisoners in Scottish jails is 9.6 per cent of the UK total. This is partly

because crimes of violence, including murder, are more common in Scotland.                           The male

homicide rate in Scotland is 70 per cent above that in England and Wales. Female murder rates

differ little across Great Britain. Homicide using sharp instruments (knives) and hitting or

kicking by males known to the victim are particularly prevalent. (Scottish Executive 1999a).

Again, the distribution within Scotland is instructive. Recorded crime data for 2003 show that

for many crimes, rates of offending in Strathclyde and the Rest of Scotland are quite similar.

These include burglary, motor offences and crimes of dishonesty. But the violent crime rate in

Strathclyde is twice that of the rest of Scotland.7

          There is a vast array of statistics showing that Scots are relatively unhealthy. Recent

investigations have shown that Scots have higher rates of obesity8 and asthma9 than in other parts


7
 Scottish Executive (2005) Recorded Crime in Scotland 2003 downloadable at
http://www.scotland.gov.uk/stats/bulletins/00338-11.asp
8
    See Chin and Rona (2001).
9
   See Masoli et al (2004) in a report presented by the Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA) at the World Asthma
meeting in Bangkok, Thailand on February 16th 2004 show that more than a third of 13-14 year olds in Scotland had
suffered symptoms of the disease in the last year compared with 30% in England and 34% in Wales. Overall more
than 18% of all Scots experience symptoms compared with 17.0% in Wales, 15.3% in England. Switzerland has a
rate of 2.3% and Greece 1.9%. The UK has twice as many adults with some degree of asthma (25%) as France
(triple the Italian figure). UK children are up to three times more likely to suffer from asthma than children in
of the UK and indeed Europe. Diabetes in Scotland is 24 per 100,000 per year in the under 15

year old population and is one of the highest incidence areas in the world. Scottish men and

women have among the highest premature mortality rates from coronary heart disease and one of

the highest rates of stroke in the Western World. It is estimated that half a million Scots have

coronary heart disease, of which 180,000 require treatment.

        Table 3 reports the numbers of deaths, by cause, in England and Wales and separately for

Scotland in 2003 along with the proportion of British deaths accounted for by Scottish residents.

Overall Scotland accounts for 8.74% of the population but 9.8% of all deaths. The table indicates

that Scottish death rates are particularly high for reasons of alcohol abuse, drug dependency and

to a lesser degree for lung cancer and chronic liver disease. Deaths due to suicide and intentional

self-harm, accidental falls and homicide are also particularly prevalent in Scotland. Indeed, the

incidence of chronic liver disease is more than double the incidence found in the United States

while deaths from lung cancer were over 40 per cent higher in Scotland.10

        More than half of middle-aged Scots are overweight. The middle-aged Scot also has a

blood pressure which rates as one of the highest in the Western World. The Scottish Executive

acknowledges that the Scottish diet is, next to smoking, the most significant reason for Scotland'
                                                                                                 s

poor health record - premature death is twice as likely in Scotland as in many western countries

(Scottish Office 1999b).




France, Germany or Italy. The report suggests that more than 1200 people died of asthma in Scotland between 1990
and 1999 of which 43% were under the age of 65.
10
   Source: US Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2005, Table 103 shows that the death rate by ‘chronic liver
disease and cirrhosis’ in the United States in 2002 was 9.3 per 100000 population compared with 23.1 in Scotland in
2003. The figures for deaths from ‘malignant neoplasms of trachea, bronchus and lung’ were 54.9 and 77.0 per
100,000 population respectively.
       Table 4 provides information for England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland on

mortality, fertility and birth rates plus self-reported health, smoking and alcohol consumption.

The main findings are as follows.

1) Infant mortality rates and perinatal mortality rates are a little higher in Scotland than for the

 UK as a whole.

2) Overall mortality rates are particularly high in Scotland for cerebro-vascular disease,

 bronchitis and cancer.

3) Cancer rates in Scotland are relatively high for both men and women but are the same as the

 rest of the UK for breast and cervical cancer.

4) The population in Scotland is declining. The UK population has increased 5.9% since 1971

 compared with a decline of 3.5% in Scotland (Regional Trends, 2004, Table 3.1).

5) Suicide rates are high in Scotland.

6) Heavy cigarette smoking and alcohol consumption are particularly prevalent in Scotland.

7) The proportion of the population who report that their health is good is lower in Scotland for

 men, for all age groups, than it is in England. In the case of women the reverse is true for those

 over 44 years of age.

       Although death rates from heart disease and, to a lesser extent, cancer have been falling

in recent years, the incidence of these diseases is well above both UK and European averages.

The immediate causes of poor health and high mortality rates may be well understood, but the

underlying causes are much less clear. It was thought that Scotland’s excess death rate was

associated with high levels of deprivation, but recent evidence (Public Health Institute for

Scotland 2001) shows that while deprived areas in Strathclyde have the highest rates of excess

deaths in the UK, all other parts of Scotland experience death rates above the English and Welsh
median during the 1990s. For example death rates per 1000 population in the UK in 2002 were

10.2%; they were 13.1% in South Ayrshire; 13.5% in the Western Isles and 12.0% in the Scottish

Borders (Regional Trends, 2004 Table 16.2). No clear cut causal explanation of the economic,

social and psychological factors that underlie this outcome has been forthcoming.

          Scotland also has high accident rates from road accidents, from falls and from assaults.

For males according to the General Register Office Scotland and the Office of National Statistics

deaths by falls in 2002 for males in Scotland were 10% (16%) compared with 4% (4%) for

England and Wales and 4% (2%) for Europe.11 In the case of deaths by assault the figures for

males in Scotland were 4% (1%) compared with 1% (1%) for England and Wales as well as for

Europe. Each of these causes is probably influenced by excessive use of alcohol in Scotland

which we document below.

          Figure 1 shows that the suicide rate in Scotland is significantly higher than that of other

English speaking countries including the USA, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and Ireland and

higher than the Scandinavian countries, with the exception of Finland. However, it is lower than

many of the transition economies of Eastern Europe, which have among the highest suicide rates

in the world. Figure 2 reports the change in the rate of deaths by both ‘intentional self-harm’ and

‘undetermined cause’ in Scotland, 1980-2004. It is clear that there has been a rise in the

incidence over time for men but not for women. Though the absolute rates of suicide for women

are lower, there is a sevenfold differential in their suicide rates between deprived and affluent

areas. Because deprivation is concentrated in Strathclyde, this suggests higher suicide rates in

this part of Scotland. In 2003, male suicide rates in Strathclyde were 9 per cent higher than in

Scotland as a whole. In Glasgow the male rate was 40 per cent higher, while that for females was


11
     Figures in parentheses are for females.
53 per cent higher than that in Scotland as a whole. As can be seen from Table 5, there is also a

high incidence of suicides in the more rural areas of Scotland including the Highlands, Shetland

and the Western Isles.12

           Suicide rates are especially high for men ages 35-44 which in Scotland in 2004 were 47.2

per 100,000 population. Cutler et al (2001) suggest that the variability of individual welfare has

increased through time. This may be the result of family breakdown, with children having less

access to family relations as a “buffer” to deal with emotional upheavals. More variability

implies more individuals with very low perceptions of their own wellbeing and consequently

more predisposition to attempt suicide. At the 2001 Census, 11.3 per cent of the adult population

of Glasgow were divorced or separated compared with 8.9 per cent in Strathclyde and 8.3 per

cent in Scotland as a whole.

           Overindulgence in alcohol and smoking are prevalent in Scotland. Table 4 shows that

28% of men in Scotland drank more than 8 units in the previous week compared with 21% in

England and 20% in Wales. Females in Scotland also reported drinking slightly more than those

in the rest of the UK, but the differences were smaller than was the case for males. In a study of

European drinking patterns and suicide rates, Ramstedt, (2002) argues that there is a relationship

between alcohol consumption and suicide rates which is strongest in those countries with

traditionally low levels of alcohol consumption. However, the UK as a whole is classed as

having medium consumption levels. Links between suicide and alcohol consumption are less

clear for countries in this consumption category.

           Table 4 also shows that a higher proportion of both men and women in Scotland are

heavy smokers – that is they smoke more than 20 cigarettes a day. In England in 1998 10% of


12
     Source: http://www.chooselife.net/web/site/Statistics/LocalAuthorityAreas.asp
girls ages 11-15 and 17% of boys of these ages smoked. In Scotland 14% of girls ages 12-15 and

19% of boys smoked (Drever et al, 2000). According to the 2003/2004 Scottish Household

Survey 27% of adult Scots smoked with the highest rate in Glasgow City (33%) and the lowest

in East Dunbartonshire (18%).13 This likely explains the very high prevalence of lung cancer

among the causes of death.

           There is also evidence from Table 3 that Scotland accounts for a considerably higher

proportion of deaths from drug dependence and non-dependent abuse of drugs than is true in the

rest of Great Britain. Scotland’s share of deaths by this cause has shown a strong increase since

1997-8. According to the Scottish Crime Surveys, however, there has been some decline in the

use of drugs in Scotland.14 It appears that drug misuse, particularly among the younger age

groups, increased in the mid 1990s but fell at the end of the 1990s. Looking at use in the last

year (the most reliable indicator of change), there was a significant decrease in respondents

reporting the use of any drug from 9% to 6.6%. There was also a significant decrease in the

proportion of respondents who had ‘ever’ used drugs, from 22.5% to 19.2%.

           These indicators together paint a fairly depressing picture of the overall health of the

Scottish population. On almost all measures of physical health, Scots fare worse than residents

of any other region of the UK and often worse than the rest of Europe. High suicide rates are

also indicative of poor states of mental health. Scottish men in particular are less likely to report

that their health is good than is true in the rest of the UK. Many of the adverse health outcomes

are avoidable in the sense that they are the result of lifestyle choices made by Scots. These

inevitably reflect societal and cultural pressures – but they also depend on the economic


13
     See Martin et al (2005).
14
     http://www.scotland.gov.uk/cru/kd01/green/dmis-04.asp
environment. The labour market is key to this interaction and we now consider how labour

market experiences differ between Scotland and other parts of the UK.

4. Econometric Analysis

The Labour Market

           To see how Scots fare in the United Kingdom labour market we conducted an

econometric analysis using data from the quarterly Labour Force Surveys for the period January

1992-May 2005. To do this we merged together 39 separate quarterly surveys. We include

every quarterly survey since 1995 and exclude spring and fall quarters in 1993-1995 only to be

consistent with later analysis on depression which is only asked in these quarters. Nothing of

importance hinges on these sample exclusions. We thus have a large, recent dataset with

approximately four million observations in which all of the questions in which we were

interested were asked in a consistent fashion.

           We first restricted our analysis to individuals of working age between the ages of 16 and

64. We conducted separate econometric analyses where we examined the rankings of Strathclyde

and the Rest of Scotland compared with the other regions in the UK: we report separate results

also for Wales, Northern Ireland, Inner London, Outer London and the Rest of England with the

Rest of the South East as the excluded category. First, we model the probability of an individual

being unemployed (relative to being employed or self-employed) followed by the probability of

an individual reporting being ‘inactive due to long term sickness or disability’ compared with

everyone else in our sample. Table 6 models the probability of an individual in the labor force

being unemployed15 and now use a relatively recent sample from March 1997 to May 2005 of

just over two million individuals.           In this table anyone who is Out-of-the-Labour-Force is


15
     We use the conventional ILO definition of unemployment.
excluded (OLF); the dependent variable is set to one if the individual is unemployed and zero if

working as an employee or as self-employed. Robust standard errors are used. The equations

control for age, gender, race, schooling, month of interview, an annual time trend and region of

residence. The probability of an individual being unemployed, holding constant this host of

personal characteristics, is higher in Strathclyde than in any other region of the country and

especially so for men. The Rest of Scotland fares a little better. Unemployment is also high for

men living in Inner London. Unemployment trends down in Scotland and Strathclyde.

        The next analysis models those who are inactive due to ‘long-term sickness or disability’

and tells a further depressing tale. Table 7, which has a sample size of nearly 3.5 million as it

includes the employed, the unemployed and those out of the labour force; the dependent variable

is set to one if the individual is OLF due to '
                                              sickness or disability'and zero if employed,

unemployed or OLF for other reasons, with robust standard errors. The full time-run of data are

used from January 1992 through May 2005 in column 1 and for the period 1992-February 1997

in column 2 and for the period March 1997 through May 2005 in column 3.16 There is evidence

in column 1 that a higher proportion of individuals in Strathclyde have withdrawn from the

labour force for reasons of sickness or disability. The coefficient on the Strathclyde dummy of

.07 is large, given that it has an overall unweighted mean in the data of .06. There is evidence

also that the gap is widening over time as the coefficient grew from .065 in the earlier period to

.077 in the second. The coefficient is also increasing in the Rest of Scotland, which has a higher

proportion of individuals who have withdrawn from the labour force because of sickness than is

found in the Rest of England, Outer London and the Rest of the South East. In contrast to the

evidence on unemployment presented above, the proportion of individuals reporting that they are


16
   The choice of time periods is designed to be consistent with the analysis of depression in the next table where
there was a change in the health question from March 1997. Nothing crucial hinges on this choice of date.
inactive due to long-term sickness is rising over time. Interestingly despite the fact that there has

been an overall rise in the incidence of reporting being inactive due to sickness the trend is

downward in Scotland and Strathclyde, for which there is no obvious explanation.

        Many of the long-term disabled are likely to be discouraged workers who have failed to

escape unemployment and then have moved onto different types of social security benefits.

Scotland accounts for 8.7 per cent of the GB population, but 11.7 per cent of incapacity benefit

claimants, 11 per cent of disability living allowance claimants and 10.5 per cent of income

support claimants in May 2005. Thus the benefits data are consistent with the weakness of the

labour market revealed by the econometric analysis of unemployment and long-term sickness or

disability.

        The local authority data also reveal the same consistency between benefit claims and

labour market status. Strathclyde accounts for 43 per cent of the Scottish population, but 52 per

cent of the unemployment, while Glasgow, which accounts for 11 per cent of the population had

17.5 per cent of Scotland’s unemployed in May 2005. The rate of claims for disability living

allowance (DLA) in Strathclyde is 32 per cent above that for Scotland as a whole, while the rate

in Glasgow it is 202 per cent higher. DLA claims increased by 12 per cent between 2002 and

2005 both in the UK as a whole and in Scotland.

        Thus our relatively simple comparisons of labour market and social security benefit

statistics and the more robust econometric results from large samples drawn from the Labour

Force Survey reveal a weakness in the Scottish labour market that is particularly focused on the

Strathclyde area in general and Glasgow in particular. These findings are reasonably well known.

We now attempt to tie this analysis both to considerations of mental health and to life satisfaction

and happiness.
Mental illness

        In the Labour Force Surveys a series of questions have been asked since 1992 about an

individual’s health and the extent to which any health problems limit that individual’s ability to

work, to get about and generally how their daily lives are affected. The questions have been

asked in each quarter from Spring 1992 to Winter 1992, Summer and Winter quarters only from

Summer 1993 to Winter 1995 and then each quarter from Spring 1996 to Winter 96.17 The

respondents are asked whether they have health problems or disabilities which ‘limit the kind of

paid work they can do’. Respondents are not asked about the extent of the limitation. Each

quarter to Winter 96 respondents reported that they had '
                                                        depression, bad nerves'and reported up

to three '
         health problems which affect you the most'
                                                  . From Winter 1996 on respondents reported

on their most important health problem with the classification now changed to '
                                                                              depression, bad

nerves or anxiety'
                 . The focus and number of questions on health and disability further changed

in Spring 1997 to reflect the provisions of the Disability Discrimination Act 1995. In particular,

the new questions are concerned with all health problems, whilst until spring 97 the emphasis

had been on problems which affect respondent’s work. Since that time there has been a dramatic

increase in a number of the health problems reported, including in the incidence of ‘depression,

bad nerves or anxiety’. Its (unweighted) incidence has nearly doubled since 1998, as is shown in

Table 8.

        More disturbing, however, is the high incidence of self-reported depression in

Strathclyde, which was over 3% using the latest estimates for mid-2005. Table 9 shows the

results of an analysis which estimates the probability that an individual reports being depressed,


17
  Note that in the LFS the Spring quarter is March, April and May; the Summer quarter is June, July and August;
the Fall quarter is September, October and November and the Winter quarter December and January and February of
the following year.
given their personal characteristics. It shows that the incidence in Strathclyde is high even after

controlling for individual characteristics. For the period before February 1997 the dependent

variable is set to one if the respondent reported that they were depressed on any one of the three

health variables. After February 1997, the dependent variable uses the response to the single

health variable covering the “most important illness”. The first column is for the whole period

1992-2005 while the second column is for the period up to February 1997 using the first

definition of the health variable where three possible options are available and the response

relates to a condition limiting their ability to work. Column three uses the single variable where

respondents reported the single most important health problem; column 4 is for Scotland and

column 5 for Strathclyde only. In all five equations there is an upward time trend (1992=1 and

so on) which is especially large in Strathclyde (.0018 compared with .0011 for the UK), despite

the fact that the proportion of individuals reporting being inactive due to disability and sickness

in Table 6. Even after allowing for differences in age, race, gender, month of interview and level

of education, those living in Strathclyde are significantly more likely to report depression, bad

nerves and anxiety than is the case in any other area in the UK and the gap is rising over time

which is a cause for concern.

       Taken together, this evidence suggests a picture of ill health – both physical and mental –

in Scotland in general and in Strathclyde in particular. The evidence comes from objectively

measured health outcomes – such as mortality data - and from self-reported health measures. We

have also seen that labour market outcomes – such as inactivity and unemployment are linked to

health status. Attributing the direction of causation is extremely difficult with such relationships.

This is not an area that we investigate here. However, one point we would wish to make is that a

number of the health conditions from which Scots particularly suffer are associated with lifestyle
choices including drug-taking, alcohol consumption and diet. Such choices are properly of

interest to economists as well as to other professional groups. An economists’ explanation of

why they occur would centre around two possibilities. The first is that perhaps Scots are poorly

informed about the future implications of the choices they make. This argument is difficult to

support since there is no obvious reasons why information on the implications of lifestyle

choices should be any different in Scotland from the rest if the UK. The second reason is that

Scots may discount the future more than people in other parts of the UK. That is, their choices

are more dominated by short-term than long-term considerations. If this were the case, then

short-run choices that might lead to long-term adverse health consequences might seem rational.

Unfortunately, economics is not very adept at explaining why individual discount rates vary.

There is an extensive literature on the potential effects of differences in discount rates, but little

to explain why they might arise. A plausible proposition is that high discount rates are linked to

low self-esteem, which in turn has been linked to other potentially adverse behaviours such as

smoking, drinking, drug-taking and obesity.         This would be consistent with the objective

evidence which we have collected, particularly in relation to Strathclyde. Third, there is a legacy

of the past that has been very difficult to overcome. Herman (2001) noted that poverty and

disease existed in and around Glasgow at the beginning of the twentieth century and it appears

that this is also true at the start of the twenty first century, although its manifestation in the form

of lung cancer, heart disease and poor mental health is seemingly different. We see few signs

that there will be a marked improvement any time soon.

Social Capital

       Another hypothesis that we have sought to test is that the adverse indicators for Scotland

and Strathclyde are due to low levels of social capital. For this test we used the social capital data
collected with the 2000-01 General Household Survey which highlights five dimensions of social

capital: these comprise civic engagement, neighbourliness and reciprocity, social networks,

social support and views about the local area.18 These are intended to capture individuals’ views

of: the neighbourliness of their area; their views of local social facilities; whether they feel that

they have an adequate network of friends; whether they feel that they have an adequate network

of family and whether they are “civically engaged”. There were 8200 observations in Great

Britain as a whole, 730 of which were in Scotland. No subdivisions within Scotland were

available. We tested whether there is a significant “Scotland effect” associated with these six

summary measures of social capital.

          Table 10 shows the value of the Scotland dummy (with England as the base case) for our

five index measures of social capital. Some of the dependent variables are continuous while

others are dichotomous. We therefore use a mixture of OLS and probit estimators. In each

equation we include age, gender and marital status as controls. Both on neighbourliness and on

views of local facilities, the Scotland dummy is not statistically significant, implying no

difference between Scotland and England in these categories. But Scots tend to have better

friendship and family networks. This is implied by the significance of the dummy variables for

the relevant equations. Finally, using the variable that ONS argue is most closely aligned with

Putnam’s concept of social capital, namely “lack of social engagement”, there is again no

statistically significant difference between Scotland and England. These findings suggest that

social capital levels in Scotland are certainly no lower than in the rest of Great Britain. Thus, a

low level of social capital is not a strong contender as an explanation of low levels of well-being

in Scotland as a whole.


18
     For details see Coulthard, Walker and Morgan (2002)
           There were two findings. First, there were no significant differences between Scotland,

England and Wales in perceptions of neighborliness, local problems or local facilities. Second,

Wales and Scotland had substantially higher scores than England on closeness to friends and

family. For Wales the relevant p value is 1 per cent, while for Scotland it is somewhat weaker at

7 per cent. These findings were robust to the addition of variables measuring household income,

economic activity and housing tenure.

           The preceding analysis did not investigate social capital within Scotland. We now rectify

this by using data from the Scottish Household Survey for the two years (2001/02 and 2002/03)

to model some indicators of social capital collected by this survey.19 These capture similar

concepts to the General Household Survey. Hope et al (2003), which is the main source book on

the data, show that overall 51% of adult Scots report that their neighborhood is a ‘very good’

place to live compared to a low of 33% in Glasgow City and a high of 70% in both Orkney and

the Western Isles (Table 4.28).

           Specifically we use the micro data to model whether respondents feel that they live in a

neighbourhood with “friendly people”, how they rate their neighbourhood as a place to live and

whether they feel safe when walking after dark. Using the appropriate ordered logit or probit

estimator, these indicators are regressed on age, economic status and a set of dummy variables

that distinguish thirteen areas within Scotland. Table 11 shows the coefficients on these

estimated area effects. Edinburgh City is the excluded category.

           The results imply that some parts of Scotland are perceived as friendlier than Edinburgh,

including the Highlands and Southern Scotland. Within Strathclyde, Lanarkshire is perceived as

more friendly, Ayrshire less friendly and Glasgow not significantly different from Edinburgh.


19
     See Hope et al (2003).
Again the Highlands and Southern Scotland are rated by their inhabitants as better places to live

than Edinburgh, but all parts of Strathclyde are perceived as worse, with the strongest effect in

Glasgow, followed by North Lanarkshire. Glasgow residents feel least safe venturing out after

dark. Indeed all parts of Strathclyde perform poorly on this indicator, while Tayside, Southern

Scotland and particularly the Highlands are perceived as safe.

       Our first analysis showed that Scotland has levels of social capital at least as high as

those in England. However, our second analysis shows that there is wide variation within

Scotland and that again the areas which comprise Strathclyde are not seen as either particularly

good or safe places to live. Again, this evidence accords with our previous analyses of health,

crime and the labour market.

       The final link in our puzzle is to relate the foregoing evidence to information on life

satisfaction. That is, we now present some data on how individuals in Scotland respond to

questions about how satisfied they are with the life they lead.

Life satisfaction and happiness

       Data on life satisfaction are available in a number of sweeps of the Eurobarometer

survey. We make use of data for the period 1973-2003 excluding the years 1974, 1996 and 1999

when no data were available.        Data for a shorter number of years for Great Britain was

previously examined in Blanchflower and Oswald (2004a). Life satisfaction for Great Britain is

tabulated below. It appears from these data that the Scots report lower levels of satisfaction than

those in Great Britain as a whole

       As we noted above data are also available on happiness in the Eurobarometers for the

years 1975-1979 and then again for 1982-1986. Individuals also report their life satisfaction;

below we tabulate responses from both happiness and life satisfaction for 14,341 respondents
from Great Britain and then separately for 1,536 observations from Scotland. We report the

overall percentages in each cell so 17% means that 17% of the sample said both that they were

very happy and were very satisfied with their life. It is clear from both measures of wellbeing

that the Scots are less happy and less satisfied with life than is the case for the British population

as a whole. Overall 31% report being very satisfied with life compared with 24% in Scotland

while 26% report being very happy overall compared with 21% of Scots. The vast majority of

the sample is on the main diagonal, suggesting the two measures are highly correlated.

       We now focus on life satisfaction as this is available for a long run of years as well as for

the recent period: it also includes data from Southern Ireland. Table 10 reports ordered logit

models of life satisfaction and for males and females separately in columns 1-3; columns 4-6

separates Scotland into five separate components – Strathclyde, Borders, Highlands and Islands,

Grampian. It is only possible from 1989 on to identify the regions within Scotland so for the

years prior to 1989 we include only a Scotland pre 1989 dummy. Table 10 reports results for the

UK as a whole and includes controls for age and its square, gender, schooling, labor market

status and a time trend. Confirming findings in Blanchflower and Oswald (2004a) there is an

upward trend in happiness. Males are less satisfied with their lives than females though the trend

for men is upward, while females’ life satisfaction shows no distinct trend. Married people are

happier than single people and happiness is U-shaped in age. Individuals who are married are

more satisfied than individuals who are living together. Separated individuals are especially

miserable. After allowing for these influences, it is still the case that residing in Scotland has a

negative and significant effect on life satisfaction whatever time period is used. Residents of

Strathclyde are particularly unhappy and this is true both for men and women. In two recent

papers Blanchflower and Oswald (2005, 2006) also found that happiness, and other measures of
wellbeing including job satisfaction, and suicide were correlated in Australia; happiness was low

in Australia compared with other English speaking countries but it also has the highest suicide

rate.20

           Our wellbeing results do not control for social capital. Nevertheless our previous

regressions with various measures of social capital suggest that, on average, indicators of social

capital in Scotland are no worse than in England or Wales. However, the detailed analysis within

Scotland shows that social capital indicators for the Strathclyde area are relatively low. This is

consistent with the lower self-reported wellbeing in this part of Scotland.

5. Conclusions & Policy Lessons

           Let’s now return to the issue of economic growth, which is where we started. Our paper

paints a relatively depressing picture of Scotland over a range of objective and subjective

indicators of health, welfare and wellbeing. Interestingly, the wellbeing indicators are all telling

a consistent story; Scotland has low levels of wellbeing whether we look at suicide, depression or

life satisfaction. Some of these indicators may stem from economic factors, while others have a

basis in the social and cultural environment and possibly even the Scottish gene pool (in respect

of some diseases which have a strong inherited predisposition). Economic factors are likely only

to make a difference at the margin to these welfare outcomes. Nevertheless, as mentioned above,

economic growth is accorded the highest priority in terms of the policy ambitions of the Scottish

Executive. Increased growth will involve some combination of more workers and/or higher

incomes. How will this impact on welfare outcomes?

           It is clear from our analysis that incomes among the employed in Scotland are not

substantially lower than in other parts of the UK. And household income has been increasing

rapidly in real terms, particularly among those households with employed people on low
20
     Leigh and Wolfers (2006) argue that Australia’s ranking on happiness is higher using an earlier dataset.
earnings. As a consequence poverty levels have been declining. Indeed, the proportions of

households on low incomes or in receipt of social security benefits is not that much different than

in the rest of the UK (Table 1). However, though employment levels in Scotland are high, there

is still a substantial pool of inactivity, often associated with poor health, and particularly

concentrated in Strathclyde in general and Glasgow City in particular. Our results show that

higher incomes for this group will not necessarily improve their wellbeing. And Deaton and

Paxson’s work implying that there is not necessarily a strong link between mortality rates and

income levels in the UK does not suggest that higher incomes will necessarily improve health

outcomes.

       There is no prima facie evidence that public goods provision enhances individuals’

wellbeing. Further, public spending has increasingly focused on those areas with high levels of

deprivation. Yet our analysis shows no discernible improvements of outcomes in Strathclyde

compared with the rest of Scotland in recent years. Indeed, some indicators, such as violent

crime, appear to be worsening. This suggests that the economic levers on health and wellbeing

are much less powerful than economists and politicians have imagined. In consequence, the

solutions to the many problems we have described may have more to do with institutions and

social structure rather than higher public spending and increased private income. Part of the

lesson must be that the economic policy cannot be divorced from social and health policy as well

as from institutional change. Although inactivity and unemployment have adverse effects on

wellbeing, it would also be wrong to focus development strategies simply on trying to get the

inactive and unemployed back into work, since this does not address the mechanism whereby

these individuals have very low wellbeing outcomes.
       The paper has also shown that economic, health and social problems in Scotland have a

geographic focus. The difficulties experienced in Strathclyde especially may have their roots in

the demise of production industries in recent decades, but the consequences in terms of poorer

lifestyle-related physical and mental health, more adverse labour market outcomes and lowered

wellbeing seem both persistent through time and resistant to policy initiatives aimed at reducing

inequalities in health and labour market outcomes. Based on our analysis it seems that policies

aimed at raising economic growth, such as those advocated by the Scottish Executive, are

unlikely to be successful in raising the overall wellbeing of the Scots. Policies targeted at

lowering suicide, improving the diet of Scotland’s citizens, reducing alcohol consumption and

cutting cigarette smoking are more likely to be successful. Scotland'
                                                                    s fate still hangs in the

balance.
Table 1: Key Statistics

                                                                UK    Scotland
 Population, 2002 (thousands)                                  59,229  5,055
  Percentage aged under 16                                      19.9    18.9
  Percentage pension age and over (65 males 60 females)         18.4    18.8
 Male life expectancy at birth 2002-2004                        76.25   73.8

 % pupils achieving >=5 GCSE grades A*-C 2001/02                52.5    60.4
 Crime rate per 100,000 population 2002                        11,327   8,448

 Economic activity rate, Spring 2005 (%)                        78.7     79.7
 Employment rate, Spring 2003 (%)                               74.7     74.6
 Unemployment rate, September 2005 (%)                           4.7      5.4
 % Inactive - long run sickness/disability doesn’t want job     18.1     22.3
 % Inactive - long run sickness/disability wants job             8.9     11.6
 % Inactive - wants job but not seeking in last 4 weeks         24.3     31.7

 Average gross weekly household income, 1999-2002 (£)          510      446
 Average weekly household expenditure, 1999-2002 (£)           379.7    344.7
 Average gross weekly full-time earnings 2002 (£)              462.6    427.0
 Households in receipt of income support 2005 (%)                3.9      5.5
 % Incomes from social security benefits 1999-2002              12       14

 % Households earning <£150 per week 1999-2002                  18       21
 % Households bottom quintile before housing costs 2001-2002    20       22
 % Households bottom quintile after housing costs 2001-2002     20       19
 % Taxpayers annual taxable incomes <£5,000                      2.7      2.7
 % Taxpayers annual taxable incomes >£30,000                    13.9     11.2

Source: Regional Trends 2004
Table 2. Offences committed against households, 20011 per 10,000 households2

                                                                       Vehicle
                                                              3
                                   Vandalism         Burglary          thefts4       All offences5
England                             1,217              455             1,528            3,664
Wales                                 999              235             1,534            3,240
Scotland                              999              548               385            2,374
Northern Ireland                    1,110              272               781            2,485

Source: British Crime Survey, Home Office; Scottish Crime Survey, Scottish Executive;
Northern Ireland Crime Survey, Northern Ireland Office

1
  . Data for Scotland relate to 1999. Data for Northern Ireland relate to the period 1 September
2000 to 31 August 2001.
2
  . The vehicle theft risks are based on vehicle-owning households only.
3
  . The term used in Scotland is housebreaking. The figures include attempts at
burglary/housebreaking.
4
  . Comprises theft of vehicles, thefts from vehicles and associated attempts.
5
  . Comprises the three individual categories plus thefts of bicycles and other household thefts.
Table 3. Deaths in Scotland analyzed by cause as percentage of GB, 2003
                                                        England & Scotland      Scotland
                                                          Wales                 % of GB
Population                                              52,794,000 5,057,000      8.74%
Total deaths                                             538,254       58,472     9.80%
Deaths from natural causes                               519,297       56,161     9.76%
Certain infectious and parasitic diseases                   4,763         660    12.17%
Neoplasms                                                139,360       15,412     9.96%
 Malignant neoplasm of trachea, bronchus and lung         28,765         3893    11.92%
Alcohol abuse (inc. alcoholic psychosis)                      469         356    43.15%
Drug dependence and non-dependent abuse of drugs              655         228    25.82%
Diseases of the circulatory system                       205,508       22,102     9.71%
 Ischaemic heart diseases                                 99,790       11,441    10.29%
 Cerebrovascular diseases                                 57,808        6,497    10.10%
Diseases of the respiratory system                        75,138        7,454     9.03%
Diseases of the digestive system                          24,948        3,215    11.42%
 Chronic liver disease                                      5,844       1,170    16.68%
Accidental falls                                            2,732         668    19.65%
Suicide and intentional self-harm                           3,270         560    14.62%
Homicide and assault                                          318         101    24.11%
Event of undetermined intent                                1,754         234    11.77%
Source: Annual Abstract of Statistics, 2005, Table 9.6, ONS
Table 4. Death and birth rates, health, smoking and alcohol consumption by country.

                                             UK/GB   England   Wales   Scotland   N Ireland
Infant mortality rate /1000 live births         6       5         5         6          6
Perinatal mortality rate /1000 live births      8       8         8         9          8
Mortality rates - all                         954     935       988      1085        977
 Males                                        892     870       921      1044        924
 Females                                      999     981      1039      1121       1019
Mortality rates - cerebro-vascular            103     100       108       124        104
 Males                                        129     126       136       155        130
 Females                                       75      73        77        92         76
Mortality rates - bronchitis                   44      42        46        54         40
 Males                                         45      45        46        54         43
 Females                                       40      38        45        54         36
Mortality rates - cancer                      251     246       259       288        249
 Males                                        254     248       260       298        259
 Females                                      243     238       251       277        235
Mortality rates - cervical cancer females       5       5         8         5          4
Mortality rates - breast cancer females        55      55        56        55         53
Mortality rates – suicides + open
verdicts                                       10       9        11        17         10
 Males                                         16      14        19        26         17
 Females                                        5       4         4         9          3

Fertility rate per 1000 women                   2       2         2         1          2
% live births outside marriage                 40      40        48        43         33

Cigarette smoking 20+/day – males %            10       9         9        13       n/a
Cigarette smoking 20+/day – females %           7       7         6         9       n/a

Alcohol > 8 units last week – males %         n/a      21        20        28       n/a
Alcohol > 6 units last week – females %       n/a       9        11        13       n/a

% reporting good health males                 n/a      62        55        58         57
16-44                                         n/a      73        66        68         72
45-64                                         n/a      56        53        53         48
>=65                                          n/a      38        32        36         31
% reporting good health females               n/a      58        55        57         52
16-44                                         n/a      69        72        66         66
45-64                                         n/a      54        53        59         47
>=65                                          n/a      37        25        39         26


Notes: mortality rates are all per 100,000 population. Cigarette smoking and alcohol
consumption and self-reported health are for 2001/2. Mortality rates are for 2001. Perinatal and
infant mortality rates are for 2002.
Source: Regional Trends, 2004.
Table 5: Deaths caused by intentional self harm and events of undetermined intent by Local
Authority and time period


                                 1980-84      1985-89       1990-94      1995-99      2000-04
Both sexes combined
Aberdeen City                      14.2         13.0         12.2         19.2          17.1
West Dumbartonshire                10.0         13.3         17.5         19.8          22.0
City of Dundee                     14.0         16.4         18.9         21.9          19.1
East Renfrewshire                   9.2         10.9          8.8          8.2           8.7
City of Edinburgh                  13.9         14.7         16.9         15.8          15.8
City of Glasgow                    20.7         19.1         23.3         21.9          22.6
Highland                           18.2         19.2         20.4         20.0          24.0
Shetland Islands                   15.7          8.1         15.0         20.2          23.7
Eilean Siar (Western Isles)        10.8         19.6         17.0         22.8          20.5
Scotland (Males)                   18.9         21.3         24.2         26.3          26.1
Scotland (Females)                  9.3          8.4          7.9          8.3           8.4
Scotland                           13.9         14.6         15.7         16.9          17.0

Notes: rates are the number of deaths divided by the LA population per 100,000 population.
Source: http://www.chooselife.net/web/site/Statistics/LocalAuthorityAreas.asp
Table 6. Dprobit Unemployment Equations
                                             All                 Scotland            Strathclyde
Strathclyde                              .0475 (48.67)         .0190 (18.71)             n/a
Rest of Scotland                         .0228 (28.24)             n/a                   n/a
Wales                                    .0195 (24.13)             n/a                   n/a
Northern Ireland                         .0208 (23.52)             n/a                   n/a
Inner London                             .0393 (42.58)             n/a                   n/a
Outer London                             .0114 (16.85)             n/a                   n/a
Rest of England                          .0073 (22.99)             n/a                   n/a
Time                                    -.0020 (33.57)        -.0021 (10.06)       -.0026 (7.22)
Age                                     -.0072 (110.03)       -.0091 (39.14)       -.0114 (28.17)
Age2                                     .0001 (84.88)         .0001 (30.59)        .0001 (21.97)
Male                                     .0127 (44.86)          .0217 (20.92)        .0345 (19.08)
Mixed race                               .0544 (38.70)         .0603 (6.14)         .0426 (11.84)
Indian, Pakistani & Bangladeshi          .0397 (43.54)         .0313 (4.93)         .0382 (4.19)
Black                                    .0713 (54.82)         .0784 (40.04)        .0584 (35.05)
Chinese                                  .0194 (6.97)          .0134 (3.36)         .0837 (3.37)
Other races                              .0544 (38.70)         .0574 (25.16)        .0777 (4.61)

N                                         2,121,113              194,312               78,761
Wald Chi2                                   65694                6982.4                   .1012
Pseudo R2                                   .0842                 .0873                 .0814
Notes: region is based on residence. Excluded categories Rest of South East and white. Ages 16-
64. Robust standard errors. Sample consists of the workforce only – employed plus unemployed.
Source: Labor Force Survey:March 1997-May 2005. All equations also include 47 schooling
dummies and 11 month dummies.
Dprobit reports marginal effect rather than coefficients. That is, it gives the change in the
probability for an infinitesimal change in each independent, continuous variable and reports the
discrete change in the probability for dummy variables.
Table 7. Dprobit ‘inactive due to long term sickness or disability’ equations

                              1992-2005       1992-February     March 1997-        March 1997-       March 1997-
                                                   1997            2005                2005               2005
                                 All                All             All               Scotland         Strathclyde
Strathclyde                .0657 (96.79)       .0649 (57.44)   .0657 (77.87)        .0249 (30.09)          n/a
Rest of Scotland           .0273 (49.57)       .0244 (27.44)   .0286 (41.30)            n/a                n/a
Wales                      .0551 (92.74)       .0541 (54.79)   .0552 (74.75)            n/a                n/a
Northern Ireland           .0457 (66.61)       .0414 (25.36)   .0446 (57.48)            n/a                n/a
Inner London               .0329 (49.75)       .0284 (26.44)   .0349 (42.02)            n/a                n/a
Outer London               .0078 (16.64)       .0079 (10.46)   .0077 (13.08)            n/a                n/a
Rest of England            .0191 (73.80)       .0167 (40.25)   .0200 (61.54)            n/a                n/a
Time                       .0018 (155.87)      .0047 (50.55)   .0005 (10.84)       -.0003 (1.96)     -.0009 (2.84)
Age                        .0021 (47.45)       .0015 (21.27)   .0023 (41.50)        .0019 (8.99)      .0019 (5.31)
Age2                       -.0000 (0.08)       .000003 (3.83) -.0000 (1.21)         .00001 (4.94)     .00002 (5.34)
Male                       .0066 (35.91)       .0063 (21.05)   .0065 (28.13)        .0085 (9.67)      .0147 (9.32)
Asian                      .0111 (21.29)       .0099 (11.25)   .0119 (18.41)       -.0193 (4.47)     -.0230 (3.51)
Black                      .0030 (4.01)        .0046 (3.60)    .0024 (2.51)        -.0173 (1.58)      .0090 (0.43)
Chinese                    -.0225 (15.19)     -.0177 (7.10)   -.0245 (13.29)       -.0397 (5.26)     -.0607 (4.27)
Other races                .0056 (6.41)       -.00003 (0.02)   .0074 (7.03)        -.0259 (3.55)     -.0367 (2.91)

N                             3,900,435         1,202,226          2,697,794          247,952           104,855
Wald Chi2                      2.3e+05           59,967             1.7e+05            20866             11117
Pseudo R2                       .1582             .1594              .1591             .1834             .1972

Notes: region is based on residence. Excluded categories Rest of South East and white. Ages 16-64. Robust standard errors
Source: Source: Labor Force Survey: March 1992-May 2005. All equations also include 47 schooling dummies and 11 month
dummies. The variables ‘Inecaca’, '  Inecacr'and '  Inecac05'are used to define the dependent variable which is set to 1 if it was in one
of the following three categories (09) Inactive - seeking, unavailable, long-term sick or disabled; (16) Inactive - not seeking, would
like work, long term sick or disabled; (25) Inactive - not seeking, not like work, long term sick or disabled, zero otherwise.
Table 8: Proportion of working-age population with “depression, bad nerves or anxiety”.

              UK       Scotland   Strathclyde    Rest of
                                                Scotland
  1998       0.93%      1.33%       1.73%        1.00%
  1999       1.02%      1.24%       1.54%        1.00%
  2000       1.08%      1.34%       1.62%        1.12%
  2001       1.22%      1.53%       1.97%        1.19%
  2002       1.40%      1.92%       2.58%        1.46%
  2003       1.52%      1.84%       2.22%        1.60%
  2004       1.65%      2.03%       2.74%        1.54%
2005(Q2)     1.64%      2.21%       3.09%        1.59%

Source: Labour Force Surveys
Table 9. Depression Dprobits

                       1992-2005          1992- Feb 1997       March 1997-2005       March 1997-2005       March 1997-2005
                          All                   All                  All                 Scotland             Strathclyde
Strathclyde          .0126 (36.44)         .0111 (20.57)         .0131 (30.52)         .0065 (14.31)             n/a
Rest of Scotland     .0043 (15.00)         .0034 (7.79)          .0045 (12.97)             n/a                   n/a
Wales                .0112 (36.87)         .0140 (27.61)         .0096 (25.97)             n/a                   n/a
Northern Ireland     .0064 (19.15)         .0001 (0.08)          .0077 (19.98)             n/a                   n/a
Inner London         .0068 (19.82)         .0079 (14.20)         .0060 (14.50)             n/a                   n/a
Outer London         .0011 (4.22)          .0023 (5.72)          .0005 (1.64)              n/a                   n/a
Rest of England      .0036 (25.41)         .0036 (16.77)         .0034 (19.60)             n/a                   n/a
Time                 .0006 (42.96)         .0002 (3.71)          .0011 (44.32)         .0013 (13.82)         .0018 (10.34)
Age                  .0015 (58.48)         .0010 (25.70)         .0016 (51.66)         .0020 (17.64)         .0027 (13.67)
Age2                -.000016 (51.09)      -.000009 (20.68)      -.0000 (46.92)        -.00002 (16.43)       -.00003 (12.84)
Male                -.0016 (15.51)        -.0004 (2.29)         -.0021 (17.06         -.0045 (9.38)         -.0047 (5.59)
Asian               -.0032 (12.02)        -.0011 (2.65)         -.0041 (12.63)        -.0058 (2.62)         -.0039 (1.14)
Black               -.0025 (6.35)         -.0008 (1.28)         -.0032 (6.88)             n/a                    n/a
Chinese             -.0065 (7.60)         -.0052 (3.85)         -.0068 (6.66)             n/a                    n/a
Other races          .0009 (1.97)         -.0002 (0.30)          .0011 (2.11)         -.0126 (3.08)              n/a

N                      3,900,416            1,201,642              2,697,775              246,010               103,613
Wald Chi2                22,543.2             8,318.0               14,389.3               2128.3                 1190.2
Pseudo R2            .0433                    .0664                   .0393                 .0509                 ..0534
Notes: region is based on residence. Excluded categories are white and employee. Ages 16-64. Source: Labor Force Survey: March
1992-May 2005. Each quarter from Spring 92 to Winter 92. Summer and Winter quarters only from Summer 93 to Winter 95. Each
quarter from Spring 96 to Winter 96. The respondents are asked whether they have health problems or disabilities which limit the
kind of paid work they can do. Respondents are not asked about the extent of the limitation. Each quarter to Winter 96 respondents
reported that they had 'depression, bad nerves'and reported up to three '  health problems which affect you the most'. From Winter
1996 on respondents reported on their most important health problem with the classification now changed to '  depression, bad nerves
or anxiety'. Robust standard errors. All equations also include 47 schooling dummies and 11 month dummies.
Table 10. Social capital regressions

                                Scotland                           Method    R2 (OLS)/Pseudo R2   F (OLS) / LM
Dependent Variable             Coefficient      T           N                     (Dprobit)         (Dprobit)
Neighbourliness Score             0.007      (0.10)        8137     OLS             0.016              13.29
Local Facilities Score           -0.033      (0.45)        8137     OLS             0.011               9.17
Network of friends                0.039      (1.84)        8137    Dprobit          0.009             101.2
Family network                    0.055      (2.51)        8137    Dprobit          0.023             112.3
Not civically engaged             0.011      (0.64)        8137    Dprobit          0.013             114.3

Source: General Household Survey 2000/1. Robust standard errors.
Table 11. Social capital within Scotland

                                                        Area as a place            Safe walking
Area                             Friendly people            to live                 after dark
Glasgow                          -0.001 (0.04)       -0.584 (11.09)            -0.856 (14.78)
North Lanarkshire                 0.047 (2.95)       -0.151 (2.39)             -0.484      (7.27)
South Lanarkshire                -0.042 (2.66)       -0.246 (3.83)             -0.301      (4.49)
Dunbartonshire                   -0.039 (2.14)       -0.228 (3.14)             -0.171      (2.17)
Renfrewshire And
Inverclyde                        -0.067   (4.54)    -0.555 (9.59)             -0.172     (2.60)
Ayrshire                          -0.054   (3.69)    -0.283 (4.96)             -0.163     (2.57)
Fife                               0.000   (0.03)    -0.039 (0.71)             -0.151     (2.35)
Highlands And Islands              0.042   (3.24)     1.683 (30.54)            0.483      (8.61)
Grampian                          -0.051   (3.60)    -0.160 (2.82)             0.058      (0.94)
Tayside                           -0.027   (1.85)     0.251  (4.22)            -0.078     (1.22)
Central                            0.010   (0.65)    -0.054 (0.95)             -0.220     (3.43)
Lothian                            0.044   (2.90)     0.140  (2.39)            -0.008     (0.13)
Southern Scotland                  0.054   (3.23)     0.767 (10.83)            0.365      (5.03)

N                                26,609              26,609                   26,609
Pseudo R2                        0.0106              0.0869                   0.0422
Method                           Dprobit             Ologit                    Ologit

Source: Scottish Household Survey 2001-2003

Notes: Excluded area is Edinburgh. Area as a place to live rating varies from 4 (very good) to 1 (very poor). Safety after dark varies
from 4 (very safe) to 1 (very unsafe). Friendly people and community spirit are both dichotomous variables where 1 signifies
agreement, 0 signifies disagreement. Areas within Strathclyde are shown in bold. Robust standard errors.
Table 12: Life Satisfaction, Scotland and Great Britain, 1973-2002

               % not at all   % not very satisfied   % fairly satisfied    % very
                satisfied                                                 satisfied
 a) GB
 1973-1977          4                 11                    54               31
 1978-1982          4                 10                    53               33
 1983-1987          4                 10                    55               31
 1988-1992          4                 10                    55               31
 1993-1997          3                 10                    57               31
 1998-2002          2                 9                     55               35

 b) Scotland
 1973-1977          3                 12                    57               28
 1978-1982          2                 10                    62               26
 1983-1987          5                 9                     61               25
 1988-1992          4                 11                    58               27
 1993-1997          4                 11                    58               27
 1998-2002          3                 11                    58               28

Source: Eurobarometer Surveys 1973-2003.
Table 13. Happiness and life satisfaction, Scotland and Great Britain


                                         Life satisfaction
 Happiness %          % very satisfied       % fairly        % not very   % not at all
                                             satisfied        satisfied    satisfied
 a) GB
 Very happy                 17                  8                1            0
 Pretty happy               11                 41                5            1
 Not too happy               2                  6                5            2
 Total                      31                 56               10            4

 b) Scotland
 Very happy                 12                  8                0            0
 Pretty happy               10                 47                5            1
 Not too happy               2                  7                5            2
 Total                      24                 61               10            4

Source: Eurobarometer Surveys 1975-1979 and 1982-1986.
Table 14. Life satisfaction equations
                             All           Males             Females         All               Males          Females
Scotland                -.1533 (5.78)    -.1585 (4.17) -.15020 (4.00)
Strathclyde                                                               -.2929 (5.84)     -.2858 (4.16)     -.2995 (4.02)
Borders                                                                   -.0638 (1.01)     -.0660 (0.70)     -.0745 (0.85)
Highlands                                                                  .1402 (1.15)      .0275 (0.14)      .2066 (1.34)
Grampian                                                                   .0750 (0.75)      .0107 (0.08)      .1446 (0.97)
Scotland pre 1989                                                         -.1652 (4.43)     -.1561 (2.94)     -.1685 (3.23)
Eire                     .0652 (4.77)    .0291 (1.49)     .1055 (5.40)     .0652 (4.77)      .0292 (1.49)      .1052 (5.39)
N. Ireland               .1818 (10.09)   .1575 (6.09)     .2061 (8.11)     .1817 (10.09)     .1575 (6.08)      .2060 (8.11)
Wales                    .0374 (0.94)    .0610 (1.06)     .0200 (0.36)     .0374 (0.93)      .0610 (1.06)      .0199 (0.36)
Time                     .0024 (3.36)    .0041 (3.93)    -.0003 (0.27)     .0023 (3.23)      .0041 (3.87)     -.0004 (0.34)
Age                     -.0352 (15.74)  -.0401 (12.08)   -.0301 (9.79)    -.0351 (15.72)   -.0400 (12.06)     -.0300 (9.77)
Age squared              .0004 (20.39)   .0005 (15.21)   .0004 (13.28)     .0004 (20.36)    .0005 (15.19)      .0004 (13.25)
Male                    -.1836 (14.67)                                    -.1833 (14.65)
Married                  .2819 (15.99)   .2384 (9.94)    .3470 (12.84)     .2813 (15.95)      .2381 (9.92)     .3460 (12.80)
Living together          .0981 (2.65)    .1156 (2.21)     .0854 (1.56)     .0974 (2.63)       .1152 (2.21)     .0841 (1.53)
Divorce                 -.5819 (13.89)  -.3572 (5.18)  -.6841 (12.59)     -.5827 (13.91)     -.3564 (5.17)    -.6856 (12.62
Separated               -.6844 (14.20)  -.6315 (8.41)  -.7037 (11.04)     -.6853 (14.22)     -.6310 (8.40)    -.7063 (11.08
Widowed                 -.3024 (10.50)  -.3222 (6.40)    -.2370 (6.29)    -.3024 (10.50)     -.3223 (6.40)    -.2370 (6.29)
Self-employed            .0942 (4.50)    .0984 (3.98)     .0988 (2.29)     .0942 (4.51)       .0987 (3.99)     .0986 (2.29)
Student                  .0495 (1.06)    .1165 (1.57)    -.0122 (0.20)     .0502 (1.08)       .1175 (1.59)    -.0117 (0.20)
Retired                 -.0828 (3.39)   -.0850 (2.38)    -.1316 (3.66)    -.0823 (3.37)      -.0841 (2.36)    -.1317 (3.66)
Housewife               -.1116 (6.32)   -.3765 (4.07)    -.1303 (6.28)    -.1109 (6.28)      -.3739 (4.05)    -.1295 (6.24)
Unemployed             -1.184 (43.37)  -1.383 (41.32)  -.7883 (16.58)    -1.1835 (43.33)   -1.383 (41.27)     -.7880 (16.58)
Cut_1                   -3.5587        -3.5225          -3.4126          -3.5592           -3.5217           -3.4143
Cut_2                   -2.1312        -2.1212          -1.9519          -2.1316           -2.1203           -1.9534
Cut_3                       .58467         .6256           .7373           .5846            .6267              .7362
N                          117,775          56,612          59.956           117,775            56,612           59.956
    2
Chi                           6109            3572           2556              6141               3586             2573
Pseudo R2                    .0280           .0352           0216             .0281              .0352            .0217
Source: Eurobarometer Surveys 1973-2003. Robust standard errors
Figure 1. Suicide Rate Per 100,000 Population (most recent year observed)


                               90

                               80

                               70
  Rate Per 100000 Population




                               60

                               50
                                                                                     Males
                                                                                     Females
                               40

                               30

                               20

                               10

                                   0
                                                               A
                                                              A




                                                              A




                                                             IA




                                                              N
                                                               E
                                                              D




                                                              K

                                                             IA


                                                    FR D




                                                              D




                                                              D


                                                   ER IA




                                                             IA
                                                              M
                                                            LY




                                                               Y




                                                               Y
                                                             IN




                                                            EN




                                                              M
                                                            A




                                                            N




                                                            C
                                                            D




                                                            LI




                                                            O
                                                           IC




                                                            R
                                                            N




                                                            N




                                                            N




                                                            N
                                                           O




                                                          IU
                                                           R
                                                           A




                                                           K




                                                           N
                                                         TV
                                                          A




                                                         W
                                                          A




                                                          A




                                                          N
                                                        ED




                                                          A




                                                          A




                                                          A




                                                        LA




                                                          A




                                                         TI
                                                         A
                                                         D




                                                       ER




                                                       ST
                                                       VA




                                                         A
                                                       SP




                                                        G
                                                       IT




                                                        A
                                                       M
                                                        N




                                                      EL




                                                      TL




                                                        L
                                                       M




                                                       A
                                                       R
                                                       R
                                                       G




                                                       A

                                                       U
                                                     EL


                                                      N
                                                    PO
                                                   SW
                                                      A




                                                   ER

                                                   EN




                                                     U




                                                     L
                                                   ST
                                                     O
                                                     M




                                                     O
                                                    IN




                                                  TH
                                                    O
                                                   IR




                                                   FI
                                                    C




                                                   A
                                                  N




                                                 SL
                                                  A




                                                  B
                                                  K




                                               SC
                                                 U




                                                 G

                                                 D




                                                 D

                                                LI
                                                F




                                               A
                                   ED




                                              FE
                                              O
                                IT




                                            S




                                            N
                                         TE
                               N




                                         IA
                               U




                                      SS
                                       A
                                    ST




                                    U
                                   R
                                       ED
                                    IT
                                   N
                                   U




Source: General Register Office (Scotland) and World Health Organisation
(http://www.who.int/mental_health/prevention/suicide/country_reports/en/index.html
                                                 Figure 2. Intentional self-harm and undetermined death rate, Scotland 1980-2004


                                30.0




                                25.0
Death rate/100,000 population




                                20.0



                                                                                                                                                 All
                                15.0                                                                                                             Males
                                                                                                                                                 Females



                                10.0




                                 5.0




                                 0.0
                                   1980   1982     1984     1986     1988     1990     1992     1994     1996     1998     2000    2002   2004
                                                                                       Year

                                Source:http://www.chooselife.net/web/site/Statistics/ScottishTrends.asp
                                             References

Alesina A, R. DiTella and R. MacCulloch (2004), ‘Inequality and happiness: are Europeans and
Americans different?’, Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 88, Issues 7-8, (9-10), pp. 2009-2042

Argyle, M. (1989). The psychology of happiness, Routledge, London.

Baron, S., J. Field and T. Schuller (eds.) (2000) Social capital - critical perspectives. Oxford
University Press.

Bell, D.N.F. and G.J. Jack (2002), ‘Worklessness and polarisation in Scotland’, Scotecon.

Blanchflower, D.G. (2004), ‘Self-employment: more may not be better’, Swedish Economic
Policy, 11(2), Fall, pp. 15-74.

Blanchflower, D.G. (2001), ‘Unemployment, wellbeing and wage curves in Eastern and Central
Europe’, Journal of Japanese and International Economies, 15 (4), December, pp. 364-402.

Blanchflower, D.G. and A.J. Oswald (2004a). ‘Wellbeing over time in Britain and the USA’,
Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 88, Issues 7-8, July, pp. 1359-1386

Blanchflower, D.G. and A.J. Oswald (2004b), ‘Money, sex and happiness’, Scandinavian Journal
of Economics, 106(3), pp. 393–415.

Blanchflower, D.G. and A.J. Oswald (2005), ‘Happiness and the Human Development Index: the
paradox of Australia’, The Australian Economic Review, 38(3), September, pp. 307-318(12).

Blanchflower, D.G. and A.J. Oswald (2006), ‘On Leigh-Wolfers and wellbeing in Australia’,
forthcoming, The Australian Economic Review.

Campbell, A. (1981). The sense of wellbeing in America, McGraw Hill, New York.

Chin, S. and R.J. Rona (2001), ‘Prevalence and trends in overweight and obesity in three cross
sectional studies of British children, 1974-94’, British Medical Journal, 322: pp.24-26 (6th
January)

Coulthard, M. Walker, A. and Morgan, A. (2002) ‘People'  s perceptions of their neighbourhood
and community involvement. Results from the social capital module of the General Household
Survey 2000’, Office of National Statistics.
http://www.statistics.gov.uk/downloads/theme_social/Peoples_perceptions_social_capital.pdf

Cutler, D.M., E.L. Glaeser and K.E. Norberg (2001),’Explaining the rise in youth suicides’ in
Risky behavior among youths, edited by J. Gruber, NBER and University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, Il.
Deaton, A. and C. Paxson (2004), ‘Mortality, income and income inequality over time in Britain
& the United States’ in David Wise (ed.), Perspectives on the Economics of Aging University of
Chicago Press for NBER

Drever, F., K. Fisher, J. Brown and J. Clark (2000), Social inequalities, 2000 Edition, Office of
National Statistics, downloadable at
http://www.statistics.gov.uk/StatBase/Product.asp?vlnk=5771&Pos=8&ColRank=2&Rank=208

Easterlin, R.A. (1974). ‘Does economic growth improve the human lot? some empirical
evidence’, in Nations and households in economic growth: essays in honor of Moses
Abramowitz, edited by P.A. David and M.W. Reder, Academic Press, New York and London.

Gardner, J. & Oswald, A.J. (2006) ‘Do divorcing couples become happier by splitting up?’
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A, forthcoming.

Helliwell, J.F. (2003) ‘How’s life? Combining individual and national variables to explain
subjective wellbeing’, Economic Modelling 20(2): 331-60.

Herman, A. (2001), How the Scots invented the modern world, Three Rivers Press, New York.

Hope, S., C. Martin and A. Dudleston (2003), Scotland’s People. Results from the 2001/2002
Scottish Household Survey, Volume 7: Annual report. A Scottish Executive National Statistics
publication downloadable from http://www.scotland.gov.uk/library5/finance/spv7-00.asp

Kawachi, I. Kennedy, P. and Wilkinson, R.G. (eds) (1999), Income inequality and health, The
New Press, New York

Leigh, A. and J. Wolfers (2006),’ Happiness and the Human Development Index:
Australia is not a paradox’, forthcoming, The Australian Economic Review.

Luttmer, E.F.P. (2005), ‘Neighbors as negatives; relative earnings and wellbeing’, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, August, CXX(3), pp. 963-1002.

Martin, C., A. Duddleston J., Harkins, E. Hewitt, S. Hope, P. MacLeod and L. Murray (2005),
Scotland’s people. Annual report: results from the 2003/2004 Scottish Household Survey, . A
Scottish Executive National Statistics publication, downloadable from
http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Publications/2005/08/03155211/52120

Masoli, M. Fabian, D. Holt, S. Beasley, R. (2004), Global burden of asthma, Global
Initiative on Asthma, downloadable at http://www.ginasthma.com/

Oswald, A.J. (1997). ‘Happiness and economic performance,’ Economic Journal, 107(445), pp.
1815-1831.

Parkes, A. and Kearnes, A. (2004), ‘The Multi-dimensional neighbourhood and health. A cross-
sectional analysis of the Scottish Household Survey, 2001’, ESRC Centre for Neighbourhood
Research, University of Bristol, Working Paper 19.
Paterson, L. (2002), 'Governing from the centre: ideology and public policy'
                                                                           , in J. Curtice, D.
McCrone, A. Park, and L. Paterson (eds), New Scotland, New Society?, Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press, pp. 196-218.

Putnam, R. (1993), The prosperous community: social capital and public life, The American
Prospect, no 13.

Putnam, R.D. (2000), Bowling alone - the collapse and revival of American community, New
York: Simon & Schuster.

Ramstedt, M. (2002) ‘Alcohol and suicide in 14 European countries - A comparative time series
analysis’, Stockholm University, Centre for Social Research on Alcohol and Drugs.

Scottish Executive (1999a) ‘Homicide in Britain: a comparative study of rates in Scotland and
England and Wales’, Crime and Criminal Research Findings No 36, downloadable at
http://www.scotland.gov.uk/cru/resfinds/crf36-00.htm

Scottish Executive (1999b), ‘Towards a healthier Scotland – A White Paper on health’, February,
Cm 4269.
