                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          YEARS OF SERVICE AND PROBABILITY OF PROMOTION



                       Katharine G. Abraham


                         James L. Medoff




                      Working Paper No. 1191




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            August 1983




We acknowledge the helpful advice of Charles Brown, Gary
Chamberlain and Zvi Griliches. We thank Molly Abraham, David
Belluck and Martin Van Denburgh for their valuable assistance.
Useful suggestions were made at the industrial relations workshop
at M.I.T. The research reported here is part of the NBER'S research
program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                         NBER Working   Paper #1191
                                         August 1983



           Years of Service and Probability of Promotion


                             ABSTRACT




       This study provides evidence which we believe challenges some

 conventional assumptions about the promotion process. Based on

 survey information collected from a large random sample of U.S.

 private sector firms, we reach two main conclusions. First,

 seniority independent of productivity appears to play a significant

role even in nonunion promotion decisions. Second, the differences

 between union and nonunion promotion processes, at least with regard

to the weight assigned to seniority per se, appear to be important

 but less dramatic than is popularly supposed.




Katharine G. Abraham                                James L. Medoff
Sloan School of Management                          Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute                             Harvard University
of Technology                                       Littauer Center 115
E52 — 453D
                                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
Cambridge, MA 02139
       The relative weights afforded seniority and ability in the

 promotion process have been a long standing source of debate. At

 least within the economics profession, it is typically assumed that

 promotions in nonunion settings are awarded on a purely meritocratic

 basis. This assumption is consistent with the human capital view

 that the upward slope of the tenure/earnings profile should simply

reflect the growth in employees' productivity with services!'

 Though some would argue that promotions are most often awarded

meritocratically even in union settings, the more widespread view is

 that unions restrict managements' ability to promote the most

qualified candidate. Collective bargaining agreements which assign

seniority a role in the promotion process are fairly common and case

studies suggest that the weight actually given to seniority is often

even greater than the terms of these provisions would suggest.-'

The perception that unionization constrains managements' ability to

promote as they please has contributed to the popular belief that

union firms are less efficient than nonunion firms.

      This paper presents data which we believe call into question

the usual beliefs about how promotions are made. Based on survey

information collected from a large random sample of U.S. private

sector firms, we reach two main conclusions. First, seniority

independent of productivity appears to play a significant role even

in nonunion promotion decisions. Second, the differences between

union and nonunion promotion processes, at least with regard to the

weight assigned to seniority, appear to be important but less

dramatic than is popularly supposed.
      Section I of the paper describes the survey on which our main

conclusions rest. The data obtained from this survey are presented

in Section II. In Section III, we discuss why we chose to ask

managers about how promotion decisions are made at their firms,

rather than drawing conclusions solely from econometric analysis of

actual promotions data. Evidence concerning promotions based on two

companies' personnel data are presented in Section IV; these are

consistent with our survey data. The paper's final section offers

some concluding thoughts.



I.    Collection of the Survey Data

      The data on which this paper's central conclusions rest were

obtained from a mail survey which asked employers both about formal

policies governing seniority's role in the promotions process and,

more importantly, about the role played by seniority in actual

promotion decisions.

      We sent our survey to 1025 randomly selected nonagricultural,

nonconstruction firms from the 1981 edition of Standard and Poor's

Register..J Firms based outside the U.S. were excluded from the

sample. Standard and Poor's generally lists companies with 50 plus

employees and l,00O,0O0 plus in sales in their Register; these

companies represent perhaps two—thirds of total U.S. nonagricultural,

nonconstruction employment

      Whenever possible, we mailed our survey to that individual at

each firm who appeared to be in charge of personnel matters (e.g.,

the Executive Vice—President of Personnel, the Personnel Director or

the Industrial Relations Vice—President). In cases where no such



                                 —2—
 individual's name could be obtained, the letter was sent to the Chief

Executive Officer of the corporation. The original letter was dated

August 15, 1981. If no response was received from a firm within six

weeks after our first request was mailed, a second request was sent

to the original contact. Altogether, we received 429 responses (a

response rate of 42 percent). Because of various data problems,

there were somewhat fewer usable responses.

      A question at the start of the survey form asked how many

exempt employees (most likely managers and/or professionals),

nonexempt salaried employees and hourly employees were affected by

the respondent's personnel decisions; all subsequent answers refer to

the largest of these subordinate groups. One of the later

questionnaire items inquired whether a majority of those in the

relevant group were covered by a collective bargaining agreement. In

the analysis which follows, we look separately at three response

categories: union hourly employees; nonunion hourly employees; and

nonunion salaried employees (nonexempt and exempt combined).-"

      Much previous work on the role played by seniority in promotion

decisions has focused on collective bargaining agreement provisions.

We asked whether either a collective bargaining agreement or a

written policy dealing explicitly with the role of seniority In

promotion decisions covered the group of employees referred to by

each respondent. Where we were told that such an agreement or policy

did exist, we asked whether the relevant language stated that

seniority should be the single most important factor in determining

who would be promoted.




                                —3—
      Our primary objective was to learn more about actual practice

concerning the role of seniority in promotion decisions. To this

end, respondents were asked the following question:


      In actual practice, are junior employees promoted instead of
      more senior employees who want the job?

      17 Yes, if it is believed that the junior employee will do
           better than the senior employee on the next job or on
           later jobs.

      1/ Yes, if it is believed that the junior employee will do
           significantly better than the senior employee on the next
           job or on later jobs.

      LT No, never.

This question produces the most important information in our data set

for exploring the issue at hand. The responses indicate the strength

of the preference for senior employees when promotions occur ."



II.   Survey Results

      The data from our survey provide evidence both on formal

policies and on actual practice concerning seniority's role in the

promotions process. The relevant results are presented in this

section of the paper.



Written Promotion Provisions Covering Various Groups

      Table 1 summarizes the content of written policy provisions

governing promotions as reported by our survey respondents.

      The first things to note are that very few nonunion employees

are covered by written provisions which specify seniority's role in

the promotions process and that even fewer are covered by written

provisions which assign seniority a determining role in that

process. Fewer than 5 percent of our nonunion hourly respondents and
                                —4—
                Table 1: Contract and Written Policy

                   Provisions Governing Promotions




                                                   Employee Type
                                          Hourly      Hourly     Salaried
                                          Union      Nonunion    Nonunion
Proportion for which contract
or written policy specifies role
of seniority in promotion decisions       .851         .244       .070
(P)

Given a contract or written policy
which specifies seniority's role,
proportion for which relevant
language states seniority to be most
important factor in promotion decisions    .483       .132        .000
(SMI)

Proportion for which language in
a contract or written policy states
seniority to be most important
factor in promotion decisions             .410        .032        .000
(P x SMI)

Number of observations on which
above proportions based                    134         156         100




                                  —5—
none of our salaried nonunion respondents indicated the presence of a

written policy clause stating that seniority should be the most

important factor in promotion decisions.

      In contrast, a large majority (85 percent) of our union hourly

respondents reported provisions specifying seniority's role in

promotion decisions and almost half (48 percent) of those reporting

such provisions said they made seniority the key factor determining

who gets promoted. Thus, just over 40 percent of our union hourly

respondents reported coverage by written provisions making length of

service the primary factor in promotion decisions.

      We know of no other comparable data on written promotions

provisions covering nonunion employees. Our 40 percent figure for

union hourly employees is somewhat larger than that produced by a

Bureau of Labor Statistics study of 1967—1968 major collective

bargaining agreements, in which only 29 percent of contracts had a

provision specifying seniority to be either the "sole factor" or the

"primary factor" in promotions.-' However, our figure agrees well

with that produced by a more recent Bureau of National Affairs study

of 400 representative collective bargaining agreements, in which 45

percent of the contracts specified seniority to be either the "sole

factor" or the "determining factor" in promotions

      Based solely on the terms of the relevant written provisions,

then, one might be tempted to conclude that almost no nonunion hourly

employees or nonunion salaried employees but a substantial minority

of union hourly employees worked in settings where length of service

had an important independent effect on promotion decisions. Overall,




                                 —6—
assuming that seniority plays a role in promotion decisions only

insofar as specified in written policy or collective bargaining

agreement clauses, a very rough estimate based on our survey

responses would be that 8 percent of our county's private sector,

nonagricultural, nonconstruction employees work in settings where

seniority plays an important role in the promotion process.91'



Actual Practice Concerning Promotions

      The answers we received to our question on the role actually

played by seniority in promotion decisions suggest that these

conclusions would be seriously in error.

      As reported in Table 2, over half (56 percent) of our nonunion

hourly responses and over half (57 percent) of our salaried nonunion

responses indicated that in practice senior employees are afforded

substantial preference in the promotions process (meaning either that

a junior employee would never be promoted ahead of a senior employee

or that a junior employee would be promoted ahead of a senior

employee only if expected to perform significantly better on the next

job or on later jobs). Thus, seniority seems to matter for many

nonunion promotion decisions even though there are few written

provisions specifying that it should.

      Comparing union hourly and nonunion hourly responses, the union

figures show both a higher total percentage of cases where senior

employees receive substantial preference (76 percent versus 56

percent) and a higher percentage of cases where a senior employee

would never lose out to a junior competitor (33 percent versus 15

percent). The implicit advancement rights afforded to senior

employees do seem to be both more prevalent and stronger for union

                                 —7—
          Table 2: Actual Practice Concerning the Role of

                  Seniority in Promotion Decisions




                                                  Employee
                                                  —        Type
                                         Hourly      Hourly       Salaried
                                         Union     Nonunion       Nonunion

Proportion reporting that junior
employees never promoted ahead
of senior employees                       .333        .146          .120

Proportion reporting that junior
employees promoted ahead of senior
employees only If they are expected
to perform significantly better on
the next job or on later jobs             .430        .411          .450

Proportion reporting that junior
employees promoted ahead of senior
employees jf they are expected to
perform better on the next job or
on later jobs                             .237        .443          .430

Number of observations on which
above proportions based                    135        158            100




                                   —8—
 hourly than for nonunion hourly work groups. Though these

 union/nonunion differences are substantial and statistically

 significant, it is noteworthy that they are not quite so pronounced

 as the differences in the terms of relevant written provisions

 discussed above.

       While we know of no other data that permit the independent

 effect of seniority on promotions to be identified in the way our

 data do, two interesting new interview studies have produced results

 that seem consistent with our findings. Edwin Dean obtained

 interview data from 134 union establishments and 47 nonunion

establishments; these establishments were not selected in a purely

random fashion, but do cover a fairly wide cross section of U.S.

industry. At 70 percent of the union establishments and at 43

percent of the nonunion establishments in Dean's sample, seniority

was ranked the first or second most important selection criterion in

promotion (the other choices being written tests, written performance

evaluations, Interviews, educational qualifications, prior related

work experience and supervisors' recommendations).-! Quinn Mills

obtained interview data pertaining to 248 actual promotion decisions

at a randomly   selected sample of firms. While his study focused
primarily   on the effect of job posting on promotion decisions, he

does conclude that "a very substantial minority of senior persons are

promoted over better—performing junior persons.'

      Based on what our respondents had to say about actual practice,

then, we estimate that over half of both nonunion hourly employees

and nonunion salaried employees and over three quarters of union

hourly employees work in settings where length of service has an



                                  —9—
important independent role in the promotions process. Overall, among

perhaps 60 percent of our country's private sector, nonagricultural,

nonconstruction employees, senior individuals are afforded

substantial preference in promotion decisions.l3l4'



111. What Can Promotions History Data Tell Us?



        Why   did   we choose to collect survey information on how

promotion decisions are made, rather than just looking at the

computerized personnel data we have investigated for other purposes?

In this section of the paper we discuss the limitations of using

company personnel records, which contain valuable information on

workers' advancement, their length of service, and their likely

contribution in higher—level jobs, for addressing the question at

hand.



Promotions Equations Without Measures of Capacity to Perform

        Data from company personnel files on individuals' work

histories may be useful for studying some aspects of the promotion

process. However, unless these data sources contain "perfect"

measures of individuals' relative capacities to perform in the job or

jobs they might be promoted to, they cannot be used to estimate the

"true" effect of seniority perse.

        The following simple setup illustrates this point. Suppose

that we were able to identify a group of individuals who were

starting out at some particular job level and that all these

individuals faced similar promotion opportunities. Let the promotion

process relevant for this group be captured by the following equation:

                                      —10—
      (1) P =   a   +   S   + 'y + C

where P equals 1 if a promotion has occurred and equals 0 otherwise,

S represents years of service, C represents capacity to perform at

the next level in the relevant job hierarchy and c represents the
                                                  15/
equation error (assumed to be orthogonal to S and C).— If it

were possible to measure C perfectly, then would give an unbiased

estimate of the effect of seniority per se on advancement out of the

level under analysis. For heuristic purposes, assume that it is

impossible to derive even a poorly—measured proxy for C and that as a

result we must fit the following misspecified model:

      (2) P = a'        + (3'S +      c'
The expected value of the service coefficient in equation (2) is:

      (3) E ((3')         (3 +   y.    coy (S,C)
                                        var S

Coy (S,C) has the same sign as the correlation between S and C; var S

is always positive. If merit does in fact play an important role in

the promotion process affecting the group under consideration

(y>O), so that the "best" employees in the level tend to be

promoted, the within—group correlation between S and C should become

negative (ccv (S,c) <       0).       Thus, in this case, '     will   represent

a downward—biased estimate of the true effect of length of service on

promotions. Even if longer service improves one's promotion

prospects (>O), a negative estimated length—of—service

coefficient could easily be obtained. Only if merit plays no role in

the promotion process (y = 0) will '               represent   an unbiased

estimate of the true effect of length of service on promotions.




                                           —11—
Promotions Equations With Imperfect Measures of Capacity to Perform

      Company personnel records do sometimes contain measures of

individuals' likely success on the job or jobs they might be promoted

to. However, these measures are most certainly imperfect. Suppose

that an imperfect measure of capacity to perform in the next job or

later jobs were obtained:

      (4) N =   C   +

where M is the available measure, C represents true capacity to

perform in the next job or later jobs, and      is the error term. If

N were introduced into the simple promotion model of equation (1) in

lieu of C:

      (5) Pa"+"S'+y"M+c"
the expected value of the length of service coefficient would be:


      (6) E(") =        +         y   coy (S,C) var
                            var S var C — coy (s,C)2 +   var   S var

Comparison of (6), which shows the service coefficient bias in a

promotions equation which includes an imperfect measure of potential,

against (3), which shows the service coefficient bias in a promotions

equation with no potential measure, reveals that the introduction of

the imperfect potential measure should reduce but not eliminate any

downward bias initially present in the service coefficient (since it

can be shown that (var      /(var S var C — coy (S,C)2 +   var   S var

is less than 1/var S). Nevertheless, as long as the C—proxy captures C

with error, the estimated effect of S can be expected to be biased

downward.




                                   —12—
Promotion Equations Exploiting Longitudinal Data

        In principle, it might seem that the lack of direct measures of

individuals' differing capacities could be dealt with by using more

sophisticated longitudinal econometric models of the promotion process.

In practice, this approach is unlikely to be satisfactory. Assume, as

before, that the promotion process in year t can be represented by the

following equation:

        (7) Pt = a +      +   +

where       equals 1 if a promotion occurs in year t and equals 0

otherwise, St represents length of service as of the start of year t, C

represents capacity to perform at the next level of the relevant job

hierachy (assumed to be stable over time) and c1 represents the

equation error (assumed to be orthogonal to S. and C). If a,         and

y were fixed over time and two years of promotion data were available,

the following equation could be estimated:

        (8) +1 —       = (s÷ — S) +       (c÷ — er).
                 —
Note that
                   S will always equal one; since there is no
variation in     S1 —
                      S, the model reduces to an equation with      just a

contant term. In effect, then, this procedure can yield a reliable

estimate of the effects of length of service on promotion probabilities

only if we are confident that      is in fact fixed over time; any changes

in a, such as might be associated with faster or slower corporate

growth leading to a higher or lower overall promotion rate, will

contaminate the estimated value of 3. There is no obvious way to

escape this problem.




                                   —13—
Summarizing The Usefulness Of Promotions Data

      While longitudinal data are thus not apt to be especially helpful,

the preceding discussion suggests we can glean some potentially useful

insights from cross—sectional promotions data. First, a negative service

coefficient in a simple promotions equation implies that merit is

important in the promotion process, though it reveals nothing about the

independent effect of length of service. The addition of performance or

potential measures to such an equation should move the estimated length

of service coefficient towards zero. Second, a positive service

coefficient in a simple promotion equation indicates that seniority plays

an important role in the promotion process, though it does not establish

that merit is unimportant. If seniority per se determines promotions

alone, the addition of performance or potential variables to the equation

should not affect the length of service coefficient2-"



IV.   Analysis Of Actual Promotions Data

      While we are convinced that our survey data offer uniquely valuable

insight into the role played by seniority in firms' advancement

decisions, it would certainly be reassuring if analyses of actual

promotions records were consistent with our findings. In this section of

the paper, we present and discuss evidence concerning the relationship of

company service and rated performance to the probability of being

promoted among one group of white male exempt employees, for whom

information on potential exists, and among a second group of unionized

hourly employees, for whom an objective measure of productivity is

available.




                                —14—
 Results for Sample Of Nonunion Salaried Employees

       The first data set we will look at contains information for the

 white male exempt employees of a large U.S. manufacturing corporation

which we will refer to as Company          Exempt positions at Company C

 are grouped into salary grade levels; we define a promotion as a move

from any salary grade to a higher salary grade level. An employee

relations manager at this firm told us that among the exempt population,

a junior employee would be promoted ahead of a more senior employee who

wanted the job if the junior employee was considered a better performer

than the senior employee. Thus, in terms of our survey, this is a group

of employees in which junior employees would be promoted ahead of senior

employees if they are expected to perform better on the next job or later

jobs; Table 2 reveals that 43 percent of those responding for salaried

nonunion employees gave similar replies.

      Company C computerized personnel records contain a considerable

amount of information on each of its exempt employees. We were able to

get a fix on each employee who was with the company as of each year end

from 1973 through 1978. These data enabled us to estimate five sets of

promotion equations, one each for 1973—1974, 1974—1975, 1975—1976,

1976—1977 and 1977—1978. The information available on each employee

included education, age (used to construct a pre—conipany experience

proxy), length of service, region where employed, race and sex. As

stated above, we restricted our analysis to white males. The personnel

records also contained annual performance ratings and an annual

assessment of potential for each employee. The performance rating is

assigned based upon the consensus of all the supervisors in an area and

measures how well an employee is fulfilling the responsibilities of his



                                —15—
position. The potential rating represents the immediate supervisor's

assessment of the highest grade level an employee can be expected to

reach in the course of his career with Company C. This variable was made

continuous by assigning to each individual the 1977 mean salary for white

males in the grade level to which he could be expected to reach.

      Table 3 reports the 1977—1978 promotion equations we estimated

using the Company C data; qualitatively similar results were obtained

with each of the other year's data. The model in column (1) includes

controls for education, pre—company experience, region and grade level in

addition to company service. As would be expected in a meritocratic

system, length of service bears a strong negative relationship to

probability of promotion. At the overall sample means, an additional

year of service is associated with a .005 or 4 percent lower probability

of being promoted. Can this lower probability be attributed to

discrimination against senior employees? The models presented in columns

(2), (3) and (4) suggest that it cannot be. The model in column (2) adds

performance rating dummies to the model reported in column (1). While

good performance at one level of the managerial hierarchy does not

necessarily imply success at the next level, the two should be positively

correlated. As expected, the introduction of the performance rating

dummies Into the promotion equation moves the estimated seniority

coefficient towards zero. The model (2) coefficients imply that at the

overall sample means, an additional year of service is associated with a

.003 or 2 percent lower probability of being promoted. One could argue

that the potential assessments mentioned above are a better measure of

employees' likely success in the next higher grade level than the




                                —16—
                Table 3: PromotIon Equations for Company C's Exempt Employees

                                                 Dependent Variable = 1 If Promoted
                                                 Between January 1 and December 31, 1978,
                                                 0   Otherwise
                                   Mean
                                   [Standard
                                   Deviation]              (N = 7,381)


                                                       1             2         3         4


Years   of Company Service/lO        1.954           —.961         —.795      .174      .011
                                    [1.109]          (.130)        (.133)    (.151)    (.152)

(Years of Company Service)2/100      5.048            .116          .129     —.045      .003
                                    [4.386)          (.034)        (.035)    (.037)    (.037)

Performance rating 1                  .002                         —.427               —.181
(worst; yes = 1)                     [.048]                       (1.053)             (1.039)

Performance rating 2                  .123                         —.250               —.195
(yes = 1)                            [.329]                        (.170)              (.170)

Performance rating 4                  .261                          .564                .436
(yes = 1)                            [.439]                        (.110)              (.110)

Performance rating 5                  .265                         1.137                .793
(yes = 1)                            [.442]                        (.105)              (.110)
Performance    rating 6               .095                         1.575                .896
(best; yes =   1)                    [.293]                        (.126)              (.142)

Ln (mean salary in potentially      10.421                                   3.612     2.782
highest grade)                       [.318]                                  (.215)    (.239)

Education dummies (4)                                 yes          yes        yes       yes

Pre—company    experience                             yes          yes        yes       yes
and its square
Grade level dummies (11)                              yes          yes        yes      yes
Constant                                              yes          yes        yes       yes
                                                 4321.31         4569.80    4638.03   4714.10

d.f.                                                 19            24         20        25



     a. Equations were estimated using a maximum likelihood logit procedure.
Individuals in grade levels where either everyone or no one received a promotion were
excluded from the logit samples. The mean (standard deviation) of the dependent
variable is .167 [.373]. All independent variables are as of December 31, 1977.
              Note: Standard errors are enclosed in parentheses below the
                     coefficient estimates.

                                          —17—
performance ratings. These are introduced in model (3). With this

model's estimated coefficients, at the overall sample means, service has

virtually no association with the probability of being promoted.

Finally, model (4) includes both the rated performance dummies and the

rated potential variable. While the two ratings are related, each has

its own sizable relationship with chance of promotion. With both ratings

held constant, one more year of service is associated with a .0003 or .2

percent higher promotion probability.

      These results match those predicted for a regime where promotions

are awarded meritocratically. In this sort of situation, the estimated

length of service coefficient in a promotion equation with no performance

or potential measure should be negative. However, the introduction of a

performance and/or potential measure should move the service coefficient

towards, and maybe even through, zero. This is what the Company C data
    18/
show.—


Results For Sample Of Union Hourly Employees

      Extending work done previously by Robert H. Yariker, we have also

examined data related to the promotion process for unionized hourly blue

collar employees at a U.S. manufacturing firm which we will refer to as

Company        Among this group of employees, job movements occur

through a posting and bidding system. When there is a job opening, a

notice which describes the position and specifies its wage is posted on

all factory bulletin boards. Any employee can then file a bid for the




                                —18—
 posted job; on the bid, the employee gives his or her seniority date and

 outlines why he or she is qualified for the job in question. The General

 Foreman of the company reviews all of the bids and determines who is to

 be given the job. The collective bargaining agreement covering these

 employees states that the selection is to be based on "plant wide

 seniority provided the individual is qualified." The agreement further

 specifies that:

      Qualified for a job opening. . . means that an employee
      has the basic knowledge required for a job opening and/or
      has demonstrated by working on a similar, though perhaps
      lower rated, job that he has the ability to perform the
      job involved.

Thus, while both seniority and ability are mentioned, seniority would

appear to be the primary factor. In terms of our survey, this is a

group of employees among which the junior employee would never be

promoted ahead of his or her senior co—worker or would only be

promoted if he or she was significantly better. Table 2 reveals that

two—thirds of those responding for unionized hourly employee groups

gave similar replies. For purposes of the analysis that follows, we

define a promotion as winning a bid to fill a vacant position.

      Company G keeps track of all jobs that are posted, including

the name of the successful bidder and the names of all unsuccessful

bidders. We have studied all of the bids which occurred between

January 1, 1979 and July 1, 1979. Information on years of service

and productivity could be obtained for 377 hourly employees at the

company. The productivity index deserves more explanation. Each job




                                —19—
that a worker does has a certain amount of time considered standard

for Its completion. The standard times are initially based on

engineering estimates and are then tested in the shop; in this study,

we use only production ratings based on tested standards. Production

ratings for each worker were derived as standard time divided by

actual time to complete the job. A final piece of information taken

from the personnel records was each employee's department; this was

needed because the different departments have different average

productivity ratings. For this reason, productivity indices equal to

an individual's production rating divided by his or her department's

mean rating were calculated and used in the investigation to be

summarized.

      At Company G during the 6 months under analysis, information

existed on 125 bid groups in which a worker was awarded a posted

job. Because of the way advancement up the job hierarchy occurs

among the production workers at Company G, there was much less

dispersion in years of service among those bidding for a job than

among the work force as a whole; moreover, it was primarily low

service employees at the bottom of the job pyramid who sought

advancement. Averaging across the 125 bid groups, we find a standard

deviation of years of service equal to 1.48 and a mean service of

3.71, whereas in the entire sample of 377 individuals the comparable

figures are 9.13 and 8.27. Averaging across bid groups reveals that

the standard deviation and mean in productivity within bid groups was

much closer to what was observed for the sample as a whole; within

bid groups the relevant figures were .22 and 1.03, and in the entire

sample they were .30 and 1.00. The productivity statistics are what



                                 —20—
might be expected in a promotion system where

ability/performance/potential played a very secondary role to

seniority per se in determining advancement.

      Who won the bids? In 97 percent of the cases it was the bidder

with the greatest service. Was the senior winner also the most

productive? Only by chance it seems; in 52 percent of the bid groups

the most senior worker who won the bid competition had the highest

production index, whereas in 48 percent he or she was dominated in

terms of productivity.

      A full analysis of the advancement process at Company G cannot

be conducted, since data do not exist to place workers in the same or

comparable jobs at the beginning of the period under analysis.

However, our investigation of the bidding process reveals the very

important role of years of service in a promotion procedure which

relies on posting and bidding and is governed by a union contract.



V.    Conclusions

      The results reported in this paper have some important

implications. First, our finding that perhaps 60% of U.S. employees

work in settings where seniority leads to substantial preference in

promotion decisions seems inconsistent with the human capital view

that upward sloping tenure/earnings profiles necessarily reflect

upward sloping tenure/productivity profiles. In earlier work, we

have argued that none of the rather substantial within—job earnings

increment associated with seniority reflects a corresponding

within—job productivity increment; this increment must be considered

a return to seniority jse.2' These new results suggest that,

for a substantial part of the U.S. workforce, the earnings advantage

                                —21—
enjoyed by longer service employees because they hold higher level

jobs must also be considered at least partly a return to seniority

independent of performance. Second, while our findings indicate that

length of service carries greater weight in the typical union hourly

promotion decision than in the typical nonunion hourly promotion

decision, this difference is less pronounced than one might have

expected based on an examination of written provisions covering the

two groups. For both nonunion and union employee groups, actual

practice regarding promotions seems to give more weight to length of

service than required by the terms of any written provisions. The

discrepancy between practice and policy is more marked for nonunion

employee groups. The seniority—based promotion rules prevalent in

union environments are often pointed to as an important cause of

inflexibility and reduced productivity in those settings. While such

seniority—based rules are certainly applied both more often and more

rigidly in union plants than in nonunion plants, these are

differences of degree rather than differences of kind. Even in the

absence of a union, managers are often not completely free to promote

the candidate expected to perform best on the new job. Even in the

presence of a union, management usually can avoid making a promotion

which would have very deterious productivity effects.

      Several major questions remain unanswered by our research in

this area to date. What explains the diversity in promotion

practices across firms? How do these promotion practices fit into

the larger web of personnel practices at these firms? Why do so many

firms give such substantial weight to length of service per se in

rewarding promotions? Why do they give service per se still more



                                —22—
weight In termination dI5euS5I05?a!! All of these questions

suggest possible directions for future explorations.




                               —23—
                             FOOTNOTES




1.   Becker [1975, PP. 16—37] lays out the basic human capital model

     of on—the—job training. Mincer [1974, pp. 80—83] focuses

     specifically on the promotions process; he argues that, even in

     the union sector, promotions are most often awarded primarily

     on the basis of merit rather than on the basis of seniority.

2.   See U.S. Department of Labor [1970, pp. 36—37] and Bureau of

     National Affairs [1983, p. El] for summaries of promotions

     provisions found in two samples of collective bargaining

     agreements. Slichter, Healy and Livernash [1960, pp. 178—210]

     offers a classic discussion of how actual promotions practices

     may diverge from contract language.

3.   The same questionnaire was also sent to 250 randomly selected

     manufacturing firms from a 1980 News Front listing. We

     oversampled manufacturing because our survey contained

     questions on layoffs in addition to the questions on promotions

     used in this paper and we wanted to secure respnses from a

     reasonable number of companies that had experienced workforce

     reductions. In this paper, we chose to focus on our Standard

     and Poor's responses because we felt they should be more

     representative of the economy as a whole.

4.   Tabulations based on the May 1979 Current Population Survey

     show that 56 percent of those whose primary employment was in

     the nonagricultural, nonconstruction private sector said they

     worked for companies with 100 plus employees and 70 percent

     said they worked for companies with 25 plus employees. Data

     from the ES—202 program indicate that unemployment insurance

                               —24—
     reporting units with 50 or more employees account for 64

     percent of total covered private sector employment outside

     agriculture and construction; since firms may contain more than

     one unemployment insurance reporting unit, firms with 50 or

     more employees should account for some larger fraction of

     covered employment in the relevant sectors.

5.   There were a very small number of responses pertaining to

     unionized salaried employees which were excluded from the

     sample we used for analysis.

6.   In addition to the questions described in the text, we also

     asked about the total employment, product mix and location of

     each firm in our sample. This information was used in some

     sensitivity analyses.

7.   See U.S. Department of Labor [1970, pp. 36—37].

8.   See Bureau of National Affairs [1983, p. El].

9.   One concern we had about the raw results reported in Table 1

     was that they might be contaminated by nonresponse bias. To

     check whether this was a problem, we prepared separate

     tabulations for early responders (those who replied to our

     original mailing) versus late responders (those who replied

     only after receiving our followup letter) and then checked for

     differences between the two groups' answers. Among both the

     union hourly and the nonunion hourly replies, early responders

     were significantly more likely than late responders to report

     the existence of a written provision specifying seniority's

     role in promotion (.895 versus .766 for the union hourly

     implies and .311 versus .115 for the nonunion hourly replies).



                               —25—
      These were the only significant early/late differences we

      found. The qualitative conclusions derived from either the

      early responses alone or the late responses alone are the same

      as those derived from Table 1. We also looked at two sets of

      weighted tabulations, one which corrected for differing

      response rates across nine firm size/industry cells and a

      second which used CPS employment weights for the same firm

      size/industry cells. Both of these sets of numbers were very

      similar to those reported in Table 1.

10.   This very rough estimate was obtained by weighting the

      estimates for union hourly employees, nonunion hourly employees

      and salaried employees by the fractions of private sector,

      nonagricultural, nonconstruction employment in each of these

      same three groups. The employment figures were derived from

      the May 1978 Current Population Survey (CPS): union members

      paid by the hour, 17 percent; nonmembers paid by the hour, 43

      percent; and nonhourly employees, 40 percent, of which 8

      percent were union and 92 percent were nonunion. There was no

      way to distinguish nonexempt and exempt salaried employment on

      the CPS.

11.   See Dean [1982]. The numbers we cite are not reported in

      Dean's paper but can be derived from those he does report.

12.   See Mills [19821.

13. As with our Table 1 results, we were concerned that the numbers

      reported in Table 2 might be contaminated by nonresponse bias.

      We again prepared separate tabulations for early versus late

      responders. The distribution of early union hourly responses

      was significantly different from the distribution of late union

                                 —26—
       hourly responses, with the late distribution including a higher

       proportion of answers at one extreme or the other. However,

       once again, the qualitative conclusions derivable from either

       the early responses alone or the late responses alone are no

       different than those derived from the figures we report. We

       also prepared two sets of weighted tabulations like those

       reported in Table 2, one of which corrected for response rate

       variation across nine firm size/industry cells and a second

      which used CPS employment weights for the same firm

      size/industry cells. The results were in both cases very

      similar to those we report.

14.   The 60 percent figure was derived in the fashion described in

      footnote 10.

15.   One would actually want to estimate a logit or. a probit

      equation rather than an ordinary least squares regression, but

      the bias argument made here in terms of an ordinary least

      squares regression should be qualitatively correct.

16.   We have discussed the problem of interpreting promotion

      equation estimates for a group of employees who all are covered

      by the same internal labor market rules. Additional

      complications arise if one tries to analyze a data set like the

      Quality of Employment Survey (QES) panel or the Panel Study of

      Income Dynamics, where the individual observations come from

      many different occupational groups and from many different

      firms. Olson and Berger (1982) report the results of a

      promotions analysis based on the QES panel and also offer an

      insightful discussion of some of the potential problems with

      their approach.

                                —27—
17. A more detailed description of this data set and related

      estimates can be found in Medoff and Abraham [1981].

18.   We also estimated models like those in column (1) and column

      (2) using data for another firm's white male exempt employees.

      The relevant promotion process had been described to us as

      meritocratic. See the the discussion pertaining to Company B

      in Medoff and Abraham [1980] for a detailed description of this

      data set. As with the Company C data, the promotion equation

      with no performance rating dummies produced a negative and

      strongly significant service effect. Introducing the

      performance rating dummies moved the service effect towards

      zero, though the shift was much less pronounced than in the

      Company C data.

19.   See Yanker [1980] for a more detailed discussion of these data

      and some related estimates.

20.   See Medoff and Abraham [1980] and Medoff and Abraham [19811.

21.   See Abraham and Medoff [1983].




                                —28—
                              REFERENCE S




Abraham, Katharine G. and James L. Medoff, "Length of Service, Term-
      inations and the Nature of the Employment
                                                Relationship", mimeo,
      January 1983.

Becker, Gary S., Human Capital, 2nd ed., New York: National Bureau
      of Economic Research, 1975.

Bureau of National Affairs, "Basic Patterns in Seniority Provisions,"
      Daily Labor Report, March 25, 1983, pp. El—E2.

Dean, Edwin, "Implicit Contracting, Union Strength, and Seniority,"
      mimeo, Industrial Relations Research Association, Proceedings
      of the Thirty—Fifth Annual Meeting, December 1982.

Medoff, James and Katharine Abraham, "Are Those Paid More Really More
      Productive?: The Case of Experience," Journal of Human
      Resources, XVI (Spring 1981), pp. 186—216.

                             "Experience, Performance and Earnings,"
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, VC (December 1980), pp. 703—736,

Mills, Quinn, "Promotions and Human Capital Theory," mimeo, December
      1982.

Mincer, Jacob, Schooling, Experience and Earnings, New York:
      National Bureau of Economic Research, 1974.

Olson, Craig, and Chris Berger, "The Relationship Between Seniority,
      Ability and the Promotion of Union and Nonunion Workers," in
      Advances in Industrial and Labor Relations, Lipsky and Douglas,
      eds., Greenwich, Connecticut: JAI Press Inc., 1982.

Slichter, Sumner H., James J. Healy and E. Robert Livernash, The
      Impact of Collective Bargaining on Management. Washington,
      D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1960.

U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Major
      Collective Agreements: Seniority in Promotion and Transfer
      Provisions, Bulletin No. 1425—il, Washington: Government
      Printing Office, 1970.

Yanker, Robert H., "Productivity Versus Seniority: What is the
      Determining Factor in Regard to Wages and Promotion?", Harvard
      College Senior Honors Thesis, 1980




                                —29—
