                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             FIVE FACTS YOU NEED TO KNOW
                             ABOUT TECHNOLOGY DIFFUSION

                                          Diego Comin
                                           Bart Hobijn
                                          Emilie Rovito

                                       Working Paper 11928
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w11928


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2006




Correspondence to: Diego Comin, Department of Economics, New York University, 269 Mercer
Street, 7th Floor, New York, NY 10003. E-mail: diego.comin@nyu.edu. The views in this paper
solely reflect those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, nor those of the Federal System as a whole. We would like to thank Erick Gong and Ana
Maria Santacreu for their execellent research assistance. This project has benefitted from the
interaction with Fernando Alvarez, Robert Barro, Jess Benhabib, John Coleman, Boyan Jovanovic,
Sam Kortum, Greg Mankiw and Ed Prescott. We also appreciate the financial assistance of the NSF
(Grant # SES-0517910) and of the C.V. Starr Center for Applied Economics. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2006 by Diego Comin, Bart Hobijn and Emilie Rovito. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Five Facts You Need to Know About Technology Diffusion
Diego Comin, Bart Hobijn and Emilie Rovito
NBER Working Paper No. 11928
January 2006
JEL No. O33, O47, O57

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper presents a new data set on the diffusion of about 115 technologies in over 150 countries

over the last 200 years. We use this comprehensive data set to uncover general patterns of technology

diffusion. Our main 5 findings are as follows: (i) Once the intensive margin is measured,

technologies do not diffuse in a logistic way. (ii) Within a typical technology, the dispersion in the

adoption levels across countries is about 5 times larger than the cross-country dispersion in income

per capita. (iii) The rankings of countries by level of technology adoption are very highly correlated

across technologies. (iv) Within a typical technology, there has been convergence at an average rate

of 4 percent per year. (v) The speed of convergence for technologies developed since 1925 has been

three times higher than the speed of convergence for technologies developed before 1925.

Diego Comin
Department of Economics
New York University
269 Mercer Street, 72
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
diego.comin@nyu.edu

Bart Hobijn
bart.hobijn@ny.frb.org

Emilie Rovito
emilie.rovito@ny.frb.org
Technology plays a central role in macroeconomics and in economic development. Real business cycle

theory places technology at the root of economic fluctuations (Kydland and Prescott [1982]). Growth

theory has long postulated that improvements in technology are the source of long-run growth (Solow

[1956], Romer [1990] and Aghion and Howitt [1992]) and that differences in technology are the main

determinant of income per capita differences across countries (Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare [1997] and

Hsieh and Klenow [2003]).

   To test these and other assertions of macro theory it is quite important to have direct measures of

technology; however, current measures of technology are not completely satisfactory.

   The Solow residual, the most commonly applied measure of technology, has been criticized

because, in addition to technology, it also captures the variation in capacity utilization (Basu [1995]),

labor hoarding (Burnside et al. [1995]), and the inefficiencies of the economy (Weil [2005] ch.10).

   A more direct way of measuring technology involves measuring the share of potential adopters that

have adopted a given technology at a point in time (Griliches [1957], Mansfield [1961], Gort and

Klepper [1982], and Skinner and Staiger [2005]). This approach has two drawbacks. First, while this

measure captures the extensive margin of technology adoption, it neglects the intensive margin (i.e.

how intensively each potential adopter uses the technology). Second, it is complicated to measure the

number of potential adopters. As a result, the diffusion of only a limited number of technologies can be

documented using such measures.

   This paper has two goals. First, it presents a new data set on direct measures of technology

adoption. Since technology is often embodied in capital goods, many of our measures correspond to

the number of specific capital goods per capita. We measure computers and telephones in this way.

Other technologies take the form of new production techniques. In these cases we can measure the

diffusion of the technology either by the share of output produced with the technique (i.e. share of steel



                                                  -2-
produced with blast oxygen furnaces) or directly by the technique’s level of diffusion (i.e. number of

credit and debit card transactions or cheques issued, both on per capita basis).

   Our Cross-Country Historical Adoption of Technology (CHAT) data set covers the diffusion of

about 115 technologies in over 150 countries during the last 200 years. These technologies cover most

sectors of economic activity.

   Since we measure technology directly, our measures are not subject to the type of criticisms raised

against the Solow residual. Furthermore, as in Comin and Hobijn [2004], our measures of technology

capture both the extensive and the intensive margins of diffusion.

   Besides presenting the data set, the second goal of this paper is to uncover general characteristics of

technology adoption patterns both across countries and over time. We start this search by providing a

number of illustrative examples taken from the CHAT data set. However, because of the large number

of technologies and countries in the dataset, merely presenting the data does not allow us to extract

common patterns more formally. We overcome this complication by using simple summary statistics to

document a set of general patterns in the international diffusion of technology.

   Five facts emerge from this exploration.

   First, once the intensive margin is taken into account, the evolution of the level of the technology in

the country does not typically follow an S-shaped pattern.

   Second, the cross-country dispersion of the level of technology is much larger than the dispersion

of income per capita. On average, the dispersion of technology per capita is between 3 and 5 times

larger than the dispersion of income per capita, and for 68 percent of the technologies the cross-

country dispersion of the technology level is larger than the dispersion of income per capita.

   Third, there are universal leaders and universal followers in technology among the countries in the

world. That is, the rankings of countries according to the technology adoption level in a given year are



                                                   -3-
highly correlated across technologies. The median correlation is 0.78. Among OECD countries, the

universality of technological leadership is weaker. The median correlation of country rankings across

technologies within the OECD is 0.54.

   Fourth, there is absolute convergence in 91 percent of the technologies of our CHAT data set. The

average speed of convergence is 3.7 percent per year. Thus, half of the distance to the steady state is

covered in 19 years.

   Fifth, the speed of convergence of technology across countries has accelerated over time. The

median speed of convergence for technologies invented before 1925 has been about 2 percent per year.

The median speed of convergence for technologies invented between 1925 and 1950 has been 5.5

percent per year, and, for the technologies invented since 1950, the median speed of convergence has

been about 6 percent per year.

   The rest of the paper is structured as follows. The next section discusses the various conceptual and

practical issues of measuring technology. Section 2 presents the illustrative examples of several

diffusion curves that we use to point out the general patterns documented in the subsequent sections.

Section 3 explores the shape of diffusion curves for each country-technology pair and shows that S-

shaped diffusion is only applicable for a limited set of technologies. Section 4 studies the cross-country

dispersion of technology levels and compares it to the cross-country dispersion of income per capita.

Section 5 examines the rankings of countries by level of adoption to see whether some countries tend

to lead in all technologies or lead in some and trail in others. Section 6 looks at the cross-country

convergence of technology and the evolution of the speed of convergence over time. Section 7

concludes.




                                                  -4-
                                                1. Measurement

According to the Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, technology is

            “a manner of accomplishing a task especially using technical processes, methods, or knowledge”

Next we discuss various conceptual and practical issues that arise when attempting to measure

technology levels.


                                              1.a Conceptual issues
One approach to measuring technology diffusion, used in Griliches [1957] and Mansfield [1961],

assumes that the adoption of technologies is a binary decision; producers or consumers can either

adopt a technology or not adopt it. The ratio of the number of users of the technology to the number

of potential users measures this extensive margin.

   For some technologies, however, the intensive margin may be as relevant as the extensive. For

example, in transportation technologies, the improvement in productivity is proportional to the

frequency of use, not to whether the technology is used at all; for computers and cars it is not

unreasonable to think that, in the long run, each potential adopter may adopt more than one unit of the

good. Similarly, technological change in cotton spinning has been directed toward increasing the

number of spindles that each worker can operate simultaneously. Thus, we consider it necessary to

incorporate the intensive margin into measurement of technology diffusion. By doing that, we may be

studying a different phenomenon than what the diffusion literature has previously explored, and some

new terminology might be necessary. Conversely, one may think that technologies also diffuse along the

intensive margin and employing the traditional terminology to refer to more comprehensive measures

of the adoption of technologies may be appropriate. This latter opinion is our view on the matter, and,




                                                        -5-
in the rest of the paper, we continue to talk about technology diffusion as encompassing both the

intensive and the extensive margins.

    To capture the intensive margin, we use measures of technology for which the numerator depends

on the intensity with which each producer or consumer adopts the technology. For example, the

diffusion of credit and debit cards is measured by the number of credit and debit card transactions per

capita or by the number of points of service per capita, instead of by the share of people that has at

least one credit card. This latter measure would capture only the extensive margin.

    A second important issue concerns the heterogeneity of units in our multiple measures of

technology. We remove units from our measures either by taking logs (i.e. log of number of MRI units

per capita) or by looking at shares (i.e. share of farmland that uses high yield varieties).

    The problem of units, however, does not fully address the larger question of how to measure

technology, which can enter the economy in many forms and often cannot be separated from other

inputs to production. Many new technologies are embodied in new capital. Their degree of adoption is

therefore proportional to the amount of the existent capital in which they are embodied. Thus, it can be

difficult to determine if cross-country differences in these technologies are due to cross-country

variation in aggregate capital per capita or in the degree of adoption of technologies. We answer this

question by comparing the cross-country dispersion in our measures of embodied technology to the

cross-country dispersion in aggregate capital per capita. The differential in the dispersion of embodied

technologies over the dispersion in aggregate capital per capita is due to the dispersion in technology.

    One of the well-known Kaldor facts is that the capital-output ratio is roughly constant across

countries. This implies that the cross-country dispersion in aggregate capital per capita is similar to the

cross-country dispersion in income per capita. Based on this, we take the dispersion in income per

capita as the benchmark for the embodied measures of technologies.



                                                     -6-
    Not all of our technologies are measured with capital per capita; some are measured by the capital

or output share associated to a new technology. These measures capture the diffusion of a particular

production process or technique. Since the diffusion of these technologies typically involves capital

substitution, it should not lead to capital deepening. The share of spindles that are ring or the share of

steel produced with open hearth furnaces should thus be immune to variation in capital per worker. For

these technological measures, the observed cross-country variation reflect only cross-country

differences in technology.

    Another potentially interesting distinction is between technologies exclusively used for production

and those also used by consumers. It may be argued that the latter are less interesting because home

production output and consumer’s utility are left largely outside national accounting. Many technologies

described as consumer technologies, however, including cell phones and cars, are important in the

production of some services. In addition, since we have only about 13 technologies that are used

primarily by consumers in our data set, the effect of their inclusion in our analysis will be small.

    Finally, after analyzing each individual technology, we need to aggregate the results. One way to

aggregate over technologies is to use the GDP share of each technology’s sector. However, this

approach presents two problems. First, we do not have a time series on sectoral shares for all countries

in the data set. Second, these weights will depend on the level of aggregation used when assigning

technologies to sectors. To avoid these complications, we restrict our analysis to technologies that have

a significant effect in the sector and report both means and medians of the distribution of statistics by

technology.


                                            1.b Practical issues
To make cross-country and time-series comparisons of the level of technology, the objects measured

must be as homogenous as possible. We try to mitigate this problem by measuring precisely defined


                                                    -7-
technologies. In some cases, such as credit and debit card transactions or tons of steel produced with

Bessemer furnaces, the measure of technology is relatively homogenous both over time and across

countries. In others, such as cars, there are important differences in the quality of the object measured

over time and across countries. One factor that moderates in part the differences in quality is the

positive correlation between demand and the quality of a technology. As a result, our quantity measures

of technology partially reflect the cross-country and time-series variation in the quality of technologies.

    In order to be useful for inferring general patterns of technology diffusion, the data set must be

comprehensive in at least three dimensions. First, it must contain information on technologies that

span the most relevant sectors of economic activity. Second, it is important that the list of technologies

covers production activities within sectors densely. Given the micro nature of our technologies,

individual technologies may not be representative of the technological state of the sector; we have thus

included multiple measures of technology for each sector. Third, the data set must cover both advanced

and developing countries in significant numbers. This diversity overcomes the sample selection bias

that may arise when focusing on a sample of developed countries (DeLong [1988]).

    The final practical concern is that the measures of technology sought must be easy to find. One of

the main drawbacks of the traditional measures of the diffusion literature is that, in the last 50 years,

researchers have been able to document the diffusion of a relatively small number of technologies in a

few countries; measuring the number of producers that use a particular technology or the number of

producers that potentially could requires micro-level data that is difficult to find. It is therefore

important that we are able to compute our measures of diffusion using aggregate national data instead

of information at the plant or producer level.




                                                    -8-
                                       1.c The CHAT Data Set
The Cross-Country Historical Adoption of Technology data set is an unbalanced panel with

information on the diffusion of about 115 technologies in over 150 countries during the last 200 years.

Table A1 (in the appendix) describes for each country the number of technologies for which we have

data that span at least three five-year periods. The average number of technologies per country is about

34, while the median is 28. Table 1 describes the geographic distribution of the countries in our sample

and the distribution of the number of technologies (that span at least three consecutive five-year

periods) for countries in each continent. One interesting feature of the data set is that even in

continents that have predominantly low income countries, such as Africa, the number of technologies

in the typical country is fairly large. In this respect, the CHAT data set improves on previous data sets

on technology diffusion, including the HCCTAD, which was presented in Comin and Hobijn [2004]

and covered the diffusion of 25 technologies in 23 developed economies.

   In addition to covering the countries in the world evenly, a comprehensive data set on technology

diffusion must also represent the various sectors in the economy. Table 2 describes the number of

technologies covered by the CHAT data set in each of 8 major sectors in which the technologies are

primarily used. These are agriculture, finance, health, steel, telecommunications, textiles, tourism, and

transportation. Three of our technologies, namely electricity production, the number of computers, and

the number of internet users, are used across the economy. They represent general purpose

technologies and thus defy categorization by sector; we place them in a separate group.

   The first observation from Table 2 is that the data set covers eight sectors that represent a majority

of GDP in most of the countries. In the U.S., for example, the sectors covered by the data set

represented approximately 55 percent of the value added in the private sector in 2000.




                                                  -9-
    In addition, the data set covers a substantial number of technologies in each of the sectors. These

range from 2 technologies in tourism to 49 in health. Along this dimension, the CHAT data set also

constitutes a substantial improvement over the HCCTAD, which does not contain information on the

technologies in agriculture, finance, health, and tourism and has only 25 technologies, instead of about

115.



                                        2. Illustrative examples

Before exploring the general patterns of technology diffusion, it is useful to consider some specific

examples. This will enable us to illustrate the general patterns uncovered in the sections that follow.

    One of the main conclusions from the empirical literature on technology diffusion has been that S-

shaped curves, such as the logistic, provide a good approximation to the diffusion of technologies. In

Figure 1 we present one technology, the share of modern varieties in the total area cultivated, that

diffuses approximately in an S-shaped manner. It reflects the extensive margin with which modern

variety agricultural technologies are used.

    However, for technologies for which the intensive margin is more relevant, S-shaped curves do not

appear to provide a good fit for diffusion patterns. This is the case, for example, in Figures 2 and 3,

which cover the diffusion of planes and cars, respectively. More specifically, Figure 2 plots the (log of

the) passenger-kilometers traveled by plane per capita, while Figure 3 plots the (log of) cars per capita.

    Another a striking feature of these figures is the large cross-country dispersion present in diffusion.

The number of per capita aviation passenger-kilometers traveled in the U.S. in 1960 was 400 times

larger than in China and almost 150 times larger than in India in the same year. The number of cars per

capita in the U.S. in 1960 was 400 times larger than in India and, as late as 2000, it was about 50 times

larger than in China or India. These disparities are very big when compared to the large gap in income



                                                   - 10 -
per capita between the U.S. and China and India (a factor of about 20). Moreover, they do not reflect

the quality differential between cars in the U.S. and cars in China or India.

    The large disparity in technology diffusion across countries is ubiquitous across sectors. Figure 4

illustrates this point with the (log of) kilowatts of electricity produced per capita.

    A complementary way to address this issue is to measure how many years it took country B to

reach the level country A had in year Y. Answering this question is only possible with a long time series.

Data this extensive is often not available. For the case of telephones, however, we have sufficient data

to measure the cross-country technological distance in time. As illustrated in Figure 5, the distances are

fairly large and vary substantially across countries. For example, the level of phones per capita in the

U.S. had in 1910 was reached by France 45 years later, by South Africa 55 years later, by Brazil 65 years

later, by China more than 80 years later, and by India 90 years later; Tanzania still has fewer phones per

capita than the U.S. in 1910.

    Interestingly, this enormous dispersion in technology diffusion is also present within advanced

economies. Figures 6, 7 and 8 display the diffusion of technologies in the service sector. Figures 6 and 7

depict the diffusion of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computer-assisted tomography (CAT)

scanners, respectively, by looking at the log of units per capita. Figure 8 covers the diffusion of a

technology in the financial sector, namely the log of the number of credit and debit card payments per

capita.

    The multidimensional nature of technology implies that for the large cross-country differences in

technology adoption to lead to large cross-country differences in the overall technological level, the

relative position of countries in technology adoption must be highly correlated across technologies. In

other words, there must be universal technology leaders and universal followers across technologies.

Figures 2 through 5 support the consistency in technological leadership from a worldwide perspective.



                                                    - 11 -
Figures 6 through 8 demonstrate that, within the OECD, country rankings in technology adoption are

less correlated across technologies.

    After studying the distribution of technology adoption levels in the cross-section, it is interesting to

explore its dynamics. In particular, we can investigate whether the differences in the speed of

technology adoption across countries decline over time. Figure 9 presents the diffusion of cell phones.

The gap between the U.S. and China in the number of cell phones per capita has reduced from a factor

of about 1100 in 1990 to about 7 in 2000. This convergence in the technology adoption levels is also

evident in most of the other technologies whose diffusion curves we have presented so far.

    Because of the multidimensional nature of technology, however, we can look for a new notion of

convergence that does not arise in one-dimensional variables such as income per capita. We can

examine whether the speed with which followers catch up to the technological leaders has accelerated

for recent technologies relative to technologies that were invented earlier. Figures 10 and 11 represent

the diffusion of computers and the internet, respectively. The diffusion of these technologies in the

U.S. in 1990 was, respectively, 490 and 13,000 times more extensive than in China, while in 2000 the

gap was reduced by a factor of 14 for computers and to a factor of 480 for the internet. In earlier

technologies, such as automobiles or electricity, the diffusion of these technologies in the U.S. in 1990

was 20 and 400 times more extensive than in China. By 2000, this gap was reduced by a factor of 7 and

8, respectively. These illustrative examples suggest that the convergence within newer technologies is

faster than within older technologies.

    Next, we go beyond these illustrative examples to show that the basic observations presented in this

section constitute robust facts about the general diffusion patterns of the CHAT data set.




                                                   - 12 -
                                    3. Diffusion Curves are not Logistic

At least since Griliches [1957], economists have acknowledged the good approximation that S-shaped

curves, such as the logistic, provide to the process of technology diffusion as measured by the extensive

margin. The logistic curve is defined by

                                                                                δ1
                                                         Yt =
                                                                      [1 − e (   − δ 2 +δ 3t )
                                                                                                 ]                   (1)

where t represents time, in our case measured in years, δ3 reflects the speed of adoption, δ2 is a constant

of integration that positions the curve on the time scale, and δ1 is the long-run outcome, i.e. the limit of

Yt for t going to infinity.

    Several features of this curve are relevant. First of all, it asymptotes to 0 when t goes to minus

infinity and to δ1 when t goes to infinity. Secondly, it is symmetric around the inflection point of

Yt=0.5δ1 which occurs at t=-δ2/δ3. Finally, the one percent diffusion point (i.e. the time in which

Yt=0.01δ1) is given by t=(-ln(0.99)-δ2)/δ3. On account of its good fit when the extensive margin of

adoption is measured, the logistic has often been used to reduce the process of technology diffusion to

the three parameters that define it, namely δ1, δ2, and δ3.

    The first question that we investigate is whether this approximation of a country’s technology

diffusion still provides a reasonable approximation once the measure of technology diffusion

incorporates the intensive margin. To answer this question we fit a logistic curve to each of the 5700

technology-country pairs and explore the implications of the estimates. Specifically, let Yijt be the level

of technology i in country j at time t. The curve we fit is as follows:


                                                                             ] + ε ijt where ε ijt ~ N (0, σ ij2 )
                                                     ( −δ 2 ij −δ 3 ij t )
                              Yijt = δ 1ij /[1 + e                                                                   (2)




                                                                        - 13 -
    We first find that, for 23 percent of the technology-country combinations, it is not possible to fit

logistic to the diffusion curves, likely because of the data’s lack of curvature. When the diffusion line

does not have sufficient curvature, the log-likelihood function is flat for many parameter

configurations, and it is therefore not possible to determine the parameter configuration that maximizes

the log-likelihood function. In these circumstances, we cannot identify the parameters that govern the

curvature of the logistic. We take this as an indication that the logistic provides a poor approximation

to the diffusion of technology i in country j.

    When the estimation converges, the R2 tends to be very high. In particular, conditional on obtaining

an estimate, the R2 is above .90 for 92 percent of the technology-country pairs.

    The R2 is not a good measure of fit for logistic curves. It is well known that, since both the fitted

logistic curves and the data contain trends, the high R2s reflect the fit of this trend and not of the

fluctuations around it. Therefore, for a better sense of the appropriateness of the logistic

approximation, we have to go beyond the R2.

    In particular, we explore how the data conforms to three properties of the logistic. First, logistic

curves increase monotonically from the introduction of the technology to a ceiling. This implies that

the estimate of δ3ij should be positive. This is the case for a majority of technology-country pairs, but a

substantial number of pairs (929 out of 4381) have a negative estimate of δ3ij. In some instances, such as

open hearth steel production or the number of mule spindles, the negative estimate of δ3ij results from

the partial or complete replacement of the technology by a better technology. The replacement of a

dominated technology may, of course, be consistent with a logistic diffusion.

    In other cases, however, the negative estimate of δ3ij does not result from the replacement of the

technology but simply from the fact that the use of technology is growing at a lower rate than the




                                                  - 14 -
population. The example of cars in Tanzania illustrated in Figure 3 provides a good example of this

phenomenon. These cases contradict the hypothesis of logistic diffusion.

       In order to precisely identify cases that violate this property of logistic diffusion, we would have to

examine each of the 929 pairs individually. This would involve an, in large part, arbitrary classification

of our results. However, we can make a conservative estimate of the number of technology-country

pairs for which the negative estimate of δ3ij does not result from the substitution by a superior

technology. Since the relative productivity of two competing technologies is likely to be similar across

countries, the introduction of a superior technology will likely induce the eventual replacement of the

original technology in all countries and will thus produce negative estimates of δ3ij for a majority of

countries. Therefore, we can use the fraction of negative estimates of δ3ij to guide our judgments.

       For 17 out of 116 technologies in CHAT, at least 50 percent of the countries have negative

estimates for δ3ij. As expected, the technologies include measures such as open hearth and Bessemer

steel production and the number of sail ships, hospital beds, and cheques, all of which have been

recently dominated by another technology. In addition, only a few technologies with a high prevalence

of countries with negative estimates of δ3ij., such as pesticide usage and the number of varicose vein

correction procedures, clearly have no superior technology. Meanwhile, the list of technologies that do

not have a majority of negative estimates of δ3ij includes a few technologies, such as the number of

telegrams sent, that have been dominated in some countries. Using the 50 percent cutoff as a general

guide for selecting non-dominated technologies, we find that 462 of the 929 technology-country pairs

with a negative estimate of δ3ij violate one of the assumptions of logistic diffusion by not increasing

monotonically to a ceiling (Table 3, row 4).1


1   From this point forward, we consider only technologies with positive curvature parameters.




                                                                   - 15 -
       Next, we explore the predicted initial adoption dates to detect further issues with the logistic

approach. To determine predicted initial adoption dates, we use our estimates of equation (2) to find

the predicted time at which 1 percent of the estimated ceiling adoption level was reached. Then, we

compare these to each technology’s invention date. Figures 12 and 13 plot these predicted adoption

dates and actual invention dates for every technology-country pair2. Figure 13 zooms in Figure 12 and

only shows the technologies invented during the last 200 years.

       Two types of red flags emerge from these figures. For 210 of the technology-country pairs for

which we have a positive estimate of the slope, the predicted initial date of diffusion is prior to the

invention date of the technology. For some technologies for which we do not have an invention date,

such as hospital beds or irrigation, it is harder to determine precisely when a predicted initial adoption

date is too early to be reasonable. Even after taking this fact into consideration, however, the estimated

initial adoption dates are still implausibly early for some countries. Taking a conservative invention date

of 1000BC, we find an additional 14 technology-country pairs with implausibly early predicted adoption

dates.

       These implausible estimates reflect the fact that the diffusion of the technology does not follow a

logistic pattern in these countries. More precisely, it likely happens because the identified diffusion

curves are concave. When fitting a logistic to a curve that is concave, the steeper region of the curve

will be fit near to inflexion point of the logistic, and, as a result, the predicted 1 percent adoption level

will occur much earlier than the actual one. This can be seen in Figure 14, which presents the actual

diffusion of televisions in Sweden (in solid) and the diffusion predicted by fitting a logistic (in dash).

       The opposite situation, an unrealistically late predicted initial adoption date, also suggests the failure

of the logistic approximation. Technically, this may occur for two different reasons. First, the diffusion


2   For clarity we have not included in the plots the technologies already available in 1500. The invention date of these technologies is more
     difficult to establish.



                                                                     - 16 -
data for the technology may be relatively flat initially with a slight acceleration at the end of the sample.

The logistic interprets this acceleration as indication that the inflexion point has not yet been reached

and places the predicted initial adoption date close to the first available observation; in some cases, the

first observation in our data set may correspond to a date posterior to the invention. Figure 15

illustrates this argument with the diffusion of cars in Taiwan. Second, the logistic may predict an

unrealistically late initial adoption date if the first observation in sample is significantly later than the

invention date and if the slope of the diffusion data’s curve is initially steep before flattening. As

illustrated with the diffusion of newspapers in Germany in Figure 16, the logistic fits the first

observation near to the inflexion point. Since the curve is initially very steep, the predicted initial

adoption date is close to the first observation. In reality, however, diffusion has not occurred

symmetrically, and it has taken many years to reach the level at which our sample starts. In addition, the

initial level in sample is substantially higher than one percent of the “estimated ceiling”. As a result, the

logistic predicts that the one percent adoption level is reached close to the beginning of sample, while,

in reality, that level was reached long before.

       The identification of these cases is a bit arbitrary since, as we have seen in Figure 5, some countries

tend to lag the technological leaders for as long as a century. Given that the existence of data for a

technology implies that diffusion has begun, we assume that the 1 percent level must be reached soon

after our initial observation. We will assume that the initial adoption date predicted by the logistic is

unreasonably late if either it is at least 150 years after the invention date or at least 20 years after the

first observation we have in sample for the pair.3 We find 294 additional technology-country pairs are

poorly approximated by the logistic in this respect (Table 3, row 5).


3   We omit the technologies without precise invention dates when identifying cases in which initial adoption falls more than 150 years after
     the invention date.




                                                                    - 17 -
    One final, critical property of S-shaped diffusion curves is that their convergence to a fixed ceiling.

Once the intensive margin is included, this condition no longer necessarily holds. Indeed, based on the

plots in Figures 2, 4, 5, 8, and 9, we can see that technological measures such as aviation passenger-

kilometers, electricity, telephones, credit and debit card payments, and cell phones violate this property.

However, as with the share of negative estimates of δ3ij, it is not trivial to determine exactly how many

of our technology-country pairs have a moving ceiling. However, it seems reasonable to attempt to

identify technologies that clearly fit this profile. To the list above we can conservatively add steam and

motor ship tonnage; rail passengers-kilometers; railway freight tonnage; tons of blast-oxygen furnace,

electric-arc furnace, and stainless steel produced; cars; trucks; aviation freight ton-kilometers; TVs; PCs;

credit and debit card points of service; ATMs; and cheques, all in per capita terms. The variable ceiling

that characterizes a priori the diffusion of these technologies generates 1171 additional deviations from

the logistic pattern (row 6 in Table 3). This brings the total number of technology-country pairs for

which the diffusion is not well characterized by the logistic to 3507 out of the 5700 technology-country

pairs in our sample. Hence, we conclude with the first finding of our analysis.

        Fact 1: Once the intensive margin is included in the measure of technology diffusion, the S-shaped
        curves, and in particular the logistic, provide a poor description of the diffusion process.



                                 4. Cross-country Dispersion in Technology

One important rationale for looking directly at technology is to assess the role of technological

differences as a determinant of the cross-country dispersion in income per capita. If technology is an

important driving force of differences in standards of living, observed cross-country disparities in

technology must be large. To explore whether this is the case, for each technology and year, we




                                                            - 18 -
compute the dispersion of the technology levels across countries and compare it to the dispersion of

income per capita for the same groups of countries.

    This analysis requires that our dispersion statistics are unaffected by the units of the technology

measures. We achieve this in two ways. First, we express the differences in technology adoption levels

in log per capita terms, which do not depend on units of measurement; therefore, we measure their

dispersion with the cross-country variance. For the technologies measured as shares, we compute

dispersion with the coefficient of variation. Then we compare the cross-country dispersion of each

technology with the cross-country dispersion of either the log of income per capita (for log per capita

technologies) or income per capita (for shares) across the same set of countries. This results in one ratio

of dispersion measure for each technology for each five-year period. We aggregate all this information

across technologies both weighted by the length of our time series (measured by the number of five-

year periods for which we have data) and un-weighted.

   Table 4 reports the average ratio of cross-country dispersion of technology over the cross-country

dispersion of income per capita. To have a better sense of the distribution of these ratios, Table 4 also

reports the percentage of cases in which the cross-country dispersion in technology is larger than the

cross-country dispersion in income per capita.

    The main conclusion from this analysis is that cross-country differences in the adoption of

technologies are much larger than income per capita differences. The ratio of the variances is on

average 5 when we weight technologies by the length of their time series and 3 when we do not weight.

It is not merely a few outliers driving this large dispersion; for 76 percent of the technology-periods the

cross-country dispersion in technology adoption is larger than the dispersion in income per capita.

When giving equal weights to the technologies, we still find that the cross-country dispersion is larger

than the dispersion in income per capita in 68 percent of the technologies.



                                                  - 19 -
    We do observe that the cross-country dispersion in the 13 consumer technologies in CHAT is

larger than for the rest of log-per capita technologies. In particular, the un-weighted average of the ratio

of the dispersion of consumer technologies to the dispersion in log income per capita is slightly below

7; when weighted by the length of series, the ratio is 9.8.



    Finally, the cross-country dispersion of technology relative to income per capita seems to be smaller

for technologies measured as shares than for technologies measured in log per capita terms. However,

even in the former, cross-country dispersion in technology adoption is comparable to the cross-country

dispersion in income per capita.

    Based on these facts, we summarize the main conclusion from our exploration of the cross-country

variation in technology adoption and income.

        Fact 2: The cross-country dispersion in technology adoption for individual technologies is 3 to 5 times
        larger than cross-country dispersion in income per capita.



                                      5. Universal Technology Leaders

The multidimensional nature of technology makes it possible to understand the correlation of relative

positions of countries across technologies. This is relevant for two reasons. First, given the large

observed cross-country dispersion in individual technology adoption (Fact 2), a high correlation of

rankings across technologies implies that there are big cross-country differences in aggregate

technology levels. Second, as we shall see in the next section, the persistence of country rankings across

technologies in the initial stages of adoption may have important consequences for the dynamics of the

cross-country distribution of overall technology levels.




                                                          - 20 -
       One practical problem with considering a country’s percentile at a point in time stems from the way

that relative position depends on the country coverage of the data set for that technology and period;

variation in the country coverage may significantly distort the rankings of countries. We mitigate this

potential problem in two ways. First, we conduct two separate analyses, one using only OECD

countries and the other using only technologies that cover both OECD and non-OECD countries..

With this strategy, we lessen the effect of variation in the mix of rich and poor countries in the sample

when assigning rankings. In addition, we also remove from our analysis the technology-periods for

which we have very few countries in sample. This reduces the volatility of rankings of countries in the

initial stages of diffusion when the data set includes only a few countries.4

       To compute the correlations between country rankings in a technology and country rankings across

technologies we proceed as follows: First, we assign each country (j) to a percentile for each technology

(i) and 5-year period (t). Let’s denote this percentile by rijt. Then, we compute the average ranking across

technologies for each country and year, rjt. Formally,

                                                                      N jt

                                                                      ∑r
                                                                      i =1
                                                                             ijt
                                                             r jt =                ,                                                     (3)
                                                                       N jt
where Njt denotes the number of technologies for country j in period t. Finally, we compute the cross-

country correlation between the vector of rankings in the technology (rijt) and the vector of average

country rankings across technologies (rjt) for year t. This generates a correlation for each technology and

(5-year) time period. To aggregate this information we compute the average and median of these cross-

country correlations. These are reported in Table 5 both for the sub-sample of technologies that have

an even coverage of the countries in the world and for the OECD sub-sample.


4   For OECD technologies we require at least 3 countries in sample to consider the correlation. For technologies that cover both OECD
     and non-OECD countries we require a minimum of 6 countries.




                                                                  - 21 -
    The correlations of rankings across technologies are fairly high. For the technologies that cover

both OECD and non-OECD countries the average correlation is 67 percent, while the median is

78 percent. When we restrict attention to the OECD, the correlations remain high but are significantly

lower than when all the countries are included. Within the OECD sample, the average correlation of

technology rankings is 45 percent, while the median is 54 percent. Therefore, we conclude that, from a

global perspective, there are universal technological leaders and universal followers.

        Fact 3: The relative position of countries according to the degree of technology adoption is very highly
        correlated across technologies. This correlation declines significantly within the OECD.



                                                  6. Convergence

After exploring the properties of the cross-sectional distribution of technologies, we turn our attention

to the dynamics of the distribution. More specifically, we address the issue of convergence in

technology levels across countries. The convergence of income per capita levels across countries has

attracted much attention (Baumol [1986], DeLong [1988], Mankiw et al. [1992], Barro and Sala-i-Martin

[1992]).5 Because technology is an important determinant of income per capita differences, the issue of

technological convergence is of equal interest.

    One important difference from the literature on the convergence of income per capita stems from

the multidimensional nature of technology. This introduces the distinction between convergence within

a technology and convergence across technologies. That is, even if countries that start behind catch up

with leaders within each technology, the overall technology level of less advanced countries may not be

converging if less advanced countries similarly start behind in the new technologies. We proceed next

to explore the convergence first within and then across technologies.




                                                         - 22 -
                                                      6.a Within Technologies
We follow the example of the convergence of income per capita literature and estimate both measures

of absolute β-convergence and σ-convergence. We estimate the speed of β-convergence of technology i

by running the following regression for technologies measured in log-per-capita terms:

                                                                                   −β j
                                      ln(Yij ,t ) − ln(Yij ,t −1 ) = α − (1 − e           ) ln(Yij ,t −1 ) + u ij ,t                   (4)

while for technologies measured as shares we estimate β-convergence from:

                                                                                 −β j
                                             y ij ,t − y ij ,t −1 = α − (1 − e          ) y ij ,t −1 + u ij ,t                         (5)

Figures 17 and 18 display the distributions of β separately for the technologies measured in logs per

capita and those measured as shares. Table 6 reports the mean and median speed of convergence for

each type of technology. For both types of technologies combined, the average speed of convergence

has been 3.8 percent per year, while the median has been 2.6 percent per year. We observe β-

convergence in 93 percent of the log-per-capita measures and 83 percent of the technologies measured

as shares. The distributions of speeds of convergence are fairly similar for each type of measure. The

average speed of convergence is slightly higher for log-per-capita than for share variables, but the way

the technology adoption level is measured does not seem to be relevant when studying the convergence

properties of technology. For the small subset of consumer technologies, meanwhile, the average speed

of convergence is slightly smaller than for the overall group of log-per-capita technologies (2.7 vs. 4.1

percent per year).

       The absolute convergence within technologies contrasts with the established lack of convergence in

income per capita on the global level. Within the OECD, however, it is well established that income per

capita levels converge. The dichotomy in income per capita level convergence makes one wonder if the


5   Furthermore, in principle, one can explore the convergence of any variable. Comin [1997] and Hobijn and Franses [2001], for example,
     explore whether there is convergence in alternative indicators of standards of living, like life expectancy and mortality.



                                                                   - 23 -
within-technology convergence comes only from OECD countries converging to the technological

leader. To answer this question we analyze the technologies for which we have data for both OECD

and non-OECD countries. For these technologies we estimate the speed of convergence within the

OECD and compare it to the speed of convergence worldwide. In Table 7 we observe that, for these

technologies, the worldwide speed of convergence is on average 2.9 percent per year while within the

OECD the average speed of convergence for these technologies is 1.9 percent per year. Hence,

contrary to what we observe in income per capita, non-OECD countries converge to the adoption level

of technological leaders faster than the technological laggards within the OECD.

    σ-convergence provides an alternative way to describe the evolution of the cross-country

distribution of technology over time. We estimate the speed of σ-convergence in technology i, βσi, by

running the following regression:

                                                          −2 β j
                                        σ 2j ,t = α + e            σ 2j ,t −1 + u j ,t                 (6)

where σ2jt is the cross-country standard deviation of technology j at year t. To avoid the bias produced

by the gradual inclusion of countries to the sample, we make sure that every year the cross-country

measures of technology used as left and right-hand-side variables in regression (3) are computed over

the same sample of countries. Columns 4 through 6 of Table 6 report the mean and median speeds of

σ-convergence. The average of the technology speeds of convergence estimated from equation (3) is

7 percent per year, and the median speed of convergence is 4.1 percent per year. These estimates are 80

and 60 percent higher than the estimates obtained from the β speeds of convergence regression (2).

Qualitatively, the β and σ estimates of the speed of convergence within a technology are consistent. Not

only is the fraction of convergent technologies similar (89 percent for β vs. 80 percent for σ), but also

the β and σ-speeds of convergence are positively correlated across technologies (42 percent for the 109

technologies for which β is smaller than .5).


                                                     - 24 -
    The disparity in the average speed of β and σ convergence may be an indication that the system that

governs the dynamics of technology diffusion has multiple state variables. In this case, the dynamics of

the system would not be well approximated by only the current state of the specific technology. Our

goal here, however, is to provide a statistical description of the dynamics of technology diffusion and

not to interpret these estimates in a structural way.

    Based on these results we reach the following conclusion.

        Fact 4: There is convergence within technologies. The average speed of convergence is between 4 and 7
        percent per year.


                                            6.b Across Technologies
The presence of cross-country convergence within technologies may not be sufficient to guarantee the

convergence of overall technology levels. If new technologies arrive continuously and laggard countries

tend to start behind in most new technologies, that effect will counterbalance the catch up that takes

place within existing technologies. As a result, follower countries will not catch up in the overall

technological level unless the speed of convergence within technologies accelerates over time. This

situation is represented in Figures 19 and 20 in which we see the trajectories for a continuum of

technologies in two countries (A, the leader, and B, the laggard). In Figure 19, the speed of convergence

within each technology is constant, and, in this stationary world, the overall technological gap between

A and B is also constant (see bottom panel). In Figure 20, the speed of diffusion of technologies in

country B accelerates over time, which increases the speed of convergence within technologies and

reduces the technological gap between A and B (see bottom panel).

    To consider which of these situations provides a better characterization of global technology

diffusion, we order the technologies in the CHAT data set by their date of invention and explore how

the speed of convergence has evolved over time. For the purposes of brevity, we only report the results


                                                       - 25 -
from this exercise using the β speed of convergence. The results for σ convergence are qualitatively very

similar. Figure 21 presents the scatter plot of the speeds of convergence of our technologies and the

evolution of the median speed of convergence for the technologies invented in each 25 year period.

Table 8 reports the evolution of the average and median speed of convergence.

       The first striking observation is that there has been a significant increase in the speed of

convergence for technologies developed after 1925.6 The average speed of convergence for

technologies developed before 1925 is 2.4 percent per year, and the median speed of convergence is

2 percent. For the technologies developed after 1925 the mean and median speeds of convergence are,

respectively, 6.7 and 5.9 percent per year. The average speed of convergence within technologies

developed after 1925 has almost tripled in comparison to those developed before 1925.

       By looking at the evolution of the average and median speed of convergence within technologies, it

is also evident that the increase in the speed of convergence of post-1925 technologies resembles more

a structural break than a smooth transition.7 The average speed of convergence of technologies

developed in the period 1900-1925 is approximately 1.5 percent per year, while the average speeds of

convergence for technologies developed in the periods 1925-1950 and 1950-1975 are 5.8 and 7.8

percent per year, respectively.

       However, before concluding that cross-country technology levels have converged faster for new

than for old technologies, we must determine whether the acceleration of the speed of convergence is

uniform across technologies or whether it is driven by the technologies that cover only OECD

countries. Figure 22 answers this question by plotting the evolution of the median speed of


6   Table A3 in the appendix details the speed of convergence for each technology together with the technology invention dates.
7
  The high average speed of convergence during the period 1850-1875 is driven entirely by acid Bessemer steel. If that
technology is removed from the sample, the average speed of convergence for the technologies developed between 1850
and 1875 becomes 2.6 percent per year.




                                                                   - 26 -
convergence for each 25-year period separating the technologies that cover only OECD economies

from the rest. The increase in the median speed of convergence is evident for both groups of

technologies; therefore, this suggests that the increase in the speed of convergence is present across

OECD and non-OECD countries.

   Thus, we conclude our analysis by stating the last finding.

       Fact 5: The cross-country speed of convergence within technologies developed after 1925 is about three
       times higher than for the technologies developed before 1925.

A corollary of Fact 4 and Fact 5 is that there seems to be evidence of absolute convergence in the

overall technology levels across countries. This finding may seem to be at odds with the observed lack

of absolute convergence in income per capita. However, it is consistent with the evolution of existing

aggregate measures of technology. In particular, we have estimated a standard convergence regression

(with no controls) on the productivity residuals that emerge from the development accounting exercise

conducted by Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare [1997]. Using this very different measure of aggregate

technology we also estimate a rapid speed of convergence (7 percent per year).



                                                   7. Conclusion

This paper has presented and begun to analyze a new data set that provides the most comprehensive

coverage to date of technology diffusion over the last 200 years. Five facts emerge from this analysis.

First, once the intensive margin is measured, technologies do not diffuse in a logistic way. Second,

within a typical technology, the dispersion in the adoption levels across countries is about 5 times larger

than the cross-country dispersion in income per capita. Third, there is a high correlation across

technologies in the rankings of countries by technology adoption. Fourth, within a typical technology,

there has been convergence at an average rate of 4 percent per year. Fifth, the speed of convergence for



                                                        - 27 -
technologies developed since 1925 has been almost three times higher than the speed of convergence

for technologies developed before 1925.

   These facts are important in themselves. Our CHAT data set allows us to uncover direct evidence

on relevant patterns in technology adoption that could not be explored using other data sets. In

addition, these stylized facts provide guidance for the development of future theories on determinants

of technology adoption.

   We leave for future research the search for correlates of our technology measures that should

provide a second set of binding constraints in the effort to uncover the determinants of the large cross-

country differences in technology adoption. Candidate correlates are not only variables that have been

suggested as determinants of income per capita, but also the intensity of other technologies that may

complement or substitute the relevant technology.




                                                 - 28 -
                                             References
Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt (1992) “A          Model of Growth through Creative Destruction,
   Econometrica 60(2): 323-351.

Barro, Robert and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (1992) “Convergence” Journal of Political Economy, Vol 100,2. pp.
   223-251.

Basu, Susanto (1996) “Procyclical Productivity, Increasing Returns or Cyclical Utilization?,” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 111(3), August, 719-751.

Baumol, William J., (1986), “Productivity Growth, Convergence, and Welfare: What the Long-Run
   Data Show”, American Economic Review, 76, 1072-1085.

Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo 1995, "Capacity Utilization and Returns to
   Scale," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Bernanke B. and J. Rotemberg, eds., 67-110.

Comin, Diego (1997) “Convergence in Health: Dream or Reality” Gaceta Sanitaria,Vol. 11, (1)

Comin, Diego, and Bart Hobijn (2004), “Cross-country technology adoption: making the theories face
   the facts”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Volume 51, 38-83.

DeLong, J. Bradford (1988), "Productivity Growth, Convergence, and Welfare: Comment," American
   Economic Review 78: 5 (December), pp. 1138-1154.

Gort, Michael, and Steven Klepper (1982), “Time Paths in the Diffusion of Product Innovations”,
   Economic Journal, 92, 630-653.

Griliches, Zvi (1957), “Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of Technological Change”,
   Econometrica, 25, 501-522.

Hobijn, Bart, and Philip Hans Franses (2001), “Are Living Standards Converging?”, Structural Change and
   Economic Dynamics, 12, 171-200.




                                                  - 29 -
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J. Klenow (2005), “Relative Prices and Relative Prosperity” mimeo
   Stanford.

Klenow, Peter J. and Andrés Rodríquez-Clare (1997), “The Neoclassical Revival in Growth Economics:
   Has It Gone Too Far?”, NBER Macroeconomics Annual, B. Bernanke and J. Rotemberg eds.,
   Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 73-102.

Kydland, Finn and Edward Prescott (1982), “Time to Build and aggregate Fluctuations”, Econometrica,
   Vol 50,6. pp. 1345-1370.

Mankiw, Gregory, David Romer and David Weil (1992), “A Contribution to the Emirics of Economic
   Growth” Quarterly journal of Economics, Vol 107,2, pp.407-437.

Mansfield, Edwin (1961), “Technical Change and the Rate of Imitation”, Econometrica, Vol. 29, No. 4.
   (Oct.), pp. 741-766.

Weil, David (2004) Economic Growth , Addison-Wesley Boston




                                                - 30 -
                                        A. Underlying details

This appendix contains more detailed information about the CHAT data set and about the estimated

rates of convergence presented in the main text. Tables A1, A2 and Figure A1 provide detailed

information about the coverage of the data that we use, while table A3 contains details about the

estimated rates of convergence.

   Table A1 lists the number of technologies we have for each of the countries in the data set. In our

analysis we have to deal both with country fragmentations and reunification processes. When a majority

of the territory remains after the fragmentation or a majority of the unified territory corresponds to just

one of the pre-unification countries we identify the unified country with the big part. In cases of

country fragmentation, we have identified a successor country in cases where a large portion of the

territory remains as a single country; in cases of unification, we have identified a precursor country in a

similar manner. Thus, Russia and the U.S.S.R have been treated as one national entity, as have

Germany and West Germany. In cases where a country divides into or merges from a number of more

equal pieces, we have chosen to treat the whole and the parts as different countries. Examples of this

approach include Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia, and Korea.

   Table A2 describes for each technology the number of countries, the type of economies, and the

time period covered.

   Table A3 presents the annual speed of β-convergence for each technology together with its

invention date. Technologies invented prior to 1500 are usually difficult to date precisely, and we list

them as pre-1500 technologies.




                                                  - 31 -
                Table 1: Geographic Distribution of Sample Countries and Technologies

                            Mean             Median          Standard Deviation
                                                                                        Number of
Region                   Technologies      Technologies      of Technologies Per
                                                                                        Countries
                         Per Country       Per Country            Country

Total                        34.2              28.0                 20.37                 159
Africa                       24.9              26.0                   9.00                 48
Asia                         28.9              26.5                   12.51                44
Europe                       49.3              41.5                   28.23                38
North America                34.0              27.5                   22.64                12
Oceania                      43.3              44.0                   21.09                 4
South America                40.0              44.0                   20.94                13




                                Table 2: Technology Sector Coverage

                                                           Technologies Per Sector

            Agriculture                                                8
            Finance                                                    5
            General Purpose                                            3
            Health                                                    49
            Steel                                                     14
            Telecommunications                                         8
            Textiles                                                   6
            Tourism                                                    2
            Transportation                                            21




                                               - 32 -
                                    Table 3: Deviations from Logistic Diffusion

                                             Number of Technology-Country Pairs               Cumulative Failure of Logistic
Total Country -Technology Pairs                                     5700

Flatness of Likelihood Surface                                      1319                                     1319

Negative Estimate of δ3                                             462                                      1781

Too Early Predicted Adoption                                        224                                      2005

Too Late Predicted Adoption                                         331                                      2336

Growing Ceiling                                                     1171                                     3507



      Table 4: Dispersion in Technology Adoption Relative to Dispersion in Income per Capita

                                      Average Dispersion                      Percentage of Instances with Ratios>1
                        Log Per Capita           Share              All    Log Per Capita          Share              All
Weighted by # of 5-
                             6.02                 1.03              5.2         84                   33               76
Year Intervals

Un-Weighted                  3.68                 0.95              3.17        75                   42               68




                      Table 5: Correlations Between Country Rankings in a Technology
                            and Average Country Rankings across Technologies

                                     Technologies Covering All Countries             Technologies Covering OECD countries
Average Correlation                                      0.67                                             0.45
Median Correlation                                       0.78                                             0.54
Number of Technologies                                     51                                              115




                                                           - 33 -
                     Table 6: Speed of Convergence Within Technologies.

                                      β-convergence                                               σ-convergence
                          Log Per                                                     Log Per
                           Capita               Shares              All                Capita           Shares     All
Average                    0.041                0.027              0.038               0.071            0.068     0.07
Median                      0.03                 0.015             0.026                0.043           0.019     0.041
Number of
                             89                    23                112                   91            24       115
technologies




               Table 7: Speed of Convergence Worldwide and Within the OECD.

                                                                       β-convergence
                                                             All Countries                      OECD
                 Average                                           0.029                        0.019
                 Median                                             0.02                        0.01
                           Note: Average and median speed of convergence over 55 technologies
                                  that cover both OECD and non-OECD countries




                                                        - 34 -
Table 8: Evolution of Speed of Convergence by Invention Date.

      Inverval            Median               Mean
     Up to 1800            0.020                0.025
                                            (0.015, 0.034)


     1801-1825             0.004                0.011
                                            (-0.004, 0.026)


     1826-1850             0.020                0.018
                                             (0.005, 0.03)


     1851-1875             0.025                0.061
                                            (0.005, 0.118)


     1876-1900             0.030                0.024
                                            (-0.005, 0.052)


     1901-1925             0.015                0.002
                                            (-0.039, 0.042)


     1926-1950             0.055                0.055
                                             (0.03, 0.079)


     1951-1975             0.087                0.087
                                            (0.059, 0.115)


     1976-2000             0.037                0.038
                                             (0.017, 0.06)




                           - 35 -
                                 Table A1: Technologies Per Country

Afghanistan                16   Egypt               43       Lebanon                 39   Saudi Arabia            34
Albania                    21   El Salvador         34       Lesotho                 16   Senegal                 28
Algeria                    44   Equatorial Guinea   9        Liberia                 17   Serbia and Montenegro   18
Angola                     26   Eritrea             3        Libya                   28   Sierra Leone            21
Argentina                  48   Estonia             20       Lithuania               19   Singapore               27
Armenia                    14   Ethiopia            29       Luxembourg              10   Slovak Republic         39
Australia                  68   Finland             95       Macedonia               16   Slovenia                22
Austria                    70   France              82       Madagascar              29   Somalia                 20
Azerbaijan                 15   Gabon               20       Malawi                  5    South Africa            44
Bangladesh                 32   Gambia              18       Malaysia                37   South Korea             44
Belarus                    16   Georgia             15       Mali                    26   Spain                   77
Belgium                    78   Germany             87       Mauritania              22   Sri Lanka               37
Belize                     4    Ghana               36       Mauritius               26   Sudan                   29
Benin                      26   Greece              61       Mexico                  78   Suriname                4
Bolivia                    29   Guatemala           27       Moldova                 21   Swaziland               17
Bosnia-Herzegovina         17   Guinea              26       Mongolia                20   Sweden                  83
Botswana                   21   Guinea-Bissau       13       Morocco                 36   Switzerland             59
Brazil                     49   Guyana              20       Mozambique              24   Syria                   33
Bulgaria                   34   Haiti               17       Namibia                 16   Taiwan                  28
Burkina Faso               18   Honduras            29       Nepal                   18   Tajikistan              13
Burma                      34   Hong Kong           19       Netherlands             77   Tanzania                27
Burundi                    20   Hungary             66       New Zealand             48   Thailand                40
Cambodia                   27   Iceland             5        Nicaragua               28   Togo                    27
Cameroon                   29   India               50       Niger                   19   Tunisia                 34
Canada                     77   Indonesia           39       Nigeria                 37   Turkey                  57
Central African Republic   20   Iran                41       North Korea             23   Turkmenistan            12
Chad                       21   Iraq                34       Norway                  65   Uganda                  27
Chile                      50   Ireland             81       Oman                    21   Ukraine                 24
China                      49   Israel              38       Pakistan                42   United Arab Emirates    24
Colombia                   45   Italy               75       Panama                  27   United Kingdom          94
Costa Rica                 26   Ivory Coast         31       Papua New Guinea        17   United States           80
Croatia                    20   Japan               59       Paraguay                27   Uruguay                 44
Cuba                       40   Jordan              26       Peru                    44   Uzbekistan              17
Czech Republic             39   Kazakhstan          17       Philippines             40   Venezuela               41
Czechoslovakia             36   Kenya               33       Poland                  62   Vietnam                 22
Dem. Rep. of the Congo     35   Korea               18       Portugal                82   Yemen                   21
Denmark                    84   Kuwait              25       Republic of the Congo   26   Yugoslavia              44
Dominican Republic         19   Kyrgyzstan          14       Romania                 39   Zambia                  28
East Germany               30   Laos                19       Russia                  44   Zimbabwe                31
Ecuador                    41   Latvia              22       Rwanda                  16




                                                         - 36 -
                           Table A2: Description of Technologies and their Coverage

Category      Variable Description                                       Number of Countries   Country Coverage   Date Range

Agriculture   Fertilizer consumed, total                                        149                   all         1965 - 2005
              Harvesters                                                        116                   all         1965 - 2005
              Irrigated area                                                    144                   all         1965 - 2005
              Milking machines                                                   53                   all         1965 - 2005
              Percent of cultivated land using modern variety crops              85               developing      1960 - 2000
              Percent of irigated land out of cultivated land                   148                   all         1965 - 2005
              Pesticide consumed, total                                         120                   all         1990 - 2000
              Tractors                                                          149                   all         1965 - 2005
Financial     ATMs                                                               33             mostly OECD       1990 - 2005
              Cheques issued                                                     39             mostly OECD       1990 - 2005
              Debit and credit card transactions                                 37             mostly OECD       1990 - 2005
              Electronic funds transfers                                         34             mostly OECD       1990 - 2005
              Points of service for debit/credit cards                           35             mostly OECD       1990 - 2005
General       Electricity production                                            149                   all         1895 - 2005
              Internet users                                                    146                   all         1990 - 2005
              Personal computers                                                129                   all         1980 - 2005
Health        Appendectomies                                                     19                OECD           1990 - 2005
              Beds: in-patient acute care                                        26                OECD           1960 - 2005
              Beds: in-patient long-term care                                    20                OECD           1960 - 2005
              Beds: total hospital                                              145                   all         1960 - 2005
              Bone marrow transplants                                            25                OECD           1975 - 2005
              Breast conservation surgeries                                      13                OECD           1995 - 2005
              Caesarean sections                                                 19                OECD           1990 - 2005
              Cardiac catheterisations                                           17                OECD           1990 - 2005
              Cataract surgeries                                                 17                OECD           1980 - 2005
              Cholecystectomies                                                  16                OECD           1980 - 2005
              Cholecystectomies, laparoscopic                                    10                OECD           1995 - 2005
              Computed tomography (CAT) scanners                                 27                OECD           1980 - 2005
              Coronary bypass procedures, in-patient                             20                OECD           1980 - 2005
              Coronary bypasses                                                  23                OECD           1990 - 2005
              Coronary interventions, percutaneous (PTCA and
              stenting)                                                          24                OECD           1990 - 2005




                                                                - 37 -
                Table A2 (continued): Description of Technologies and their Coverage

Category          Variable Description                                 Number of Countries   Country Coverage   Date Range

Health (ctd.)     Coronary stenting procedures                                 10                OECD           1995 - 2005
                  Dialysis patients                                            27                OECD           1970 - 2005
                  Dialysis patients, home                                      24                OECD           1970 - 2005
                  Heart transplants                                            25                OECD           1980 - 2005
                  Hernia procedures, inguinal and femoral                      17                OECD           1980 - 2005
                  Hip replacement surgeries                                    20                OECD           1990 - 2005
                  Hysterectomies (vaginal only)                                20                OECD           1990 - 2005
                  Kidney transplants                                           27                OECD           1965 - 2005
                  Kidney transplants, functioning                              25                OECD           1970 - 2005
                  Knee replacement surgeries                                   15                OECD           1990 - 2005
                  Lithotriptors                                                23                OECD           1985 - 2005
                  Liver transplants                                            27                OECD           1980 - 2005
                  Lung transplants                                             22                OECD           1985 - 2005
                  Mammographs                                                  15                OECD           1970 - 2005
                  Mastectomies                                                 18                OECD           1990 - 2005
                  MRI units                                                    26                OECD           1985 - 2005
                  Pacemaker surgical procedures                                11                OECD           1990 - 2005
                  Percent immunized for DPT, children 12-23
                  months                                                      153                   all         1980 - 2005
                  Percent immunized for measles, children 12-23
                  months                                                      153                   all         1980 - 2005
                  Percent of beds for acute care                               21                OECD           1960 - 2005
                  Percent of cataract surgeries done as day cases              14                OECD           1990 - 2005
                  Percent of cholecystectomies (laparoscopic)
                  done as day cases                                            9                 OECD           1995 - 2005
                  Percent of cholecystectomies done as day cases               11                OECD           1995 - 2005
                  Percent of dialysis patients at home                         25                OECD           1970 - 2005
                  Percent of hernia procedures (inguinal and
                  femoral) done as day cases                                   14                OECD           1995 - 2005
                  Percent of renal failure patients, end stage                 28                OECD           1970 - 2005
                  Percent of tonsillectomies done as day cases                 12                OECD           1995 - 2005
                  Percent of varicose veins procedures done as day
                  cases                                                        14                OECD           1995 - 2005
                  Prostatectomies (excluding transurethral)                    14                OECD           1990 - 2005
                  Prostatectomies (transurethral)                              17                OECD           1990 - 2005




                                                              - 38 -
                Table A2 (continued): Description of Technologies and their Coverage

                                                                               Number of   Country
Category             Variable Description                                                             Date Range
                                                                               Countries   Coverage

Health (ctd.)        Radiation therapy equipment                                  24       OECD       1960 - 2005
                     Renal failure patients, end stage                            25       OECD       1970 - 2005
                     Tonsillectomies                                              13       OECD       1980 - 2005
                     Varicose vein procedures                                     12       OECD       1995 - 2005
Steel                Percent of steel production by other methods                 23          all     1930 - 2005
                     Percent of steel production by the acid bessemer method      11          all     1930 - 1975
                     Percent of steel production by the basic bessemer
                     method                                                        9          all     1930 - 1980
                     Percent of steel production in BOFs                          58          all     1960 - 2005
                     Percent of steel production in EAFs                          95          all     1930 - 2005
                     Percent of steel production in OHFs                          53          all     1930 - 2005
                     Percent of steel production that is stainless                24          all     1985 - 1990
                     Stainless steel production                                   24          all     1985 - 1990
                     Steel production by other methods                            23          all     1930 - 2005
                     Steel production by the acid bessemer method                 11          all     1930 - 1975
                     Steel production by the basic bessemer method                 8          all     1930 - 1980
                     Steel production in blast oxygen furnaces                    56          all     1960 - 2005
                     Steel production in electric arc furnaces                    93          all     1930 - 2005
                     Steel production in open hearth furnances                    51          all     1930 - 2005
Telecommunications   Cable television subscribers                                 95          all     1975 - 2005
                     Cell phones                                                  146         all     1980 - 2005
                     Mail items                                                   79          all     1830 - 1995
                     Newspaper circulation (daily)                                153         all     1950 - 2000
                     Radios                                                       149         all     1925 - 2000
                     Telegrams                                                    78          all     1850 - 1995
                     Telephones                                                   152         all     1880 - 2005
                     TVs                                                          152         all     1950 - 2005
Textiles             Automatic looms                                              96          all     1965 - 1980
                     Percent of automatic textile looms                           98          all     1965 - 1980




                                                                 - 39 -
                  Table A2 (continued): Description of Technologies and their Coverage

                                                                             Number of   Country
Category          Variable Description                                                              Date Range
                                                                             Countries   Coverage

Textiles (ctd.)   Percent of spindles that are ring spindles                    31          all     1905 - 1955
                  Percent of textile raw materials that are unnatural           79          all     1965 - 1980
                  Spindles: mule                                                31          all     1905 - 1955
                  Spindles: ring                                                52          all     1905 - 1955
Tourism           Hotel and other visitor beds                                  144         all     1980 - 2005
                  Hotel and other visitor rooms                                 145         all     1980 - 2005
Transportation    Aviation passenger kilometers                                 109         all     1920 - 1995
                  Aviation ton-km of cargo                                      103         all     1930 - 1995
                  Percent of ships that are steam and motor                     71          all     1790 - 1995
                  Percent of the tonnage of ships that are steam and motor      71          all     1790 - 1995
                  Railroads: freight ton-kilometers                             100         all     1850 - 1995
                  Railroads: freight tons                                       116         all     1850 - 1995
                  Railroads: length of line open                                126         all     1830 - 1995
                  Railroads: passenger journeys                                 112         all     1835 - 1995
                  Railroads: passenger-journey kilometers                       94          all     1840 - 1995
                  Ships: motor                                                   8          all     1910 - 1995
                  Ships: sail                                                   31          all     1820 - 1995
                  Ships: steam                                                  20          all     1820 - 1995
                  Ships: steam and motor                                        57          all     1870 - 1995
                  Ships: total                                                  13          all     1830 - 1995
                  Tonnage of motor ships                                        8           all     1910 - 1995
                  Tonnage of sail ships                                         32          all     1790 - 1995
                  Tonnage of steam and motor ships                              59          all     1870 - 1995
                  Tonnage of steam ships                                        21          all     1810 - 1995
                  Tonnage of total ships                                        13          all     1830 - 1995
                  Vehicles: commercial                                          121         all     1905 - 1995
                  Vehicles: passenger cars                                      149         all     1895 - 2005




                                                                - 40 -
                                                  Table A3: Annual speed of β Convergence by Variable

                                                              Invention      Speed of                                                                       Invention    Speed of
Variable Description                                                                             Variable Description
                                                                Date        Convergence                                                                       Date      Convergence


Beds: in-patient acute care                                   pre-1500         0.035             Ships: steam                                                 1788        -0.002

Beds: in-patient long-term care                               pre-1500         0.011             Ships: steam and motor                                       1788         0.002

Beds: total hospital                                          pre-1500         0.082             Tonnage of steam and motor ships                             1788         0.020

Breast conservation surgeries                                 pre-1500         0.022             Tonnage of steam ships                                       1788         0.001

Caesarean sections                                            pre-1500         0.030             Automatic looms                                              1801         0.001

Cheques issued                                                pre-1500         0.059             Percent of automatic textile looms                           1801         0.063

Hernia procedures, inguinal and femoral                       pre-1500         0.122             Fertilizer consumed, total                                   1815         0.004

Hotel and other visitor beds                                  pre-1500         0.011             Railroads: freight ton-kilometers                            1825         0.008

Hotel and other visitor rooms                                 pre-1500         0.035             Railroads: freight tons                                      1825        -0.001

Irrigated area                                                pre-1500         0.012             Railroads: length of line open                               1825         0.004

Mail items                                                    pre-1500         0.020             Railroads: passenger journeys                                1825         0.013

Mastectomies                                                  pre-1500         -0.002            Railroads: passenger-journey kilometers                      1825        -0.002

Percent of beds for acute care                                pre-1500         0.007             Percent of spindles that are ring spindles                   1828         0.025

Percent of hernia procedures done as day cases                pre-1500         0.009             Spindles: ring                                               1828         0.015

Percent of irigated land out of cultivated land               pre-1500         -0.005            Telegrams                                                    1835         0.001

Percent of tonsillectomies done as day cases                  pre-1500         0.001             Hysterectomies (vaginal only)                                1843         0.028

Percent of varicose veins procedures done as day cases        pre-1500         0.007             Harvesters                                                   1850         0.008

Ships: sail                                                   pre-1500         0.020             Percent of steel production by the acid bessemer method      1855         0.276

Ships: total                                                  pre-1500         0.033             Percent of steel production by the basic bessemer method     1855         0.023

Tonnage of sail ships                                         pre-1500         0.027             Percent of steel production in OHFs                          1855         0.014

Tonnage of total ships                                        pre-1500         0.009             Steel production by other methods                            1855         0.040

Tonsillectomies                                               pre-1500         0.023             Steel production by the acid bessemer method                 1855         0.080

Varicose vein procedures                                      pre-1500         0.033             Steel production by the basic bessemer method                1855         0.082

Newspaper circulation (daily)                                   1606           0.041             Steel production in open hearth furnances                    1867         0.025

Cataract surgeries                                              1748           0.072             Tractors                                                     1868         0.007

Percent of cataract surgeries done as day cases                 1748           0.039             Milking machines                                             1870         0.006

Percent of ships that are steam and motor                       1788           0.004             Telephones                                                   1876         0.041

Percent of the tonnage of ships that are steam and motor        1788           0.007             Cholecystectomies                                            1882         0.002

                                                           Note: Speed of convergence estimated using equation (4) or (5).




                                                                                        - 41 -
                                    Table A3 (continued): Annual speed of β Convergence by Variable

                                                      Invention    Speed of                                                                Invention    Speed of
Variable Description                                                                Variable Description
                                                        Date      Convergence                                                                Date      Convergence


Electricity production                                  1882         0.010          Percent of dialysis patients at home                     1943         0.021

Percent of cholecystectomies done as day cases          1882        -0.145          Percent of renal failure patients, end stage             1943         0.063

Prostatectomies (excluding transurethral)               1883         0.024          Cell phones                                              1947         0.033

Percent of textile raw materials that are unnatural     1884         0.073          Cable television subscribers                             1949         0.015

Appendectomies                                          1885         0.037          Debit and credit card transactions                       1950        -0.002

Vehicles: commercial                                    1885         0.024          Percent of steel production in BOFs                      1950         0.061

Vehicles: passenger cars                                1885         0.055          Points of service for debit/credit cards                 1950         0.148

Ships: motor                                            1897         0.024          Steel production in blast oxygen furnaces                1950        -0.027

Tonnage of motor ships                                  1897         0.039          Kidney transplants, functioning                          1951         0.115

Percent of steel production in EAFs                     1900         0.015          Kidney transplants                                       1951         0.229

Radiation therapy equipment                             1900         0.083          Pacemaker surgical procedures                            1952         0.028

Steel production in electric arc furnaces               1900         0.048          Coronary bypasses                                        1953         0.036

Cholecystectomies, laparoscopic                         1901         0.039          Coronary bypass procedures, in-patient                   1953         0.033

Percent of cholecystectomies done as day cases          1901        -0.133          Bone marrow transplants                                  1956         0.043

Radios                                                  1901         0.004          Lung transplants                                         1963         0.118

Aviation passenger kilometers                           1903         0.047          Percent immunized for measles, children 12-23 months     1964         0.119

Aviation ton-km of cargo                                1903         0.033          Mammographs                                              1966         0.104

Percent of steel production that is stainless           1913        -0.005          ATMs                                                     1967         0.148

Stainless steel production                              1913         0.022          Heart transplants                                        1967         0.093

TVs                                                     1924         0.009          Liver transplants                                        1967         0.112

Percent immunized for DPT, children 12-23 months        1927         0.086          Knee replacement surgeries                               1970         0.016

Prostatectomies (transurethral)                         1931         0.051          Computed tomography (CAT) scanners                       1972         0.037

Hip replacement surgeries                               1938         0.025          Internet users                                           1973         0.078

Pesticide consumed, total                               1939         0.164          Personal computers                                       1973         0.082

Cardiac catheterisations                                1941         0.044          Electronic funds transfers                               1979         0.020

Dialysis patients                                       1943         0.065          Coronary stenting procedures                             1980         0.059

Renal failure patients, end stage                       1943         0.060          Lithotriptors                                            1980         0.020

Dialysis patients, home                                 1943         0.069          MRI units                                                1981         0.054

                                                      Note: Speed of convergence estimated using equation (4) or (5).




                                                                                 - 42 -
        80




        60




        40




        20




         0
                    1965               1975                  1985                  1995


                     Brazil              Colombia               Costa Rica                Nigeria
                     Peru                South Africa           Tanzania                  Uruguay


Figure 1: Percent of agricultural area using modern varieties in various developing countries.


        4



        0



        -4



        -8



       -12



       -16
             1929               1944                1959                   1974                1989

                USA                     France                      South Africa           Tanzania
                India                   China                       Poland                 Brazil


                       Figure 2: Log of per capita aviation passenger-kilometers.




                                                    - 43 -
     8



     6



     4



     2



     0



     -2
      1928              1943                1958               1973              1988

             USA                    France                     South Africa             Tanzania
             India                  China                      Poland                   Brazil


                               Figure 3: Log of cars per capita.


20




15




10




 5




 0
 1919                1934            1949               1964              1979              1994

          USA         France          Venezuela                Tanzania          China             India


             Figure 4: Log of kilowatts of electricity produced per capita.




                                               - 44 -
      7


      5


      3


      1


      -1


      -3


      -5
       1889           1904      1919        1934        1949       1964       1979          1994

              USA                       France                 South Africa           Tanzania
              India                     China                  Russia                 Brazil

                              Figure 5: Log of telephones per capita.


 -3




 -5




 -7




 -9




-11
       1982                  1986                1990            1994                1998


           USA                 France               Japan               Canada               Australia

           Germany             Italy                Sweden

                         Figure 6: Log of MRI scanner units per capita.



                                                   - 45 -
 -2


 -3


 -4


 -5


 -6


 -7


 -8
      1980           1984            1988            1992      1996           2000

        USA                 France          Japan           Canada          Australia
        Germany             Italy           Sweden

                   Figure 7: Log of CAT scanner units per capita.



-1




-3




-5




-7




-9
      1987                   1991                1995                1999

       USA                  France           Japan          Canada           Australia
       Germany              Italy            Sweden

              Figure 8: Log of credit and debit card payments per capita.




                                            - 46 -
     8

     6

     4

     2

     0

     -2

     -4

     -6

     -8
          1984            1988             1992          1996            2000

              USA                 France              South Africa        Tanzania
              India               China               Russia              Brazil


                          Figure 9: Log of cell phones per capita.


7




4




1




-2
     1981                        1988                     1995                       2002

            USA                  France                South Africa         Tanzania
            India                China                 Poland               Brazil

                      Figure 10: Log of personal computers per capita.



                                            - 47 -
                                       7



                                       4



                                       1



                                       -2



                                       -5



                                       -8
                                            1990          1993                   1996             1999                   2002

                                               USA               France                 South Africa            Tanzania
                                               India             China                  Poland                  Brazil

                                                       Figure 11: Log of internet users per capita.



                                       2100


                                       2000
          Est. Initial Adoption Date




                                       1900


                                       1800


                                       1700

                                       1600


                                       1500
                                            1500        1600              1700          1800             1900               2000
                                                                            Invention Date


Figure 12: Predicted initial adoption under logistic vs. invention dates for technology-country pairs




                                                                            - 48 -
                             2100


                             2050
Est. Initial Adoption Date




                             2000

                             1950

                             1900


                             1850

                             1800
                                 1800   1825    1850   1875       1900         1925   1950   1975   2000
                                                              Invention Date


Figure 13: Predicted initial adoption under logistic vs. invention dates (1800-2000).



1000


      800


      600


      400


      200


                             0
                             1925              1945               1965                1985           2005

                                                         Actual           Estimated


                   Figure 14: Actual adoption curve of TVs in Sweden and fitted logistic function.




                                                              - 49 -
  450
  400
  350
  300
  250
  200
  150
  100
   50
    0
     1940       1950       1960       1970        1980         1990     2000       2010

                                      Actual       Estimated


    Figure 15: Actual adoption curve of cars in Taiwan and fitted logistic function.



  4500
  4000
  3500
  3000
  2500
  2000
  1500
  1000
   500
        0
        1930     1940       1950       1960       1970          1980    1990       2000

                                       Actual       Estimated


Figure 16: Actual adoption curve of newspapers in Germany and fitted logistic function.




                                         - 50 -
       0.35


        0.3


       0.25


        0.2


       0.15


        0.1


       0.05


         0
              < -.02   -.02 to 0     0 to 0.02   0.02 to     0.04 to      0.06 to     0.08 to   > 0.15
                                                  0.04        0.06         0.08        0.15
                                          Annual Speed of Convergence


Figure 17: Distribution of estimates of β-speed of convergence: log-per capita technologies.


      0.35


       0.3


      0.25


       0.2


      0.15


       0.1


      0.05


        0
              < -.10     -.01 to 0      0 to 0.02   0.02 to 0.04       0.04 to      0.08 to     > 0.10
                                                                        0.08         0.10
                                          Annual Speed of Convergence


    Figure 18: Distribution of estimates of β-speed of convergence: share technologies.




                                                    - 51 -
                             5
     Technology Level
                             3


                             1


                             -1


                             -3
                                      1   21   41    61            81        101        121    141
                                                               Years



                             8
     Aggregate Tech. Level




                             6

                             4


                             2


                             0
                                  1       21    41        61            81            101     121
                                                               Years

                                                     Leader (A)         Laggard (B)


Figure 19: Convergence within technologies does not imply convergence across technologies.




                                                          - 52 -
                            5
    Technology Level
                            3


                            1


                            -1


                            -3
                                 1   21   41        61            81        101        121    141
                                                              Year



                            8
    Aggregate Tech. Level




                            6

                            4

                            2

                            0
                                 1   21        41        61            81            101     121
                                                              Years

                                                    Leader (A)         Laggard (B)


Figure 20: Convergence within technologies could imply convergence across technologies.




                                                         - 53 -
                                0.3



                                0.2
         Speed of Convergence




                                0.1



                                      0



                                -0.1



                                -0.2
                                            1800                 1825         1850     1875       1900          1925        1950       1975       2000
                                                                                              Invention Date
                                                                           Speed of Convergence for Technology
                                                                           Median Speed of Convergence in Previous 25 Years


                                                         Figure 21: Evolution of the speed of technology by invention date.


                                                         0.09

                                                         0.08

                                                         0.07
                                  Speed of Convergence




                                                         0.06

                                                         0.05

                                                         0.04

                                                         0.03

                                                         0.02

                                                         0.01

                                                           0
                                                                    1800             1850              1900            1950             2000
                                                                                               Invention Date

                                                         Median of Technologies that cover only OECD          Median of Technologies that cover both



Figure 22: Evolution of median speed of convergence for technologies according to country coverage.




                                                                                              - 54 -
