                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                      EARLY DECISIONS:
                                 A REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

                                             John Beshears
                                              James J. Choi
                                             David Laibson
                                           Brigitte C. Madrian

                                         Working Paper 11920
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11920


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2006




We are grateful for insightful suggestions from our discussant, Karine Nyborg, and for outstanding research
assistance from Jonathan Hall, Hongyi Li, Chris Nosko, and Tom Widland. Choi acknowledges financial
support from the Mustard Seed Foundation. Choi, Laibson, and Madrian acknowledge individual and
collective financial support from the National Institute on Aging (grants P01-AG005842, R01-AG021650,
and T32-AG00186). Laibson also acknowledges financial support from the Sloan Foundation. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2006 by John Beshears, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Early Decisions: A Regulatory Framework
John Beshears, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian
NBER Working Paper No. 11920
January 2006
JEL No. D11, D69, D91, H21, H31, I12, I18

                                             ABSTRACT

We describe a regulatory framework that helps consumers who have difficulty sticking to their own

long-run plans. Early Decision regulations help long-run preferences prevail by allowing consumers

to partially commit to their long-run goals, making it harder for a momentary impulse to reverse past

decisions. In the cigarette market, examples of Early Decision regulations include restricting the

locations or times at which cigarettes are sold, delaying the receipt of cigarettes following purchase,

and allowing a consumer to choose in advance the legal restrictions on her own cigarette purchases.

A formal model of Early Decision regulations demonstrates that Early Decisions are optimal when

consumer preferences are heterogeneous. Intuitively, each consumer knows his own preferences, so

self-rationing - which is what Early Decisions enable - is better than a one-size-fits-all regulation like

a sin tax. Of course, Early Decision regulations incur social costs and therefore require empirical

evaluation to determine their net social value.

John Beshears                                            David Laibson
Department of Economics                                  Department of Economics
Littauer Center                                          Littauer M-14
Harvard University                                       Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138                                      Cambridge, MA 02138
beshears@fas.harvard.edu                                 and NBER
                                                         dlaibson@harvard.edu
James J. Choi
Yale School of Management                                Brigitte C. Madrian
135 Prospect Street                                      Dept. of Business and Public Policy
P.O. Box 208200                                          University of Pennsylvania Wharton School
New Haven, CT 06520-8200                                 3620 Locust Walk, Suite 1400 SH-DH
and NBER                                                 Philadelphia, PA 19104-6372
james.choi@yale.edu                                      and NBER
                                                         bmadrian@wharton.upenn.edu
      For some goods, convenience can be undesirable. Ex-smokers prefer not to have

a spare pack of cigarettes in their cupboard. Dieters prefer not to have a bowl of

candy on their desk or a gallon of ice cream in their freezer.

      We recognize the conflicts between our long-run goals (e.g. “I want to stop

smoking”) and our momentary desires (“I’d like to smoke right now”). The long-

term perspective is patient (“I want to start a healthy diet”), while the short-

run perspective is indulgent (“I’ll have dessert tonight despite the future conse-

quences”). A failure of self-control occurs when the short-run preference leads to

behavior contrary to the long-run plan.

      For a range of reasons, societies often like citizens to act on their patient long-

run preferences and resist their impatient short-run impulses.1 Regulation may

have a small role to play if a society wants to tip the balance in favor of long-run

preferences. In this paper, we discuss a range of regulations that buttress con-

sumers’ long-term behavioral intentions and reduce the likelihood that momentary

impulses will undermine those intentions. All of these regulations, which we call

Early Decision regulations, encourage consumers to make forward-looking decisions

that they cannot easily reverse later.

      For example, consider a regulation that severely restricts the hours of cigarette

sales (e.g., to one hour per day). Such a policy would have both benefits and

drawbacks. On the positive side, ex-smokers/quitters would rarely be able to

make an impulse purchase; any cigarette consumption during non-sale hours would
  1
      Dynamically inconsistent preferences can microfound this societal goal.


                                                 3
be bounded by the number of cigarettes they decided to buy in advance. This

makes it easier to quit smoking and easier to avoid a relapse. Such a policy

would also have negative consequences. People who don’t want to quit smoking

would lose some convenience. A limited black market might develop to feed the

demand of consumers who want a cigarette immediately and do not have a stock

of prepurchased cigarettes. Hence, the merit of a time restriction policy is an

empirical question. Does the benefit of reducing impulse buying offset the cost of

lost convenience and the risk of encouraging a black market?2

       Survey evidence weakly suggests that smoking regulations produce more bene-

fits than costs, even for smokers (Hersch 2005). For example, among current US

smokers 51% favor smoking bans in indoor work areas, 61% favor smoking bans in

indoor sporting events, and 60% favor smoking bans in indoor shopping malls.

       We describe examples of Early Decision regulations in Section 1, focusing on

applications to the cigarette market. We emphasize that these Early Decision

regulations have both costs and benefits and that all of our proposals would need

to be empirically evaluated in small-scale experiments to determine their net social

benefits. We review the likely costs for the cigarette market in Section 2. We then

discuss extensions of our framework to other markets in Section 3.

       In Section 4, we present a model that formalizes the theoretical rationale for

Early Decision regulations. This model enables us to show how Early Decisions
   2
    Measuring these costs and benefits is not trivial, since it is not obvious which set of preferences
(and discount functions) the analyst should use.



                                                  4
and sin taxes can be used to produce desirable consumer regulations. In the model,

Early Decisions are superior to sin taxes when consumers have heterogeneous but

fixed preferences. (Section 4 can be skipped by readers who are not interested in

mathematical modelling.)          In Section 5, we conclude by explaining why private

market-based solutions are not always feasible as a substitute for Early Decision

regulations.



1         Early Decision in the cigarette market

         We begin with a discussion of the market for cigarettes. This is a natural

starting point for two reasons. First, most smokers would like to stop smoking

cigarettes. Indeed, 40% of U.S. smokers have tried to quit smoking in the past

12 months,3 and 80% have tried to quit at some point.4 Second, cigarettes are

easily stored, which makes it possible to separate the moment of purchase from

the moment the cigarette is smoked.

        To illustrate our approach, we will discuss five different classes of Early De-

cision regulations: location-based regulation, time-based regulation, delay-based

regulation, self-regulation, and hybrid regulation.

        Location-based regulations force consumers to make Early Decisions by decreas-

ing the frequency with which consumers are near sellers of the regulated good. To
    3
        U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (2004)
    4
        Gruber and Koszegi (2001)




                                               5
gain intuition for this regulation, we begin by noting that in the U.S., cigarettes

are sold at most convenience stores, grocery stores, pharmacies, newsstands, and

gas stations. Hence, cigarettes are widely available. For example, within one block

of the Harvard Square subway station in Cambridge, Massachusetts, cigarettes are

sold at six stores.

   Location regulations reduce the density of cigarette vendors. For instance, loca-

tion regulations could disallow vending machines at workplaces, train stations, or

other public places. Likewise, location regulatoins could restrict sales to a limited

number of licensed stores. Such licenses could be auctioned off. Moreover, spatial

restrictions might be placed on the vendors who participate in these auctions. For

example, only stores at least 200 meters away from a public transportation hub

could be eligible. Location-based restrictions have two effects. First, they give

the “licensed” vendor market power, thereby raising the market price. This acts

as an implicit sin tax (see Gruber and Koszegi 2004 for calibration of optimal sin

taxes). This tax effect is a redundant consequence of a location restriction, since

the government can impose cigarette taxes directly. Hence, we focus our analysis

on the second effect of location restrictions: limits on availability.

   Consider a smoker who is trying to cut back his consumption of cigarettes

despite his strong momentary impulses to smoke. In the status quo free market

environment, rationing his cigarette consumption is difficult. Whenever he runs

out of cigarettes, he is likely to be near a convenience store that will gladly sell him



                                           6
another pack. In contrast, if cigarette vendors were few and far between, then the

smoker would be able to partially precommit to a particular quantity of cigarettes.

For example, precommitment would be possible if the town supermarket were the

only store that could stock cigarettes and the supermarket were not close to the

smoker’s home, workplace, or commuting route. The consumer might visit the

supermarket once per week to pick up his groceries. During that weekly visit, the

consumer would decide how many cigarettes to buy for the week. Over the course

of the week, impulses to buy additional cigarettes might be easy to resist given the

transactions costs of prematurely returning to the supermarket.5

       Time-based regulations work on a similar set of principles. For example, all

cigarette vendors could be permitted to sell cigarettes only from 8 A.M. to 9

A.M. each day. Alternatively, cigarette sales could be permitted only during some

limited window of time on Mondays. Such time-based regulations generate no

pricing distortion, since they do not change the competitive structure of the market.

Nevertheless, time-based regulations do limit access to the regulated good, again

facilitating self-rationing.6

       Delay-based regulations work on the principle that impulse purchases are moti-

vated primarily by a transitory desire to immediately consume the regulated good.
   5
      In both the U.S. and Europe, location-based restrictions exist on some products. For example,
in some U.S. states cigarettes and alcohol cannot be sold within a certain distance of a school. In
some U.S. states, alcohol can only be purchased in state-owned liquor stores, and in other states
alcohol can only be sold with a license. Some U.S. municipalities forbid alcohol sales altogether.
European nations have many such restrictions as well, particularly the Scandinavian countries.
    6
      Many U.S. municipalities restrict alcohol sales after a certain hour (e.g., 11 P.M.) or during
certain days (e.g., so-called “blue laws” restrict alcohol sales on Sundays).


                                                 7
Hence, consumption would be significantly reduced if a delay were built into the

purchase process, so that a current purchase did not create an immediate oppor-

tunity for consumption. For example, consider a mail-order system for cigarettes,

with delivery lagged by some number of days. In such a system, consumers could

buy as many cigarettes as they wanted, but they would not be able to buy and

immediately smoke on impulse. A decision to buy today would only enable con-

sumption at a lag. Such a system would work well for a consumer who was happy

to commit not to smoke next week but could not resist smoking right now. With

cigarettes only available by mail, such a consumer would be able to commit not to

smoke in the future by simply not ordering cigarettes in advance.

   Self-regulation refers to a broad category of schemes that allow the consumer to

create her own regulatory constraints. With self-regulation, the consumer is only

constrained if she wants to be. Such self-regulation systems give the consumer

autonomy and acknowledge the consumer’s decision-making authority. We discuss

three versions of self-regulation, in increasing order of complexity.

   In the simplest case of self-regulation, buying cigarettes would require a cigarette

photo ID card. To obtain a cigarette card, a consumer would fill out a (confidential)

application form, obtain an appropriate photograph, and submit her application

to the regulator with a modest annual fee (e.g., $20). After an intentional delay of

one month, two copies of the card would be delivered, and the cards would expire

a year after receipt. Two cards would be provided in case the consumer loses one



                                          8
of them. The consumer would reapply every twelve months to maintain a current

card.

   Such a system would have the following benefits. First, a card system makes

it possible for a smoker to commit to temporarily stop smoking by simply cutting

up her current cards. Second, for a smoker who is trying to quit, the expiration

date of her current cards creates a salient quit date. Third, a card system creates a

default of not smoking, since not applying for the cigarette card is the path of least

resistance. Fourth, the card system discourages impulse initiation or resumption

of smoking, since application delays make it impossible for a person without a card

to immediately obtain one.

   In a second (more complex) version of self-regulation, the card system would

be customized for each individual. For example, on the application the consumer

could request that certain restrictions be printed on her cards. If the applicant

were trying to cut back her smoking, she could designate that her card restrict

purchases to a limited number of hours (e.g., only 8 A.M. to 9 A.M.) or days of

the week (e.g., only Saturdays).

   A third (even more complex) version of such a system, would allow highly

customized self-regulation. (This last self-regulation requires that all cigarette

vendors have an Internet connection.) In this proposal, all cigarette card holders

would be given a personal homepage on which they could set the access rules for

their cigarette card. For example, a consumer could give herself the right to buy



                                          9
one pack a day, ten packs a month, or an unlimited number of packs. She could

instruct the system to reduce her allowance over time, either gradually or with

a sudden drop. Almost any self-allowance scheme would be possible with a well-

designed Web interface. When a consumer tries to buy cigarettes, her cigarette card

would be swiped by the vendor, and the central database would be queried. If the

consumer has given herself permission to make the current cigarette purchase, the

transaction would be completed in the store, and the system would be updated to

reflect this incremental purchase. If the consumer has not given herself permission

to make the current cigarette purchase, the consumer would be told that she has

hit her self-imposed constraint, and the purchase would be denied.

   In such a system, consumers would sometimes want to readjust the allowances

they had previously set for themselves. This too could be flexible. A default setting

would allow consumers to change their allowances, but changes would only take

effect after three days, preventing consumers from increasing their allowances on

impulse in order to smoke immediately. Consumers could change this lag time if

they preferred to do so.

   Hybrid regulations combine different Early Decision regulations. For example,

a hybrid policy might both offer mail-order purchases and create hour limits on in-

store sales. Hybrid regulations could also combine Early Decision regulations with

other regulatory structures, like sin taxes. For example, a hybrid regulation might

impose a low tax rate on cigarette sales between 8 A.M. and 9 A.M. and a much



                                         10
steeper tax rate during other hours. We will refer to this particular hybrid policy

as time-contingent taxation. Intuitively, time-contingent taxes achieve three goals.

First, consumers who do not want to quit are able to buy cigarettes without facing

a highly distortionary sin tax; these committed smokers will stock up during the

low-tax periods. Second, consumers who wish to self-ration can do so more easily.

Such consumers would buy only limited supplies of cigarettes during the low-tax

periods. Third, time-contingent taxes allow consumers to purchase a cigarette at

any time if they are very highly motivated. This safety valve reduces incentives

to create a black market and enables consumers to buy cigarettes in response to

unexpected taste shocks.



2     The road to hell is paved with good intentions

     All of the regulations discussed in Section 1 would generate at least some

negative consequences. We quickly review the five most likely side-effects: black

markets, positive demand effects, agency effects, perverse inconvenience effects,

and privacy effects.

    Black markets would grow as a result of Early Decision regulations. Some

smokers will run out of cigarettes and then appeal to a friend: “I’m feeling the

urge for a smoke. Can I borrow/buy a cigarette from you (since the regulations

prevent me from buying one for myself right now)?” Such black (or “side”) markets

are unavoidable and will reduce and potentially eliminate the efficacy of the Early

                                        11
Decision proposals made above. However, a black market transaction generates

special costs to the parties in that transaction. We imagine that embarrassment

and inconvenience would be the most important of these costs. In addition, the

person receiving the appeal for a cigarette may not know whether he is helping

or hurting his friend by acceding to the request. If black markets generate some

transactional frictions like embarrassment, then the existence of black markets will

not completely offset the benefits of Early Decision regulations. We anticipate that

black markets will not be associated with high markups, since there will probably

be plenty of people who are willing to lend (or even give) a friend a cigarette.

Hence, black markets are not likely to become an outlet for organized crime. The

primary problem with the black market is that it will undermine the ability of

consumers to constrain their own behavior.7

       Positive demand effects occur when Early Decision regulations paradoxically

increase the consumption of the regulated good. This could occur for several

reasons, two of which we mention here. First, it is possible that anti-cigarette

legislation would increase the countercultural appeal of cigarettes. Second, some

smokers who want to quit might respond to vendor restrictions by stockpiling

cigarettes, particularly if they are naı̈ve about their future tendency to succumb

to temptation.8 Such cigarette stockpiles could induce some consumers to increase
   7
     The prevalence of the black market and its association with organized crime will depend
on the type of regulation. For example, time-of-day sales restrictions might lead to more black
market activity than self-regulation. High cigarette taxes have led to an active black market in
Canada.
   8
     See Strotz (1956), Akerlof (1991), and O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999) for analysis of naivete


                                              12
their rates of smoking.

    By reducing consumer choice, regulations affect consumer autonomy. To some

people, such agency effects are an overarching concern. These concerns derive from

at least three sources. First, some observers oppose regulations that have the effect

of implicitly encouraging people to rely on the state (which these observers view

as a bad habit). Second, many of the regulations that we have discussed might be

perceived as unwelcome, elitist efforts to control the behavior of other members of

society. Third, some observers oppose consumer regulation on the principle that

consumer freedom should be maximized. But it is not clear that Early Decision

regulations necessarily violate these libertarian principles. For example, some of

the Early Decision policies we have discussed give the consumer the freedom to

engage in self-regulation.

    Perverse inconvenience effects arise when satisfied smokers are inconvenienced

by regulations that are designed to help ambivalent smokers quit. For example,

the self-regulation cigarette card policy would have the unfortunate consequence

of generating bureaucratic costs for cigarette smokers who do not want to quit.

Indeed, all of the policies that we have discussed have at least some potential

to inconvenience satisfied smokers. In addition, some of the policies create bu-

reaucratic costs for cigarette vendors. In the case of the cigarette card policy,

vendors would have to engage in the time-consuming task of inspecting cigarette

cards or installing Internet connections in their stores. If these policies do little to
in self-control.


                                          13
help ambivalent smokers cut consumption but substantially inconvenience satisfied

smokers and cigarette vendors, then the policies generate a net reduction in social

surplus.

    Finally, privacy effects arise when self-regulation schemes create unwanted pub-

lic disclosures of private preferences. Of course, self-regulation schemes could be

designed to minimize as much as possible such information revelation.



3     Early Decision in other markets

     Other markets could also be regulated using Early Decision principles. A

complete description of such possibilities is beyond the scope of the current pa-

per. However, Early Decisions could be considered in any market where some

consumers have a conflict between their long-run behavioral goals and their actual

behavior. At the same time, if a market is a candidate for Early Decision regu-

lation, one might consider whether the Early Decision policies can be designed so

that they generate only small inconveniences for consumers who are not interested

in changing their behavior (Camerer et al 2003).

    Gambling is an example of a domain that could be regulated using Early De-

cisions. Some gamblers have a profound conflict between their long-term goals—

gambling responsibly—and their short-run reckless behavior. Also, gambling re-

strictions can be designed to disproportionately inconvenience such compulsive

gamblers. For instance, casino guests could be allowed to purchase chips only once

                                         14
every 24 hours. Alternatively, chip sales could be disallowed between midnight and

9 A.M. As another possibility, gamblers could be asked to preregister the amounts

they intend to put at risk. Responsible gamblers would be only marginally affected

by such restrictions, but compulsive gamblers might be considerably helped. Leg-

islation has already created self-rationing programs at U.S. casinos. “Self-Limit

Access Programs” can be used to cancel access to promotional mailings and casino

services such as credit provision and check-cashing. Many states also have self-

exclusion programs where consumers can ask to be barred from all casinos. Those

who are subsequently found in a casino may face fines and prison time (Yerak

2001).

    Alcohol and unhealthy foods are other examples of markets where Early De-

cision principles could be applied. Self-regulation policies could help consumers

precommit not to purchase predesignated goods in these categories. For instance,

an alcohol card could be designed using the same principles as the cigarette card.



4     Theory for Early Decision Regulations

     In this section, we develop a simple model that enables us to study Early

Decision regulations. The model has three periods. In period 0, the consumer can

purchase (but not immediately consume) quantity c0 ≥ 0 of the regulated good.

Think of this period as a short buying opportunity on the way to work. In period

1, the consumer is able to buy more of the regulated good (c1 ≥ 0) and also to

                                       15
consume the regulated good (think of this as the bulk of the consumer’s day).

Total consumption is c = c0 + c1 . In period 2, the consumer uses any remaining

resources to consume the non-regulated good x.

   We assume that the consumer faces the following budget constraint:


                          1 + T = c0 (1 + τ0 ) + c1 (1 + τ1 ) + x


where τ0 and τ1 are taxes on c0 and c1 respectively and T is a lump-sum transfer.

Specifically, T = c0 τ0 + c1 τ1 , where c0 and c1 are the average cigarette consumption

of all consumers. In a large economy, c0 and c1 are not affected by the consumer’s

own consumption. The budget constraint normalizes non-transfer income to be

unity without loss of generality.

   The game is summarized in the following timeline:


   • Period 0: purchase amount c0 at after-tax price (1 + τ0 ).


   • Period 1: purchase additional amount c1 at after-tax price (1 + τ1 ). Consume

      c = c0 + c1 .


   • Period 2: purchase and consume x at price 1 with remaining resources: 1 +

      T − c0 (1 + τ0 ) − c1 (1 + τ1 ).


   The consumer has a quasi-hyperbolic intertemporal discount function: 1, βδ,

βδ 2 , βδ 3 ,.... We assume 0 < β < 1, so this function captures the idea that


                                            16
consumers discount more sharply in the short run than in the long run (Phelps

and Pollak 1968, Laibson 1997), implying dynamically inconsistent preferences.

Empirical estimates find that β ' 2/3 and δ ' 1 (Laibson, Repetto and Tobacman

2005).

   The regulated good, c, generates both immediate rewards and delayed costs.

Imagine that c represents cigarette consumption, so the immediate rewards are

pleasure and relaxation and the delayed costs are health-oriented. We assume the

following functional forms for illustrative purposes.

   The immediate benefit from smoking c cigarettes is (α + ∆ + ε) ln(c), where

α is a fixed taste-shifter, ∆ is a fixed taste shifter, and ε is a stochastic taste

shifter. We assume that the stochastic taste shifter, ε, is not revealed until period

1. Assume, without loss of generality, that E [ε] = 0. Assume also that α > 0,

∆ > 0, and ∆ + ε > 0 (for all values of ε in the support of the distribution).

   The delayed cost from smoking c cigarettes is α ln(c).

   The benefit of residual consumption of x is assumed to be linear to reflect

the fact that “all other goods” will show little if any diminishing marginal utility

relative to the curvature of a single good like c.

   ¿From the period 0 perspective, the utility function is


            EU0 (c, x) = E βδ (α + ∆ + ε) ln(c) − βδ 2 α ln(c) + βδ 2 x .
                                                                      



To simplify analysis and to reflect the fact that we are thinking about high fre-

                                         17
quency choices (at the daily level), we set δ = 1. Therefore, the period 0 utility

function becomes


                EU0 (c, x) = E [β (α + ∆ + ε) ln(c) − βα ln(c) + βx]

                          = Eβ [(α + ∆ + ε) ln(c) − α ln(c) + x]

                          = Eβ [(∆ + ε) ln(c) + x] .


¿From the period 1 perspective, the utility function is


                   U1 (c, x) = (α + ∆ + ε) ln(c) − βα ln(c) + βx.


Note that the period 0 and period 1 utility functions are not affine transformations

of each other, reflecting the dynamic inconsistency in the quasi-hyperbolic discount

function.



4.1     Perfect precommitment case

      In this subsection, we derive the optimal commitment path from the perspec-

tive of the period 0 self. This is the policy function that maximizes the period 0

utility function and which the period 0 self would like to achieve. Note that this

policy function is primarily of theoretical interest, since it may not be possible in

practice for the period 0 self to achieve this outcome (recall that ε is not revealed

until period 1, so the period 0 self has insufficient information to commit at period

                                         18
0 to the first-best path). Note also that the taxes τ0 and τ1 do not need to be

considered here, since they serve a purely regulatory function.



Proposition 1 Under perfect precommitment and τ0 = τ1 = 0,


                                    c = ∆ + ε,


and

                   EU0 = E [β (∆ + ε) ln (∆ + ε)] + β (1 − ∆) .



   Proof. For each value of ε, the period 0 first-order condition is


                                    ∆+ε
                                        = 1.
                                     c




4.2     No regulation case

      We now consider the free-market case in which the government imposes no

regulation whatsoever. This will not be optimal, but it is nevertheless an important

benchmark.




                                        19
Proposition 2 With no regulation (τ0 = τ1 = 0),


                                   α (1 − β) + ∆ + ε
                              c=                     ,
                                           β


and

                                             
                             α (1 − β) + ∆ + ε
       EU0 = Eβ (∆ + ε) ln                        + (β − α (1 − β) − ∆) .
                                     β



   Proof. For each value of ε, the period 1 first-order condition is


                              α (1 − β) + ∆ + ε
                                                = β.
                                      c




   Without regulation, the marginal utility of consuming c is strictly less than

the marginal utility of consuming x from the perspective of the period 0 self. The

free-market outcome is not first-best optimal.



4.3     Optimal regulation with heterogeneous consumers and

        no taste shocks

      We now consider the case in which consumers have fixed differences in prefer-

ences. Intuitively, this is the natural case in which some consumers like to smoke


                                         20
more or less than others and these taste differences persist over time. To capture

this stylized fact, we assume that ∆ has a distribution across the population.

     The following proposition shows that an Early Decision regime is the opti-

mal regulatory mechanism in the world of heterogeneous consumers with no taste

shocks. In this example, the Early Decision mechanism allows consumers to pur-

chase the regulated good in period 0 but does not allow consumers to purchase the

regulated good in period 1.


Proposition 3 With heterogeneous consumers (i.e., with variation in ∆) and no

taste shocks (i.e., no variation in ε), an Early Decision mechanism with no taxes in

period 0 and no market for c in period 1 is optimal. Under this optimal regulation,


                                      c = ∆,


and

                       EU0 = Eβ [∆ ln (∆)] + β (1 − E [∆]) .



     Proof. Under the Early Decision mechanism, the period 0 first-order condition

is
                                      ∆
                                        = 1,
                                      c

so

                           U0 = β∆ ln (∆) + β (1 − ∆) .


                                        21
This consumption rule achieves the first-best consumption allocation (see the per-

fect precommitment case in Proposition 1) when ε = 0.


      Formally, Early Decisions are equivalent to an extreme combination of taxes:

no taxes in period 0 and infinite taxes in period 1. Now, we characterize optimal

tax rates under a regime with stationary taxes.


Lemma 4 With homogeneous consumers (i.e., no variation in ∆) and no taste

shocks (i.e., no variation in ε), a taxation mechanism with a stationary tax rate τ

has
                                      α (1 − β) + ∆
                                 c=                 .
                                         β (1 + τ )

The tax rate that optimizes period 0 welfare is

                                  α 1   
                              τ=   +1    −1 ,
                                 ∆     β


in which case

                            U0 = β [∆ ln (∆) + (1 − ∆)] .



      Proof. Since period 1 demand for c exceeds period 0 demand for c, we can

ignore period 0 choices. The period 1 first-order condition for utility maximization

is
                             α (1 − β) + ∆
                                           = β (1 + τ ) ,
                                   c


                                          22
or
                                      α (1 − β) + ∆
                                 c=                 .
                                         β (1 + τ )

To derive the optimal tax rate, the period 0 first-order condition to maximize EU0

is
                                ∆    α (1 − β) + ∆
                           −       +               = 0,
                               1+τ     β (1 + τ )2

which gives us the unique optimal tax rate

                                   α 1   
                               τ=   +1    −1
                                  ∆     β


and

                                        c = ∆.




     With homogeneous consumers, this taxation mechanism is optimal. However,

such a taxation mechanism is no longer optimal when consumers are heterogeneous.

Proposition 5 With heterogeneous consumers (i.e., with variation in ∆) and no

taste shocks (i.e., no variation in ε), a taxation mechanism with a stationary tax

rate τ is strictly non-optimal. In particular, such a mechanism is strictly dominated

by an Early Decision mechanism with no taxes in period 0 and no market for c in

period 1.

     Proof. In the stationary tax rate case, period 1 demand for c exceeds period

                                          23
0 demand for c, so we can ignore period 0 choices for the stationary tax rate case.

From Lemma ??,
                                        α (1 − β) + ∆
                                  c=                  .
                                           β (1 + τ )

To derive the optimal tax rate, the period 0 first-order condition to maximize EU0

is
                                                    
                              1      α (1 − β) + E [∆]
                  β −E [∆]         +                     = 0,
                             1+τ         β(1 + τ )2

which gives us
                                                  
                                        α        1
                             τ=             +1     −1 .
                                      E [∆]      β

Note that β [∆ ln (c) + (1 − c)] < β [∆ ln (∆) + (1 − ∆)] for c 6= ∆, which holds

whenever
                                             1   
                            α        1        α
                 τ=             +1     − 1 6=   +1    −1 .
                          E [∆]      β        ∆     β

Since this holds for a nonzero mass of consumers,


                      EU0 = Eβ [∆ ln (c) + 1 + T − c (1 + τ )]

                             = Eβ [∆ ln (c) + 1 − c]

                             < Eβ [∆ ln (∆) + 1 − ∆] .


Thus such a taxation mechanism is non-optimal.

     We have shown that a pure Early Decision mechanism is optimal in a world of

heterogeneous consumers and no taste shocks. Intuitively, each consumer knows

                                            24
his own preferences, so self-rationing—which is what Early Decisions enable—is

superior to a one-size-fits-all regulation like a stationary sin tax.



4.4     Regulatory mechanisms with taste shocks

      Adding taste shocks makes the analysis of optimal regulation far more com-

plicated. In the case of homogeneous consumers with taste shocks distributed

according to a general class of density functions, a stationary tax is optimal (see

Beshears et al. 2005). With heterogeneous consumers and taste shocks, we con-

jecture that the optimal mechanism will be a hybrid with a low tax rate in period

0 (the Early Decision period) and a high tax rate in period 1. The analysis of this

case is beyond the scope of the current paper and provides fertile ground for future

work.



5       Conclusion

      When consumers’ long-run plans are regularly thwarted by short-run impul-

sivity, technologies that facilitate making choices today that bind future selves can

improve welfare. Such technologies are unlikely to be provided by the private mar-

ket when the failure of self-control represents a profit opportunity for some other

party. In the cigarette market, a firm offering to restrict cigarette sales to a smoker

trying to quit will be undercut by other firms eager to sell the smoker another pack.

This market failure arises from the inability of a firm to write contracts with all

                                          25
other existing firms and potential entrants.9

       This paper has presented a number of examples of Early Decision regulations

that facilitate self-control with respect to smoking: restricting the geographic ac-

cessibility of vendors or the hours of cigarette sales, mandating delays between

cigarette purchase and receipt, or allowing each consumer to choose in advance

the legal restrictions on her cigarette purchases. We also give examples of other

domains where Early Decision policies could be introduced, such as gambling, alco-

hol, and unhealthy food. Our theoretical analysis shows that Early Decisions can

be particularly useful when consumer preferences are heterogeneous. Intuitively,

each consumer knows his own preferences, so self-rationing with an Early Decision

mechanism can be more effective than a one-size-fits-all regulation like a sin tax.

       Early Decisions impose costs as well. These include the encouragement of black

markets, a counterculture backlash, the loss of consumer agency, and the incon-

venience experienced by vendors and consumers who do not want to change their

behavior. In addition, using sin taxes rather than Early Decisions may be more

attractive when the desirability of smoking (from the patient long-run perspective)

is unpredictable. Sin taxes, unlike Early Decisions, may also allow other taxes that

are more distortionary to be decreased. It is an empirical question whether the

costs of Early Decisions outweigh the benefits. Therefore, the desirability of Early

Decision regulations can only be evaluated in small-scale experiments.
   9
    If the firm could perfectly contract with everybody, then all parties could commit to restrict
sales, and some of the gains to the smoker from such a restriction could be distributed to the
firms and potential entrants.


                                               26
References

[1] Akerlof, G.A. (1991). Procrastination and obedience. American Economic Re-

   view, 81, 1-19.


[2] Beshears, J., Choi, J.J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B.C., and Widland, T. (2005).

   Time-contingent taxation for time-inconsistent consumers. Working paper.


[3] Camerer, C., Issacharoff, I., Loewenstein, G., O’Donoghue, T., and Rabin, M.

   (2003) “Regulation for Conservatives: Behavioral Economics and the Case

   for ‘Asymmetric Paternalism,’” University of Pennsylvania Law Review. 151,

   1211-1254.


[4] Gruber, J. and Koszegi, B. (2001). Is addiction ’rational’ ? Theory and evi-

   dence. Quarterly Journal of Economcis, 116, 1261-1303.


[5] Gruber, J. and Koszegi, B. (2004). Tax incidence when individuals are time

   inconsistent: The case of cigarette excise taxes. Journal of Public Economics,

   88, 1959-1987.


[6] Hersch, J. (2005) “Smoking Restrictions as a Self-Control Mechanism,” Jour-

   nal of Risk and Uncertainty, 31(1).


[7] Laibson, D. (1997). Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting. Quarterly Jour-

   nal of Economics, 62, 433-477.



                                      27
 [8] Laibson, D., Repetto, A., and Tobacman, J. (2005). Estimating discount func-

    tions from lifecycle consumption choices. Harvard University mimeo.


 [9] O’Donoghue, T. and Rabin, M. (1999). Doing it now or later. American Eco-

    nomic Review, 89, 103-124.


[10] Phelps, N. and Pollak, R. (1968). On second best national saving and game

    equilibrium growth. Review of Economic Studies, 35, 185-199.


[11] Strotz, R.H. (1956). Myopia and inconsistency in dynamic utility maximiza-

    tion. Review of Economic Studies, 23, 165-180.


[12] U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2004). Health behaviors of

    adults: United States, 1999-2001. Vital and Health Statistics, 10, 19.


[13] Yerak, B. (2001). Program helps gamblers quit. Detroit News, December 2.

    http://www.detnews.com/2001/business/0112/02/b01-356707.htm




                                       28
