NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERNATIONAL R&D RIVALRY AND INDUSTRIAL STRATEGY

Barbara

J. Spencer

James A. Brander

Working Paper No. 1192

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1983

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies and program in Productivity (World
Economy). Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper /11192
August 1983

International R&D Rivalry and Industrial Strategy

ABSTRACT

This paper presents a theory of government intervention which provides

an explanation for "industrial strategy" policies such as R&D or export

subsidies in imperfectly competitive international markets. Each producing country has an incentive to try to capture a greater share of
rent-earning industries using subsidies, but the subsidy-ridden inter-

national equilibrium is jointly suboptimal. The equilibrium in the
strategic game involving firms and governments is modelled as a three

stage subgame perfect Nash equilibrium. The assumption that the government is the first player in this game allows it to influence equilibrium
industry outcomes by altering the set of credible actions open to firms.

Barbara J. Spencer
Department of Economics
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02167

James A. Brander
Department of Economics
University of British
Columbia
Vancouver, British Columbia
V6T 1Y2
Canada

International R & D Rivalry and Industrial Strategy
Barbara J. Spencer/Boston College
James A. Brander/Queen's University

1. Introduction
National governments in a number of countries subsidize research and
development (R & D) activities of domestic firms, particularly in
industries in which foreign and domesticly owned firms are in compet-

ition for international markets. This paper presents a positive theory
to explain such industrial strategy policies in the context of an
imperfectly

comeptitive world where the R & U rivalry between firms plays

an important role. It is shown that a government which has the objective

of

maximizing domestic welfare has an incentive to introduce such sub-

sidies.

We

RR

tion

focus on possible subsidization of cost—reducing or "process"

fl cijch

as, for example, the recent Japanese and French subsidiza-

of robotics in automobile assembly. Export subsidies are

considered.

also

We show that with export subsidies available, countries

would not choose to subsidize R & U.

Nevertheless, because GATT codes

effectively restrict direct export subsidies, we view the setting in
which only R & U subsidies are available as the most relevant case.

-2—

R

& 0 is assumed to be undertaken before the associated output is

produced, with firms anticipating the effect of R & 0 on the resolution

of output shares. Thus R & D serves as a commitment or credible threat,
along the lines considered in Spence (1977, 1979), Friedman (1979),

Dixit (1980) and Eaton and Lipsey (1980, 1981). In contrast to these
papers, however, where an established firm

acts

first1, we use a model

developed in Brander and Spencer (1983) where firms have equal opportun—

.2.

ity in setting R & 0 levels.

The efficacy of government policy in this paper
assumption that a government can credibly

arises from the

commit itself to R & D

(or output) subsidies before the R & 0 decisions are made by private

firms. We would like to emphasize that this is an example of a more

principle in understanding government policy: the government
becomes the first player in a multi-stage game and can influence the
general

equilibrium

outcome of the game played by private agents by altering

the set of credible actions open to them.

The motivation for government policy in the paper

is that it is to

the advantage of a country to "capture" a larger share of the production
of imperfectly competitive rent earning

industries operating in inter-

national markets. It is well known that monopoly power in international
trade provides incentives for governments to carry out policies designed
to extract rent from foreign trade.

This includes the monopoly tariff

argument (as in Johnson (1953)), the use of export taxes and encouragement of export cartels to exploit the monopoly power

of domestic firms

-3-.
(as in, for example, Auquier and Caves (1979)), or the use of tariffs
to extract rent from foreign imperfectly competitive firms (as, for

example, in Brander and Spencer (1981)). The capture idea is somewhat
different and is more closely related to the classic infant industry

argument in trade theory. The difference here is
incentives

that

national

do not arise from positive externalities or because capital

markets are imperfect, but simply from obtaining a larger domestic
share of internationally profitable industries.
2: Overview
The model of firm behaviour is based on a two stage game played by
two competing firms, which we imagine to be located in different

countries. In the first stage firms choose R & D levels, and in the
second stage, output levels. The second stage equilibrium is a Nash
equilibrium in outputs, taking R & D levels as given by the preceeding

stage. Using this second stage solution we can then write down the

payoff

functions for the game played at the preceding stage: the

profits of each firm are written as a function of the pair of R & D
levels chosen. We seek a Nash equilibrium in that game. This gives

rise

to a subgame perfect equilibrium in the two stage game3, which is

characterized by inefficiently high levels of R & D for the output
levels chosen.

This basic game is subsequently extended in several ways. First,

the government of one country is allowed to make a prior corrinitment to

subsidize R & D. Then, both governments are allowed to simultaneously

-4-

set such R & D subsidies. Finally •both governments make simultaneous
moves to subsidize (or tax) R & D, and are allowed to announce export
sUbsidies. In each case we examine the subganie perfect equilibrium for
the extended three stage game.

The principle results are as follows. With a single government
allowed to subsidize R & D we get an outcome equivalent to that which

would obtain if a leader—follower equilibrium were used in the basic

game at the "choice of R & D" stage. If both governments can subsidize
R & D both will do so. Finally, if R & D and output taxes or subsidies
are available, both governments will tax R & D, thereby achieving
production efficiency, and will accompany this by a subsidy on exports.

Section 3 contains the basic model, the government is introduced
and the main results are developed in section 4, and section 5 contains
concluding remarks.

3.

The Basic Model

We begin by analysing the last stage (the choice of output stage)

in the firms' rivalry. Each firm i produces output y1 at variable
cost C1, which includes all costs except R & D, and earns revenue R1.

The R & D level of firm i is denoted x1 and costs v1 per unit. Profit
of firm i is then

112 i

ir (y ,y ;x )

i
I
1
= Ri(y 12
,y ) - C (y ;x )

- vii
x

(1)

Outputs y1 and y2 are substitutes and we also assume that increasing
the output of one good decreases the marginal revenue of the other.

Using subscripts to denote derivatives, this implies

-5—

R1. < 0

; R. < 0

(2)

The effect of increasing cost-reducing R & D is, of course, to reduce
C1 given y1, and the rate of decrease delcines as x1 increases.

Marginal cost

is denoted c1 and is assumed to fall as x'

increases:

C < 0

;

C'

> 0

;

c

> 0 ;

c

< 0

(3)

The Nash equilibrium in outputs is characterized by first order
condi ti ons

71. =

R(y',y2)

-

c1(y';x1)

=

0

(4)

and second order conditions
=

— c'y < 0

(5)

We also assume that own effects of output on marginal profit dominate
cross effects, giving rise to the following condition:
A

12 12
l22l

> 0

117122 —

(6,

This conditions holds for most demand and cost structures, and is a

fairly standard condition in noncooperative models because, if it holds
globally, it insures uniquiness and global stability of the equilibrium.4

The solutions, y and y2 to (4) depend on x and x2 and can be
written as

y1 =

112 ; y 2 q212
(x ,x )

q (x ,x )

=

(7)

Output (and market share) depend on marginal cost, which depends on x'.
An increase in cost-reducing R & 0 by firm

1

will lower C',

shift

its

—6—

reaction function outward and increase its output and market share, as

illustrated in Figure 1 by the move from A to B. The reaction functions
in the diagram are downward sloping. This follows from total differentiation of (4) with respect to y1 and y2 holding x1 and x2 constant,
which yields the slope of the reaction function, dy1/dy3 =

which is negative from (2) and (5).

Figure 1

The algebra corresponding to Figure 1 comes from total differentiation
respect to y' ,

-of (4)

y2 and x1. Using (5) and (6) it follows

that a firm's Nash equilibrium level of output is increasing in own
R & D and decreasing in the other firm's R & ft.

q = dy1/dx'
=

dy3/dx1

=

=

cr/A > 0
_c1T/A

(8)

(9)

< 0

This completes the analysis of the output stage in which R & D

levels are treated as exogenous. We now analyse the preceeding stage,

in which firms choose R & D leels. Firms are aware of the dependence
(via (7)) of output on R & U levels. Therefore, profits can be
written

as functions of x1 and x2. Let g1 (for gain) represent the

profit function for firm i.
i

g

vt

ill 2 212
q (x ,x ) ; xi
(q (x ,x ),

)

(10)

The Nash equilibrium in R & D levels using (1), (4), and (10) is
characterized by the first order conditions for each firm

—7—C—

7Tq +

0

(11)

Rq—C—v1=0
since

C)

7T

and ir

Rq1
and

R. The second order condition is

q dR/dx1

cq

0

—

(12)

we also assume the condition analogous to [6}
D

where

=

>0

—

9[j =

Rq3

+

(13)

qdR/d.x cq

Crditicn (13) implies that own effects of R & D on marginal profit
dominate cross effects. As was the case with condition (6), (13) ensures
stability with the standard adjustment mechanism and ensures uniqueness, provided
(13)

holds

globally.

The sign of

is important for some of the comparative static

results. From examination of its terms (see (13)),

would normally

be negative5; an increase In the other firm's R & 0 normally reduces the

effect of own R & D on own profit. Unless otherwise indicated we will
assume this is the case

gj c 0
Also inspection of the expressions for

(14)

and 9j (12) and (13) shows

that existence and uniqueness of equilibrium can be a problem in two-

stage models. At least one of the terms of

is positive, making it

difficult to ensure that the second order condition for an interior profit

maximum holds. Nevertheless (12) and (13) will hold if C Is relatively

-8large, that Is, if the marginal cost reducing effect of

R

& D declines

relatively rapidly. The study of existence, uniqueness and stability of
perfect equilibrium is an interesting and nontrivial matter, but Is not
something which we wish to pursue here given our emphasis on the comparative
static properties of well behaved cases.

We conclude this section by noting that firms do not minimize costs in

this model. The condition for overall cost minimization is

C4vEO
ut these
.1

(15)

firms set

lj

C+v=R1>O

(16)

> 0 (which is the second order
by (11), (2) and (9). Indeed, since
condition for cost minimization), R & 0 Is overused in that more R & 0 15
used than required to minimize total costs for the output chosen.6
4.

industrial Strategy
In this section we demonstrate that industrial strategy, in the

form of R & D subsidies or export subsidies, can enable a domestic

firm to capture a larger share of the world market so as to increase

profits and rent, net of subsidy, to the domestic country. We should

also point cut that the variable x could be interpreted as capital,
leading to a theory of investment subsidies. In any case, our
approach is to characterize the subsidies that would maximize rent.
In

practise, of course, governments have

neither

the information nor

the singlemindedness necessary to implement such finely tuned policies.

—9-

Nevertheless,

the arguments presented here seem to capture one

significant aspect of real government incentives and behaviour.
The government is introduced as an agent that can set subsidy

rates on R & D expenditure at a period before the firms spend on
R & D. The assumption that the government can pre-commit itself to
such subsidies is essential to the analysis, and our conclusions are
tied to it. We do feel, however, that the assumption that the government can act in this leadership role is fairly natural.
There are

at

least two major reasons for such an assumption. One

is simple bureaurcratic sluggishness. The government's technology
for changing tax rates, once set, is relatively slow: the inflexib-

ility ofgovernment gives it its strength, placing it naturally in a
leadership role. A second point is that the government has a large
number of taxes and subsidies to set (and, for that matter, many other
policies as well) and is concerned with maintaining its reputation

for future policies.1 The model would not, in the words of a referee,
apply to a crude Marxian image of a banana republic, where the
government follows the directions of a corporation.

The setting is as follows. There are two firms in the industry,
one located in the "domestic" country and one located in a foreign

country. In order to focus on the purely rent-seeking rationale

industrial

for

strategy we assume that all output is for export to other

countries. The possibility of domesticconsumption would generally
strengthen any incentives for subsidization of the domestic finn

— 10 -

since

it tends to increase quantities and decrease prices, but we do

not analyze that issue here.

maximize net rent

accruing

The domestic government wishes to

to the domestic country, which in this

simple context is just the profit of the domestic firm minus the
cost of any policies carried out.

R & D Subsidies

The first type of policy to consider is a subsidy (or tax) on

R & 0 by itself. This subsidy affects the levels of R & 0 committed

but

by firms

not the resolution of the output game given R & 0 levels

wiiiih iS epreseiLedby y1 =

q(x1,x2).8

Therefore, with a subsidy,

s, per unit of R & 0, the profit of the domestic from is (from (1)
and (10)),

(y1;x1)

R1(y1,y2) —

g1(x31x2;s)

— (v1—s)x1

(17)

212
1q112
;y2q (x
(x

wherey

,x )

,x )

The first point of interest concerns

the effects of the subsidy on R & 0

levels. The subsidy shifts out the R & D reaction function of

the

increasing

domestic firm,

its equilibrium R & D and reducing

undertaken by the foreign firm,

provided reaction functions are downward

sloping. These results are obtained by total differentiation
order conditionS g1(x1,x2;S)
1

the R 8 D

of the first

0 (from 17)) and 2 0 to obtain the
2

— 11 —

following

comparative static matrix equation.

i-in-, r-l

ri
1g11

L9

g1211 x

(18)

2J L:J' L °

This implies x ..g2/D >0 •since D >.0 by (13) and g2 <0
by (12). Also x g1/D Is negative if (14) holds and positive

> 0.
Proposition

1

A domestic R & 0 subsidy Increases domestic R & D and,

provided g c 0,

reduces foreign R & D. If g > 0, foreign R & 0 rises.
21
We might note that the relationship between the comparative static effects

and x Is just x -x(g1/g2). Since the slope of the foreign firm's
reaction function Is given by dx2/dx1 _1f92 it follows that
x dx2/dx'

(19)

The Optimal Domestic R & D Subsidy
The optimal subsidy is found by maximizing net domestic benefit B1,
which Is the profit of the domestic finn less the cost of the subsidy.
81(s)

From

(17),

the

g(x1,x2;s) — 5X1

(20)

the domestic benefit (20), wIth a subsidy, Is just the profit of

firm (earned from exports) when there is no subsidy. The

question arises as to why subsidization could ever be called for, since,

after all, the firm wishes to maximize its own profit. What Is It that

the governt can do by subsidizing R & 0 that the finn cannot do for
Itself?

— 12 —

The answer lies in the nature of the firm actions which are compatible
with the subgame.. perfect equllibriLan. The level of R & D chosen by
the domestic firm is the level which maximizes its profit within the
confines of the behaviourwhich characterizes the two-stage Nash equil-

ibrium. If a finn violates this equilibrium it risks the possibility It
will earn lower profit In the unstable situation which follows. By

providing a subsidy to firms, the government alters the perceived cost
structure and thus changes the set of actions which are compatible with the two-

stage Nash equilibrium. This allows the domestic firm to earn higher profit
net of the subsidy. In essence the goverranent perceives an advantage from
introducing

an earlier stage of pre-coninitinent. The government corrrnits itself

to lowering the cost of pre-corrinitmen by domestic firms.

It is simply not credible for the finn

to

do this by itself. For

example, just as a firm cannot deter entry by threatening to produce

a large output should entry occur, it

'fs

not credible for the firm to

pursuade other finns not to expand, by announcing
in

some sense, its own R & D.

profit

that It Is subsidizing,

Without an actual subsidy, this is not

maximizing behaviour given the level of costs and the nature of

the equilibrium. On the other hand, the government is assumed able to
offer a credible R & D subsidy, and can therefore influence the final
equilibrium.9

There is, of course, nothing to stop the government in the other

country from acting in a similar manner. Later in the paper we discuss

— 13 —

the noncooperative equilibrium that would arise with both governments

involved. For the present, however, we examine the incentives facing
a single government. We might also mention that the use of benefit
function

(20) involves the usual assumptions necessary for partial

equilibrium surplus analysis. In particular if R & 0 is not subsidized
the private cost of R & 0 reflects its full social opportunity cost.

From (20) the first order condition for the welfare maximizing subsidy
Is

dB1/ds gx +

gx + g - x' - sx

(21)

0

The partial derivative g x' from (17). Also g 0 from
a

(ii)

and

X1 dx2/dx1 from (19) so (21) reduces to
dB1/ds (g (dx2/dx1) —

g

S

s)x

a

0
(22)

dx2/dx1

The optimal R & D subsidy Is equal to the increase In own

profit

from

a reduction In the foreign firm's R & D brought about by an increase In

own

R

& D.

ppostlon 2
The optimal subsidy is positive.
Proof:

by (2), and

+

4q from

>

0 by (8), It follows that g Rq < 0.

nd L14 dx2/dx1

(10) (or (17)). Since

-g2/g2 c 0, s

is

positive by (22).

0 (by(4)), 4

R

Since by (12)

<

0.

— 14 -

Another way of looking at this point is simply to observe that
is positive at S

dB1/ds

0, indicating that there is a rent-capturing incentive for

the government to subsidize R & 0, despite the fact that the subsidy increases

the bias toward excess use of R & 0 for any given level of output.1° Of
course, In the unusual but not impossible case in which the foreign firm's

reaction firctionis positively sloped (g1 > 0), then the domestic country has
an incentive to tax domestic R & 0.

Proposition 3
The optimal R & D subsidy maximizes domestic rent earned from exports
by moving the domestic firmi to what would have been the Stackelberg leader-

follower point in R & D space with no subsidy.
Proof:
Suppose the domestic firiii

and s =

0.

were a Stackelberg leader In R & D space

The first order condition for a profit maximum, taking account

of the reaction of the foreign firm, is

g(x1, X2; 0) 4 g(x1, x2;O) (dx2/dx1)

0

(23)

With a subsidy the firm's profit is increased by sx so g1(x1, x2;s)

g1(x1, x2;O) + sx. The first order condition for the domestic firm
in the first staoe Nash R & 0 game, taking subsidy s

is g(x1,x2;O) + s

0, or g(x1,x2;O) + g(x1, x2;sXdx2/dx1)

which Is the same as (23) since from the
is independent of s.

gdx2/dx1 as given
0,

proof of Proposition 2, g Rq which

That Is, Stackelberg leader—follower behaviour without

a subsidy gives rise to the same situation as Nash behaviour with
subsidy, which proves the result.

the

optimal

— 15 —

The optimal R & D subsidy is Illustrated in Figure 2. R & D reaction
functions are drawn sloping downward. Without a subsidy, both reaction
functions are satisfied at point N. Isoprofit contours show combinations
of x1

and x2 that would yield

equal profit to firm 1. The most profitable

position for firm 1, given the reaction function of firm 2,

is S, the

Stackelberg leader—follower point. The subsidy shifts the reaction function

of firm I so that It intersects the rectio function of firm 2 at the
Stackelberg pDint.
Figure

2

The goverrmient does for the domestic firm what the firm cannot do

for ltself.1 The domestic firm might have the same understanding of
Industry

structure as the government but the subsidy can allow the firm to

achieve the profit maximizing Stackelberg leader point without disturbing

the Nash equllibrlLsnbehavioUrof the private firms. In addition, the domestic
firm would naturally prefer to be moved to the Stackelberg point by a government subsidy since, without offsetting taxes, the subsidy results In a
redistribution of Income from

taxpayers to the shareholders of the

firm.

Persuading the goverrtient that subsidization of R & D will lead to a domestic

benefit from a greater share of the world market allows firms to enjoy
a higher level of profits without the risk of the price wars which might
result from the breakdown of the perfect Nash equilibrium.

An alternative interpretation is that the government knows the structure
of Industry behaviour while the naive firms do not, or simply that the

-16-

government has a different) possibly incorrect, view than do the firms.
This interpretation is not without interest or relevance but_is not really
in the spirit of the paper.

The incentive for the goverment to subsidize R & D would still remain
(and perhaps be enhanced) If we had not assumed finns use R & D strategically.

The subsidy would still induce the domestic firm

to

use additional R & D

shifting out its output reaction function, and increasing its market share.

Furthermore the incentive to subsidize R & D remains If the foreign government has announced credible R & D subsidies.

Noncooperative International Equilibrium
This R & 0 rivalry does have a beggar_thy_neighbour aspect. By imposing

a subsidy, country 1 gains at the expense of country 2. (This follows easily

since dg2/ds gx c 0 from (18) and the proof of Proposition 2). Nevertheless,
the international non-cooperative equilibrium which would occur if each

country acted independently given the subsidy imposed by the other, does
Involve positive subsidies.

To show this consider the net benefit

B1(s1, 2) g1(x1, x2; i) — s1x1

(24)

earned by each country when both have subsidized R & D. This Is the
same form as (20) since the subsidy of country 2, s2, affects the profit
of firm 1 only indirectly through its impact on R & D levels. The non-

cooperative equilibrium occurs where BB1/s1

0 and 3B2/as2 0 and

implies positive subsidies (see the proof of Proposition 2),.

—17—

g(dx/dx1)

(25)

Although (25) has the same form as the single country subsld (22), the
values of gj and dx'1/dx will be different at the noncooperative equilibriLzn.

If each firm had attempted to be a Stackelberg leader In R & D space the

outcome would not be informationally consistent and could not be a reasonable
candidate for an equilibrium structure (hence the term Stackelberg disequilibrium). However, if we think of goverrEnents setting credible subsidy
levels, then firms

setting

R 8 D levels given subsidy levels, and finally

setting output given R & D levels, the new equilibriui is essentially an

informationally consistent3 stage perfect equilibrium. This should make
clear the role of the government in being able to credibly set subsidies.

It should be emphasized that this structure is suboptimal for the

two countries

taken together. If we define B(s1, s2)

imize B by setting B/s' 0, SB/as'

B1 + B2 and max-.

0 it follows C see Appendix A)

that

(26)

The jointly optimal policy Is to tax R & D so as to just offset the negative
effect of own R & D on the other firm's profit.

If the two finns are similar, total rent Is lower and both countries

earn less rent at the noncooperative equilibrium than they would If they
had been able to come to an agreement not to subsidize R & 0 (see Appendix A).

- 18

-

Both producing countries are then worse off by their subsidization of
R & 0 rivalry. Consuming countries, of course, gain from the fall in
prices which results from greater production.

Attention is restricted to symmetric cases. However three
kinds of asymmetry should be mentioned. First, of course, there may be
exogenous asymmetry in demand for the two products or in costs, and it

is possible that in a very assmetric case one country could be better
off in the noncooperative subsidy equilibrium than at the subsidy-free

position. Secondly, a less restricted version of the model would admit
multiple equilibria, including asymmetric equilibria, even if the
exogenous structure were symmetric (along the lines of Flaherty (1980)).
This raises the possibility of one country obtaining an ex poste
advantage by admissible strategic moves. Finally, of course, •one country

might have a timing advantage and be able to gain an advantage by
acting firsts

txport Subsidies
The second tool of industrial strategy to consider is the export subsidy.
The export subsidy could be announced either before p1' after R & 0 has

occurred and could be used in conjunction with an R & D tax or subsidy, or

by itself. This creates a fairly large taxonomy of possible cases.

The case

we wish to examine In some detail is the case in which the export subsidy is
announced before R & D is in place and is used simultaneously with an R
tax or subsidy.

D

— 19

per

-

First, however, it is useful to consider the simplest case: a subsidy
unit of exports after R & D has taken place. In general the Nash equil-

ibrium

levels of production are a function of the levels of R &

export

subsidy, denoted z : y1

this case
cost

and x2 are

D and the

q(x1,.x2 , z) andy2 q2(x1, x2,

fixed and the

export subsidy by reducing

In

marginal

serves to Increase the domestic firints share of the export market.

This holds since the partial derivatives q and

are respectively positive

and negative holding x1 and x2 fixed (see Appendix B(i)). The net domestic

benefit now depends on x as follows

B1(x1. x2;z) — g1(x1, x2;z)

—

zy1

(27)

where
R1

(y, 2) - c 1y1 ;x1)

-

v1x + zy

If R & D expenditures are already sunk, the subsidy cannot affect them,
and the first order condition for maximization of (27) is

g — y — zq

B1/3z

From (27) it is easily seen that

and ii1/z — y1

since 4

—

2

Rq/q.

—

0.

output space.

of the foreign firm.

Therefore,

so the rent maximizing subsidy
(29)

R(dy2/dy1) > 0

is positive by (2) and (5). Given any R & D level, this subsidy
domestic

firm

as the R &

moves the

to what would be the Stackelberg position in output pace, much

D subsidy moves the domestic firm

R & D space.

Then,

The export subsidy

the domestic firm In

does not affect the reaction function
q(dy2/dy1)

since

i4q +

we have z —

shifts out the reaction function of
It

(28)

0

—

to

the Stackelberg point in

- 20

-

Now consider the more difficult case in which R & D and export subsidies

can be imposed before R & D take place. This is more complicated because
the export subsidy affects both the choice of output given R & D and R & D

directly. The profit function of the domestic firm

x2;s,

g1(x1,

q1(x,

where y1
on z and s.

B (sz)
Taking

z)

R1&1, y2) — c1(y1;x1) +

x?;z),y2=

q2(x1, x2;z)

zy

is
(l_5)x

(30)

and x1 and x2 themselves depend

The benefit function is

g (x , x ;s,z

.zy — sx

(31)

the derivative of B1 with respect to s and solving fr S yields

(See Appendix B (iii))
s

(32)

g(dx2/dx1) — zdy1/dx1

Looking at (22), which gives the R & D subsidy

in Isolation, we

see

that

0. However If z

>

this naturally coincides with (32) if z

0,

the optimum subsidy on R & D is reduced by the term zdy1/dx1 where
dy1/dx1, the total derivative of y1

q1 (x1, x2, z) with respect to

is positive since dx2/dx1 < 0 by (12) and (14), This term reflects the effect

uf unit increase in R & D on the cost of the export subsidy to the
government.

Similarly,

the first order condition for the export subsidy

z yields

z (gx + RqY(dy1/dz)

-

sx/(dy1/dz)

(33)

Expressions (32) and (33) must be solved simultaneously. It is
no longer clear that both s and z will be positive. The solution is
derived in aDpendix B.

(34)

s'-Rq<0
z

(g(dx2/dx1) +

Rq))/(dy1/dx)>

0

(35)

— 21 —

ProposItion

4

The optimum export subsidy, z, Is positive, but the optimal R & D

subsidy is neqative. R & D should be taxed. The tax on R & D is exactly
as required to undo the R & D bias and induce the domestic firm to minimize
costs.

Proof: The sian of a s follows from

(2) and (9). z can be sianed usinq (2).

(8). (9). (12). (13) and (14). That s exactly offsets the f& D bias
Is

clear from

(16)

since the firm now

sets

C + (v-s) 4q or

+v

as required to minimize cost for a given level of output.
Because the export subsidy and the R & D tax
before

Investment in

can

be credibly imposed

R & B takes place, they can be used to move the

domestic firm to the best position given that the foreign government does

not retaliate. The export subsidy increases domestic exports while the
R & B tax restores production efficiency. The noncooperative International
equilibrium would have both countries imposing export subsidies and R & B

taxes,and overall productIon efficiency would result. As in the case of
an R & B subsidy alone, noncooperativebehavibur reduces the total rent

to be divided relative to the rent at the collusive output level. Nevertheless the additional output from subsidization allows the consuming
nations to gain.

— 22'

!. Concluding

—

Remarks

National governments clearly play a major role in certain international
industries, particularly high technology and high investment industries.

Such industries often have only a few firms, or at least, are characterized
by some national cooperation so that there are few competitive units in the

market. These firms themselves normally have a clear understanding that
they are involved in a strategic game in which foreign firms and national
governments are players.
This is a view of the world that is displayed prominently, perhaps

too prominently, in business and financial magazines. This paper is a
step toward understanding such a world. Our approach is to assume that
governments can

credibly

commit themselves to policies which alter the

set of credible actions open to private players in subsequent strategic

games. In this setting we show that there are national incentives to
subsidize R & 0 if export subsidies are not available.

The strategic game played by firms leads them to overuse R & D
in the absence of government policy. If the government can use both
export subsidies and R & 0 subsidies (or taxes), a fairly striking

result is obtained: the government has an incentive tax R & D to
restore

domestic production efficiencf, and to use an export subsidy

to enable the domestic firm to capture a larger share of the industry

than it would unaided. Thus a prediction of the model is that a
relaxation of GATT restrictions on export subsidies would cause an
increase in the use of export subsidies and a decrease in subsidies
to investment and to process R & 0.

- 23

We

the

—

have not examined entry deterrence but It is fairly clear that

policies

and structure outlined here makes it possible to deter entry

while leaving current participants with strictly positive profits. Also; syrrnetrically expanding, the number of firms in each country to more than-I is a conceptually minor (although aigebraical-ly major) extension. Similarly, one could

modify the precise nature of final stage competition. In particular moving
to price-Nash rather than quantity-Nash does not change the nature 0f the

results, provided products are slightly differentiated. (The choice of
quantity versus price Nash for the final stage is, of course, not arbitrary
in any specific case; rather it arises naturally from the type of production

rnress._ Involved. At the level of modelli, however, the quantity version
is slightly more convenient).

Finally, we should emphasize that the analysis presented here is

not in any sense a recomendation that "industrial strategy" nolicies be used.

In the first place, any policy advocating subsidies should be viewed with
suspicion because the oportunIty cost of government revenue may be much
higher than value of unity asstzned in simple surplus analysis.

Also,

of course, we have been characterizing the incentives for noncooperative

internationalbhaviour. Such behaviourwill naturally be welfare inferior to the jointmaximizing optimum. Indeed the positive prediction for
government behaviour Is that a government will undertake Industrial strategy

If no other government does, but be willing to negotiate limitations
on such policies in the event of retaliation.

- 24 Appendix A

R

Total

rent is B

B(1,s2)

? U taxes which jointly maximize rent

B1 + B2.

g1(x1,x2;s1) -

From

Six'

+

(24)

g2(x3,x2;s2) - s2x2

using g 0, Bg1/s x and dx/ds1

(1A)

(dx/dx')(Bx'/?s1 ) we obtain the

first order conditions for a maximum of B with respect to

and

aB/3s1

fg1(dx2/dx)-s' +

g-s2(dx2/dx1)'(dx1/ds1)

0

(2A)

aB/as2

[g-s'(dx1/dx2) +

g(dx1/dx2)-s2(dx2/ds2)

0

(3A)

From (2A) and (3A), s1 and s2 satisfy

+ s2(dx2/dx1)
s1(dx1ldx2) + S2

g + g(dx2/dx)

(4A)

g(dx1/dx2)

(5A)

.'

Solving (4A) and (5A) simultaneously and cancelling terms we obtain (26)
and s2 =

g,

which implies both

and 2 are negative.

Response of

total

rent to positive subsidies

We show here that If firms are Identical total rent B
for any small

B1 + B2 falls

increase in the equal positive R & D subsidies. Since the

subsidies (see(25)) are

positive

at the noncooperative equllibritin this

implies that both countries earn less rent at the noncooperative equilIbrium than if neither had subsidized R & D.

For any small changes in s and

dB

(B/as1)ds1 +

Suppose the two

firms

(6A)

(B/2)ds2

have the same profit functions, and that

1

ds ds2. Substituting (2A) and (3A) into (6A), using dx1/ds1

and
dx2/ds2

and gathering terms we obtain

dB 4(—s2)(1+(dx2/dx1)) +

(g_sl)(l+l/dx2)J(dxl/dsl)dsl

(7A)

Since g < 0 and froci (13), dxu/dxuI_gj/gjjIc L dB < 0 If s S2

0.

The intuition of this result is that, with zero or positive subsidies,
duopoly firms already produce more than the collusive output and use more

than the collusive amount of R & D. Further subsidies just push them further

away from

the

joint profit maximum.

-26-

ppendix B
Static effects of the Export Subsidy

(1) Effects of the Export Subsidy on Output
In order to obtain the solutions for s and z, (34) and (35) respectively,

we require the partial derivatives q 3q1(x1, x2;z)/z. By total
of the first order conditions, 71

R

—

c

+ z

0 and 4

differentiation

- C2

o

with respect to y1, y2 and z, holding x1 and x2 fixed we obtain

q '-42/A and q 41/A
Since 7r2

0.

<

(1B)

< 0 by (5), A> 0 by (6) and ,r R1 < 0 by (2), q > 0

and

An increase in the export subsidy increases own output and reduces

the output of the foreign firm. Also from dy2/dy1 —4]'42 we have
(2B)

qdy2/dy1

Further from the expressions (8) and (9) of the text for q and q, and
from

(1B),

.-q/c and

q -q/c

(3B)

(ii) Effects of the Export Subsidy on R & D
For the purposes of the simultaneous solution for s and z, we also reouire
the relationship,

x2

(dx/ dx1)(x -

(l/c))

(4B)

The effect of the export subsidy on the R & D level of 1irm 2, x, depends
not only on Its effect on the R & D of firm 1, but on changes In the resolution
of the output game,
(4-B).

and q (as In Appendix B (I)). We now prove expression

-27—

The subsidies, s and z, affect the profit of firm 2 only Indirectly

through effects on y and

so

g(x1, x2, s, z) R(y1, y2)4(x1, x2, z) —

where y1
From

q1(x1, x2, z) and x1 —

total

(c(y2,

o

x2)+v2)

x1(sz).

differentiation of (5B) with respect to x, x2 and z, we have

dg g1 dx1 + g2dx2+gdz

0

(6B)

Rearranging we obtain

2 _g21fg22ix
2 2l — 22/22
2

wnere

troniditterentlation

(7B)

of (5B)

+

q2(dR/dz)

—

To simplify (7B) we need to axpress g in terms of g. Since

dR/dz =

R1q

+

R2q,

and from (3B),

dR/dz (R1q +

-(dR/dx)c
Also since from (38), q —

(9B)

—q/c,

we have q2 -

—. q2fc,

Substituting (9B), q from (3B) and q= q2 into (8B), we obtain
=

-(Rq1 + q(dRfdx1.)

—

—g,c

.

cq)/c

Substituting (lOB) Into (7B) and using dx2/dx1 —
we obtain expression (4B).

(lOB)

—g1/g2

(iii) Solution for the Optimal Combined P & D and Export Subsidies
We first obtain expression (32) for s. The first order conditions

for

the optlmal choice of s and z are B1/s

differentiation

0 and 3B1/az

0. From

of (31),

(g-s)x + gx +

— x — zdy1/ds

0

(11B)

where dy1/ds qx + qx
Using (19), x2
where

(dx2/dx1)x we have dy1/ds

(dy1/dx1)x

0 and g x1 from

dy1/dx q + q(dx2/dx1). Since

(17), (11B)

becomes

= —sx + (g(dx2/dx1) — zdy1/dx1)x

(12B)

,Stti à7
which imlies expression (32),
s

(13B)

g(dx2/dx1) — zdy1/dx1

We obtain expression (33) for z in a similar manner. From differentiation

of

(31),

(g-s)x
Recognizing that

+

gx +

0

(14B)

0, from partial differentiation of (30), we have

-

g1zRq2+y1.
Substituting

— y1— zdy1/dz

this Into (14B) and recognizing that g 0, we obtain

_sx +

gx + Rq - zdy1/dz

which rearranged yields (33).

0

(1SB)

-29-

We

now

derive

expressions (34) and (35) for s and z. Substituting

(32) or (13B) for s , (4B) for

and (3B) for

into (15B)—and cancelling,

we obtain

aB/z

z((dy1/dx1)x — dy1/dz) —

ow dy1/dz qx +
so the

first tern

qx +

(gdx2/dx1

and dy1/dx1 q

+

+

0

(16B)

qdx2/dx1

of (16B)

(dy1/dx1)x — dy1/dz

(17B)

-q(x —(dx2/dx1) x) -

Using (4B) and (3B), (17B) reduces to (dy1/dx1)/4. Substituting this
Into (16B) and rearranging we obtain
z

(gdx2/iix1 +

(18B)

Rq)f(dy1/dx1)

which is expression (35). The expression (34), s =
by substituting (35) into (32) of the text.

-Rq

is then obtained

- 30 -

Footnotes
Acknowlegement: We have received many useful comments on this paper.
In particular, James Friedman, Sandy Moroz, Robert Willig, and

the referees were very helpful. Shortcomings,of course, remain
our responsibility. The paper has benefitted considerably from
exposure at conferences on 'Trade Theory Post Heckscher—Ohlin" at
the University of Western Ontario, on "Monopolistic Competition in
International TradeH
Studies

in

at the Graduate Institute

of International

Geneva and at the 1982 NBER Sumer Institute. J. Brander

wishes to acknoi1ege gratefully financial support from a Social

Sciences and Humanities Research

Council of Canada post—doctoral

fellowship.
1. Prescott and Visscher (1977) have

a similar structure except that it

is the product type or location decision which constitutes a commit-

ment rather than investment or R & D.

2. Equal opportunity product choice commitment models have been ara1yzed
by Shaked and Sutton (1982a, 1982b). Attention should also be drawn
to Flaherty (1980), where distinct capital and output decisions
are made by firms with equal opportunity in a dynamic setting.

3. The subgame perfect Nash equilibrium has been fairly widely used
in the literature and is an example of a "closed-loop" solution for

the players involved. It is an attractive concept because the
equilibrium is self—enforcing at each stage in that there are no
incentives to cheat, and secondly because the equilibrium is not

characterized by systemtic errors about the levels of strategy

variables to be chosen by rivals: the model confirms expectations
in equilibrium.

— 31 —

4.

Uniqueness follows from direct application of Gale-Nikaido global

univalence, provided (6) holds globally. (See Nikaido (1968), ch. 7,

p. 371). This is also the Rouh-Hurwitz condition for stability of
the standard adjustment mechanism. That is, (6) is the condition for
the reaction function diagram to be stable.

Letting i = 1 and j

= 2,

the term dR/dx2 =

R1q

(2), (8) and (9) in the normal case in which R2

+

R2q

is positive from

0; an increase in y2

reduces R1 but at a diminishing rate. This ensures that the second term

of

g2 < 0

is negative. Since the third term is negative from (3) and (9),
if the first term

is not too positive. From differentiation

of (9), q2 0 if demand is linear and marginal cost c1 is constant with
respect to output.

6. This result can be regarded as art extension of Dixit (1980).

It is

reported in Brander and Spencer (1983) along with a number of other
results concerning the comparison with a corresponding one-stage

(or non-strategic) model. Output in the industry is higher and

prices and profits are lower in the two-stage model. Although R & D
is not used efficiently, for many cases, overall welfare actually
is higher.

7. This discussion follows some helpful comments by a referee who also
pointed out that the sluggishness idea appears in Schelling (1960),

and that reputation effects can give rise to credible threats even
in finite horizon models as in, for example, Kreps and Wilson (1982).
The sluggishness point seems particularly relevant to the R & D
subsidy since the R & D phase is presumably relatively short in real
time so the subsidy would not have to be maintained for very long. This

is a second reason, in addition to GAIT restrictions, for taking
the R & D subsidy as more relevant than the export subsidy.

— 32 —

8.

This fact permits a fairly straightforward generalization of the

analysis of R & D subsidies: any second stage game giving rise to
q' functions with appropriate reasonable properties could be
incorporated in the analysis.

9. A recent paper by Paul Krugman £1983) has the government engaging in

similar behaviour. By guaranteeing a "home market" for domestic firms
those firms believe, as do their rivals, that they are guaranteed some
kind of learning economy (or other econczny of scale) which gives domestic

firms an advantage in export markets as well.

10. With an R & D subsidy, the first order conditions for profit maximization

reduce to c +

v

=

Rq

+

s.

Since, without an R & D subsidy, c +

V1 Rq

(see (16)), the effect of a positive s is to increase the positive value of

c +

which (for a given output) implies a greater deviation from the

cost-minimiZirg solution: c +

= 0.

This Stackelberg leader-follower equilibrium is the equilibrium that would
emerge if the Prescott—Visscher (1977) first stage sequential entry with foresight concept were used. In this case, since the domestic f-jrm could
undertake its R & D (or install its capital) first, its position would be

credible. If, on the other hand1 it was the foreign firm who had the
opportunity to act first then the domestic government would have an incentive to announce R & D subsidies before the R & D chosen by the foreign
firm was determined.

— 33

—

References
Auquier, A. and Caves, R. (1979). "Monopolistic Export Industries,
Trade Taxes and Optimal Competition Policy." Economic Journal,
89, 559—81.

Basevi, G. (1970). "Domestic Demand and the Ability to Export." Journal
of Political Economy, 78, 330—7.
Brander, J. and Spencer, B. (1981). "Tariffs and the Extraction of
Foreign Monopoly Rents under Potential Entry." Canadian Journal

of

Economics, 14, 371-389.
Brander, J. and Spencer, B. (1983). "Strategic Commitment with R & D:
The Symmetric Case." Bell Journal of Economics, 14.
Brander, J. and Spencer, B. (1983). "Tariff Protection and Imperfect
Competition" in Monopolistic Competition in International Trade,
ed. by Henry K. Kierzkowski (Oxford University Press) (forthcoming).
Caves, R. and Porter, M. (1977). "From Entry Barriers to Mobility

ers." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 91, 241—61.

Dixit, A. (1980).

"The Role of Investment in

Economic Journal, 90, 95—106.

Entry-Deterrence."

Eaton, C. and Lipsey, R. (1980). "Exit Barriers are Entry Barriers:
The Durability of Capital as a Barrier to Entry." Bell Journal of
Economics, 11, 721-724.

___________ (1981). "Capital, Commitment and Entry Equilibrium."
Bell Journal of Economics, 12, 593-604.
Eaton, J. and Kierzkowski, H. (1982). "Oligopolistic Competition, Product
Variety and International Trade," niimeo, Yale University.

Feilner, W. (1949). Competition Among the Few. Mew York: Alfred A.
Kn op

f.

Flaherty,

M.T. (1980). "Industry Structure and Cost-Reducing Investment,"
Econometrica 48, pp. 1187-1209.

Friedman, J.W. Oligopoly and the Theory of Games. Amsterdam: North—
Holland Publishing Company, 1977.

__________ (1979). "On Entry Preventing Behaviour and Limit Price Models
of Entry." In S. Brams, A. Schotter, and G. Schwodiauer, eds.,
Applied Game Theory. Vienna: Springer.
Frenkel, J. (1971). "On Domestic Demand and Ability to Export."
Journal of Political Economy, 79, 668—72.

- 34

-

Gilbert,

R. and Harris, R.G. (1981). "Investment Decisions with Economies
of Scale and Learning." American Economic Review, (Papers and
Proceedings) 71, 172—77.

Johnson, H.G. (1965). "Optimal Trade Intervention in the Presence of
Domestic Distortions." En R.E. Baldwin et al., eds., Trade, Growth,

and the Balance of Payments. Chicago: ndThcNa11y.
Johnson, H.G. (1953). "Optim3l Tariffs and Retaliation" Review of
Economic Studies, 21, 142—153.
Kreps and Wilson (1982), "Reputation and Imperfect Information"
Journal of Economic Theory, 27, 253-279.

Krugman, P. (1983). "Import Protection as Export Promotion: International
Competition in the Presence of Oligopoly and Economies of Scale."
in Monopolistic Competition in International Trade ed. by Henryk
Kierzkowski (Oxford University Press) (forthcoming).
Nikaido, H. (1968), Convex Structures and Economic Theory. New York:
Academic Press.
Prescott, E. and Visscher, M. (1976). "Sequential Location Among Firms
With Foresight." Bell Journal of Economics, vol. 8 (Autumn),
379-93,

Pursell, G. and Snape, R. (1973). "Economies of Scale, Price Discrimination
and Exporting." Journal of International Economies, vol. 3 (February),
85-91.

Schelling, T. (1960). The Strategy of Conflict. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Seade, 3. (1980). "On the Effects of Entry". Econometrica, vol. 48
(March) 479—89.

Shaked, A. and Sutton, 3. (l982a). "Relaxing Price Competition Through
Product Differentiation," Review of Economic Studies, vol. 49
(January), 3—13.

__________ (l982b). "Natural Ologopolies and International Trade."
Mimeo, London School of Economics in Monopolistic Competition in
in International Trade ed. by Henryk
Kierzkowski (Oxford
University Press) (forthcoming).

Spence, A.M. (1977). "Entry, Investment and Oligopolistic Pricing".
Bell Journal of Economics, vol. 8 (Autumn), 534-4.

___________ (1979). "Investment Strategy and Growth in a New Market."
Bell Journal of Economics, vol. 10 (Spring), 1-19.

Takayama, A. (1974). Mathematical Economics. Hinsdale, Illinois: Dryden.

