NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OVERCONFIDENCE, SUBJECTIVE PERCEPTION
AND PRICING BEHAVIOR
Pierpaolo Benigno
Anastasios G. Karantounias
Working Paper 11922
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11922
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2006

We are grateful to Mike Woodford for useful discussions and comments and to seminar participants at
Columbia University, Federal Reserve Board of Governors and NYU. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Pierpaolo Benigno and Anastasios G. Karantounias. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Overconfidence, Subjective Perception and Pricing Behavior
Pierpaolo Benigno and Anastasios G. Karantounias
NBER Working Paper No. 11922
January 2006, Revised March 2006
JEL No. D4, D8, E3
ABSTRACT

We study the implications of a particular form of irrationality on the pricing behavior of firms in a
monopolistic-competitive market with incomplete information. We assume that firms are
overconfident, meaning that they over-estimate their abilities to understand the correct model of the
economy. However, we allow firms to obtain information by paying a fixed cost. We find two
important implications: i) overconfident firms are less inclined to acquire information; ii) prices
might exhibit excess volatility driven by non-fundamental disturbances. We use our model to match
some facts related to recent empirical evidence on disaggregated price data for the US economy.
Pierpaolo Benigno
Department of Economics
New York University
269 Mercer Street
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
pierpaolo.benigno@nyu.edu
Anastasios G. Karantounias
Department of Economics
New York University
269 Mercer Street
New York, NY 10003
anastasios.karantounias@nyu.edu

Using micro data on consumer prices for the U.S. economy, Klenow and Kryvtsov
(2004), hereinafter KK, have documented that prices change frequently with an average absolute size of 8.5% on a monthly basis and that these frequent movements
are equally likely to be positive or negative in sign. In contrast, aggregate inflation
averages just at 0.6% over an horizon of 3 months. This evidence is an important
challenge for modelers of inflation dynamics, especially for those who believe that
nominal disturbances can have real and highly persistent eﬀects on output. Indeed,
Golosov and Lucas (2004) have been able to match this empirical evidence with
a model in which pricing decisions are state dependent but subject to a cost of
changing prices. In their model the observed high volatility of prices is explained
by changes driven by highly volatile idiosyncratic productivity shocks. But, no
matter what the source and the size of the other disturbances in the economy, the
pricing decisions are dominated by the occurrence of this idiosyncratic component.
As a consequence, a nominal disturbance has negligible real eﬀects on output since
it mixes up with the idiosyncratic shocks. To counteract this result, Gertler and
Leahy (2005) have shown that even a model with state-dependent pricing can be
consistent with important real eﬀects of nominal disturbances.
In a recent work, Woodford (2002) has renewed interest on an alternative theory
of the real eﬀects of monetary policy that originates from the Phelps (1970) and
Lucas (1972) hypothesis of decisionmakers that have imperfect information on the
nature of the disturbances that aﬀect the economy. The important acumen of his
theory is to observe that it does not really matter whether information is publicly
available or not but what matters is the limited ability of agents to process available
information, as in the rational inattention theory of Sims (2003). The limited
processing ability leads to a “gap between reality and perception” (Woodford, 2002,
p.31), which can be modelled as if agents receive noisy signals about the shocks
of the economy. In particular, the hidden process of the stochastic disturbance
represents the objective “reality”, whereas the signals represent the “subjective
perception” of the decisionmakers (price-setters) and the “gap between reality and
perception” is the diﬀerence between the two.
When there is a “gap between reality and perception” and this gap is idiosyncratic to each decisionmaker, then an important source of uncertainty is the
“perception” of others together with all their higher-order beliefs on them. The
slow adjustment of higher-order beliefs can produce real eﬀects of a nominal shock
1

that are highly persistent. The attractive feature of this theory is that it can justify
unequal adjustments of prices to diﬀerent disturbances for the fact that decisionmakers can be more or less attentive to diﬀerent disturbances. Along this line of
reasoning, Maćkowiak and Wiederholt (2005) have been able to match the abovementioned empirical evidence in a model in which price setters have to dichotomize
their attention between an idiosyncratic productivity shock and an aggregate nominal shock. If the idiosyncratic disturbance is relatively more volatile, then they pay
more attention to it and therefore prices react more to these disturbances. On the
other side, when a nominal and less volatile disturbance perturbs the economy, decisionmakers show rational inattention, which combined with the slow adjustment
of higher-order beliefs can produce highly persistent eﬀects on output.
In the Woodford-Sims theory the “gap between reality and perception” is the
same whether one looks from the “reality” or the “perception” side of the world.
Decisionmakers have limited ability to process information but they are rational
in all other aspects. This assumption ignores the fact that decisionmakers may
exhibit various biases about their subjective perceptions.
We instead depart from a fully rational model. Our aim here is to explain
the excess volatility of prices documented by KK with price movements that follow idiosyncratic non-fundamental noises in contrast with the other contributions
described above.1
In the Woodford-Sims theory, we assume that the “gap between reality and
perception” is smaller when one looks from the “subjective mind” of the decisionmaker than from the objective “reality”. In practice, this translates into a
model in which price setters over-estimate their ability to understand “reality” by
overestimating the precision of their signals. This is overconfidence.
That overconfidence accords with “reality” is well documented by psychological studies. For example, in a simultaneous study of US and Swedish drivers,
88% of the US group and 77% of the Swedish group asked believed that they are
safer drivers than the median (Svenson, 1981), or 90% of 168 federal magistrate
1

A documented example is the following. Frozen concentrated orange juice in the US is for
the greatest part produced in Orlando, Florida. The most relevant fundamental variable that
changes on a day-to-day basis is then the weather around Orlando. Roll (1984) has shown that
weather surprises explain only a small fraction of the observed variability in futures prices and
on top of this no other demand or supply factors can be identified to explain more than a small
part of it.

2

judges thought that they are above average as far as their reversal rate on appeal is concerned (Guthrie, Rachlinski and Wistrich, 2001).2 Experimental studies
(see Soll and Klayman, 2004) have shown that subjective confidence intervals are
systematically too narrow given the accuracy of one’s information.3
A model with irrational behavior gives some degrees of freedom. In order
to bound it, we allow our price setters to pay a fixed cost in order to become
completely aware of “reality”.4 But who are going to be stuck with their own
perception of the world if not the ones that are overconfident and believe that the
“gap between reality and perception” is small? In consequence in our model a large
fraction of price setters is composed by inattentive and irrational decisionmakers.
Woodford’s theory then predicts that a nominal disturbance can have large and
persistent real eﬀects.5 At the same time, the fact that the “gap between reality
and perception” is smaller in the “subjective mind” of the decisionmakers than
in “reality” helps to explain the high volatility of prices in an unrelated way to
fundamental disturbances. Indeed, overconfident decisionmakers place a lot of
weight on their subjective perceptions which include the under-estimated nonfundamental noise.
We calibrate our model to be consistent with the mean and the variance of price
changes in the KK data. Moreover, we tight our parametrization to be compatible
with the persistence of the eﬀects of nominal disturbances on output as found in
the VAR literature.
With rational price setters, our model implies that the average absolute size of
price changes is of the order of only 2%. But with overconfidence it increases up to
the value found in the data. In particular, for a reasonable degree of overconfidence
documented in experimental studies we find that the average absolute size of price
2

See for example Compte and Postlewaite (2004) for further references.
In finance researchers have analyzed the implications of overconfidence on the financial markets, see Daniel, Hirshleifer and Subrahmanyam (2001), Daniel, Hirshleifer, Teoh (2002) and
Scheinkman and Xiong (2003) among others.
4
A recent related work is that of Reis (2005) in which he shows that information costs can
rationalize a model where fully rational price setters have diﬀerent information sets as in Mankiw
and Reis (2002). However in his model information flows with delays while in our model, as in
the Sims’s theory, information flows in each period with a noisy channel.
5
In a recent work Morris and Shin (2006) have emphasized that in models with forwardlooking expectations even the existence of a small fraction of uninformed agents about the future
path of fundamentals can generate persistence in the price behavior.
3

3

changes is of the order of 4 − 5%. This is quite a success for a model that does not
rely at all on idiosyncratic fundamental shocks.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 1 presents the static model under
full information. Section 2 discusses the incomplete-information model. Section
3 approximates and solves the incomplete-information model. Section 4 discusses
the price implications of the static model and the role of overconfidence. Section
5 extends the model to an infinite horizon. Section 6 performs the calibration
of the model and studies the success of the model in explaining the empirical
evidence. Section 7 presents some statistical tests to study whether overconfidence
is statistically detectable. Section 8 concludes.

1

Model

In this section, we present a partial-equilibrium model of price-setting behavior
in which firms have full information on the structure, parameters and variables
of interest.6 We consider a continuum of firms indexed by i on the unit interval [0, 1]. Each firm produces a good that is diﬀerentiated in the preferences of
consumers. We do not explicitly model neither consumer preferences nor their
optimization problem. We just assume what is needed to characterize the pricesetting problem of firms. Firms are profit maximizers and set their prices in a
monopolistic-competitive market. The problem of a generic firm j is to choose the
price of its product P (j) to maximize real profits given by
P (j)
W
Y (j) − L(j)
P
P
where Y (j) is the demand of good j given by
µ
¶−ε
P (j)
Y (j) =
Y
P

(1.1)

(1.2)

that depends on the relative price of the good j with respect to the general price
index P given by
1
∙Z 1
¸ 1−ε
1−ε
P =
P (i) di
(1.3)
0

6

The model is similar to the one used in Ball and Romer (1989, 1991) and Blanchard and
Kiyotaki (1987).

4

and on aggregate production Y .7 The parameter ε (with ε > 1) denotes the
elasticity of substitution across diﬀerentiated goods in consumer preferences. Firms
use labor L(j) to produce goods through the production function Y (j) = AL(j),
where A is a productivity shock common to all firms; W is the nominal wage paid
for one unit of labor in the labor market.
In this market (not modelled here) we assume that the labor-supply schedule
implies the following relation between real wage and aggregate production
W
= Yη
P

(1.4)

with η > 0.8 We assume the existence of a monetary authority that has a perfect
control on the level of nominal spending in the economy. It follows that
M = PY

(1.5)

where M, which may be labelled as money supply, is indeed controlled by the
monetary authority.
We can substitute (1.2), (1.4) and (1.5) into (1.1) to define a profit function of
firm j as
∙
µ ¶η ¸ µ
¶−ε µ ¶
P (j)
P (j)
M
1 M
π(P (j), P, θ) ≡
−
.
(1.6)
P
A P
P
P
Profits of firm j are a function of the action (in game-theoretic sense) of firm j,
P (j), of the actions of all other firms synthesized by the index P and the vector
θ ≡ (A, M). Firm j is of measure zero with respect to the aggregate, so its pricing
decision does not aﬀect the general price index P . We denote with P † (j) the
optimal price choice of firm j given by
µ ¶η
ε P M
†
(1.7)
P (j) =
ε−1A P
7

In (1.3), we use the index i to emphasize that firm j is small with respect to the overall
market.
8
This labor-supply schedule can be derived from the optimizing-behavior of households in a
general-equilibrium model. In particular, η would be a combination of the risk-aversion coeﬃcient
in consumer preferences and of the Frisch elasticity of substitution of labor supply, or in case of
local labor market of ε as well. Assuming a more general labor-supply schedule does not change
the following analysis.

5

which is just the familiar markup rule over marginal cost. Since the right-hand
side of (1.7) is independent of j, all firms set the same price. It follows that
P † (j) = P = P ∗ for all j where
∗

P =

µ

ε 1
ε−1A

¶ η1

M.

For later use, we can use the definition of P ∗ to write (1.7) as
P † (j) = P 1−η P ∗η .

(1.8)

This rewriting shows that the parameter η determines whether price-setting decisions are strategic complement (the case 0 < η < 1) or strategic substitutes
(η > 1). In the strategic-complement case, there is a positive elasticity between
the individual optimal price and the aggregate price level. The elasticity is negative
when pricing decisions are strategic substitutes.

2

Incomplete information

In this section, we formalize the incomplete-information version of the above model.
First, we assume that firms do not know the realization of the vector θ. In particular
we assume that θ belongs to a set of possible outcomes Θ and that each firm knows
that there is a probability distribution f (θ) over the possible outcomes.9 Each firm
can observe a signal sj that belongs to a set S. We model incomplete information
by assuming that each firm can only observe its own signal, which is then private
information.
Each firm believes that the signals are related to the possible outcomes θ
through a likelihood function ˜lj (sj |θ) which might be specific to the firm j but
common knowledge to all firms. We call ˜lj (sj |θ) the subjective likelihood function
to distinguish it from the objective likelihood lj (sj |θ) that characterizes the true
conditional probability distribution of signals. In this way we depart from full
rationality.10
9

We are assuming that Θ is finite for the sake of the discussion.
In the literature on ambiguity in the priors, see Gilboa and Schmeidler (1989), it is assumed
instead that there can be multiple likelihoods, whereas we assume a single likelihood, which may
not be the correct one though.
10

6

Given its private signal sj , each firm can update its probability distribution
over the set of outcomes Θ using Bayes’ rule and obtain the posterior distribution
˜lj (sj |θ)f (θ)
f˜j (θ|sj ) = P
,
˜lj (sj |θ)f (θ)
Θ

for each θ ∈ Θ. However the realization of θ is not the only element of uncertainty
in the profit function (1.6). Indeed profits depend also on the non-observable general price index P , which consists of the non-observable prices chosen by other
firms and through them on the private signals of the other firms. Since the likelihoods and priors are all common knowledge, each firm can apply rules of conditional probability to obtain the conditional probability distribution of other firms’
signals given the realization of its own signal. But this is not enough to characterize
all the relevant uncertainty since pricing decisions of other firms depend on their
beliefs about the signals of others as well as on the beliefs about others’ beliefs and
so on ad infinitum. As in a Bayesian game of incomplete information, each firm
is not only characterized by its private signal, but also by all the full hierarchy of
beliefs about others.
To define the objective function of firms in this incomplete-information game,
we need to specify a broader set of states of nature Ω whose element ω represents
the knowledge and the interactive beliefs of each firm.11 Each firm is then characterized by a type tj belonging to a set T j and tj is related to ω through a function
τ (·) such that tj = τ j (ω).
Given this abstract formalization of the states of nature, each firm strategy can
be understood as a mapping of the form P (j) = P (tj ) from the space of types to
the space of possible prices. Each firm can form a probability distribution p(ω|tj )
over the broader set of states of nature Ω conditional on being of type tj . We can
now write the objective function of a generic firm j as
X
E j {π(P (j), P, θ)} ≡
pj (ω|tj )π(P (j), P (t−j ), θ),
(2.9)
{ω: (t̃−j ,θ̃)=(t−j ,θ)}

where t−j denotes all the other types of firms excluding firm j and with P (t−j ) we
denote
1
∙Z 1
¸ 1−ε
−j
i 1−ε
P (t ) =
P (t ) di
.
0

11

We follow Battigalli (2003) in this construction.

7

In a Bayesian equilibrium a firm of type tj chooses its action P (j) to maximize the
objective function (2.9) given the strategy of other firms. We denote this choice
by P̃ (j) and it satisfies
E j {P † (j)Z}
P̃ (j) =
,
(2.10)
E j {Z}

where Z is defined as Z ≡ MP ε−2 and P † (j) is given by (1.8). In particular, P † (j)
denotes the complete-information price. Indeed this is the price that a generic
firm would set if it knew the realization of ω. But this price does not necessarily
coincide with the full-information price since it is not yet specified whether other
firms know ω. According to (2.10), when there is incomplete information, a generic
firm j sets its price as a subjective expectation (appropriately weighted) of the price
that would be set under complete information.
We enrich the above framework by allowing each firm to acquire complete
information on the state of the economy —i.e. to know the state ω. This process
of acquisition of information is costly: real profits are reduced by a fixed cost c̃j .
Moreover, this decision is conditional on the firm of being of type tj . In what
follows we label as ‘informed’ firms the ones that acquire information, while the
others are denoted as ‘uninformed’.
We have to specify the strategy of each firm in this modified problem. We can
compactly write the strategy as a mapping σ(·) that maps from the space T j of
types to the actions. It now involves two actions: the decision of whether or not to
acquire information and the price chosen following this decision. Note that when
informed a firm would set its price to P † (j). The expected profit function of a firm
j conditional of being of type tj is now
X
pj (ω|tj )π(P (j), σ(t−j ), θ).
E j {π(P (j), P, θ)} ≡
{ω: (t̃−j ,θ̃)=(t−j ,θ)}

A generic firm j of type tj chooses to acquire complete information when the
expected increase in profits in doing this is higher than the cost c̃j
E j {π(P † (j), P, θ) − π(P̃ (j), P, θ)} ≥ c̃j .

(2.11)

Indeed since the profit function is concave in the price P (j) then setting P (j) with
a finer knowledge of the state of nature does not worsen utility, so that the LHS
of the above expression is always non-negative. Having observed the realization of
8

its own signal, a firm j evaluates the LHS of (2.11) and acquires information and
sets the price P † (j), if (2.11) holds, otherwise it chooses P̃ (j).

3

Approximation to the incomplete-information
model

In this section we solve the previous model in a log-linear approximation around
a steady-state in which θ = θ̄. As shown in the Appendix, a second-order approximation to the objective function (2.11) leads to a criterion of the form
varj {p† (j)} ≥ cj ,

(3.12)

where varj {·} denotes the variance operator conditional on the subjective information set, while p† (j) is the log of the price that firm j would set with complete
information and cj is a reparametrization of the cost c̃j . The decision of acquiring
or not information depends on whether the subjective variance of the price that a
firm sets under complete information is higher than the cost cj .
An important implication of the approximation taken is that (3.12) can be
evaluated using just a log-linear approximation to the equilibrium conditions. In
this log-linear approximation, equation (2.10) implies that the log of the price
under incomplete information is the expected value of the log of the price under
complete information
p̃(j) = E j p† (j),
(3.13)
where lower-case letters denote log of the respective variables.12 Moreover p† (j) is
independent of j and in a log-linear approximation to (1.8) is given by
p† = (1 − η)p + ηp∗ ,

(3.14)

where p∗ is the log of the full-information equilibrium price level and p is given by
Z 1
p(i)di
p=
0

as a result of a first-order approximation of (1.3).
12

In the steady-state all firms set the same constant price.

9

Let us denote with µ the fraction of firms that in equilibrium decide to keep
the subjective information set and assuming without loss of generality that agents
j ∈ [0, µ] are the ones who remain uninformed, we can write the above equation as
p = µp̃ + (1 − µ)p† ,

(3.15)

where we have defined with p̃ the average price of the subjectively-informed firms
as
Z
1 µ
p̃(i)di.
(3.16)
p̃ ≡
µ 0
We can then plug (3.15) into (3.14) to obtain

p† = δp∗ + (1 − δ)p̃,
where
δ≡

(3.17)

η
,
η + (1 − η)µ

with δ a decreasing function of µ and η ≤ δ ≤ 1 in case of strategic complements
(η < 1) and δ an increasing function of µ with 1 ≤ δ ≤ η in case of strategic
substitutes (η > 1).
The set of equations (3.13), one for each firm that remains uninformed, together
with (3.16) and (3.17) determine the equilibrium prices of informed and uninformed
firms in a first-order approximation to the equilibrium conditions.
To solve for the equilibrium prices, we describe in details the information structure. First, we note that uncertainty about the vector θ has collapsed to uncertainty about the full-information price p∗ . We assume that p∗ is a random variable
of the form
p∗ = p̄∗ + u,
where p̄∗ is a constant and u is a Gaussian white-noise process with variance σ 2u . It
follows that the prior distribution of p∗ is Gaussian with mean p̄∗ and variance σ 2u .
These priors are common knowledge and correspond to the objective probability
distribution of p∗ .13 Each firm receives a private signal sj that is linearly related
to p∗ as
sj = p∗ + ξ j ,
13

In the non-linear model, these priors correspond to the assumption on the distribution f (θ).

10

where ξ j is an idiosyncratic Gaussian noise with mean zero and variance σ̄ 2ξ for
each j. Moreover ξ j is statistically independent of u as well as of ξ i for each i 6= j.
All this information is common knowledge. Instead, the realization of the signal
sj is private information.
In the previous section, we assumed that the subjective likelihood function
j
˜l(st |θt ) can be diﬀerent from the true likelihood through which signals are extracted. We capture this by assuming that the belief, σ̄ 2ξ , on the variance of the
noise ξ j does not correspond to the true variance σ 2ξ .
Given this information structure, each firm can form its own expectation of the
full-information price p∗ as in a standard signal-extraction problem
E j p∗ = (1 − r̄j )p̄∗ + r̄j sj ,

(3.18)

where the weight r̄j is defined as
r̄j = r̄ ≡
with

1
1 + λ̄

σ̄ 2ξ
λ̄ = 2 .
σu

Since λ̄ is common and common knowledge across the diﬀerent firms, then r̄j is
independent of j and equal to a common r̄. In particular λ̄ represents the noise-tofundamental variance ratio and can be interpreted as an index of confidence in how
a firm’s private signal is a good representation of the full-information price. Lower
values of λ̄ implies a higher weight to the signal when firms form expectations of
the full-information price and then a high degree of confidence on the subjective
information set. Since σ 2ξ does not necessarily correspond to the prior σ̄ 2ξ , we define
a ‘true’ degree of confidence λ as
σ 2ξ
λ = 2,
σu
with a respective value for the weight r = 1/(1 + λ). When λ̄ < λ ( r̄ > r) firms
are over-confident and trust more their subjective perception of the world than in
the case they would have known the true likelihood. In the opposite case, there is
under-confidence.

11

Each firm forms its own expectation of the signals of others as
E j si = E j p∗ = (1 − r̄)p̄∗ + r̄sj
which is then a first-order expectation belief.14 Furthermore, each firm can form
its subjective expectation of others’ first-order expectation belief as
E j E i sk = E j [(1 − r̄)p̄∗ + r̄si ] = (1 − r̄)p̄∗ + r̄E j p∗
and so on. We can construct all the hierarchy of expectation beliefs, first and
higher-order expectations as well as all the other relevant moments that identify a
generic type tj in the first-order approximation to the model.
To solve for the equilibrium prices of informed and uninformed agents and for
the equilibrium fraction of firms that acquire or not information, we first guess
that µ is known to each type tj . We then verify that this is indeed the case. Given
this guess, we can substitute (3.17) into (3.13) to get
p̃(j) = δE j p∗t + (1 − δ)E j p̃

(3.19)

which can be averaged across all uninformed price setters to obtain
p̃ = δ Ēp∗ + (1 − δ)Ē p̃,

Rµ
where we have defined the operator Ē(·) ≡ µ1 0 Ē(·)di which represents the average expectation among the uninformed firms. We can iterate the above expression
to obtain
∞
X
(1 − δ)k Ē (k+1) p∗ ,
(3.20)
p̃ = δ
k=0

where the (k + 1)−order average expectation operator is defined as Ē (k+1) (·) ≡
Ē(Ē (k) (·)) for each k ≥ 1.15 It follows that the average price of uninformed
firms is a linear combination of their higher-order average expectations of the
full-information price. We can plug (3.20) into (3.19) to obtain
∞
X
p̃(j) = δE p + δ(1 − δ)
(1 − δ)k E j Ē (k+1) p∗ .
j ∗

k=0

14

See Allen et al. (2005) and Amato and Shin (2003, 2006) for examples of solutions of problems
with iterated expectations.
15
Under the restriction that η(2µ − 1) < 2µ , δ is such that |1 − δ| < 1.

12

The price set by an uninformed firm depends on its own expectation of the fullinformation price and its own expectation of the average expectation (of uninformed firms) of the full-information prices as well as on all higher-order expectations. Since (3.18) holds for all uninformed firms, we can obtain that
Ēp∗ = (1 − r̄)p̄∗ + r̄p∗ ,

(3.21)

where we have implicitly assumed that the law of large number holds on a positive
measure16
Z
1 µ i
ξ di = 0.
(3.22)
µ 0

It follows that the firm i’s expectation of the average expectation of the fullinformation price is given by
E i Ēp∗ = (1 − r̄)p̄∗ + rE i p∗

= (1 − r̄)p̄∗ + r̄(1 − r̄)p̄ + r̄2 si

from which it follows that the second-order average estimate is given
Ē (2) p∗ = (1 − r̄)(1 + r̄)p̄∗ + r̄2 p∗ .
By re-iterating the above arguments, we get that the k-fold average expectation of
the full-information price is
Ē k p∗ = (1 − r̄k )p̄∗ + r̄k p∗ .

(3.23)

We can substitute (3.23) into (3.20) to obtain
r̄δ
1 − r̄
p̄∗ +
p∗
1 − (1 − δ)r̄
1 − (1 − δ)r̄
η(1 − r̄) + (1 − η)(1 − r̄)µ ∗
r̄η
=
p̄ +
p∗ .
η + (1 − η)(1 − r̄)µ
η + (1 − η)(1 − r̄)µ

p̃ =

(3.24)

Substituting (3.24) into (3.14) we obtain that the price set by any informed firm
is
(1 − r̄)(1 − η)µ ∗
η
p† =
(3.25)
p̄ +
p∗ .
η + (1 − η)(1 − r̄)µ
η + (1 − η)(1 − r̄)µ
16

See Uhlig (1996) for the conditions under which this holds.

13

Given (3.25), it follows that a generic firm j decides to acquire information if the
following inequality holds
∙
¸2
η
varj {p∗ } ≥ cj ,
η + (1 − η)(1 − r̄)µ
where varj {p∗t } is the variance of the full-information price level conditional on the
subjective information set of type tj . This is given by
varj {p∗ } = σ 2u (1 − r̄j ).
We can then write the above inequality as
∙
¸2
η
σ 2u (1 − r̄j ) ≥ cj ,
η + (1 − η)(1 − r̄)µ

(3.26)

where we have kept the distinction —since it matters for the discussion that followsbetween the own degree of confidence r̄j and the others’ degree of confidence r̄—
although we have assumed that they are the same.17
According to (3.26), several parameters of the model drive the incentives for
firm j to acquire information. The higher is the prior on the variance of the
full-information price, σ 2u , the higher are the incentives to acquire information.
Obviously, the lower the cost cj , the higher those incentives. In the case of strategic
complementarity in the pricing decision, 0 < η < 1, the higher is the fraction of
firms that are acquiring information (i.e. the lower the µ) the higher are the
incentives for the individual firm to acquire information. This result is of the same
nature as the one found by Ball and Romer (1989) in a similar model but with
only imperfect information, in which firms’s decisions are on whether to change or
not prices.
Each firm’s decision is also influenced by the degree of confidence in the inforj
mativeness of the signal. If r̄j is high (λ̄ is low), i.e. it believes that the signal
conveys good information on the full-information price, it will not have incentives
to acquire finer information. A high degree of confidence implies that firms are
going to be stuck with their perceptions of the world when setting their prices.
Interestingly, if the confidence of others increases (λ̄ decreases and r̄ increases)
then the price under complete information has higher subjective variance since the
17

Indeed, (3.25) could have been derived even if we didn’t have the same r̄i by defining r̄
¡R µ i ¢
Rµ
≡ 0 r̄ di /µ and by assuming a law of large numbers to hold for 0 ξ i r̄i di = 0.

14

average price of uninformed firms is getting close to the full information price, as
shown in (3.21). Then, each individual firm has higher incentives to acquire information and imitate other firms —when pricing decisions are strategic complements.
We move to characterize the equilibrium value of µ, under the assumption
j
r̄ = r̄ for each j. We define
"
#2
1
2
η(1 − r̄)
σ 2u
c∗ ≡
η + (1 − η)(1 − r̄)µ
and note that (3.26) implies that all firms with cj less than c∗ acquire information.
Assuming that the distribution of cj is common knowledge with a density function
f (cj ) on a support [c, c̄], then the measure µ of agents that remain uninformed is
¯
given by
Z
c̄

f (c)dc = µ.

(3.27)

c∗

This solution confirms our initial guess that µ is a function of known parameters
and then known to each type tj . The properties of the distribution function f (·)
determines the existence and the characteristics of the equilibrium. Indeed when
cj = c for each j, multiple equilibria are possible for the same reasons as they
occur in the imperfect-information model of Ball and Romer (1989). For other
distributions f (·) multiple equilibria might disappear. Since this is not the focus
of this work, we assume that f (·) is such that there exists a unique equilibrium.
Using Leibniz rule and noting that c∗ = c∗ (r̄, µ (r̄)), we obtain that (3.27)
implies
∗
f (c∗ ) ∂c
dµ
∂ r̄
=−
(3.28)
∗ .
dr̄
1 + f (c∗ ) ∂c
∂µ
The denominator of (3.28) is positive when µ is a stable fixed point of the LHS
of (3.27).18 Moreover
dc∗
η 2 σ 2u
[−η + (1 − r̄) (1 − η) µ]
=
dr̄
[η + (1 − η)(1 − r̄)µ]3
is negative for all η such that η > η̄ where η̄ is a function of r̄ bounded above by
1/2 and decreasing to zero when r̄ increases to one. It follows that for values of η
18

The solution µ that we refer as stable is the one in which the LHS of (3.27), considered as a
function of µ, intersects the 45 degrees line with a positive slope less than unitary.

15

in this range an increase in the degree of confidence (λ̄ decreases and r̄ increases)
raises the fraction of firms that remain uninformed.
In particular, overconfidence increases the equilibrium fraction of firms that
choose not to acquire information in comparison to the equilibrium fraction of
rational signal-extraction problem.

4

Price implications of incomplete information
and overconfidence

In the previous section, we have shown how to determine the fraction of firms that
in equilibrium decide to remain uninformed. A high degree of confidence under
standard regularity conditions implies a higher fraction of uninformed firms. In
this section we study the price implications of the model and in particular the
relation between excess volatility of prices and overconfidence.
A first important implication is that the model displays two levels of heterogeneity: at a first stage there are diﬀerences in prices between informed and uninformed firms, second, within uninformed firms, prices are related to the realization
of subjective signals. We can rewrite equation (3.25) and show that the price of
the informed firms is
p† = p̄∗ + (1 + λ̄)k̂u,
(4.29)
where
k̂ =

r̄η
.
η + (1 − η)(1 − r̄)µ

The prices of the informed firms react only to the fundamental shocks of the model.
On the opposite the uninformed firms set their prices as a subjective expectation
of p† , based on their signals which include also non-fundamental noises. We obtain
that a generic uninformed firm j sets
p̃(j) = p̄∗ + k̂u + k̂ξ j ,
while the average price of uninformed firms is given by
p̃ = p̄∗ + k̂u.

16

(4.30)

We first discuss how prices react to fundamental shocks. Following (4.29) prices
of informed firms react less than proportionally to fundamental shocks when pricing decisions are strategic complements, since (1 + λ̄)k̂ < 1, but more than proportionally in the strategic-substitute case. As shown in (4.30), the response of
uninformed firms is always smaller than that of informed firms, since λ̄ > 0.
However, prices of uninformed firms react also to non-fundamental shocks, ξ j ,
in the same proportion as they do with fundamental shocks.
Overconfidence— modelled as the possibility that uninformed firms misinterpret
the model of the economy by using an incorrect likelihood — can aﬀect the volatility
of prices. Using equation (4.30), we obtain that the “true” variance of prices for a
generic uninformed agent j is
var{p̃(j)} = (1 + λ)k̂2 σ 2u .
Equation (4.29) implies that the variance of the prices of informed firms is given
by
var{p† } = (1 + λ̄)2 k̂ 2 σ 2u .
It follows that the ratio of the volatilities of prices of uninformed and informed
firms is given by
#
"
1

var{p̃(j)}
(1 + λ) 2
=
var{p† }
(1 + λ̄)

2

.

In a model in which there is no discrepancy between the “perception” and “reality”
so that the signal-extraction problem is rational (i.e. λ = λ̄), prices of uninformed
firms are always less volatile than informed firms. With overconfident firms, it is
1
instead possible for the reverse to happen. It is suﬃcient that (1 + λ̄) < (1 + λ) 2 .
In particular it is required to have that the true volatility of the idiosyncratic noise
σ 2ξ is high enough with respect to the perceived σ̄ 2ξ .
A second important implication of overconfidence is that it is even possible to
have excess volatility of the price of an individual uninformed firm with respect to
the full-information (fundamental) price. Indeed we obtain that
#2
"
1
var{p̃(j)}
ζ(1 + λ) 2
=
var{p∗ }
(1 + λ̄)
where ζ is a positive parameter given by ζ = k̂/r̄ such that ζ < 1 (ζ > 1) when
pricing decisions are strategic complements (substitutes). To have excess volatility
17

of the prices of uninformed firms with respect to fundamentals, it is required that
1
(1 + λ̄) < ζ(1 + λ) 2 which is then a more (less) stringent condition than before
when pricing decisions are strategic complements (substitutes).19
Overconfidence has two important roles in this model. On one side, it implies
that a higher fraction of firms is going to decide optimally not to acquire information and just pay attention to their own perceptions. On the other side, the
prices of individual uninformed firms can be more volatile than fundamental disturbances and this volatility can be mainly driven by the noise in the perception of
the full-information price. These two results prepare the stage for our explanation
of the high volatility of individual prices which is found in the data without neither
assuming high volatility of fundamental disturbances nor sacrificing persistence in
the response of prices to fundamental shocks—among which monetary shocks. Indeed, in the dynamic extension of the above model, the fact that overconfident
price setters are less prone to acquire information implies that there can be a
high proportion of this kind of subjectively-driven price setters. Woodford (2002)
has shown that in this dynamic model higher-order expectations matter for determining persistent eﬀects of output and prices following exactly those disturbances
to which agents are subjectively informed. On the other side, the existence of
subjectively-informed firms which are overconfident and have irrational beliefs can
produce in this context an excess volatility of prices with respect to fundamentals.

5

Infinite-horizon model

In this section, we consider an extension of the previous model to an infinite
horizon. We assume that each firm does not know the realization of the sequence
∞
{θt }∞
t=t0 . However, each firm has a prior distribution on the sequence {θ t }t=t0 that
coincides with the correct distribution and which is common knowledge. In each
period and contingency, each firm can observe a private signal sjt . In particular
∞
the sequence of signals {sjt }∞
t=t0 , one for each j, is related to the sequence {θ t }t=t0
through a likelihood function which is known and common knowledge but, as
19

Note that with no overconfidence (λ = λ̄) the ratio is always smaller that unity even in the
case of strategic substitutes (ζ > 1). This is clear if we note that k̂ = δ/(δ + λ) and that the
ratio is less than unity when Q (δ) = λδ 2 − 2λδ − λ2 < 0, which holds for the permissible δ, i.e.
such that |1 − δ| < 1.

18

before, does not necessarily coincide with the correct likelihood function. As in
the previous model, incomplete information is modelled by assuming that each
firm knows only its own realization of the signals and not those of the others, as
well as not the price index and the individual prices. Each firm has the option to
acquire information on the states of nature — in the abstract sense as it applies to
the dynamic extension of the previous model. This can be done by paying a cost
c̃j which is known. Once the cost is paid the firm remains in the ‘informed’ state
forever, otherwise it continues to observe only its private signal and each period
decides whether to acquire or not information.
We assume that firms choose prices to maximize the expected discounted value
of profits given by
∞
X
j
Et0
β t−t0 π(Pt (j), Pt , θt ),
t=t0

where β is such that 0 < β < 1.20 Etj0 is the appropriate expectation operator
conditional on the information at time t0 . Prices are set freely in each period. An
‘informed’ firm sets its price as
Pt† (j) = Pt1−η Pt∗η
for each period t after having paid the information cost. An ‘uninformed’ firm
instead sets its price as
E j {P † (j)Zt }
,
P̃t (j) = t j t
Et {Zt }

where Zt has the same definition as before and the expectation operator is conditional on the type tjt that a firm j has at time t.
To characterize the decision for a generic firm j to acquire or not information,
we guess an equilibrium and then verify that prices and information decisions
are consistent with that equilibrium. The analysis is simplified by noting that the
fraction of firms that remain uninformed each period cannot increase over time, i.e.
{µt }+∞
t=t0 is a non-increasing sequence. Of the many equilibria that can exist, we are
interested in ones in which µt = µ for each t ≥ t0 . In particular, in these stationary
equilibria, whichever firm decides to be informed does it in the first period. For
this to be optimal, the strategy of getting information in the first period should
20

We can generalize the analysis that follows by assuming a stochastic discount factor to
evaluate real profits across contingencies and time.

19

give higher expected discounted profits than the strategy of waiting until a generic
time T , given the equilibrium strategies of all other firms. In particular at time t0
the expected profits to acquire immediately information and pay the cost should
be higher than the strategy of remaining with the subjective information until a
generic period T and pay the cost in that period. For a generic firm j to become
informed at time t0 , the following inequality should hold for each T > t0
Etj0

T −1
X

β

t−t0

t=t0

T j

π(P̃t (j), Pt , θt ) − β c̃ ≤

Etj0

T −1
X
t=t0

β t−t0 π(Pt† (j), Pt , θt ) − c̃j ,

which can be rewritten
Etj0

T −1
X
t=t0

β

t−t0

n
o
j
†
Et [π(Pt (j), Pt , θt ) − π(P̃t (j), Pt , θt )] ≥ c̃j (1 − β T ).

(5.31)

We take a second-order approximation of the above problem around a stationary point with unitary relative prices to obtain
Etj0

T −1
X
t=t0

β t−t0 vartj {p†t } ≥ cj (1 − β T ).

We guess, and verify later, that in the equilibrium vartj {p†t } is a constant that does
not depend on j and is also independent of t in a stationary filtering problem. The
above condition then simplifies to
vartj {p†t } ≥ cj (1 − β),

(5.32)

which is also independent of T. It is then also easy to check that the condition
(5.32) with the reverse inequality is all that is needed to verify, in a second-order
approximation, that for a generic firm j it is always optimal to remain uninformed.
Then (5.32) for each firm j determines the equilibrium fraction of firms that remain
uninformed in equilibrium. We verify now that vart {p†t } is constant and that µ is
also a constant and known within the information set of each type of firm at time
t0 . As before, we just need to characterize the equilibrium values of prices in a
log-linear approximation to the equilibrium.
It is still true that the set of equations (3.13), one for each firm that remains
uninformed, together with (3.16) and (3.17) determine the equilibrium prices of
20

informed and uninformed firms in a first-order approximation to the equilibrium
conditions. We continue to assume that each firm receives a private signal sjt that
is related linearly to p∗t as
sjt = p∗t + ξ jt ,
(5.33)
where ξ jt is an idiosyncratic Gaussian noise with mean zero and variance σ 2ξ for
each j. We assume that ξ jt , for each j, is statistically independent of the sequence
{p∗t } as well as of the sequence {ξ it } for each i 6= j. All this information is common
knowledge, but the realization of the private signal sjt is private information. As
before, we assume that the variance of the noises σ̄ 2ξ does not correspond to the
true variance σ 2ξ . We allow now {p∗t } to be a first-order autoregressive stochastic
process of the form
p∗t = p̄∗ + ρp∗t−1 + ut
(5.34)
with |ρ| ≤ 1 where ut is Gaussian noise with mean zero and variance σ 2u . The
assumption of persistence of the unobservable shock can in principle be a source of
complication in the solution of the model, for an infinite dimensional state might
be necessary to keep track of all the beliefs and higher-order beliefs of other firms.
Woodford (2002) has shown that the dimension of the hidden-state space is finite
in the same model as the one presented here but with all firms assumed to be
uninformed and no endogenous decision of acquiring information. Details of the
solution can be found in the appendix.
In this solution, the general price index evolves according to
pt = p̄∗ + ρ(1 − k̂)pt−1 + ρk̂p∗t−1 + [δ (1 − µ) (1 − k̂) + k̂]ut ,
where k̂ is a parameter explained in the appendix.21 We obtain that the price of
informed firms follows
p†t = p̄∗ + ρ(1 − k̂)p†t−1 + ρk̂p∗t−1 + [δ(1 − k̂) + k̂]ut ,

(5.35)

while the price of uninformed firms follows
p̃t (j) = p̄∗ + ρ(1 − k̂)p̃t−1 (j) + ρk̂p∗t−1 + k̂(ut + ξ jt ).
21

(5.36)

The k̂ in the dynamic model is a diﬀerent function of other parameters than the k̂ in the
static model. We use the same notation, since when ρ = 0 the two expressions coincide.

21

As in the static model, p̃t (j) = Etj p†t so that subtracting (5.36) from (5.35) we can
obtain the evolution of the contemporaneous forecast error
j
p†t − Etj p†t = ρ(1 − k̂)(p†t−1 − Et−1
p†t−1 ) + δ(1 − k̂)ut − k̂ξ jt

from which it follows that the contemporaneous variance of p†t in a stationary
solution is given by
vartj {p†t } =

1 + λ̄[1 − ρ2 (1 − k̂)]2

λ̄k̂2 σ 2u ,
(5.37)
[1 − ρ2 (1 − k̂)2 ]
where the static model is nested under the assumption that ρ = 0. We can now
evaluate (5.32). It follows that equilibrium fraction of uninformed firms is implicitly
defined by the same condition as (3.27) where now instead c∗ is given by
1 + λ̄[1 − ρ2 (1 − k̂)]2 λ̄k̂2 σ 2u
c ≡
.
[1 − ρ2 (1 − k̂)2 ] (1 − β)
∗

(5.38)

The main qualitative results of the static model hold in this extension with some
qualifications. Indeed it is still the case that overconfidence is needed for the
volatility of prices of uninformed to be higher than that of informed. Indeed
we show in the appendix that the ratio of the unconditional variances between
informed and uninformed firms is higher than the unitary value, i.e.
var{p̃t (i)}
>1
(5.39)
var{p†t }
if and only if
2
λ > 2λ̄ + λ̄ [1 − ρ2 (1 − k̂)2 ],
which nests the previous result. In this dynamic model, it does not only matter
the diﬀerence between the ‘true’ and the subjective degree of confidence, but also
other parameters. Indeed since k̂ < 1, the discrepancy between λ and λ̄ that is
needed in order to have excessive volatility of the uninformed prices is smaller
than in the static case. The reason is that the persistence of the shock process
makes past estimates useful to forecast the future evolution of the state. But this
leads to a larger reliance on their subjective perception (signals) and therefore,
comparatively to the static case, agents are driven more by their perceptions. As
a consequence, the amount of overconfidence needed to have excess volatility is
less. This is also the case if the mass of uninformed agents (µ) increases since k̂
becomes smaller and if the degree of strategic complementarity increases, i.e. η
becomes smaller.
22

6

How much overconfidence is needed to match
the absolute size of individual price changes?

In this section, we aim at evaluating the empirical performance of the above model.
The objective is to be able to explain in a reasonable way the large absolute
price changes that KK found in the data. With reasonable we mean that our
model should be also consistent with some other moments of the data reported
in their study and at the same time require information costs which are in line
with other empirical studies. Moreover, we want to show that our explanation can
be consistent with a model that allows for a persistent response of output to a
nominal spending disturbance.22
Considered all together, these objectives are quite ambitious for a model that
has only one fundamental shock and does not make any use of fundamental idiosyncratic disturbances. The only source of heterogeneity are the private signals of
the firms. In our model the only possibilities for increasing the size of the absolute
price changes are to increase either the degree of overconfidence in the signals or
the variance of the fundamental disturbance. By including other types of idiosyncratic shocks we can in principle relax the amount of overconfidence needed
to explain the data and then be more successful, but at the cost of obscuring the
message of the previous model.
Moreover, there can be several other possible mechanisms through which prices
change that we have not analyzed in the previous model — again for the sake of
simplicity and tractability. Most important is the fact that indeed Bils and Klenow
(2004) found that prices are sticky with a median duration of 4.3 months. But in
our model firms change their price in each period, even if they have incomplete
information. Because of this negligence, we decide to measure the time period of
our model in quarters, during which we might reasonably assume that all the firms
had the time to adjust their prices. It is reasonable to think that the large absolute
price changes that KK document on a monthly basis can be smaller at quarterly
frequencies. This again would be an argument in our favor, since it is going to
require a lower degree of overconfidence.
The parameters of the model are (ρ, p̄∗ , σ 2u , λ̄, λ̄λ , η, ε, F ), where F indicates the
22

For calibration purposes we are going to treat the shock in the full infomation price as a
nominal spending shock.

23

parameters that characterize the distribution of the costs. We calibrate ρ = 1 in a
way that our model can be consistent with a unit root in the general price index,
which is in general not rejected by the data.23 Under this assumption equilibrium
output in deviation from the steady state (i.e. yt ≡ ln Yt /Ȳ ) follows the process
yt = (1 − k̂)yt−1 + (1 − c)ut ,
where c = (δµ + 1 − δ)k̂ + δ(1 − µ) and δ = η/(η + (1 − η)µ). From this process we
can deduce that the half-life of the response of output to a nominal spending shock
is given by τ = − ln 2/ ln(1 − k̂). Since we want our model to display a persistent
response of output and at the same time be consistent with all the other facts,
we assume that τ is equal to 4 quarters as it is suggested by the VAR literature
and which is a reasonable value according to the discussion of Woodford (2003, ch.
3). This assumption implies that k̂ = 0.159. Under the assumption of ρ = 1, the
process of the inflation rate is given by24
π t = k̂p̄∗ + (1 − k̂)π t−1 + cut − (c − k̂)ut−1 .

(6.40)

In their sample, KK find an average monthly percentage price change (excluding
sales) among firms that change prices of 1.11 % with a standard deviation of 1.14%.
This corresponds to a calibration of p̄∗ = 1.11 for the mean price change among
all firms in our model. Furthermore, their data on the variance of the inflation
provide an additional moment condition to match for the variance of the model
inflation rate, σ 2π , which according to (6.40) is just a function of the form
σ 2π = f (µ, k̂, η, σ 2u )

(6.41)

pinning down a relation between η, σ 2u and µ for given k̂, σ 2π .
Recent studies on the costs of price adjustment like Zbaracki et al. (2003) have
shown that managerial and customer costs of price adjustment constitute a large
fraction of firms profits. In fact, managerial costs (which refer to information gathering, decision-making and communicating-to-sales-team costs) are 4.61% of the
23

We have experimented with data on the non-shelter CPI for the sample period of KK
(1988:1-2003:4) and found that a null of a unit root in the price level cannot be rejected.
24
Note that since the idiosyncratic noise washes out in the aggregate, the amount of overconfidence doesn’t aﬀect the aggregate dynamics of inflation and the relevant mean and standard
deviation.

24

profits. We use this evidence to measure the costs of acquiring information in our
model. We parameterize parsimoniously the distribution of costs per period as a
fraction of steady state profits by assuming a uniform distribution with a minimum
cost of zero and a mean cost of 4.61%.25 Furthermore, we assume an elasticity of
substitution between the diﬀerentiated products ε = 6, which corresponds to a
markup under full information of 20%. Given these assumptions, and noting that
λ̄ = δ(1 − k̂)/k̂2 equations (3.27) and (5.38) imply the following relation
g(µ, k̂, η, σ 2u ) = 0

(6.42)

which is then another implicit relation between η, σ 2u and µ for given k̂.
The parameter η is critical for determining whether pricing decisions are strategic complements or substitutes and plays a crucial role in determining the persistence of the response of output to a monetary shock, as discussed in Woodford
(2003, ch. 3). Indeed, Woodford (2003, ch. 3) has shown that when a suﬃcient
degree of strategic complementarity is assumed, i.e. a low value of η around 0.15,
then a sticky-price model can account for a prolonged response of output. On
the opposite case, Chari et al. (2000) assume a value of η equal to 2.25, leading
to pricing decisions that are strategic complements and then have argued that a
sticky-price model is not able to generate enough persistence. In this work, we take
an agnostic view on η and experiment how our results may diﬀer for a range of
values for this parameter. In particular, we report results for a range of η that goes
from the low number assumed in Woodford (2003, ch. 3) to the high number used
in Chari et al. (2000). Having fixed η, then equations (6.41) and (6.42) determine
µ and σ 2u . We can determine δ and, bearing in mind that λ̄ = δ(1 − k̂)/k̂2 , we can
also determine the degree of confidence compatible with our calibration strategy.
Table 1 presents the results of the calibration and in particular how the parameters and the equilibrium fraction µ are influenced by the chosen value of η. We
observe that lower values of η require higher variance of the fundamental shock σ 2u
to match the variance of price changes in the data and at the same time have the
model consistent with a half-life of 4 quarters and reasonable information costs.
However, the degree of confidence on the signals, which is λ̄, that measures how
good the signals are as a proxy of the fundamental shock, is low for low values of η.
This perhaps indicates that the model is more reasonable when η is in this range
25

See details in the appendix.

25

and a suﬃcient degree of price complementarity is assumed. Using η = 0.15 we
obtain that 83% of firms maintain a subjective information set when setting their
prices. This value decreases as η increases and reaches 57% when η = 2.25.

Table 1: Calibration and Equilibrium Fraction µ

∗

p̄
σu
λ̄
µ

η =0.15
1.11
4.234
5.81
0.831

η =0.5
1.11
2.97
20.6
0.611

η =0.9
1.11
2.310
31.20
0.580

η =1.1
1.11
2.131
35.05
0.577

η =1.5
1.11
1.903
41.07
0.573

η =1.9
1.11
1.764
45.53
0.571

η =2.25
1.11
1.678
48.62
0.570

We then proceed to simulate the model in order to characterize the pricing
behavior of 20000 firms over the sample 1988:1-2003:4 as in KK. Over this sample,
we compute the same statistics that they report and in particular we focus on the
average over the sample and across firms of the absolute of the changes in the
individual prices for two subsequent observations. This statistic corresponds to
the statistic |dp| for regular prices of all items in their Table 1. By construction,
our simulations are in line with the statistics that they report on the mean and
variance of the price changes.26
Our results on the variable |dp| depend on the degree of overconfidence assumed.
We have defined overconfidence as the ratio λ/λ̄ which is equivalent to σ 2ξ /σ̄ 2ξ , the
ratio of the true variance of the noise with respect to the perceived variance. We
choose as an index of overconfidence the parameter γ = σ ξ /σ̄ ξ which then gives a
measure on how much the true standard deviation of the noise exceeds the believed
one. We repeat our simulations for the chosen values of η by letting γ varies from
1 to 8. In particular γ = 1 corresponds to the rational signal extraction problem.
The results are presented in Table 2.
26

We have repeated the described simulation 1000 times to smooth out any influence of the
small sample on the results and we average the statistics across these repeated simulations.

26

Table 2: Average absolute value of price changes (%) and overconfidence

γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ

=1
=2
=3
=4
=5
=6
=7
=8

η =0.15
1.83
2.75
3.80
4.88
5.98
7.07
8.18
9.30

η =0.5
2.012
3.02
4.05
5.13
6.21
7.28
8.37
9.45

η =0.9
1.99
2.89
3.86
4.83
5.81
6.79
7.77
8.76

η =1.1
1.97
2.86
3.79
4.73
5.68
6.65
7.60
8.56

η =1.5
1.95
2.8
3.69
4.6
5.52
6.43
7.36
8.28

η =1.9
1.94
2.76
3.63
4.51
5.40
6.30
7.19
8.08

η =2.25
1.93
2.73
3.59
4.46
5.33
6.21
7.08
7.96

Table 2 shows for each pair γ and η the average absolute value of price changes
(|dp|) implied by this model. The reference value is the 8.5% of KK. In a rational
signal extraction problem (γ = 1) we obtain a value close to 2%. But to match
their reported value we need a degree of overconfidence close to 7 or 8, which
can be considered as a large number. Indeed, experimental studies, like Soll and
Klayman (2004), have shown that on a series of questions where individuals are
asked to form an 80% confidence interval the actual hit rate is around 40%, which
can be translated in γ being approximately equal to 2.5.27 In more complicated
tasks, as forecasting the level of the exchange rate with a confidence interval of
90% (see Oberlechner and Osler, 2004), the hit rate ranges from 5% to 70% with
an average of 40%, rationalizing values of γ higher than 3. In general values from
2 to 4 can be considered as reasonable.
If we set our target less ambitiously and ask what is the implied |dp| for a degree
of overconfidence close to experimental evidence, we find that this can range from
3% to 5%, doubling the value under a fully rational model and being close to
explain more than the 50 − 60% of the value found in the data.28 We think that
these results can be suggestive of the fact that the mechanism we underline can
27

This value can be obtained by rough computation on confidence intervals for normal distributions.
28
As Table 1 shows, this result does not depend on the value of η assumed.

27

be important to explain the excess volatility of prices —although we acknowledge
that there can be other important mechanisms from which we have abstracted in
this analysis.

7

Detecting overconfidence

One important objection against the above structure is that it is unrealistic to
think that firms can only observe their own signals. In reality, firms can gather
detailed information on the various components of their profits through which
they might be able to infer the structure of the economy and uncover the process
of the fundamentals. This objection misunderstands the essence of a model of
inattention as described in Sims (2003), since in his theory it does not really
matter the amount of information available but how this information is processed
by the decisionmakers. In reality, price setters are not even aware about the
structure of the model and in any case are in general unsure about the properties
and the characteristics of the processes that drive the economy. We interpret the
assumption that firms can only observe their own signals as a simple representation
of a more complicated world in which there are several dimensions of uncertainty.
The gap between the subjective signal and the fundamental shock is a measure of
the limitations that firms face in understanding completely the model economy.
Overconfidence means that decisionmakers in general over-estimate their ability to
understand the correct model.
In our model, decisionmakers are stubborn in their beliefs. Indeed, they do
not question at all the structure of the model and treat the parameters as fixed
and known. However, they are given a possibility to learn, but a fraction of them
optimally decide to remain subjectively informed, given their beliefs. In practice,
one reason for why people are overconfident is that there is confirmatory bias (see
Soll and Klayman, 2004) — the tendency to interpret the evidence in a way to
corroborate their own beliefs. If in our model firms were putting some uncertainty
on some parameters of the model or having multiple priors on them, their decision
process would have changed substantially from the one detailed in the previous
sections and there will be learning from the signal observation. These analyses,
although interesting, go beyond the scope of this work and will be subject of further
research.
28

In this section that goes beyond the framework presented in the previous sections, we are interested to know how quickly an agent outside the model, that treats
the parameters of the stochastic process of the signals as fixed but unknown, would
detect that firms are overconfident. So think of having one classical statistician
per firm that collects period after period the realized signals and that tries to test
the beliefs of the firm. In particular, we assume that each statistician is sure that
(5.33) and (5.34) are correct and that ρ = 1 from which it follows
∆sjt ≡ sjt − sjt−1 = p̄∗ + ut + ξ jt − ξ jt−1
for each firm j. Given the vector of unknown parameters φ ≡ (p̄∗ , σ 2u , λ)0 and
observations {∆sjt }Tt=1 for a sample of size T , each statistician can compute the
following log-likelihood
√
T
T
LL(φ | {∆sjt }Tt=1 ) = − (ln 2π + ln σ 2u ) − ln(1/2 + λ + 1/2 1 + 4λ)
2
2
T
X
1
1
√
(∆sjt − p̄∗ + ξ jt−1|t−1 ),
− 2
2σ u (1/2 + λ + 1/2 1 + 4λ) t=1
where the current forecast of ξ jt , defined as ξ jt|t , can be obtained by the following
recursive relation
ξ jt|t =

λ
√
(∆sjt − p̄ + ξ jt−1|t−1 ),
(1/2 + λ + 1/2 1 + 4λ)

for a given initial condition ξ j0|0 .
It is then possible to write the following likelihood ratio to test separately each
parameter
LL(p̄∗ , σ 2u , λ = λ̄ | {∆sjt }Tt=1 )]
LR1 = 2[max LL(φ | {∆sjt }Tt=1 ) − max
∗ 2
φ

p̄ ,σ u

LR2 = 2[max LL(φ | {∆sjt }Tt=1 ) − max
LL(p̄∗ , σ 2u = σ 2u0 , λ | {∆sjt }Tt=1 )]
∗
φ

p̄ ,λ

LR3 = 2[max LL(φ | {∆sjt }Tt=1 ) − max
LL(p̄∗ = p̄∗0 , σ 2u , λ | {∆sjt }Tt=1 )]
2
φ

λ,σu

where λ̄, σ 2u0 , and p̄∗0 correspond to the values under the respective null. Each of
the above test statistics is distributed asymptotically as a χ2 distribution with 1
29

degree of freedom. In particular LR1 tests whether the belief on λ, which is equal
to λ̄, is statistically significant; LR2 and LR3 test σ 2u0 and p̄∗0 , respectively. In the
above model, we assumed that the only element of irrationality is the degree of
confidence, so λ̄ does not correspond to the true λ while σ 2u0 and p̄∗0 coincides with
the true parameter values.
H : λ =5.81
0

100
1%
5%

90
80
70

%

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0

10

20

30
quarters

40

50

60

Figure 1: Rejection rate (%) for the null λ = 5.81 with significance level of 1%
(solid line) and 5% (dashed line).
Figure 1 (for LR1 ), 2 (for LR2 ) and 3 (for LR3 ) report the share of statisticians
that are rejecting the null hypothesis of each test respectively for T that goes from
1 to 61 quarters, as in the KK sample. We run the test for the parameter values
that correspond to the calibration when η = 0.15 (first column of Table 1) and for
a reasonable degree of overconfidence. In particular p̄∗0 = 1.11%, σ u0 = 4.234%.
and λ̄ = 5.81, while the true λ is 16 times λ̄. In practice, with the first test we are
30

H : σ =4.234
0

u

25

1%
5%

20

%

15

10

5

0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

quarters

Figure 2: Rejection rate (%) for the null σ u0 = 4.234 with significance level of 1%
(solid line) and 5% (dashed line).
testing when an index of overconfidence equal to 4 (the γ of the previous section)
becomes statistically detectable. In each figure, we present results for 1% and 5%
significance levels.29
As expected, the share of statisticians that rejects the null hypothesis in the
2
σ u -test and p̄∗ -test is fairly low, since the null corresponds to the truth in these
cases. This is shown in Figures 2 and 3 respectively, where the share of rejections
is always below 10% for the σ 2u −test and below 7% for the p̄∗ −test.
Interestingly enough, it takes a considerable amount of time for the statisticians
to detect that the firms are overconfident. We observe in Figure 1 that for a 1%
significance level they start to reject only after the 25th quarter and the share rises
29

We simulated the test 100 times. In each simulation we have 50 firms and the share reported
is the average fraction that rejects the null among simulations.

31

*

H : p =1.11
0

10

1%
5%

9

8

7

%

6

5

4

3

2

1

0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

quarters

Figure 3: Rejection rate (%) for the null p̄∗ = 1.11 with significance level of 1%
(solid line) and 5% (dashed line).
only up to 40% in the 61st quarter, whereas in the case of the larger critical region
which corresponds to a 5% significance level the share is just 25% in the 20th
quarter and rises to 65% in the 61st quarter. So despite the considerable amount
of overconfidence, the share of statisticians that would detect overconfidence is
practically very low.

8

Conclusion

In this paper, we have studied the behavior of individual and aggregate prices in
a model with monopolistic-competitive firms in an economy that is driven by a
hidden state process which is observed with noise. The subjective observation of
each firm is not common knowledge to all firms. Moreover, we have assumed that
32

this subjective observation is not rational since firms are overconfident and believe
that their perceptions are a better representation of the hidden state than they are
in reality.
This model can rationalize a persistent response of output to a perturbation to
the aggregate hidden state and be consistent at the same time with excess volatility
of individual prices since firms pay a lot of attention to their subjective perceptions which include the underestimated noisy component. In our model, firms
can in principle choose to discover reality, but their overconfidence prevents them
from doing so. This irrational inattention model has then be used to match recent
empirical evidence on the behavior of disaggregated prices in the US economy without necessarily assuming high volatility of fundamental aggregate or idiosyncratic
shocks.
There are several important assumptions in our stylized framework. Among
these is the fact that decisionmakers know (but do not observe) the true structure
of the model. What will happen when they doubt which model is going to be
unveiled once the noise disappears is the question we leave open for future research.

References
[1] Allen, Franklin, Stephen Morris and Hyun Song Shin (2005), “Beauty Contests and Iterated Expectations,” Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
[2] Amato, Jeﬀery and Hyun Song Shin (2003), “Public and Private Information
in Monetary Policy Models,” BIS Working Papers No. 138.
[3] Amato, Jeﬀery and Hyun Song Shin (2006), “Imperfect Common Knowledge
and the Information Value of Prices,” Economic Theory, 27: 213-241.
[4] Ball, Laurence and David Romer (1989), “Are Prices too Sticky?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 104 No. 3, pp. 507-524.
[5] Ball, Laurence and David Romer (1991), “Sticky Prices as Coordination Failure,” American Economic Review, Vol. 81, pp. 539-552.
[6] Battigalli, Pierpaolo (2003), “Game Theory: Games with Asymmetric and
Incomplete Information”, lecture notes, mimeo, Bocconi University.
33

[7] Bils, Mark and Peter J. Klenow (2004), “Some Evidence on the Importance
of Sticky Prices,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 112, pp. 947-985.
[8] Blanchard, Olivier and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki (1987), “Monopolistic Competition
and the Eﬀects of Aggregate Demand,” The American Economic Review, Vol.
77, No. 4., pp. 647-666.
[9] Compte, Olivier and Andrew Postlewaite (2004), “Confidence-Enhanced Performance,” The American Economic Review 94: 1536-1557.
[10] Chari, V. V. and Patrick J. Kehoe , Ellen R. Mcgrattan (2000), “Sticky Price
Models of the Business Cycle: Can the Contract Multiplier Solve the Persistence Problem?” Econometrica, Volume: 68, Issue: 5, pp. 1151 - 1179.
[11] Daniel, Kent, David Hirshleifer and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam (2001), “Overconfidence, Arbitrage, and Equilibrium Asset Pricing,” The Journal of Finance, Vol. LXI, pp. 921-65.
[12] Daniel, Kent, David Hirshleifer and Siew Hong Teoh (2002), “Investor Psychology in Capital Markets: Evidence and Policy Implications,” Journal of
Monetary Economics 49: 139-209.
[13] Gertler, Mark and John Leahy (2005), “A Phillips Curve with an Ss Foundation,” mimeo, New York University.
[14] Gilboa, Itzhak, and David Schmeidler (1989), “Maximin Expected Utility
with Nonunique Prior,” Journal of Mathematical Economics 18: 141-153.
[15] Golosov, Mikhail and Robert E. Lucas Jr. (2005), “Menu Costs and Phillips
Curves,” mimeo, MIT.
[16] Guthrie, C., J.Rachlinski and A. Wistrich (2001), “Inside the Judicial Mind:
Heuristics and Biases,” Cornell Law Review, Vol.86, pp. 777-830.
[17] Klenow, Peter J. and Oleksiy Kryvtsov (2005), “State-Dependent or TimeDependent Pricing: Does it Matter for Recent U.S Inflation?” mimeo, Stanford University.

34

[18] Lucas, Robert E., Jr., (1972), “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money,”
Journal of Economic Theory 4: 103-124.
[19] Maćkowiak, Bartosz and Mirko Wiederholt (2005), “Optimal Sticky Prices
under Rational Inattention,” mimeo, Humboldt University, Berlin.
[20] Mankiw, Gregory and Ricardo Reis (2002), “Sticky Information Versus Sticky
Prices: A Proposal to Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, vol. 117 (4), pp. 1295-1328.
[21] Morris, Stephen and Hyun Song Shin (2006), “Inertia of Forward-Looking
Expectations,” unpublished manuscript, Princeton University.
[22] Oberlechner, Thomas and Carol Osler (2004), “Overconfidence in Currency
Markets,” unpublished manuscript, University of Vienna.
[23] Phelps, Edmund S. (1970), “Introduction: The New Microeconomics in Employment and Inflation Theory,” in E.S. Phelps et al., Microeconomic Foundations of Employment and Inflation Theory, New York: Norton.
[24] Reis, Ricardo (2005), “Inattentive Producers,” Review of Economic Studies,
forthcoming.
[25] Roll, Richard (1984), “Orange Juice and Weather,” American Economic Review 64: 861-880.
[26] Scheinkman, Jose A. and Wei Xiong (2003), “Overconfidence and Speculative
Bubbles,” Journal of Political Economy, 111: 1183-1220.
[27] Sims, Christopher (2003), “Implications of Rational Inattention,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, vol. 50, pp. 665-690.
[28] Soll, Jack B. and Klayman, Joshua (2004), “Overconfidence in Interval Estimates,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 30(2), pp. 299-314.
[29] Svenson, Ola (1981), “Are We All Less Risky and More Skilful than Our
Fellow Drivers?” Acta Psychologica, Vol. 47, pp. 143-148.

35

[30] Uhlig, Harald (1996), “A Law of Large Numbers for a Large Economy,” Economic Theory, vol.8, pp. 41-50.
[31] Woodford, Michael (2002), “Imperfect Common Knowledge and the Eﬀects
of Monetary Policy,” in P.Aghion, R.Frydman, J.Stiglitz and M.Woodford
(eds) Knowledge, Information and Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics:
In Honor of Edmund S. Phelps, Princeton University Press: Princeton, pp
25-58.
[32] Woodford, Michael (2003), Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of
Monetary Policy, Princeton University Press: Princeton.

36

Appendix
Derivation of condition (3.12) from (2.11).
We first note that by using condition (1.7) we can rewrite marginal costs in
terms of the complete information price and by using also condition (2.10) we
can express the expected profits as functions of P † (j) and P̃ (j) and the variable
Z ≡ MP ε−2 as it follows
¡
¢1−ε
1
E j {π(P † (j), P, θ)} = E j { P † (j)
Z},
(A.1)
ε
1
E j {π(P̃ (j), P, θ)} = P̃ 1−ε (j)E j Z.
(A.2)
ε
We take a second order approximation of expected profits around a deterministic steady state where θ = θ̄ and as a result P = P † = P̃ ≡ P̄ . Let lowercase
variables denote log-deviations from the steady state and let kpk and kzk denote a
bound on the size of fluctuations for the price of each diﬀerentiated good and for
the variable Z respectively. We can obtain by approximating equation (A.1) that
∙
ª
©
¡ ¢2
1 1−ε
1
j
†
E π(P (j), P, θ) =
P̄ Z̄ 1 + (1 − ε) E j p† + (1 − ε)2 E j p† +
ε
2
¸
1 j 2
j
j †
+E z + E z + (1 − ε) E p z + O(kp, zk3 ). (A.3)
2

Similarly by approximating equation (A.2) we obtain that
∙
1
1 1−ε
j
P̄ Z̄ 1 + (1 − ε) p̃ (j) + (1 − ε)2 p̃ (j)2
E {π(P̃ (j), P, θ)} =
ε
2
¸
1 j 2
j
j
+E z + E z + (1 − ε) p̃ (j) E z + O(kp, zk3 ).(A.4)
2
Note that P̄ 1−ε Z̄ =

M̄
P̄

= Ȳ and let
W (j) ≡ π(P † (j), P, θ) − π(P̃ (j), P, θ)

denote the diﬀerence in profits. Then using (A.3) and (A.4) we have
½
h ¡ ¢2
i
ε−1
1
j
E {W (j)} =
Ȳ p̃ (j) − E j p† + (ε − 1) E j p† − (p̃ (j))2
ε
2
¡ †
¢ ª
j
(A.5)
−E [ p − p̃ (j) z] + O(kp, zk3 ).
37

Note that the price of the uninformed agents (1.1) in a first order approximation
is
p̃ (j) = E j p† + O(kp, zk2 ).

(A.6)

Furthermore, if we take a second-order approximation of it we obtain
¡ ¢
£
¤
1
p̃ (j) − E j p† = V arj p† + E j p† − E j p† z + O(kp, zk3 ),
2

(A.7)

where V arj (p† ) ≡ E j (p† )2 − (E j p† )2 . Using (A.6) and (A.7) into (A.5) we observe
that the terms involving z cancel out and that E j (p†2 − p̃(j))2 = V arj (p† ), so
ignoring third order terms we obtain
1ε−1
Ȳ {V arj (p† ) + (ε − 1) V arj (p† )}
2 ε
Ȳ
=
(ε − 1) V arj (p† ).
2

E j {W (j)} =

Thus firms acquire information if and only if
¡ ¢
V arj p† ≥ cj

2
where cj ≡ Ȳ (ε−1)
c̃j which is expression (3.12) in the text. In the text, we also
denote with lower-case letters the logs of the respective variable.
Note that exactly the same calculations apply in the dynamic case, where each
variable is indexed with t. In this case the expected diﬀerence of profits at time t,
in (5.31), is equal to

Etj {π(Pt† (j), Pt , θt ) − π(P̃t (j), Pt , θt )} =

Ȳ
(ε − 1) V artj (p†t )
2

in a second-order approximation, where the expectation operator is conditional on
the private history of signals including time t. So V artj (p†t ) corresponds to the
subjective contemporaneous variance of p†t .
Derivations of (5.35) and (5.36).
We proceed using the method developed in Woodford (2002). We claim that
the relevant hidden state is
#
"
p∗t
Xt =
pt
38

and guess that it evolves according to a linear law of motion
(A.8)

Xt = f + MXt−1 + mut ,
where
f≡

"

p̄∗
p̄

#

,

M≡

"

ρ 0
a b

#

,

m≡

"

1
c

#

,

are vectors and matrices to be determined. Note that our variables of interest are
the prices of the informed firms which can be written as p† = η̄ 0 Xt and that of the
uninformed which can be written as p̃t (i) = η̄ 0 Eti Xt , where η̄ 0 = (η, 1 − η).
Let e1 = (1, 0)0 . We can write the following system
Xt = f + MXt−1 + mut
sit = e01 Xt + ξ jt
where the second line corresponds to the observational equation. We proceed
assuming a stationary filtering problem. The filtering equation of a generic uninformed firm j is given by
j
j
Xt + K(sjt − Et−1
p∗t ),
Etj Xt = Et−1

(A.9)

where K is the vector of Kalman gains pre-multiplied with M −1 . Using (A.8) we
j
j
j
j
obtain that Et−1
Xt = f + MEt−1
Xt−1 and Et−1
p∗t = p̄∗ + ρEt−1
p∗t−1 ; we can then
write (A.9) as
j
j
Xt−1 + K(sjt − p̄∗ − ρEt−1
p∗t−1 ).
Etj Xt = f + MEt−1

Aggregating among all agents j that are uninformed and guessing that in equilibrium µ will be non-random (as in the static case) we obtain
¡
¢
Ēt Xt = f + M Ēt−1 Xt−1 + K p∗t − p̄∗ − ρĒt−1 p∗t−1 ,
¡
¢
= f + M Ēt−1 Xt−1 + ρK p∗t−1 − Ēt−1 p∗t−1 + Kut ,

(A.10)

which is the law of motion of the average estimate, where we have used the law of
large numbers.
Our target is to express the price level pt in terms of Xt−1 . The general price
index can be expressed as a function of the full information price and average
39

expectations as
£
¤
pt = δ (1 − µ) p∗t + µĒt p∗t + (1 − δ) Ēt pt

= (δµ, 1 − δ) Ēt Xt + δ (1 − µ) p∗t
¡
¢
= (δµ, 1 − δ) Ēt Xt + δ (1 − µ) p̄∗ + ρp∗t−1 + ut .

Using the law of motion (A.10) to substitute for Ēt Xt and collecting terms we have
£
¤
pt = [(δµ, 1 − δ) f + δ (1 − µ) p̄∗ ] + ρ δ (1 − µ) + K̄ p∗t−1 + (δµ, 1 − δ) M Ēt−1 Xt−1
£
¤
−ρK̄ Ēt−1 p∗t−1 + δ (1 − µ) + K̄ ut ,
where K̄ ≡ (δµ, 1 − δ) K. Finally, using the definition of M and Ēt−1 Xt−1 and
noting that
(δµ, 1 − δ) f + δ (1 − µ) p̄∗ = δ p̄∗ + (1 − δ) p̄

we obtain that
£
¤
£
¤
pt = δ p̄∗ + (1 − δ) p̄ + ρ δ (1 − µ) + K̄ p∗t−1 + δµρ + (1 − δ) a − ρK̄ Ēt−1 p∗t−1
£
¤
+ (1 − δ) bĒt−1 pt−1 + δ (1 − µ) + K̄ ut .
(A.11)

Since

pt−1 = δµĒt−1 p∗t−1 + (1 − δ) Ēt−1 pt−1 + δ (1 − µ) p∗t−1 ,
we can use this expression to substitute for Ēt−1 pt−1 in (A.11) and arrive at
£
¤
pt = δ p̄∗ + (1 − δ) p̄ + δ (1 − µ) (ρ − b) + ρK̄ p∗t−1
£
¤
+ δµ (ρ − b) + (1 − δ) a − ρK̄ Ēt−1 p∗t−1
£
¤
+bpt−1 + δ (1 − µ) + K̄ ut .
(A.12)

We note that (A.8) implies

pt = p̄ + ap∗t−1 + bpt−1 + cut .
We can then match the coeﬃcients between (A.12) and (A.13) and obtain
δ p̄∗ + (1 − δ) p̄ = p̄
δ (1 − µ) (ρ − b) + ρK̄ = a
δµ (ρ − b) + (1 − δ) a − ρK̄ = 0
δ (1 − µ) + K̄ = c.
40

(A.13)

Solving this system and using the definition of K̄ = (δµ, 1 − δ) K, we get
p̄ = p̄∗
a =

ρ
K̄ = ρη̄ 0 K = ρk̂
δµ + 1 − δ

since η = δµ/(δµ + 1 − δ) and k̂ ≡ η̄ 0 K. Moreover
³
´
b = ρ − a = ρ 1 − k̂
and

c = (δµ + 1 − δ) k̂ + δ (1 − µ) .
The vector of (pre-multiplied) Kalman gains satisfies the equation
¡
¢−1
K = Σe1 e01 Σe1 + σ̄ 2ξ
,

(A.14)

where Σ is the variance of the one step ahead forecast error which satisfies the
following stationary version of the Riccatti equation
¡
¢−1
Σ = MΣM 0 + mm0 σ 2u − e01 Σe1 + σ̄ 2ξ
MΣe1 e01 ΣM 0 .
(A.15)

Thus in our guess-and-verify approach we expressed M and m as a function of k̂
which depends on the vector of Kalman gains K which in turn depends on Σ. But
Σ depends on M and m by (A.15). So it remains to solve for this fixed point. Let
#
"
σ 11 σ 12
.
Σ=
σ 12 σ 22
Solving the upper left block of the Riccatti equation (A.15) we find that σ 11 satisfies
the quadratic
£¡
¢
¤
σ 211 + 1 − ρ2 σ̄ 2ξ − σ 2u σ 11 − σ̄ 2ξ σ 2u = 0.

The positive root (since σ 11 is a variance) of this quadratic is
½
¾
q¡
¡
¢2
¢
1 2
2
2
1 − (1 − ρ ) λ̄ + 4λ̄
σ 11 = σ u 1 − 1 − ρ λ̄ +
2
where λ̄ ≡

σ̄ 2ξ
.
σ2u

σ 12

From the lower left block of the Riccatti we derive
h
i
2
2
2
2
2
ρ k̂σ 11 σ̄ ξ + (σ 11 + σ̄ ξ ) (δµ + 1 − δ) k̂σ u + δ (1 − µ) σ u
h
i
=
1 − ρ2 (1 − k̂) σ̄ 2ξ + σ 11
41

and -using (A.14)- we obtain
k̂ = η̄ 0 K = η

σ 11
σ 12
+ (1 − η)
.
2
σ 11 + σ̄ ξ
σ 11 + σ̄ 2ξ

This is a system of two equations in the two unknowns (σ 12 , k̂). Solving the system
and using our solution for σ 11 we finally arrive at the quadratic expression for k̂
£ ¡
¢
¤
Q(k̂) = ρ2 λ̄k̂2 + λ̄ 1 − ρ2 + δ k̂ − δ = 0.

(A.16)

The discriminant of (A.16) is positive, so there are two real roots. Furthermore,
since Q (0) < 0 and Q (1) = λ̄ > 0, one is negative and the other positive and less
than unity. Note that subtracting pt from p∗t we get an expression for the output
deviation
yt = ρ(1 − k̂)yt−1 + (1 − c) ut ,
since p∗t + ln Ȳ =¯ ln M¯t = pt + ln Yt . In order to have a stationary solution for
¯
¯
output we need ¯1 − k̂¯ < |ρ|−1 . It follows that k̂ should satisfy the restriction
¢
¡
1 − ρ−1 < k̂ < 1 + ρ−1 . Since Q (1 − ρ−1 ) = −ρ−1 (ρ − 1)2 λ + δ < 0, only the
positive root of the quadratic satisfies the restriction. Thus
⎫
⎧
s∙
¸2
⎨
1
δ
δ
δ⎬
.
k̂ = 2 ρ2 − 1 − +
(1 − ρ2 ) +
+ 4ρ2
2ρ ⎩
λ̄
λ̄
λ̄ ⎭
Having solved for the laws of motion of Xt and Etj Xt , we can derive the laws
of motion of the prices of interest p† = η̄ 0 Xt and p̃t (j) = η̄ 0 Etj Xt and obtain
expressions (5.35) and (5.36) in the main text, respectively.
Derivations of (5.37).
Defining qtj ≡ p†t − p̃t (j) = p†t − Etj p†t we obtain
j
+ δ(1 − k̂)ut − k̂ξ jt .
qtj = ρ(1 − k̂)qt−1

(A.17)

j
j
At first notice that Etj qtj = Etj (p†t − p̃t (j)) = 0 and Et−1
qtj = Et−1
(p†t − p̃t (j)) =
j
j
Et−1
p†t − Et−1
Etj p†t = 0. Calculating variances conditional on the private history
until last period we get
j
j
j
(qtj ) = ρ2 (1 − k̂)2 V art−1
(qt−1
) + δ 2 (1 − k̂)2 σ 2u + k̂2 σ̄ 2ξ .
V art−1

42

j
j
j
j
j
j
Note that V art−1
(qt−1
) = Et−1
(qt−1
)2 = V art−1
(p†t−1 ). Moreover, V art−1
(qtj ) =
j
j
j
Et−1
(qtj )2 = Et−1
{Etj (qtj )2 } = Et−1
V artj (p†t ) = V artj (p†t ), where the last step follows
from the non-randomness of the variances of the filter. The expression in the text
for the contemporaneous variance follows by using the stationarity of the filter and
the fact that (A.16) implies δ(1 − k̂) = λ̄k̂[1 − ρ2 (1 − k̂)].

Derivations of (5.39).
We will now proceed to derive the condition for excess volatility of the prices
of the uninformed firms. Taking unconditional variances in (A.17) we obtain that
1

var(qtj ) =

1−

ρ2 (1

−

k̂)2

[δ 2 (1 − k̂)2 σ 2u + k̂2 σ 2ξ ].

Furthermore note that, since
var(qtj ) = var(p†t ) + var(p̃t (j)) − 2cov(p†t , p̃t (j))
and
cov(p†t , p̃t (j)) = cov(qtj , p̃t (j)) + var(p̃t (j)),
we have
var(p†t ) = var(qtj ) + 2cov(qtj ,p̃t (j)) + var(p̃t (j)).
Dividing over var(p†t ) we obtain
var(p̃t (j))
var(qtj ) + 2cov(qtj , p̃t (j))
=1−
.
var(p†t )
var(p†t )
So the ratio can exceed unity only if I ≡ var(qtj ) + 2cov(qtj , p̃t (j)) < 0. Note that
cov(qtj , p̃t (j)) =

1
1−

ρ2 (1

−

k̂)2

j
[ρ2 (1 − k̂)k̂ · cov(p∗t−1 , qt−1
) + δ(1 − k̂)k̂σ 2u − k̂2 σ 2ξ ].

Using the law of motion for the full information price and qtj we derive that
cov(p∗t , qtj ) =

δ(1 − k̂)σ 2u

1 − ρ2 (1 − k̂)

and plugging it in the previous expression we finally obtain
"
#
δ(1
−
k̂)
k̂
1
σ 2u − k̂2 σ 2ξ .
cov(qtj , p̃t (j)) =
2
2
2
1 − ρ (1 − k̂) 1 − ρ (1 − k̂)
43

Therefore
I=

k̂ 2
1−

ρ2 (1

−

k̂)2

"

δ(1 − k̂)
k̂

In order to have I < 0, we need
"
δ(1 − k̂) δ(1 − k̂)
k̂

k̂

Ã

δ(1 − k̂)

+

k̂

+

2
1−

2
1 − ρ2 (1 − k̂)

ρ2 (1

#

− k̂)

!

#

− λ σ 2u .

− λ < 0.

Using as before the fact that δ(1 − k̂) = λ̄k̂[1 − ρ2 (1 − k̂)] we derive the condition
(5.39).
Calibration of the information costs.
We convert the lifetime costs to costs per period by multiplying it by the factor
(1 − β). The steady state real profits are π̄ = Ȳ /ε. Recall that
cj =

2 c̃j
.
(ε − 1) Ȳ

Then the equilibrium fraction of uninformed agents is given by
µ = 1 − F r(cj ≤ c∗ ),
where F r(cj ≤ c∗ ) measures the frequency (or the mass) of costs below c∗ . In
particular
F r(cj ≤ c∗ ) = F r(cj (1 − β) ≤ c∗ (1 − β) = V artj (p†t ))
and
Fr

µ

¶
µ j
¶
c̃j (1 − β)
ε (ε − 1)
c̃ (1 − β)
(ε − 1)
j †
j †
V art (pt ) = F r
≤
V art (pt ) .
≤
2
π̄
2
Ȳ

Given our assumption of a uniform distribution for the costs as a fraction of steady
state real profits with minimum zero and mean 4.61%, it follows that
µ
¶
ε (ε − 1)
j †
µ=1−U
V art (pt ) ,
2
where U (·) is the corresponding c.d.f. This equation gives the implicit equation
(6.42).
44

