THE ECONOMICS OF CLIMATE CHANGE

        Lawrence H. Goulder
          William A. Pizer

        Working Paper 11923
                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           THE ECONOMICS OF CLIMATE CHANGE

                                         Lawrence H. Goulder
                                           William A. Pizer

                                         Working Paper 11923
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11923


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2006




This paper is forthcoming as a chapter in The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd edition, edited by
Steven Durlauf and Lawrence Blume. The authors gratefully acknowledge very helpful comments on earlier
drafts by Kenneth Arrow, Steven Durlauf, Raymond Kopp, Richard Morgenstern, Robert Stavins, and
Roberton Williams III. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Lawrence H. Goulder and William A. Pizer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Economics of Climate Change
Lawrence H. Goulder and William A. Pizer
NBER Working Paper No. 11923
January 2006
JEL No. D62, H23, N50, Q20

                                            ABSTRACT

Global climate change poses a threat to the well-being of humans and other living things through

impacts on ecosystem functioning, biodiversity, capital productivity, and human health. This paper

briefly surveys recent research on the economics of climate change, including theoretical insights

and empirical findings that offer guidance to policy makers. Section 1 frames the climate change

problem and indicates the ways that economic research can address it. Section 2 describes

approaches to measuring the benefits and costs associated with reducing greenhouse gas emissions.

In Section 3 we discuss the implications of uncertainty for the timing and stringency of policies to

address possible climate change. We then present issues related to policy design, including

instrument choice (Section 4), flexibility (Section 5), and international coordination (Section 6). The

final section offers general conclusions.

Lawrence H. Goulder
Department of Economics
Landau Economics Building
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
goulder@stanford.edu

William A Pizer
Resources for the Future
1616 P Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036
pizer@rff.org
                    The Economics of Climate Change*

                                     Lawrence H. Goulder
                    Stanford University, Resources for the Future, and NBER

                                          William A. Pizer
                                       Resources for the Future


                                            November 2005

1. Introduction


        The prospect of global climate change has emerged as a major scientific and public
policy issue. Scientific studies indicate that accumulated carbon dioxide emitted from the
burning of fossil fuels, along with contributions from other human-induced greenhouse gas
emissions, are leading to warmer surface temperatures. Possible current-century
consequences of this temperature increase include increased frequency of extreme
temperature events (such as heat waves), heightened storm intensity, altered precipitation
patterns, sea level rise, and reversal of ocean currents. These changes, in turn, can have
significant impacts on the functioning of ecosystems, the viability of wildlife, and the well-
being of humans.

       There is considerable disagreement within and among nations as to what policies, if
any, should be introduced to mitigate and perhaps prevent climate change and its various
impacts. Despite the disagreements, in recent years we have witnessed the gradual
emergence of a range of international and domestic climate-change policies, including
emissions trading programs, emissions taxes, performance standards, and technology-
promoting programs.

       Beginning with William Nordhaus’s (1982) “How Fast Shall We Graze the Global
Commons?” climate-change economics has focused on diagnosing the economic
underpinnings of climate change and offering positive and normative analyses of policies to
confront the problem. While overlapping with other areas of environmental economics, it
has a unique focus because of distinctive features of the climate problem – including the long
time-scale, the extent and nature of uncertainties, the international scope of the issue, and the
uneven distribution of policy benefits and costs across space and time.

        In our discussion of the economics of climate change, we begin with a brief account
of alternative economic approaches to measuring the benefits and costs associated with
_________________________
*This paper is forthcoming as a chapter in The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd edition, edited by
Steven Durlauf and Lawrence Blume. The authors gratefully acknowledge very helpful comments on earlier
drafts by Kenneth Arrow, Steven Durlauf, Raymond Kopp, Richard Morgenstern, Robert Stavins, and Roberton
Williams III.
reducing greenhouse gas emissions (Section 2), followed by a discussion of uncertainties and
their consequences (Section 3). We then present issues related to policy design, including
instrument choice (Section 4), flexibility (Section 5), and international coordination (Section
6). The final section offers general conclusions.



2. Assessing the Benefits and Costs of Climate Change Mitigation


a. Climate change damages and mitigation benefits

       As noted, the potential consequences of climate change include increased average
temperatures, greater frequency of extreme temperature events, altered precipitation patterns,
and sea level rise. These biophysical changes affect human welfare. While the distinction is
imperfect, economists divide the (often negative) welfare impacts into two main categories:
market and non-market damages.

        Market damages. As the name suggests, market damages are the welfare impacts
stemming from changes in prices or quantities of marketed goods. Changes in productivity
typically underlie these impacts. Often researchers have employed climate-dependent
production functions to model these changes, specifying wheat production, for example, as a
function of climate variables such as temperature and precipitation. In addition to
agriculture, this approach has been applied in other industries including forestry, energy
services, water utilities and coastal flooding from sea-level rise (see, for example, Smith and
Tirpak 1989; Yohe et al. 1996; Mansur et al. 2005).

        The production function approach tends to ignore possibilities for substitution across
products, which motivates an alternative, hedonic approach (see, for example, Mendelsohn et
al. 1994, and Schlenker et al. forthcoming;). Applied to agriculture, the hedonic approach
aims to embrace a wider range of substitution options, employing cross-section data to
examine how geographical, physical, and climate variables are related to the prices of
agricultural land. Assuming that crops are chosen to maximize rents, that rents reflect the
productivity of a given plot of land relative to that of marginal land, and that land prices are
the present value of land rents, the impact of climate variables on land prices is an indicator
of their impact on productivity after allowing for crop-substitution.

        Non-market damages. Non-market damages include the direct utility loss stemming
from a less hospitable climate, as well as welfare costs attributable to lost ecosystem services
or lost biodiversity. For these damages, revealed-preference methods face major challenges
here because non-market impacts may not leave a “behavioral trail” of induced changes in
prices or quantities that can used to determine welfare changes. The loss of biodiversity, for
example, does not have any obvious connection with price changes or observable demands.
Partly because of the difficulties of revealed-preference approaches in this context,
researchers often employ stated-preference or interview techniques – most notably the
contingent valuation method – to assess the willingness to pay to avoid non-market damages.
(See, for example, Smith 2004.)
b. Cost assessment

        The costs of avoiding emissions of carbon dioxide, the principal greenhouse gas,
depend on substitution possibilities on several margins: the ability to substitute across
different fuels (which release different amounts of carbon dioxide per unit of energy), to
substitute away from energy in general in production, and to shift away from energy-
intensive goods. The greater the potential for substitution, the lower the costs of meeting a
given emissions-reduction target.

        Applied models have taken two main approaches to assessing substitution options and
costs. One approach employs “bottom-up” energy technology models with considerable
detail on the technologies of specific energy processes or products (for example, Barretto and
Kypreos 2004). The models tend to concentrate on one sector or a small group of sectors and
offer less information on abilities to substitute from energy in general, or on how changes in
the prices of energy-intensive goods affect intermediate and final demands for those goods.

        The other approach employs “top down” economy-wide models, which include but
are not limited computable general equilibrium (CGE) models (see, for example, Jorgenson
and Wilcoxen 1996; and Conrad 2002). An attraction of these models is their ability to trace
relationships between fuel costs, production methods, and consumer choices throughout the
economy in an internally consistent way. However, they tend to include much less detail on
specific energy processes or products. Substitution across fuels is generally captured through
smooth production functions, rather than through explicit attention to alternative discrete
processes. In recent years, attempts have been made to reduce the gap between the two types
of models. Bottom-up models have gained scope, and top-down models have incorporated
greater detail. (See, for example, McFarland et al. 2004.)

        Because climate depends on the atmospheric stock of greenhouse gases, and because
for most gases the residence times in the atmosphere are hundreds (and in some cases,
thousands) of years, climate change is an inherently long-term problem and assumptions
about technological change are particularly important. The modeling of technological
change has advanced significantly beyond the early tradition that treated technological
change as exogenous. Several recent models allow the rate or direction of technological
progress to respond endogenously to policy interventions. Some models focus on R&D-
based technological change, incorporating connections between policy interventions,
incentives to research and development, and advances in knowledge. (See, for example,
Goulder and Schneider (1999), Nordhaus (2002), Buonanno et al. (2003), and Popp (2004).)
Others emphasize learning-by-doing-based technological change where production cost falls
with cumulative output, in keeping with the idea that cumulative output is associated with
learning (for example, Manne and Richels (2004)). Allowing for policy-induced
technological change tends to yield lower (and sometimes significantly lower) assessments of
the costs of reaching given emissions-reduction targets relative to models in which
technological change is exogenous.




                                               3
c. Integrated assessment

        While the cost models described above are useful for evaluating the cost-
effectiveness of alternative policies to achieve a given emissions target, the desire to relate
costs to mitigation benefits (avoided damages) has spawned the development of integrated
assessment models. These models link greenhouse gas emissions, greenhouse gas
concentrations, and changes in temperature or precipitation, and they consider how these
changes feed back on production and utility. Many of the integrated assessment models are
optimization models that solve for the emissions time-path that maximizes net benefits, in
some cases under constraints on temperature or concentration (see, for example, Nordhaus
1994).



3. Dealing with Uncertainty


        The uncertainties about both the costs and benefits from reduced climate change are
vast. In a recent meta-analysis examining 28 studies’ estimated benefits from reduced
climate change (Tol 2005), the 90-percent confidence interval for the benefit estimates
ranged from -$10 to +$350 per ton of carbon, with a mode of $1.50 per ton. On the cost side,
a separate study found marginal costs of between $10 and $212 per ton of carbon for a 10
percent reduction in 2010 (Weyant and Hill 1999).


a. Uncertainty and the stringency of climate policy

         Increasingly sophisticated numerical models have attempted to deal explicitly with
these substantial uncertainties regarding costs and benefits. Some provide an uncertainty
analysis using Monte Carlo approaches, providing either a range of consequences for a given
policy or a range of optimal policies. Others explicitly optimize over uncertain outcomes,
typically finding justification for a more aggressive climate policy than would emerge from a
deterministic analysis. Nordhaus (1994) employs an integrated climate-economy model to
compare the optimal carbon tax in a framework with uncertain parameter values with the
optimal tax when parameters are set at their central values. In this application, an uncertainty
premium arises: the optimal tax is more than twice as high in the former case than in the
latter, and the optimal amount of abatement is correspondingly much greater. The higher
optimal tax could in principle be due to uncertainty about any parameter whose relationship
with damages is convex, thus yielding large downside risks relative to upside risks. In the
Nordhaus model, the higher optimal tax stems primarily from uncertainty about the discount
rate (Pizer 1999).


b. The choice of discount rate under uncertainty




                                               4
        The importance of the discount rate arises because greenhouse gases persist in the
atmosphere for a century or more, and therefore mitigation benefits must be measured on
dramatically different time-scales from those of ordinary environmental problems. A
prescriptive approach links the discount rate to subjective judgments about intergenerational
equity as indicated by a pure social rate of time-preference (see, for example, Arrow et al.
1996). A descriptive approach relates the discount rate to future market interest rates. Under
both approaches, significant uncertainties surround the discount rates. Recent work by
Weitzman (1998) points out that a rate lower than the expected value should be employed in
the presence of such uncertainty, a reflection of the relationships among the discount factor,
the discount rate, and the time-interval over which discounting applies. Put simply, the
discount factor e-rt is an increasingly convex function of the interest rate r as the period of
discounting t increases. This implies that in the presence of uncertainty the certainty-
equivalent discount rate is lower than the expected value of the discount rate: that is,
ln(E[e-rt])/t < E[r]. The difference between the appropriate, certainty-equivalent rate and the
expected value of the discount rate widens the longer is the time horizon. While Weitzman
focuses on a single uncertain rate, Newell and Pizer (2003a) show that under reasonable
specifications of uncertainty about the evolution of future market rates, this approach doubles
the expected marginal benefits from future climate change mitigation compared with the
estimated benefits from an analysis that uses only the current rate.


c. Act today or wait for better information?

        In addition to concerns about convexity and valuation, uncertainty raises important
questions about whether and how much to embark on mitigation activities now versus
waiting until at least some uncertainty is resolved. Economic theory suggests that in the
absence of fixed costs and irreversibilities, society should mitigate (today) to the point where
expected marginal costs and benefits are equal. Yet climate change inherently involves fixed
costs and irreversible decisions both on the cost side, in terms of investments in carbon-free
technologies, and on the benefit side, in terms of accumulated emissions. These features can
lead to more intensive action, or to inaction, depending on the magnitude of their respective
sunk values (Pindyck 2000). Despite the ambiguous theory, empirically calibrated analytical
and numerical models tend to recommend initiating reductions in emissions in the present,
reflecting initially negligible marginal cost and non-negligible environmental benefits
(Manne and Richels 2004; Kolstad 1996).



4. The Choice of Instrument for Climate-Change Policy


        Policy makers can consider a range of potential instruments for promoting reductions
in emissions of greenhouse gases. Alternatives include emissions taxes, abatement subsidies,
emissions quotas, tradable emissions allowances, and performance standards. Policy makers
also can choose whether to apply a given instrument to emissions directly (as with an
emissions trading program) or instead to pollution-related goods or services (as with a fuel
tax or technology subsidy).

                                               5
        Initial economic analyses of climate-change policy tended to focus on a carbon tax
because it was relatively easy to model and implement. This is a tax on fossil fuels – oil,
coal, and natural gas – in proportion to the carbon content of the fuels. Because combustion
of fossil fuels or their refined fuel products leads to carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions
proportional to carbon content, a carbon tax is effectively a tax on CO2 emissions. In the
simplest analysis, a carbon tax set equal to the marginal climate-related damage from carbon
combustion would be efficiency-maximizing. However, in more complex analyses – where
additional dimensions such as uncertainty, other market failures, and distributional impacts
are taken into account – the superiority of such a carbon tax is no longer assured. We now
consider these other dimensions and their implications for instrument choice.


a. Prices (taxes) vs. quantities (tradable allowances) in the presence of uncertainty

        Theoretical and empirical work by Kolstad (1996) and Newell and Pizer (2003b)
suggests that the marginal benefit (avoided damage) schedule for emissions reductions is
relatively flat. Weitzman’s (1974) seminal analysis indicates that under these circumstances,
expected welfare losses are smaller when a price-based instrument like a carbon tax is
employed, as opposed to a quantity-based instrument like emissions quotas or a system of
tradable emissions allowances. That is, it is preferable to let levels of emissions remain
uncertain (which is the result under a tax) than to let the marginal price of emissions-
reductions remain uncertain (which is the result under a quota). Despite these economic
welfare arguments, and recent work on hybrid approaches (Pizer 2002), many environmental
advocates prefer the quantity-based approach precisely because it removes uncertainty about
the level of emissions.


b. Fiscal impacts and instrument choice

        A second issue stems from interactions with the tax system and the potential for
policies such as carbon taxes and auctioned permits to generate revenues. A number of
studies show that using such revenues to finance reductions in pre-existing distortionary
taxes on income, sales, or payroll can achieve given environmental targets at lower cost –
perhaps substantially lower cost – than other policies (see, for example, Goulder et al. 1999,
Parry et al. 1999, and Parry and Oates 2000). Therefore, carbon taxes and auctioned permit
programs that employ their revenues this way will lower the excess burden from prior taxes,
giving them a significant cost-advantage. Correspondingly, subsidies to emissions-
reductions or to new, “clean” technologies will have a cost-disadvantage associated with the
need to raise distortionary taxes to finance these policies.


c. Distributional considerations

       Despite these attractions of revenue-raising policies such as carbon taxes and
auctioned tradable allowance systems, trading programs with freely distributed permits have
gained more popularity among policy makers. For example, while the United Kingdom had,

                                               6
and New Zealand has planned, a carbon tax (both with exceptions for heavy industry), the
European Union and Canada have or have planned trading programs where tradable permits
are freely distributed, in line with virtually all conventional pollution trading programs in the
United States.

        The politics may reflect different regulatory burdens under a system of freely
allocated allowances, as compared with a system with auctioned allowances. Under both
types of emissions permit system, profit-maximizing firms will find it in their interest to raise
output prices based on the new, non-zero cost associated with carbon emissions. If the
allowances are given out free, firms can retain rents associated with the higher output prices,
and this offsets other compliance costs. In contrast, if the allowances are auctioned, firms do
not capture these rents. Thus, firms bear a considerably smaller share of the regulatory
burden in the case of freely allocated permits. Indeed, Bovenberg and Goulder (2001) show
that freely allocating all carbon permits to U.S. fossil fuel suppliers generally will cause those
firms to enjoy higher profits than in the absence of a permit system; and freely allocating less
than a fifth of the permits may be sufficient to keep profits from falling. These
considerations reveal a potential trade-off between efficiency and political feasibility: the
revenue-raising policies (taxes and auctioned permits) are the most cost-effective, while the
non-revenue-raising policies (freely-distributed permits) have distributional consequences
that may reduce political resistance.


d. Emissions instruments vs. technology instruments

        As noted in the cost discussion, the long-term nature of the climate-change problem
makes technological change a central issue in policy considerations. Economic analysis
suggests that both “direct emissions policies” and “technology-push policies” are justified on
efficiency grounds to correct two distinct market failures. Direct emissions policies
(emissions trading or taxes) gain support from the fact that combustion of fossil fuels and by
other greenhouse-gas-producing activities generate negative externalities in the form of
climate-change-related damages. Technology-push policies (technology and R&D
incentives) gain support from the fact that not all of the social benefits from the invention of
a new technology can be appropriated by the inventor. The latter argument applies to
research and development more generally, and is especially salient if the first market-failure
is not fully corrected (Fischer 2004a). Numerical assessments reveal substantial cost-savings
from combining the two types of policy (Fischer and Newell 2005; Schneider and Goulder
1997).



5. Policy Designs to Enhance Flexibility

       The previous discussion indicates that no single instrument is best along all important
policy dimensions, including cost uncertainty, fiscal interactions, distribution, and
technology development. A further issue in policy choice is how to give regulated firms or
nations the flexibility to seek out mitigation opportunities wherever and whenever they are
cheapest. For both price- and quantity-based policies, flexibility is enhanced through broad

                                                7
coverage: specifically, by including as many emissions sources in the program as possible
and by providing opportunities for regulated sources to offset their obligations through
relevant activities outside the program. For quantity-based programs, flexibility can also be
promoted through provisions allowing trading of allowances across gases, time, and national
boundaries. Such flexibility is automatically provided by price-based programs simply
because they involve no quantitative emissions limits. Importantly, as quantity-based
programs provide these additional dimensions of flexibility, they reduce the efficiency
arguments for price-based policies in the face of uncertainty voiced in the preceding section
by providing opportunities to adjust to idiosyncratic cost shocks across time, space, and
industry (Jacoby and Ellerman 2004).


a Flexibility over gases and sequestration

        So far we have focused almost exclusively on emissions of carbon dioxide from the
burning of fossil fuels as both the cause of human-induced climate change and the object of
any mitigation policy. Yet emissions of a number of other gases (as well as non-energy
related emissions of carbon dioxide) contribute to the problem and possibly the solution,
particularly in the short run. Models suggest that half of the reductions achievable at costs of
$5-10 per ton of carbon dioxide equivalent arise from gases other than carbon dioxide. In
addition, carbon sequestration can be part of the solution. Biological sequestration (e.g.,
through afforestation) has been cited as a particularly inexpensive response to climate change
(Sedjo 1995; Richards and Stavins 2005). Geological sequestration (e.g., injection into
depleted oil or gas reservoirs) represents a very expensive proposition now, but could be an
important component of a long-term policy solution if costs decline (Newell and Anderson
2004).

        Four issues can complicate the inclusion of these activities: monitoring, baselines,
comparability, and, in some cases, liability. First, some of these sources are fugitive
emissions that are difficult to monitor at any point in the product cycle. Second, some
activities, especially those involving fugitive emissions, are often left unregulated but
allowed to enter as “offsets,” requiring a counterfactual baseline against which actual
emissions levels can be measured. Fischer (2004b) evaluates various approaches to defining
project baselines.

        Third, a problem of comparability arises with non-CO2 gases because it is necessary
to determine relative prices among greenhouse gases in a market-based program. As a
theoretical matter, the relative price between a ton of current emissions of two gases should
be the ratio of the present value of damages from these emissions (Schmalensee 1993). In
practice, it is difficult to apply this formula because it requires a great deal of information
about the damages and because it calls for time-varying trading ratios (Reilly et al. 2001),
which implies significant administrative burdens. Under the Kyoto Protocol and the EU
Emissions Trading Scheme, one set of trading ratios is used at all times, and the ratios are
calculated by determining the ratio of warming impacts over a 100-year horizon beginning
with the present time.




                                               8
       Finally, a liability issue arises with regard to sequestration. For both biologically and
geologically sequestered carbon, a key question is who should be held liable for carbon
dioxide that is released accidentally or otherwise.


b. Flexibility over time

        While price policies naturally allow emissions to rise and fall in response to shocks
over time, quantity-based policies must explicitly address the question of whether regulated
sources can bank unused allowances for future use or, in some cases, borrow them from
future allocations. In the climate change context, merely shifting emissions across time,
versus allowing accumulated emissions to vary, holds the environment harmless because
climate consequences are generally due to accumulated concentrations, not annual emissions
(Roughgarden and Schneider 1999, discuss the possibility of dependence on both
accumulated concentrations and the rate of accumulation). Such shifts across time might
reflect either a more efficient choice of timing in response to capital turnover and
technological progress (Wigley et al. 1996), or an attempt to ameliorate cost-shocks
(Williams 2002; Jacoby and Ellerman 2004). The rate of exchange between present and
future emissions allowances need not be unity: Kling and Rubin (1997) show that the
optimal rate at which banked allowances translate across periods should reflect the expected
trend in marginal mitigation benefits, the interest rate, and decay rate of the accumulated gas.


c. Flexibility over location

         The defining feature of the climate-change problem may be its intrinsically global
nature. Greenhouse gases tend to disperse themselves uniformly around the globe. As a
result, the climate consequences of a ton of emissions of a given greenhouse gas do not
depend on the location of the source, either within or across national borders, and shifts in
emissions across locations do not change global climate impacts. Under these circumstances,
economic efficiency calls for making market-based systems as geographically broad as
possible. It supports federal over regional policies, and international coordination over
idiosyncratic domestic responses.



6. International Policy Initiatives and Coordination


        International coordination is both crucial and exceptionally difficult to achieve.
Studies indicate that the economic and social impacts of climate change would be distributed
very unevenly across the globe, with the prospect of large damages to several nations in the
tropics coupled with the potential for benefits to some countries in the temperate zones (see,
for example, Tol 2005 and Mendelsohn 2003). This uneven distribution makes achieving
international coordination especially difficult.




                                               9
       The Kyoto Protocol is the first significant international effort to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions. It assigns emissions limits to participating industrialized countries for 2008-
2012, but offers flexibility in allowing these countries to alter their limits by buying or selling
emissions allowances from other industrialized countries or by investing in projects that lead
to emissions-reductions in developing countries. The importance of these flexibility
mechanisms for dramatically lowering compliance costs in this international setting is well
documented (Weyant and Hill 1999).

        The Protocol has been criticized on the grounds that it imposes overly stringent
emissions-reduction targets and lacks a longer-term vision for action. In addition, a core
feature of the Protocol—legally-binding emissions limits—has been challenged on the
grounds that such limits are not self-enforcing, an arguably necessary attribute in a world of
sovereign nations (Barrett 2003). Some argue that the Protocol’s project-based mechanisms
for encouraging (but not requiring) emissions-reductions in developing countries are highly
bureaucratic and cumbersome, consistent with our earlier comments about project-based
programs more generally. These criticisms have led to considerable research considering the
Kyoto structure and comparing it with various alternative international approaches. Aldy et
al. (2003) summarize more than a dozen alternatives, which include an international carbon
tax and international technology standards.

       A further major criticism is that the Protocol imposes no mandatory emissions limits
on developing countries, which collectively are expected to match industrialized countries in
emissions of greenhouse gases by 2035. The desire to promote greater participation by
developing countries, and well as to involve the United States in the international effort, has
motivated considerable research examining, within a game-theoretic framework, the
requirements for broader participation and for stable international coalitions. (See, for
example, Carraro 2003, Hoel and Schneider 1997, and Tulkens 1998.)



7. Conclusions


        Climate-change economics has produced new methods for evaluating environmental
benefits, for determining costs in the presence of various market distortions or imperfections,
for making policy choices under uncertainty, and for allowing flexibility in policy responses.
Although major uncertainties remain, it has helped generate important guidelines for policy
choice that remain valid under a wide range of potential empirical conditions. It has also
helped focus empirical work by making clear where better information about key parameters
would be most valuable.

        Clearly, many theoretical and empirical questions remain unanswered. We suggest
(with some subjectivity) that there is a particularly strong need for advances in the integration
of emissions policy and technology policy, in defining baselines that determine the extent of
offset activities outside a regulated system, and in fostering international cooperation.




                                                10
        From 2003 until 2030, the world is poised to invest an estimated $16 trillion in
energy infrastructure, with annual carbon dioxide emissions estimated to rise by 60 percent.
How well economists answer important remaining questions about climate change could
have a profound impact on the nature and consequences of that investment.



References


Aldy, Joseph E., Scott Barrett, and Robert N. Stavins. 2003. Thirteen Plus One: A
        Comparison of Alternative Climate Policy Architectures. Climate Policy 3 (4):373-
        397.
Arrow, K.J., W.R. Cline, K.-G. Maler, M. Munasinghe, R. Squitieri, and J.E. Stiglitz. 1996.
        Intertemporal Equity, Discounting and Economic Efficiency. In Climate Change
        1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change, edited by J. P. Bruce, H.
        Lee and E. F. Haites. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Barrett, Scott. 2003. Environment and Statecraft. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Barretto, L., and S. Kypreos. 2004. Emissions trading and technology deployment in an
        energy-system 'bottom-up' model with technological learning. European Journal of
        Operations Research 158 (1):243-261.
Bovenberg, A. Lans, and Lawrence H. Goulder. 2001. Neutralizing the Adverse Industry
        Impacts of CO2 Abatement Policies: What Does It Cost? In Behavioral and
        Distributional Effects of Environmental Policies, edited by C. Carraro and G.
        Metcalf. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Buonanno, P., C. Carraro, and EM. Galeotti. 2003. Endogenous induced technical change
        and the costs of Kyoto. Resource and Energy Economics 25 (1):11-34.
Carraro, C., ed. 2003. The Endogenous Formation of Economic Coalitions. Northhampton,
        MA: Elgar.
Conrad, Klaus. 2002. Computable General Equilibrium Models in Environmental and
        Resource Economics. In The International Yearbook of Environmental and Resource
        Economics 2002-2003, edited by T. Tietenberg and H. Folmer. Cheltenham, UK:
        Edward Elgar.
Fischer, Carolyn. 2004a. Emission pricing, spillovers, and public investment in
        environmentally friendly technologies. Washington, DC: Resources for the Future.
———. 2004b. Project-based mechanisms for emissions reductions: balancing trade-offs
        with baselines. Energy Policy 33 (14):1807-1823.
Fischer, Carolyn, and Richard Newell. 2005. Environmental and Technology Policies for
        Climate Mitigation, working paper. Washington: Resources for the Future.
Goulder, Lawrence H., Ian Parry, Roberton Williams III, and Dallas Burtraw. 1999. The
        Cost-Effectiveness of Alternative Instruments for Environmental Protection in a
        Second-Best Setting. Journal of Public Economics 72 (3):329-360.
Goulder, Lawrence H., and Stephen L. Schneider. 1999. Induced Technological Change and
        the Attractiveness of CO2 Emissions Abatement Policies. Resource and Energy
        Economics 21:211-253.
Hoel, M., and K. Schneider. 1997. Incentives to Participate in an International Environmental
        Agreement. Environment and Resource Economics 9:153-170.

                                             11
Jacoby, Henry D., and A. Denny Ellerman. 2004. The Safety Valve and Climate Policy.
        Energy Policy 32 (4):481-491.
Jorgenson, Dale W., and Peter J. Wilcoxen. 1996. Reducing U.S. Carbon Emissions: An
        Econometric General Equilibrium Assessment. In Reducing Global Carbon Dioxide
        Emissions: Costs and Policy Options, edited by D. Gaskins and J. Weyant. Stanford,
        Calif.: Energy Modeling Forum, Stanford University.
Kolstad, Charles D. 1996. Learning and stock effects in environmental regulation: the case
        of greenhouse gas emissions. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
        31 (1):1-18.
Manne, Alan S., and R. Richels. 2004. The impacts of learning-by-doing on the timing and
        costs of CO2 abatement. Energy Economics 26 (4):603-619.
Mansur, Erin, Robert Mendelsohn, and Wendy Morrison. 2005. A Discrete-Continuous
        Choice Model of Climate Change Impacts on Energy. New Haven, CT: Yale School
        of Forestry and Environmental Studies.
McFarland, J. R., J. M. Reilly, and H. J. Herzog. 2004. Representing energy technologies in
        top-down economic models using bottom-up information. Energy Economics 26
        (4):685-707.
Mendelsohn, Robert. 2003. Assessing the market damages from climate change. In Global
        Climate Chnage: The Science, Economics, and Politics. Cheltenham, UK: Edward
        Elgar.
Mendelsohn, Robert, William D. Nordhaus, and Daigee Shaw. 1994. The Impact of Global
        Warming on Agriculture: A Ricardian Analysis. American Economic Review 84 (4).
Newell, Richard G., and Soren T. Anderson. 2004. Prospects for carbon capture and storage
        technology. Annual Review of Environment and Resources 29:109-142.
Newell, Richard, and William Pizer. 2003a. Discounting the distant future: how much do
        uncertain rates increase valuations. Journal of Environmental Economics and
        Management 46 (1):52-71.
———. 2003b. Regulating Stock Externalities Under Uncertainty. Journal of Environmental
        Economics and Management 45:416-432.
Nordhaus, William D. 1994. Managing the Global Commons. Cambridge: MIT Press.
———. 2002. Modeling Induced Innovation in Climate-Change Policy. In Technological
        Change and the Environment, edited by A. Grübler, N. Nakicenovic and W. D.
        Nordhaus. Washington: Resources for the Future.
Parry, Ian, Roberton C. Williams III, and Lawrence H. Goulder. 1999. When can carbon
        abatement policies increase welfare? The fundamental role of distorted factor
        markets. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 37(1):52-84.
Parry, Ian, and Wallace E. Oates. 2000. Policy Analysis in the Presence of Distorting Taxes.
        Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 19:603-614.
Pindyck, Robert S. 2000. Irreversiblities and the Timing of Environmental Policy. Resource
        and Energy Economics 22:233-259.
Pizer, William A. 1999. Optimal choice of policy instrument and stringency under
        uncertainty: the case of climate change. Resource and Energy Economics 21 (3-
        4):255-287.
———. 2002. Combining price and quantity controls to mitigate global climate change.
        Journal of Public Economics 85 (3):409-434.




                                             12
Popp, David. 2004. ENTICE: Endogenous technological change in the DICE model of
        global warming. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 48 (1): 742-
        68.
Reilly, John, Mustafa Babiker, and Monika Mayer. 2001. Comparing Greenhouse Gases.
        Cambridge, MA: MIT Joint Center for the Science and Policy of Global Change.
Richards, K.R., and R. Stavins. 2005. The cost of U.S. forest-based carbon sequestration.
        Arlington, VA: Pew Center on Global Climate Change.
Roughgarden, Tim, and Stephen H. Schneider. 1999. Climate Change Policy: Quantifying
        Uncertainties for Damage and Optimal Carbon Taxes. Energy Policy 27 (7).
Schlenker, Wolfram, Anthony Fisher, and Michael Hanemann. forthcoming. Will U.S.
        Agriculture Really Benefit from Global Warming. American Economic Review.
Schmalensee, Richard. 1993. Comparing Greenhouse Gases for Policy Purposes. Energy
        Journal 14 (1):245-255.
Schneider, Stephen H., and Lawrence H. Goulder, 1997. Achieving low-cost emissions
        targets. Nature 389, September.
Sedjo, Roger. 1995. The Economics of Managing Carbon via Forestry: An Assessment of
        Existing Studies. Environment and Resource Economics 6 (2):139-165.
Smith, Joel B., and Dennis A. Tirpak. 1989. The Potential Effects of Global Climate Change
        on the United States: Report to Congress. Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental
        Protection Agency.
Smith, V. Kerry. 2004. Fifty Years of Contingent Valuation. In The International Yearbook
        of Environmental and Resource Economics 2004-2005, edited by T. Tietenberg and
        H. Folmer. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Tol, Richard S.J. 2005. The marginal damage costs of carbon dioxide emissions: an
        assessment of the uncertainties. Energy Policy 33:2064-2074.
Tulkens, H. 1998. Cooperation Versus Free Riding in International Environmental Affairs:
        Two Approaches. In Game Theory and the Environment, edited by N. Hanley and H.
        Folmer. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Weitzman, Martin L. 1974. Prices vs. Quantities. Review of Economic Studies 41 (4):477-
        491.
Weyant, John P., and Jennifer Hill. 1999. The Costs of the Kyoto Protocol: A Multi-Model
        Evaluation, Introduction and Overview. Energy Journal Special Issue.
Wigley, T.M.L., R. Richels, and J.A. Edmonds. 1996. Economic and environmental choices
        in the stabilization of atmospheric CO2 concentrations. Nature 379:240-243.
Williams, Roberton III. 2002. Prices vs. Quantities vs. Tradable Quantities, working paper.
        Austin: Department of Economics, University of Texas.
Yohe, G.W., H. Ameden, P. Marshall, and J. Neumann. 1996. The economic cost of
        greenhouse-induced sea-level rise for developed property in the United States.
        Climatic Change 32 (387-410).




                                            13
