                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          TEACHER-STUDENT MATCHING AND THE
                         ASSESSMENT OF TEACHER EFFECTIVENESS

                                          Charles T. Clotfelter
                                            Helen F. Ladd
                                           Jacob L. Vigdor

                                         Working Paper 11936
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11936


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2006




Duke University, Box 90245, Durham, NC 27708. We thank Roger Aliaga, Russell Triplett, and Jane Cooley
for outstanding research assistance, the Spencer Foundation for financial support, Diane Whitmore and three
anonymous referees for valuable comments, and participants in seminars or presentations at the University
of Virginia, the University of Michigan, the University of Connecticut, the University of Chicago, Duke
University, Harvard University, and the APPAM fall conference for their comments and suggestions. A
previous draft of the current paper was entitled, “Teacher Sorting, Teacher Shopping, and the Assessment
of Teacher Effectiveness”. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Charles T. Clotfelter, Helen F. Ladd and Jacob L. Vigdor. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Teacher-Student Matching and the Assessment of Teacher Effectiveness
Charles T. Clotfelter, Helen F. Ladd and Jacob L. Vigdor
NBER Working Paper No. 11936
January 2006
JEL No. I2, J4

                                           ABSTRACT

We use administrative data on North Carolina public schools to document the tendency for more

highly qualified teachers to be matched with more advantaged students, and we measure the bias this

pattern generates in estimates of the impacts of various teacher qualifications on student

achievement. One of the strategies we use to minimize this bias is to restrict the analysis to schools

that assign students to classrooms in a manner statistically indistinguishable from random

assignment. Using data for 5th grade, we consistently find significant returns to teacher experience

in both math and reading and to licensure test scores in math achievement. We also find that the

returns in math are greater for socioeconomically advantaged students, a finding that may help

explain why the observed form of teacher-student matching persists in equilibrium.

Charles T. Clotfelter
Terry Sanford Institute of Public Policy
Duke University
Box 90245
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
charles.clotfelter@duke.edu

Helen F. Ladd
Terry Sanford Institute of Public Policy
Duke University
Box 90245
Durham, NC 27708
hladd@duke.edu

Jacob L. Vigdor
Terry Sanford Institute of Public Policy
Duke University
Box 90245
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
jacob.vigdor@duke.edu
1. Introduction

          Nearly all observers of the education process, including scholars, school administrators,

policy-makers, and parents, point to teacher quality as the most significant institutional

determinant of academic success.1 Considerable uncertainty remains, however, concerning

exactly which aspects of teachers are important, whether those aspects can be measured, and

whether that effectiveness differs by type of student. Recent studies by Rivkin, Hanushek and

Kain (2005), Hanushek, Kain, O’Brien and Rivkin (2005), Ballou, Sanders and Wright (2004),

Rockoff (2004), Nye, Konstantopoulos and Hedges (2004) and Aaronson, Barrow and Sander

(2003), for example, find evidence of significant across-teacher variation in student test scores,

but find little evidence that any observable teacher characteristic, save experience, explains any

of this variation.

         Estimates of the impact of teacher characteristics in studies like these will be biased in

situations where non-random sorting of students and teachers into schools and classrooms

introduce correlations between the included characteristics and unobserved determinants of

student test scores.2 This paper examines the extent to which the non-random matching of

teachers to students generated by these sorting processes affects estimates of the relationship

between teacher characteristics and student achievement. Our goals are both to provide new


         1
           See, for example, Darling-Hammond 2000 and American School Board Journal 1999. That public policy
also recognizes the importance of having highly qualified teachers in every classroom is indicated by government
regulation at m any levels includ ing standard s for highly qualified teachers ma ndated b y the Federa l No Child Left
Behind Act, state-level licensing requireme nts, and loca l hiring practice s.

         2
            The N ye et al. (200 4) study, which uses data from the Tenne ssee STA R experim ent, may be im mune to
this criticism, since it estimates teacher fixed effects within schools where students were assigned to classrooms
random ly. There ha ve been a n umber o f criticisms of the ran domizatio n process in the Tenne ssee STA R experim ent,
however; see Krueger (1999) for a discussion. See Todd and Wolpin (2003) for a general discussion of omitted
variables b ias in mode ls of student ach ievement.

                                                           1
evidence on this policy-relevant behavior and to illustrate how rich administrative data can be

used to approximate the results that would emerge from a random experiment.

         We begin by documenting the extent of non-random teacher-student matching, using an

administrative data set covering the population of elementary students in the State of North

Carolina, which matches most students to their individual classroom teachers. Consistent with

previous evidence, we find that teachers with more experience, degrees from more competitive

colleges, and advanced degrees tend to teach at schools serving more affluent, higher achieving

and whiter populations. We find additional evidence that even within schools, teachers with

stronger credentials tend to teach more affluent students. This evidence is consistent with

existing research on teacher labor market sorting and parental efforts to secure better resources

for their children.

         We then examine how the sorting of teachers and students affects estimates of teacher

effectiveness. In contrast to some recent studies, which estimate achievement models with

teacher fixed effects and then regress the fixed effects on observable characteristics (see, e.g.,

Nye, Konstantopoulos and Hedges 2004 or Aaronson, Barrow and Sander 2003), we focus on the

direct estimation of the relationship between teacher credentials and student outcomes.3 Any bias

uncovered in our analysis, it should be noted, applies with equal force to models that employ

teacher fixed effects.

         We employ three strategies to counter the bias that arises from the processes of sorting

         3
           Ultimately, teac her fixed-effects m odels are u nsatisfying to po licy-makers be cause they are observab le
only ex po st. Identifying impo rtant creden tials and chara cteristics is of greate r value in this rega rd. A teache r’s
characteristics are not the only determinant of a teacher’s effectiveness, of course. A more complete measure of
teacher quality would require the direct observation of classroom performance in a wide variety of standardized
settings or the use of teacher portfolios, both of which are expensive means of gathering information on teaching
quality.

                                                              2
that arise across and within schools: the addition of an extended set of student-level control

variables, the use of school fixed effects, and the use of a subsample of the schools that feature

relatively balanced distributions of students across classrooms, based on observable

characteristics.4 Our results suggest that the bias from between-school sorting is large; the bias

associated with sorting within schools, by contrast, is more limited in nature and may actually

vary in sign across subsamples of schools. Ultimately, two characteristics – teacher experience

and licensure test scores – emerge as robust determinants of test scores for fifth grade students.

         Additional tests for differential effects by type of student provide suggestive evidence

that the math score returns to teacher attributes are higher for more advantaged, higher

performing students. This finding implies, first, that efforts to increase the math achievement of

low-performing students by assigning them more experienced teachers could reduce average

math test scores, potentially setting the stage for a classic equity-efficiency tradeoff. Second, it

provides an additional possible explanation for the observed equilibrium patterns of teacher

assignment that favor more advantaged students.



2. Sorting, non-random matching, and the potential for bias in estimated teacher effects

         The principal empirical strategy used in the economics literature to assess the importance

of teachers and teacher characteristics is the estimation of education production functions, which

generally take the form:



         4
          While we cannot prove that assignment is truly random in these schools, any within school sorting of
students would have to be uncorrelated with a vector of six studen t characteristics including measures of past
achievement, socioeconomic status, and race. The ratio of selection on unobservables to selection on observables
would hav e to be very h igh to attribute the results we ob tain to selection (Altonji, Eld er and T aber, 20 02).

                                                          3
(1) yijt = *yijt-1 + $1Xit + $2Xjt + ,ijt

where i indexes students, j indexes classrooms, and t indexes time ( Rivkin, Hanushek and Kain,

2005; summaries by Hanushek, 1986, 1997, 2002; Goldhaber and Brewer, 2000; Summers and

Wolfe,1977; and Coleman et al., 1966). The dependent variable is a standardized test score.5

The lagged test score is typically included in the equation to reflect the cumulative nature of the

education process and is intended to pick up the effects of prior year school and family

characteristics. The parameter * is in many cases constrained to be equal to one. In other cases,

such as in studies for which lagged test scores are unavailable or in studies using adult outcomes

as the dependent variable, * may be constrained to zero. In still other cases, the parameter * is

estimated explicitly.6 The vector Xit measures the characteristics of student i at time t, and may

contain time-invariant characteristics such as student gender or race. The vector Xjt represents

measurable school inputs, including class size as well as teacher characteristics. Recent literature

has included teacher fixed effects as elements of Xjt.

         Obtaining unbiased estimates of $2, the marginal effects of school inputs is difficult

because parent- or teacher-driven processes of across-school and within-school sorting are likely

to lead to a situation in which observable characteristics of students, teachers and classrooms are


         5
           Although many economists would argue that a more relevant outcome is returns in the labor market (see
Card and Kreuger, 1992, and Betts, 1996), achievement test scores have the advantage of being available at the time
the education is provided, of being of interest for their own sake, and of being a proxy, albeit imperfect, for future
success in the labor market (Ferguson and Ladd, 1996).

         6
            Typically o mitted from th e standard model are unmeasure d characte ristics of students, suc h as their ability
and motivation, that affect achievement. Provided such variables have constant effects on achievement over time and
that their effects deteriorate at the same rates as prior achievement, they cancel out in this lagged form of the
production function. See Boardman and Murnane (1979) for other assumptions that would generate this particular
form of the p roduction function. In an a ssessment of the econom etric issues raised by such mo dels, To dd and W olpin
(2003 ) argue that the v alue-adde d versioni o f the model ( * = 1) assumes that inputs have the same effects at all grade
levels, while the explicitly estimated version (lagged achievement) assumes that the effects of inputs decay over time
at a constant rate. Constraining * to zero implies that only contemporaneous inputs matter.

                                                             4
correlated with unobserved, and hence omitted, factors related to student and teacher ability or to

other factors that positively influence achievement, such as parental involvement. A similar

problem arises in models that use teacher fixed effects.7

         The first such process, which we call across-school sorting, has to do with how teachers

and students choose, or are assigned, to schools. As numerous empirical studies have shown,

teachers’ preferences among districts are influenced by factors such as salary levels and student

characteristics, and among schools within districts by the characteristics of the students, with the

more qualified teachers often showing both the inclination and ability to transfer to schools with

more advantaged students.8 At the same time that teachers are making decisions about where to

teach, parents are also making decisions that affect how students are distributed across schools.

Many of these parental decisions involve the choice of where to live, as in the well-known

Tiebout (1956) model.9 But in some cases, such as in districts permitting some form of school

choice, parents may be able to choose among schools without having to move.

         The second major process driving the matching of teachers with students, within-school

sorting, has received much less attention in economic models. Parents often form opinions




         7
          The kind of non-random sorting observed in schools has similarities to job training programs. LaLonde
(1986) compares experimental and non-experimental estimation strategies in that latter application.

         8
            Empirica l studies of teach er moves a nd quits reve al that teachers a re more like ly to switch schoo ls within
a district, move from one district to another, or quit altogether if their original school has a higher percentage of low-
achieving, low-income, or minority students or a high student-teacher ratio See New York Public Education
Association (1955), Mont and Rees (1996), Freema n, Scafidi and Sjoquist (2002, Tables 10-12), Lankford, Loeb and
Wycko ff (2002, T ables 10 a nd 11), R eed and Rueben (2002) . Sieber’s (19 82, p. 42 ) study of classro om assignm ents
in a New York City elementary school reports that teachers normally “viewed as a rewarding and prestigious task”
the assignment to classes with advanced students.

         9
          Empirical studies confirm that household residential demand is influenced by perceived school quality and
by such school characteristics as racial composition (Bogart and Cromwell 2000).

                                                             5
regarding which of the available teachers in a school they would most prefer to teach their

children; some act on these preferences by trying to influence administrative decisions regarding

who will teach their child (Hollingshead 1949; Sieber 1982; Lareau 1987 and 2000; Oakes 1995).

Although many principals appear to resist such efforts, this kind of “teacher shopping” often

seems to be successful (Hui, 2003). Teachers themselves may be an additional source of within-

school sorting. Experienced teachers, for example, may successfully resist being assigned less

able students.

         If these two processes result in the matching of more able students to teachers with

stronger qualifications, a state we refer to as positive matching, coefficients on these

qualifications will be biased upward. Available evidence indicates that positive matching of

teachers and students is the empirical norm (Rivkin, Hanushek and Kain, 2005; Betts, Zau and

Rice 2003; Clotfelter, Ladd and Vigdor 2004).10 The alternative condition – negative matching –

would occur if teachers with stronger qualifications were assigned to classes with the less able

students.11 In such a scenario, coefficients on teacher qualifications would be biased downwards.



3. North Carolina data

         The data we use for this study are derived from administrative records maintained by the




         10
              See Clotfelter, Ladd and Vigdor (2004) for a discussion of theoretical rationales for positive matching.

         11
          Negative m atching might b e predicte d by a Laz ear (200 1)-style mod el of an aggre gate achieve ment-
maximizing administrato r, in the event that the returns to teac her quality are h ighest for low-p erforming stud ents.
Evidence presented below suggest that this condition does not hold, at least for the measure of achievement utilized
by North Caro lina public schools.

                                                            6
North Carolina Education Research Data Center (NCERDC).12 North Carolina is an appropriate

state for this analysis for several reasons. Because it has a statewide course of study, its tests are

closely aligned with what students are expected to know and be able to do. Hence, test scores are

likely to measure more fully what teachers have taught than in many other states. The state is

relatively large and exhibits substantial variation across its 117 school districts with respect to the

racial and socio-economic mix of the students and student performance. Although teachers’

associations in North Carolina have no collective bargaining power, cross-district variation in

salary schedules, and variation in working conditions across schools, create incentives for

teachers to sort in nonrandom ways. Finally, we note that the state boasts a stable and relatively

sophisticated performance-based accountability system which could potentially exacerbate the

incentives for positive matching (Clotfelter, Ladd, Vigdor, and Aliaga Diaz 2004).

          We link several different sets of records to form the database used for this analysis.

Student information, including race, gender, participation in the federal free and reduced price

lunch subsidy program, and standardized test scores are derived from student test records. In

addition to these variables, which are available in many administrative data sets, responses to a

number of supplemental survey questions, including information on parental education, students’

computer use, hours spent watching television, and hours spent reading for leisure at home, as

well as a measure of time spent on homework are also available. Each student test score record

identifies the name of the teacher who administered the test. In elementary schools, the teacher




         12
            While these data are not available to the general public, researchers affiliated with academic institutions
can apply to the NC ERDC , located at Duke U niversity, for access.

                                                           7
administering the test is most likely a student’s regular classroom teacher.13 By confining our

attention to 5th grade students, we are thus able to link the test score database to information on

teacher qualifications. As far as we know, North Carolina provides the only state-wide data set

that permits the matching of teachers to students at the classroom level.

         The teacher data come from a state-maintained archive of personnel records. For each

teacher, information is available on licensure test scores, including the type of test taken and the

year it was administrated; undergraduate institution attended, whether the teacher has any

advanced degrees or is National Board Certified, and the number of years of teaching experience.

We formed a standardized licensure test score variable for each teacher by converting test scores

from different test administrations in North Carolina to standardized scores using the means and

standard deviations for tests taken in each year by all teachers in our data set.14 The years of

experience variable is the one used by the state to determine a teacher’s salary, and generally

counts all years of teaching whether in the State of North Carolina, or elsewhere, for which the




         13
             To verify that a teacher listed as administering a test to students in grade i in school j, was actually a
classroom teacher in grade i in school j, we cross-referenced a separate North Carolina administrative dataset, the
School Activity Repo rt, which records the identity and assignment o f each teacher in each schoo l. This cross-
reference e liminates teach ers who taug ht non-core subjects in sch ool j (e.g. music, physical education), those who
started positions at the school midyear, and those who had no regular position at the school. Student test score
records associated with an “eliminated” teacher are excluded from our analysis. Moreover, since we focus on
schools with more than on e classroom per grad e in order to exploit within-school variation in teach er characteristics,
students with a valid teacher but in a school with no other valid teachers were also excluded from the sample.

         14
           From the early 1960s through the mid-1990s, all elementary school teachers were required to take either
the Elementary Education or the Early Childhood Education test. Starting in the mid-1990s, teachers were required
to take both an Eleme natary Education Cu rriculum and an Elem entary Education Co ntent test. We normalized test
scores on each of these tests separately for each year the test was administered based on means and standard
deviations fro m test scores fo r all teachers in o ur data set, no t just those in our 2001 su bset of 5 th grade teac hers.
For teache rs with multiple test sc ores in their pe rsonnel file, our teacher test sco re variable e quals the ave rage of all
scores for which we can p erform this normalization. W hile in principle it would be interesting to enter licensure test
scores separately, rather than as a composite, the potential for endogenous choice of test taken on the part of teachers
would comp licate any such analysis.

                                                              8
state has given the teacher credit.15 Basic demographic information on each teacher, including

race and gender, are also available.

         Table 1a presents basic summary statistics describing the 5th grade teachers working in

North Carolina during the 2000/01 school year, for both the full sample and also the evenly

balanced school subsample, to which we will return in section 5 below. The vast majority of the

3,842 individuals matching our definition of a 5th grade teacher were female and white. The

median teacher had between six and twelve years of prior experience and fewer than one in ten

had no prior experience. The proportion of teachers with licensure test scores within one

standard deviation of the mean is slightly more than would be expected with a purely normal

distribution (73 percent rather than 68 percent), and the teachers with test scores outside this

interval are disproportionately drawn from the lower tail of the distribution. Provided outside

opportunities are positively correlated with teacher test scores, this distribution is consistent with

a positive correlation between the probability of departure and access to non-teaching

opportunities.16 Most teachers graduate from colleges ranked by Barron’s as being competitive,

and more teachers are drawn from the schools at the low end of the college quality spectrum than

from the high end.17 This pattern reflects the fact that the largest teacher education programs in


         15
           The teacher experience variable was missing for some teachers. In cases where it was possible to observe
experience levels in payroll records from other years, we imputed values. In cases where observations from other
years’ payroll d ata were inco nsistent with the 20 00/01 re cord., we p ut more we ight on the mo re recent rec ord. .

         16
           Reflecting differences in alternative employment opportunities by teaching field, Murnane and Olsen
(1989 ) show that the le ngth of first spell in teac hing varied sig nificantly by teachin g area.

         17
            The categories were derived from information from Barron’s College Admissions Selector for 1988,
based on information for first-year students in each university in 1986-87. Our category of very competitive includes
universities rated as most competitive, highly competitive or very competitive; competitive are those rated as
competitive; less competitive are those rated as less competitive or non competitive; and the unranked category
includes spe cial progra ms such as ar t schools, intern ational univer sities or universities fo r which we we re not able to
find a rating. Barron’s uses criteria such as the median entrance examination scores, percentages of students scoring

                                                              9
North Carolina are, by state policy, located in the state colleges, which are relatively unselective.

Although North Carolina boasts the largest number of National Board Certified teachers in the

country, they account for less than 4 percent of the state’s fifth grade teachers.

         The characteristics of North Carolina’s 2000/01 cohort of public school 5th grade students

are summarized in Table 1b. Once again, we focus here on the characteristics of the full sample

and postpone the discussion of the evenly balanced school subsample to Section 5. Students are

more racially diverse than their teachers, and the proportion of black students significantly

exceeds the national average. The median student has parents with a high school diploma but no

postsecondary degrees, watches between two and three hours of television per day, only rarely

uses a personal computer at home, spends 30 minutes per day reading for pleasure, and spends

one to three hours on homework per day.18 Nearly four students in nine are eligible for

subsidized lunch; and substantial numbers are rated as exceptional, whether gifted or

handicapped. Relatively few students are either repeating the 5th grade or have limited English

proficiency.



4. Evidence of across- and within-school sorting

         As discussed above, in the absence of purposeful intervention on the part of


500 and above and 600 and above on both the math and verbal parts of the SAT or comparable scores for the ACT,
percentage of students who ranked in the upper fifth or two-fifths of their high school class, and the percentage of
applicants who were accepted. If information for a university was missing for 1988, we substituted the ranking for
the 1979 or 1999 Selector, with th e choice va rying with the era in w hich the teach er attended college.

         18
            The information on parental education is based on teacher reports at the time the students are tested.
Instead of using the reports of current teach ers, we use those of each student’s teacher in the p rior year. We use these
prior year estimates to minimize any bias in our subsequent analyses of the effects of the qualifications of fifth grade
teachers on student achievement that could arise from any systematic under or overreporting of parental education
correlated with the characteristics of the fifth grade teachers.

                                                           10
administrators or other officials, theory and previous empirical research suggest that teachers

with better credentials will gravitate towards schools with more advantaged students. Table 2

provides evidence of across-school sorting in North Carolina 5th grade classrooms. The rows of

the table categorize teachers in five ways, and the columns refer to average characteristics of

students at the school level. The table entries are means of these averages, weighted by the

number of teachers having the specified qualifications. In all cases higher entries for school

characteristics represent higher proportions of more advantaged or higher performing students.

         Consistent with the hypothesis of positive matching, the table shows that, by most

measures, teachers with better qualifications typically work in schools serving higher proportions

of advantaged students.19 Teachers with more experience, degrees from more highly ranked

colleges, higher licensure test scores, or advanced degrees are more likely to be found in schools

with higher proportions of students who are white, not receiving subsidized lunches, have college

educated parents and who scored well on the prior year test. The only non-monotonic patterns

appear in the relationships between teacher experience and parent education, and between college

rank and percent nonwhite. Nonetheless, the general pattern is clear.

          Measures of within-school sorting are shown in Table 3. The rows display the same set

of teacher qualifications as those shown in Table 2 and the columns refer to the same student

characteristics. The entries, however, now refer to the average characteristics of students at the

classroom level relative to the school-wide average.20 The clearest patterns emerge for the

         19
           Using F-tests, we were able to reject the hypothesis of equality of student characteristics across teacher
qualification categories except in the cell relating teacher experience to percent of students with parents who are
college graduates, and in the four ce lls relating National Board C ertification to student characteristics.

         20
           In this and subsequent analysis, we restrict our attention to schools with more than one classroom per
grade. T he mean fo r each scho ol characte ristic in the first three co lumns is one a nd in the fourth c olumn is zero .

                                                             11
teachers with the lowest licensure test scores and the teachers who are National Board Certified.

Teachers with the lowest test scores tend to teach in classrooms that have below-average

percentages of white students and of students with college-educated parents, and they teach

students with less average ability as measured their prior year test scores than those in other

classrooms. In contrast, teachers who are National Board Certified teach students who are more

affluent, whose parents are more likely to be college graduates, and who are more able than

students in other classrooms. Further evidence of this positive matching at the classroom level

emerges from the observation that the least experienced teachers tend to teach in classrooms with

below-average proportions of students with college educated parents, and teachers who have

degrees from the least competitive colleges tend to be in classrooms with the least able students.

Thus, the net effect of within-school sorting is qualitatively quite similar to the effect of across-

school sorting in that it tends to match the most qualified teachers with the most able students.

         To investigate the extent of within-school sorting more formally, we conducted a series of

P2 tests using 1,160 North Carolina elementary schools with at least two 5th grade classrooms in

2000/01. We conducted up to six tests in each school to examine whether students’ classroom

assignments are statistically independent of a set of six student characteristics: gender, race,

participation in the Federal subsidized school lunch program, whether the student attended the

same school in the previous year, the student’s prior year test score (with categories being above

or below the state average), and the prior year teacher’s report of parental education.21 The null

hypothesis in each test is that students were assigned randomly across classrooms within the



         21
            We use d the prior ye ar teacher’s re port in ord er to break any potential re lationship be tween the erro rs in
the current teacher’s estimates of parental educ ation levels and the particular students she teache rs.

                                                             12
school with respect to the specified characteristic.

         To reduce the probability of incorrectly accepting the null hypothesis, we raised the

power of the tests by pooling information on student assignments in the third, fourth, and fifth

grades in each school.22 We also chose the relatively conservative significance level of 10

percent as the critical value for the tests. Finally, we examine the overall distribution of p-values

for each set of tests to determine whether the schools that we conclude are assigning students

randomly are instead simply presenting insufficient evidence to warrant rejection of the null

hypotheses. Were this latter possibility the case, we would expect a skewed overall distribution

of p-values. Under random assignment, the distribution of p-values should be roughly uniform.

          As shown in Table 4, in 521 out of the 1,160 schools we failed to reject the null

hypothesis of random assignment for all six of our tests.23 Figure 1 displays the distribution of p-

values for the parental education test for all the schools in the sample. The tests for about 6

percent of these schools exhibit p-values less that 1 percent, indicating particularly extreme

departures from a random distribution of students by parental education. Beyond the 10 percent

level, and particularly beyond the 15 percent level, however, the p-values display a nearly

uniform distribution, with close to 1 percent of all p-values in each band of width 0.01. This



         22
           In these tests, we compare the actual distribution of students in each classroom to the expected
distribution under the hypothesis of even assignment within each grade. In other words, variation in student
composition across grades within a school does not increase the size of the chi-squared statistic. Some schools have
data or mu ltiple classroo ms only for ce rtain grades; fo r these schoo ls our tests are b ased only o n the grades with
adequa te data. Th e previous year test score a nd previo us year attend ance tests use o nly 4 th and 5th grade data, since
we have no information on test scores or school attendance prior to 3rd grade.

         23
            Under the hypothesis of random assignment, and presuming that the six chi-squared tests are
independent, we would expect about 53 percent of schools to fail at least one test, using the 10 percent significance
level. Beca use the studen t characteristics a re likely to be co rrelated, ho wever, the ch i-squared tes ts are not likely to
be indep endent. As a result, we would expect a lo wer prop ortion of the sc hools to fail at lea st one test.

                                                               13
suggests that a relatively small number of schools are responsible for a large share of the

systematic sorting made apparent in Table 3.

         Figures 2 and 3 show the distributions of p-values from the P2 tests for students by race

and subsidized lunch status. The near uniform distribution of the p-values for the racial

composition test suggests that only a very small fraction of North Carolina schools systematically

segregate students by race within schools. At the same time, only a small mass of points emerge

with p-values very close to one, indicating that few if any schools perfectly balance the racial

composition of all classrooms. That pattern is consistent with prior findings of low racial

segregation across classrooms within elementary schools (Morgan and McPartland 1981 and

Clotfelter, Ladd and Vigdor 2003). The pattern of p-values is less uniform for the free and

reduced lunch status of students. This measure of student socioeconomic status is actually the

strongest predictor of separation across classrooms in North Carolina, yet only a small fraction of

schools show evidence of systematic separation by this variable.24 We return to the sample of

schools that failed none of the six tests in our modeling effort below.



5. Estimating the effect of teacher qualifications on student achievement

         In principle, the best way to determine the effects of teacher qualifications on student

achievement would be to randomly assign teachers with different qualifications to schools and

classrooms and to compare the test scores of students facing teachers with different

         24
            Although it would be interesting to explore the reasons that schools differ in the apparent randomness of
their classroom assignments, observable indicators show little relation with assignment patterns. Tables 1a and 1b
show that the non-random schools on average have slightly higher shares of black teachers and black, poor, and low-
achieving stud ents, comp ared to ap parently rand om scho ols. Other tha n these relatively sm all differences, it is
possible only to speculate that, for one reason or another, principals in the non-random schools are simply more open
to parental suggestions regarding c lassroom assignments than are p rincipals in the apparently random schools.

                                                         14
qualifications. The previous section has documented that the actual distribution of teachers in

North Carolina is far from random across schools, and that at least some schools systematically

assign teachers to classrooms with significantly different characteristics. As a result, the

estimation strategy must be more complex and must explicitly account for the nonrandom

distribution of teachers. The goal is to approximate the results that would emerge from a truly

random experiment.

        Our strategy for estimating the effects on teacher qualifications on student achievement in

the presence of across-school and within-school sorting has three main components. First is the

use of a rich set of student-level control variables that includes both the demographic

characteristics of students and their survey responses about the time they spend watching TV,

reading and doing homework. To the extent these characteristics are correlated with both

achievement and teacher credentials, including them will ameliorate omitted variable bias.

Second is the addition of school fixed effects. These fixed effects imply that coefficients are

identified on the basis of variation in teacher qualifications across classrooms within each school,

eliminating any bias associated with across-school sorting. Third, we restrict the sample to the

set of schools that, based on the P2 tests just discussed, have distributed students across

classrooms in a way that balances observable student characteristics. Because any bias

associated with nonrandom matching within schools is likely to be most severe in schools that

show evidence of a departure from even balancing, restricting the sample in this way will reduce

if not eliminate it.

        As a benchmark for analyzing the impact of sorting on estimates of teacher credential

effects, the first two columns of Table 5 present a very simple descriptive specification. Fifth


                                                 15
grade math and reading test scores, standardized in each regression to have mean zero and

standard deviation one, are estimated as a function solely of teacher characteristics, as well as

class size. The absence of control variables means that the estimated effects should be interpreted

as associations, not as causal relationships.

          The table indicates that many teacher characteristics, including both demographic

characteristics and qualifications, exhibit strong and statistically significant partial correlations

with student achievement. Relative to white teachers (the omitted racial category) black teachers

and teachers of other races teach students with significantly lower test scores. Similarly, relative

to female teachers, male teachers teach students with lower math and reading scores. The

relationship between student achievement and teacher experience is nonlinear, with the peak

occurring in those classrooms with teachers having between 13 and 26 years of experience;

novice teachers (the omitted base category) are associated with the lowest test scores. Teachers

with degrees from less competitive institutions teach students with significantly lower test scores,

and teachers with advanced degrees show a slight but insignificant tendency to teach students

with higher test scores. Higher licensure test scores are associated with higher-test scores.

Finally, class size is a significant positive predictor of test scores, which could reflect efforts on

the part of school administrators to put low-performing students in smaller classes as in Lazear

(2001).

          The other four regressions in Table 5 reflect the addition of student-level covariates to the

basic specification. The third and fourth regressions include controls for student gender, race,

subsidized lunch receipt, parental education, time spent watching television, reading for pleasure,




                                                   16
using a computer, and doing homework, but not for the student’s prior year test score.25 The

addition of these control variables alters the coefficients of the teacher characteristics in ways

that are consistent with the phenomenon of positive matching. The difference between black

and white teachers is greatly reduced, and the negative coefficient on teachers of “other race” has

been reduced in the equation for reading and reversed in sign for math. The estimated impact of

male teachers on reading scores is reduced by two thirds in reading and is indistinguishable from

zero for math. The coefficients on the teacher experience variables continue to be largely

significant, and the peak continues to occur among highly experienced teachers, but the

magnitude of the relationships have declined appreciably. Teachers graduating from less

competitive colleges continue to be associated with lower-performance in reading, and those with

lower licensure test scores are associated with lower scores in both areas, but the magnitudes of

these effects decline as well. Point estimates of class size effects continue to be positive, but the

magnitudes are at most one-fifth the level of the initial estimates.26

         The final pair of regressions in Table 5 adds a single control variable for each student: the

student’s 4th grade test score. As we noted earlier, lagged test scores are usually included in

achievement models to account for the cumulative nature of the education process. When error

         25
           Because time spen t on homework m ay be endogeno usly determined by teacher b ehavior, we have also
estimated models that exclude the homework variables. The results are similar except that the estimated effects of
teacher experience are all somewhat larger than in equations that omit the behavioral variables. Coefficients on
student characteristics, derived from the regressions reported in Table 6, appear as Appendix Table A1. Student
characteristic c oefficients der ived from o ther specificatio ns are availab le from the au thors upon request.
         Our sample size declines by roughly 7,000 students in each regression that adds student covariates, owing
primarily to missing data on subsidized lunch receipt. Results estimated on a co nstant set of students across
specifications yield qualitatively identical results.

         26
            It is worth noting that the addition of student covariates has much the same effect in models with school
fixed effects: the model without student covariates exhibits consistently larger estimated teacher effects. The
implication is tha t positive matc hing within scho ols is at work, thus imbuing estim ated teache r characteristic s with
unwarranted impac t, owing to omitted variable bias.

                                                            17
terms are serially correlated, however, the inclusion of a lagged dependent variable can lead to

biased and inconsistent coefficient estimates, with the sign and magnitude of the bias depending

on the direction of serial correlation.27

         Given certain conditions, however, estimates of the effects of teacher qualifications on

student achievement will be unbiased under either specification. The conditions are that the

teacher qualifications be uncorrelated with both past values of observable characteristics and the

error term, conditional on other observed variables. These conditions would be clearly met if

teachers were randomly assigned to students. In such a scenario, teacher credentials are

uncorrelated with observed and unobserved student characteristics, both past and present. An

empirical test for whether our regression estimates mirror those that would be obtained from a

random assignment trial, then, is whether the estimated coefficients are sensitive to the inclusion

of a lagged dependent variable.28

         Comparing the final two columns of Table 5 with the previous two indicates significant

differences between models that do or do not include lagged student test scores and, hence, that

we have not yet estimated unbiased causal effects of teacher characteristics. For example, the

fact that the addition of the lagged dependent achievement variable causes the large negative

effect of being a black teacher to disappear provides evidence that the other control variables are



         27
            The sign of this correlation is unclear a priori. On the one hand, unobserved but relatively permanent
characteristics would generate po sitive serial correlation. On the other hand, be cause standardized tests are no isy
signals of ability, some mean reversion is likely to occur which w ould generate negative serial corre lation. Thus,
while failure to control for lagged achievement will be expected to generate biased coefficients under any but the
most unusual circumstances (namely, when achievement is affected only by contemporaneous school and non-school
factors), the inclu sion of a lagge d achievem ent variable m ay introduce bias of its own.

         28
          As with tests of over identifying restrictions in instrumental variable estimation, this check focuses on a
necessary but not sufficient condition. (Hausman, 1978).

                                                          18
not sufficient to break the correlation between being a black teacher and being assigned to low

performing students. Other differences have similar interpetations.

         Fortunately, the unusually detailed character of our data, which makes it possible for us to

match teachers and students at the classroom level, allows us to incorporate school fixed effects

into our achievement regressions (see Table 6). The inclusion of these school fixed effects

means that the coefficients of teacher characteristics in that table are estimated based only on

the within-school variation in teacher characteristics, thereby eliminating any remaining bias

associated with the nonrandom sorting of teachers and students across schools (but not within

schools).29

         Two clear patterns emerge from Table 6. First, introducing school fixed effects drives

most of the effects of qualifications down, even relative to the attenuated levels observed in the

final columns of Table 5.30 Nonetheless many of them remain statistically significant. Second,

the two sets of estimates of the effects of teacher qualifications – those from the models with and

without the lagged achievement variable – converge. The high degree of concordance of results

across specifications gives us confidence that we now have obtained relatively unbiased

estimates of the effects of teacher qualifications.


         29
             There may be some concern that our use of school fixed effects biases estimates of teacher credential
effects downwards. Such a bias would occur, for example, if school administrators had access to superior
information on teacher quality and hire d teachers o f uniform qua lity. In such a scena rio, observ ed differenc es in
teacher characteristics across classrooms within a school would be offset by opposite differences in unobserved
compo nents of qua lity. While we su spect that such a bias is not likely to b e empirica lly noteworthy, re aders with
differing opinions may wish to consider our estimates in Tables 6 and 7 as lower bounds for the true effect of teacher
credentials on student test scores. The estimates in Table 5 wou ld then serve as upper bo unds.

         30
           In spite of this evid ence, it would not be app ropriate to c onclude th at the use of scho ol fixed effects
obviates the need for inc luding studen t-level covaria tes. In unrepo rted specifica tions including school fixed effects
but no student-level covariates, the estimated relationship between most teacher credentials and test scores is more
positive than that reported in Table 6 – indicative of omitted variable bias associated with positive within-school
matching.

                                                            19
         As displayed in Table 6, statistically significant positive effects on student achievement

emerge for teacher experience (for both math and reading), teacher test scores (most clearly for

math) and National Board Certification (for reading only). Compared to students assigned to

teachers with no prior experience, students assigned to highly experienced teachers attain

standardized reading and math test scores roughly one-tenth of a standard deviation higher in

math and slightly less than a tenth of a standard deviation in reading. 31 About half of this gain

occurs for the first one or two years of teaching. After that point the experience-test score profile

flattens considerably, with the peak occurring in the 20-27 year category in all four

specifications. Students assigned to teachers with higher licensure test scores apparently do

better in math, but the effect is relatively modest. A one-standard-deviation increase in teacher

test score implies at most a 0.017 standard deviation increase in average student math test scores

and a somewhat smaller increase in reading scores. Students assigned to National Board

Certified teachers score on average 0.030-0.045 standard deviations higher in reading, but no

higher in math.32

         The estimated impact of the quality of the teacher’s college is uniformly small and, in

general is not statistically significant. The most surprising result is the consistently negative

         31
             In a model applying student and school fixed effects estimated for 4th - 7 th graders Rivkin, Hanushek and
Kain (2005, pp. 444-445) find that novice teachers were associated with math achievement gains of .103 standard
deviations below those for teachers with six or more years of experience; for reading the novice deficit was .045
standard deviations. Rockoff (2004) finds the difference in reading scores between teachers with zero and ten years
to be abo ut .17. Our findings for zer o versus 6-1 2 years of .08 5 and .06 4 for math a nd reading , respectively, are in
this general range.

         32
             These results may appear to conflict Goldhaber and Anthony (2004), which is generally cited as a study
finding significant p ositive effects of N ational Bo ard Certifica tion. A close re ading of that ar ticle, howeve r, reveals
that no direct conflict exists. The Goldhaber and Anthony study finds that teachers who are destined to become
National Board Certified in the future are most effective, and find no significant evidence that teachers who became
certified in the past – the only group flagged in our analysis – are more or less effective than teachers who never
applied for certification. Goldha ber and Anthon y also focus on older N orth Carolina data, from the late 1 990s.

                                                              20
effect of a master’s degree on student achievement. The coefficients suggest that, all else

constant, teachers with master’s degrees are less effective than those without.33

         In contrast to the teacher qualification variables, the coefficients of the teacher race

variables in Table 6 continue to exhibit substantial variation across the specifications with and

without controls for lagged student achievement. Because fixed effects for schools are included,

the difference in coefficients can only be attributable to nonrandom assignment of teachers across

classrooms within schools. In particular, it appears that black teachers tend to teach the lower

performing math students within schools. Evidence for that conclusion emerges from that fact

that once prior year performance is included in the equations, the coefficient for black teachers is

closer to zero and not statistically significant.

          Analogously, the fact that the inclusion of the lagged achievement score eliminates the

statistically significant positive effect of class size that appears in columns 1 and 2 suggests that,

consistent with Lazear’s (2001) theoretical prediction, low performing students may be

disproportionately placed in smaller classes within schools. The absence of class size effects in

columns 3 and 4 does not mean that class size is irrelevant for student achievement. Instead it

simply means that once we use school fixed effects to focus on differences within a school, we

do not observe sufficient variation in class sizes to estimate an effect. This methodology is thus

far better suited to measuring the effects of teachers, which do indeed vary quite significantly




         33
            In analysis not shown here, we find that the more experienced teachers have a far higher probability of
having a ma ster’s degree than do the yo unger teach ers. Further an alysis of the chara cteristics of teach ers who get a
master’s deg ree would be desirab le. One interp retation of these results is that the financia l incentives to ge t a
master’s degree that are embedded in the single salary schedule represented wasted money except insofar as they
keep som e teachers in the profession s o that students c an benefit from their experien ce.



                                                            21
within schools, than to measuring class size effects.34

         Although we have a good bit of confidence in the estimated effects of teacher credentials

that emerge from Table 6, these equations still might not fully address the bias that arises from

within-school sorting. To address that source of bias, we restrict the sample to the schools in

which students were assigned to classrooms in a balanced manner, namely the schools that failed

none of the six P2 tests for random assignment of students. While it is still possible for there to

be some form of nonrandom selection into classrooms in these schools, any such selection would

have to be along a dimension uncorrelated with any of the six characteristics used in our tests.35

If nothing else, the probability of selection on unobservables should be significantly lower in

schools that do not also feature selection on unobservables.

          Tables 1a and 1b compare summary statistics for the overall sample and this evenly

balanced school subsample, which includes roughly 40 percent of the full set of students. In

general, the characteristics of teachers and students in the balanced school subsample are quite

similar to those in the full sample. With respect to the characteristics of teachers, only the racial

characteristics differ between the two samples, with the share of white teachers in the balanced

school subsample being about 2 percentage points higher than the share in the full sample (Table

1a).

          With respect to the two sets of students, a larger number of statistically significant


         34
            By way of comparison, we estimated a school fixed effects model comparable to those in Table 6 using
gains in achievement rather than the lagged dependent form. Except for differences in the first experience term (a
larger effect for math and a smaller one for reading) and a large and significant positive effect for other race teachers,
the estimated effects in the achie vement gain model we re generally clo se to those in the lagged ach ievement m odel.

         35
            Selection alo ng most of the student-level ch aracteristics use d in our chi-sq uared tests is no t an issue in
many of ou r earlier estimate s, since we co ntrol for mo st of those char acteristics direc tly. Rather, our g oal here is to
identify schools that are less likely to select on unobservables ac ross classrooms.

                                                              22
differences emerge, as shown in Table 1b. The students in the balanced school subsample are on

average somewhat more advantaged, in the sense of being more white and have higher prior year

test scores and parents with more education than those in the full sample. Still, the differences

between the two samples are generally quite small in magnitude.

       Table 7 shows the results of regression specifications identical to those in Table 6,

including school fixed effects and student-level covariates, estimated on the balanced school

subsample. Although the smaller sample generates somewhat larger standard errors and hence

coefficients that are somewhat less precisely estimated, the patterns and estimated coefficients

are quite similar to those obtained with the full sample. These findings provide added support

for our previous conclusions about the effects of teacher credentials. The factors associated with

higher student test scores in the full sample, namely teacher experience and teacher licensure test

scores, continue to be significant predictors of achievement, with estimated magnitudes that are

similar across the two samples. As with the full sample, the difference in test scores between

students with novice teachers and those highly experienced teachers is roughly one-tenth of a

standard deviation, with a large portion of these returns to experience occurring within the first

few years of teaching. These experience effects are in the range of those found in other studies

employing similar data, but smaller than the largest estimates.36 In addition, a one-standard

deviation increase in a teacher’s licensure test score now predicts a 0.012 standard deviation in

student achievement in math.

       In both Tables 6 and 7, coefficients exhibit a tendency to be higher when controls for

lagged test scores are introduced as explanatory variables. In Table 7, the higher coefficients are


       36
            See footnote 31, above, for a discussion of estimates found in existing literature.

                                                           23
somewhat troubling as they suggests that lagged test scores are correlated with teacher

characteristics even in schools that appear to be evenly balanced. Note, however, that the fact

that the coefficients are larger rules out the possibility of positive matching in evenly balanced

schools. Instead they suggest that teachers with better credentials in these schoools are being

assigned to less able students. If anything, then, the coefficients we report here are biased

towards zero – the opposite of the typical concern in studies of this nature.37



6. Differential effects by type of student

         How teachers are distributed among schools and across classrooms within schools

relative to students clearly affects the distribution of student achievement. One final question is

whether it also affects the average level of achievement. The answer to this question hinges on

the existence of nonlinearities in the relationship between teacher characteristics and student

achievement.38 To this point, our regression estimates have maintained the assumption that the


         37
            To provide further evidence along these lines, we estimated models analogous to those in Table 7 for the
set of schoo ls that failed one or mo re tests for rand om assignm ent – that is, the set o f schools exc luded from Table 7 .
These estimates are shown in Appendix Table A2. Comparing specifications with and without lagged achievement
test scores reveals substantial evidence of bias associated with positive matching in this sample. The majority of
teacher experience coefficients, for example, decline upon introduction of the lagged dependent variable.
          We also estimated identical specifications using the set of schools where we uniformly failed to reject the
null hypothesis of random assignment using the 20% significance level. Whereas the original 10% criterion produced
a sample about 40% as large as the full sample, the 20% criterion yielded one slightly smaller than one fourth the
original size. Results, shown in Appendix Table A3, show the same pattern of increasing upon introduction of
lagged achievement controls shown in Table 7. The typical coefficient increase is smaller, however, suggesting that
further increases in stringency would prod uce more com plete convergence o f coefficients across specifications.
          Finally, we note that coefficient magnitudes on teache r experience are similar across all spe cifications,
lending grea ter confiden ce to the co nclusion that an y bias remain ing in estimated specifications m ust be small.

         38
            The answer to this question is also sensitive to the measurement of student achievement scores. Indeed,
by testing for nonlinear effects on achievement we are assuming that we have identified a valid measure of
achievement and are measuring it linearly. Nonlinear but monotonic transformations of our achievement test scores
may be equally valid measures of achievement but may also yield very different conclusions regarding the existence
of nonlinear effects. We proceed with this exercise under the presumption that the scale of our achievement measure
is an important one for policy purposes – it is used by the State of North Carolina for the purpose of gauging

                                                             24
effects of teacher qualifications do not vary systematically across types of students. Table 8

summarizes the results of regression specifications that relax this assumption by interacting the

full set of teacher characteristics with particular student characteristics, including subsidized

lunch receipt, parent education, and prior year achievement.39 The regressions are estimated on

the sample of North Carolina elementary schools with evenly balanced classroom assignment

patterns, using covariates identical to those employed in Table 7. The student characteristics are

all defined as 0-1 variables in which 1 denotes greater advantage or ability. The table reports

coefficients and standard errors only for the interaction terms.40

         The first column in Table 8 reveals evidence that math score returns to teacher experience

are significantly larger for students not receiving subsidized lunches – that is, for the more

affluent students. All six interaction terms related to teacher experience are positive. The two

largest interaction terms, identifying the differential impact of teachers with at least 20 years’

experience on students not receiving subsidized lunch, are statistically significant at the 10 and 5

percent level, respectively. 41


progress in schools, and applying positive and negative sanctions to schools and their staff (Clotfelter, Ladd, Vigdor
and Aliaga Diaz 2004).

         39
            In addition to these specifica tions, we estima ted mod els interacting stud ent race (no nwhite vs. white) w ith
teacher characteristics. None of the interaction coefficients in these models was statistically significant. In the
current study we do not examine the related question of whether students learn at higher rates when matched to a
teacher of the same race or gender, an issue that has been examined by Dee (2005).

         40
            Since Tables 7 and 8 both use the evenly balanced school subsample, comparison of the interaction terms
in Table 8 with the corresponding main effects in Table 7 provides some insight as to the impact of teacher
characteristics on the omitted group. For example, the two significant positive coefficients on teacher
experience/non-subsidized lunch student in Table 8 are smaller than the corresponding main effects in Table 7,
indicating that the net impact of teacher experience on subsidized lunch students is still positive. Complete results of
Table 8 are given in A ppendix Table A 4.

         41
            This table shows several significant coefficients associated with teachers from unranked colleges. As
Table 1 a shows, rou ghly 1 perce nt of evenly ba lanced sch ool subsam ple teacher s fall into this catego ry. Thus, this
result quite likely reflects the impact of a very small number of influential observations.

                                                             25
         The second column, which replaces math with reading test scores as a dependent variable

but otherwise replicates the first specification, shows no statistically significant interaction terms.

This general pattern of significant interaction terms for math but not reading is replicated in the

third and fourth columns, where we interact teacher characteristics with a dichotomous variable

measuring parental education. More experienced teachers have a significantly more positive

impact on the math test scores of students with more educated parents: all six interaction terms

are positive, and three are significant at the 10 percent level or above. Children of highly

educated parents also tend to have relatively higher math test scores when assigned to teachers

who are neither black nor “other race,” and who attended unranked colleges.

         The final set of specifications interacts a dichotomous measure of prior achievement,

based on students’ 4th grade test scores, with teacher characteristics. Although all six experience

interactions are once again positive in the math specification, none is statistically significant.42

         To the extent that these results indicate that teachers with stronger credentials are more

effective in raising the achievement of the more advantaged students, they have two important

implications. First, reallocating teachers to students in a manner that offsets the pattern of

positive matching described in Section 4 above would have the likely effect of reducing mean

achievement scores, at least for math and as measured on the scale used in North Carolina.

However, the normative implications of this finding are unclear, for at least three reasons: we do

not know how units of test scores correspond to actual skill accumulation at various points along

the skill distribution; we do not know how fifth grade achievement affects lifetime skill


         42
           Among the other results, it appears that Hispanic teachers have a comparative advantage in educating
lower-perfo rming studen ts. Since the eve nly balanced school sub sample co ntains only a han dful of Hisp anic
teachers (see Table 1a), these results should be interpreted with extreme caution.

                                                         26
accumulation; and we lack the broader measure of social welfare that would allow us to value

skill enhancements. Thus any compelling welfare assessment is obviously well beyond the scope

of this paper.

         The second implication follows from the first: particularly in a regime that attaches

incentives to the mean level of achievement within a school, school administrators may well

consider positive matching to be consistent with their own objectives. Thus, the fact that we

observe positive matching in equilibrium can be attributed to four forces: the desire of teachers

to find more amenable working conditions, the desire of parents to maximize the quality of their

children’s education, the desire of administrators to please potentially vocal parents, and the

desire of administrators to maximize mean achievement. This confluence of objectives may

explain why the alternative pattern of negative matching, which would be expected in a regime

that supported a progressive distribution of teacher and other resources among students, is not the

empirical norm.43



7. Conclusions

         The tendencies for teachers to seek out more congenial working environments and for

parents to seek out desirable schools and teachers for their children are common features of

public schools as we know them. Together, they usually produce a “positive matching” of

students to teachers, in which affluent or high-achieving students end up in classrooms taught by



         43
           It is worth noting th at some sch ool acco untability prog rams, includin g for examp le the federal N o Child
Left Behind Act, with its attention to the academ ic progress of subgrou ps within each school, co uld conce ivably
provide a counterweight by inducing administrators to pay closer attention to the achievement of less advantaged
children.

                                                            27
better-credentialed teachers. This positive matching has the effect of confounding efforts to

estimate the relationship between teacher characteristics and student achievement. To our

knowledge, no previous studies have identified and measured both of these sources of positive

matching. Our results indicate that the positive correlations between the strength of teacher

qualifications and student achievement observed in cross-sectional data are driven largely by

sorting of teachers and students across schools and, to a lesser extent, within schools.

         This paper illustrates, however, how detailed administrative data can be used to help

disentangle omitted variable bias from true causal effects. Such data allow one to control for a

rich set of covariates including school fixed effects, and to restrict the analysis to schools that

feature a relatively balanced distribution of student observable characteristics across classrooms.

Results suggest that the within-school matching is relatively minor in North Carolina, implying

that specifications with school fixed effects ameliorate most concerns regarding selection bias.

         We also find that the only teacher qualifications that consistently predict improved

student performance are experience and licensure test scores. For the typical student, the benefit

from having a highly experienced teacher is approximately one-tenth of a standard deviation on

reading and math test scores. and roughly half of this return occurs for the first one or two years

of teaching experience.44 With respect to teacher licensure scores, a one-standard-deviation

increase in scores increases predicted student achievement in math by 1 to 2 percent of a standard

deviation. These results suggest that achievement-maximizing school administrators operating in

a competitive teacher labor market would clearly reward experience, as is the current norm.



         44
          It is unclear whether this return to early teacher experience reflects true gains in teacher quality or
nonrandom attrition by low-quality teachers. See Rockoff (2004) for a discussion of this topic.

                                                          28
Rewarding other characteristics, such as advanced degrees and National Board Certification,

would be productive only if such rewards create indirect impacts, such as by inducing teachers to

remain in the profession.

       Using our subsample of evenly balanced schools, we find suggestive evidence that returns

to teacher experience in the form of higher student test scores are consistently larger in math,

although not in reading, for the more socioeconomically advantaged and more able students.

This pattern supports the view that positive teacher-student matching increases the average level

of student achievement in math and may help explain why school administrators have not been

more vigorous in counteracting the positive matching that results from sorting.

       It is worth reiterating that this conclusion about the trade-offs in the allocation of teachers

to students with differing characteristics says nothing about the social valuation of those

tradeoffs. Though it appears that efforts to offset the positive matching of teachers and students

would reduce overall mean achievement in math as measured by test scores, the implications for

social policy depend on at least two additional factors. First, the existence of complementarities

in skill formation over a student’s school career could militate in the direction of more

investment for disadvantaged students, as suggested by Cunha, Heckman, Lochner and Masterov

(2005). Second, because the ultimate outcomes of social interest are not test scores but rather a

broader set of life chances it may well be appropriate to attach greater weight to achievement

gains at the low end of the distribution. Thus, any social valuation of the trade-offs involved

with positive matching require further debate and discussion by social scientists and policy

makers.




                                                 29
References

Aaronson, D., L. Barrow and W. Sander. (2003) “Teachers and Student Achievement in the
Chicago Public High Schools.” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago manuscript.

Altonji, J.G., T.E. Elder and C.R. Taber (2002) “Selection on Observed and Unobserved
Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools.” Northwestern University
manuscript.

Ballou, D., W. Sanders and P. Wright (2004) “Controlling for Student Background in Value-
Added Assessment of Teachers,” Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics 29 (Spring),
37-66.

Becker, H.S. (1952) “The Career of the Chicago Public Schoolteacher,” American Journal of
Sociology v.57 pp.470-477.

Betts, J.R. (1996) “Is There a Link between School Inputs and Earnings? Fresh Scrutiny of an
Old Literature.” In Gary Burtless, ed., Does Money Matter: The Effect of School Resources on
Student Achievement and Adult Success. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, pp. 141-
191.

Betts, J.R., A. Zau and L. Rice (2003) Determinants of Student Achievement: Evidence from San
Diego. San Francisco: Public Policy Institute of California.

Boardman, E.E. and R.J. Murnane. (1979) “Using Panel Data to Improve Estimates of the
Determinants of Educational Achievement.” Sociology of Education v.52 pp.113-121.

Bogart, W. T., and B. A. Cromwell. (2000) “How Much is a Neighborhood School Worth?”
Journal of Urban Economics 47: 280-305.

Card , D. and A.B. Krueger. (1992) “Does School Quality Matter? Returns to Education and the
Characteristics of Public Schools in the United States.” Journal of Political Economy v.100 pp.1-
40.

Clotfelter, C.T., H.F. Ladd, and J.L. Vigdor. (2003) “Segregation and Resegregation in North
Carolina's Public School Classrooms,” North Carolina Law Review v.81 pp.1463-1511.

Clotfelter, C.T., H.F. Ladd, and J.L. Vigdor (2004) “Who Teaches Whom? Race and the
Distribution of Novice Teachers.” Forthcoming, Economics of Education Review.

Clotfeter, C.T., H.F. Ladd, J.L. Vigdor and R.A. Aliaga Diaz (2004) “Do School Accountability
Systems Make It More Difficult for Low Performing Schools to Attract and Retain High Quality
Teachers?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management v.23 pp.251-271.


                                               30
Coleman, J.S. et al. (1966) Equality of Educational Opportunity. Washington: Office of
Education, US Department of Health, Education and Welfare.

Cunha, F., J.J. Heckman, L. Lochner, and D.V. Masterov (2005) “Interpreting the Evidence on
Life Cycle Skill Formation,” NBER Working Paper 11331, May 2005.

Dee, T.S., “A Teacher Like Me: Does Race, Ethnicity, or Gender Matter?” American Economic
Review 95 (May 2005), 158-165.

Freeman, C., B. Scafidi, and D. Sjoquist. (2002) “Racial Segregation in Georgia Public Schools,
1994-2001: Trends, Causes, and Impact on Teacher Quality,” Fiscal Research Program Report
77, Georgia State University.

Goldhaber, D. and E. Anthony (2004) “Can Teacher Quality be Effectively Assessed?” Urban
Institute Working Paper.

Goldhaber, D.D. and D.Brewer (2000) “Does Teacher Certification Matter? High School Teacher
Certification Status and Student Achievement.” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis v.22
pp.129-45.

Hanushek, E.A. (1986) “The Economics of Schooling: Production and Efficiency in Public
Schools,” Journal of Economic Literature v.24 pp.1141-1177.

Hanushek, E.A. (1997). Assessing the Effects of School Resources on Student Performance: An
Update. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 19(2): 141-164.

Hanushek, E.A. (2002) “Publicly Provided Education,” NBER Working Paper 8799, February.

Hanushek, E. A., J. F. Kain, D. M. O’Brien and S.G. Rivkin (2005) “The Market for Teacher
Quality,” unpublished paper, Stanford University, January.

Hausman, J. (1978) “Specification Tests in Econometrics.” Econometrica v.46 pp.1251-1271.

Hollingshead, August B. (1949) Elmtown’s Youth: The Impact of Social Classes on Adolescents
New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.

Hui, T. Keung. (2003). “It’s teacher shopping season: Principals gently wield veto power over
parents who request popular teachers.” News and Observer, July 15, p. 1.
(newsobserver.com/front/story/2694508p-2498214c.html).

Krueger, A.B. (1999) “Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics v.114 pp.497-532.



                                              31
LaLonde, R.J. (1986) “Evaluating the Econometric Evaluations of Training Programs with
Experimental Data,” American Economic Review 76 (September), 604-620.

Lankford, H., S. Loeb, and J. Wyckoff. (2002) “Teacher Sorting and the Plight of Urban
Schools,” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis v.24 pp.37-62.

Lalonde, R., "Evaluating the Econometric Evaluations of Training Programs with experimental
Data," American Economic Review 76, 604-620

Lareau, A. (1987) “Social Class Differences in Family-School Relationships: The Importance of
Cultural Capital,” Sociology of Education v.60 pp.73-85.

Lareau, A. (2000) Home Advantage. (Lanham: Rowman and Littlefield Publishers).

Mont, Daniel and Daniel I. Rees. (1996) “The Influence of Classroom Characteristics on High
School Teacher Turnover,” Economic Inquiry 34 (January), 152-167.

Morgan, P.R. and J.M. McPartland. (1981) “The Extent of Classroom Segregation within
Desegregated Schools.” Unpublished manuscript, Johns Hopkins University, Center for Social
Organization of Schools. August.

Mickelson, R.A., (2001) “Subverting Swann: First- and Second-Generation Segregation in the
Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools,” American Education Research Journal, v.38 pp.215-252.

Mont, D. and D.I. Rees (1996) “The Influence of Classroom Characteristics on High School
Teacher Turnover,” Economic Inquiry v.34 pp.152-167.

Murnane, R. and R. Olsen. (1989) “Will There be Enough Teachers?” American Economic
Review v.79 pp.242-246.

Nye, B., S. Konstantopoulos, and L.V. Hedges (2004) “How Large Are Teacher Effects?”
Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis v.26 n.3

Oakes, J. (1995) “Ability Grouping, Tracking and Within-School Segregation in New Castle
County Schools,” Report to the U.S. district Court for the District of Delaware in the case of
Coalition to Save our Children v. State Board of Education, et al. December 9, 1994 (corrected
January 1, 1995).

Public Education Association (New York City). (1955) The Status of the Public School
Education of Negro and Puerto Rican Children in New York City, Board of Education
Commission on Integration, October.

Rivkin, S.G., E.A. Hanushek, and J.F. Kain (2005) “Teachers, Schools and Academic


                                              32
Achievement.” Econometrica v.79 pp.418-458.

Rockoff, J.E. (2004) “The Impact of Individual Teachers on Student Achievement: Evidence
from Panel Data,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings (May 2004), 247-252.

Reed, D. and K. Rueben, 2002 “Teacher Turnover in California,” unpublished paper, Public
Policy Institute of California, October 31, 2002.

Sieber, R. T. (1982) “The Politics of Middle Class Success in an Inner-City Public School,”
Boston University Journal of Education v.30 pp.30-47.

Summers, A.A. and B.L. Wolfe (1977) “Do Schools Make A Difference?” American Economic
Review v.67 pp.639-652.

Tiebout, C. M. (1956) “A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures,” Journal of Political Economy 64
(October), 416-424.

Todd, P.E. and K.I. Wolpin (2003) “On the Specification and Estimation of the Production
Function for Cognitive Achievement,” Economic Journal 113 (February), F3-F33.

g:\teachq\papers\tsjhr-ctcrev




                                               33
              Table 1a: Summary Statistics for 5th grade teachers in North Carolina
                                            Full sample             Evenly balanced school
                                            (N=3,223)                subsample (N=1,287)
Percent female                                 90.32                         91.30
Percent white                                  84.64                        86.48**
Percent black                                  14.24                        12.43**
Percent Hispanic                                0.22                          0.31
Percent with:
   0 years experience                           7.38                          7.46
     1-2 years experience                      13.34                         13.52
     3-5 years experience                      15.02                         14.30
     6-12 years experience                     21.84                         22.84
     13-20 years experience                    16.29                         16.47
     20-27 years experience                    17.00                         15.77
     More than 27 years experience              9.12                          9.63
Percent with licensure test scores:
   1 std. dev. or more below mean              17.84                         16.86
     Within 1 std. dev. of mean                72.54                         73.82
     1 std. dev. or more above mean             9.62                          9.32
Percent graduating from college:
   Ranked as very competitive                   9.22                          9.17
     Ranked as competitive                     53.74                         55.17
     Ranked as less competitive                36.18                         34.65
     Not ranked by Barron’s                     0.87                          1.01
Percent National Board Certified                3.35                          3.26
Percent with advanced degree                   23.67                         23.85
**
  denotes a statistic that differs between the evenly balanced school subsample and residual set
of North Carolina elementary schools at the 5% significance level.



                                               34
                   Table 1b. Summary Statistics for 5th grade students in North Carolina (N=60,791)
                                                          Full sample             Evenly ba lanced sch ool subsam ple
                                                          (N=60,791)                          (N=24,824)
Percent fem ale                                              49.88                                49.67
Percent w hite                                               62.51                               65.46**
Percent black                                                29.93                              27.25**
Percent H ispanic                                             3.19                                 3.26
Percent free/reduced price lunch                             41.91                              40.19**
Percent labeled as gifted                                    16.56                                16.83
Percent labeled as handicapped                               10.66                                10.90
Percent limited English proficient                            1.22                               1.33**
                th
Percent with 4 grade test score
  1 std. dev. or more below mean                             16.07                              15.14**
   Within 1 std. dev. of mean                                67.10                                66.93
   1 std. dev. or more above mean                            16.83                              17.93**
Percent who have repeated a grade                             1.08                                 1.12
Percent with parental education:
   No high school diploma                                    10.24                              11.15**
   High schoo l diploma o nly                                51.04                              48.45**
   Some post secondary                                       13.75                              14.12**
   College graduate                                          25.00                              26.28**
Percent reporting homework time:
  None                                                        1.57                                 1.53
  Less than 1 hour per week                                  25.72                              24.98**
  1-3 hours per week                                         39.65                              40.15**
  3-5 hours per week                                         16.85                                17.08
  5-10 hours per week                                        13.11                                13.07
  More than 10 hours per week                                 3.10                                 3.19
Percent re porting ho me PC use:
   Almost every day                                           5.03                                 5.05
   Once or twice a week                                      11.67                                11.56
   Once or tw ice a month                                    17.27                                17.18
   Hardly ever                                               29.35                                29.64
   Never                                                     18.70                                18.80
   No computer at home                                       17.98                                17.77
Percent reporting reading:
  No free time spent reading                                  6.20                                 6.05
  30 minutes per day                                         45.87                              44.95**
  1 hour per day                                             25.17                               26.17**
  1-2 hours per day                                          15.24                                15.32
  More than 2 hours per day                                   7.52                                 7.50
Percent reporting T V use
   None                                                       4.84                                 4.89
   Less than 1 hour per day                                  28.48                               29.23**
   2 hours per day                                           25.84                                25.98
   3 hours per day                                           18.64                                18.78
   4-5 hours per day                                         12.94                                12.62*
   6 hours or m ore per d ay                                   9.26                               8.49**
** *
  ( ) denotes a statistic that differs betw een the even ly balanced school sub sample an d residual se t of North
Carolina e lementary sch ools at the 5% (10%) significance leve l.




                                                          35
36
 Table 2. Evidence of across-school sorting: Characteristics of students taught by the typical
     teacher having specified qualification, North Carolina schools offering 5th grade
Teacher qualification             Percent        Percent not       Percent with      Mean prior
                                   white          receiving      parents who are      year test
                                                 subsidized      college graduate     score (Z)
                                                    lunch             parents
Teacher experience:
  0 to 1 year                       58.0            51.8               22.9            -0.134
   2 to 5 years                     58.2            54.4               23.8            -0.072
   6 or more years                  62.8            54.5               23.5             0.000
Barron’s College Rank:
  Less competitive                  53.7            49.8               20.3            -0.206
   Competitive                      64.4            57.1               24.4             0.118
   Very competitive                 59.3            58.2               30.4             0.126
   Not Ranked                       58.8            53.5               24.9            -0.047
Licensure test score:
   Z-score < -1                     51.2            46.4               18.2            -0.306
   -1 < Z-score < 1                 62.9            56.0               24.3             0.054
   Z-score > 1                      66.2            58.4               26.8             0.158
Nat’l Board Certification
  No                                61.0            54.4               23.4             0.000
   Yes                              65.0            57.6               23.8            -0.002
Advanced Degree
  No                                60.0            53.5               22.9            -0.043
   Yes                              64.9            57.8               25.2             13.8


Overall mean                        61.1            54.5               23.5             0.000
Note: For teachers with a given qualification, table entries are averages of school-wide figures
computed over those schools with at least one such teacher. Using F-tests, the hypothesis that
student characteristics are equal across teacher qualification categories is rejected in all but
the following cases: teacher experience and percent of students with parents who are college
graduates; teacher National Board Certification and all four student characteristics.


                                               37
Table 3: Evidence of within-school sorting: classroom characteristics for teachers with varying
 qualifications, relative to school, North Carolina schools with more than one 5th grade class
Teacher characteristic             Percent        Percent not      Percent with       Mean prior
                                    white          receiving      parents who are      year test
                                                  subsidized          college          score (Z)
                                                     lunch           graduates
Teacher experience:
  0 to 1 year                       0.99             0.97               0.94*           -0.050
   2 to 5 years                     1.01             1.00               1.00             0.004
   6 or more years                  1.00             1.00               1.00             0.009
Barron’s College Rank:
  Less competitive                  1.00             1.00               0.98            -0.052*
   Competitive                      0.99             0.99               1.00             0.017
   Very competitive                 1.04             1.00               1.07             0.052*
   Not Ranked                       0.97             0.87               1.08            -0.184
Licensure test score:
   Z-score < -1                    0.98***           0.98               0.94*          -0.133***
   -1 < Z-score < 1                 1.01             1.01               1.00             0.023
   Z-score > 1                      1.01             1.00               1.08            0.075**
Nat’l Board Certification
  No                                1.00             1.00               0.99            -0.006
   Yes                              1.06             1.11*             1.23**           0.182**
Advanced Degree
  No                                1.00             1.00               1.00             0.004
   Yes                              0.99             0.98               1.00             -0.011
Note: For teachers with a given qualification, table entries in the first three columns are ratios
of classroom characteristics to school-wide averages. Table entries in the last column are
mean differences between classroom and school-average test scores.
***
    denotes a ratio or mean difference significantly different from one at the 1% level; ** the 5%
level; * the 10% level.




                                               38
        Table 4: Summary of Chi-squared tests of random assignment of students across 5th
                            classrooms within elementary schools
Number of tests failed                               Number of             Percent of schools
                                                      schools
0 of 6                                                   521                      44.9
1 of 6                                                   326                      28.1
2 of 6                                                   163                      14.1
3 of 6                                                    75                       6.5
4 of 6                                                   41                        3.5
5 of 6                                                   14                        1.2
6 of 6                                                    0                        0.0


Total                                                   1,160                     100.0
Note: This table reports the results of Chi-squared tests of the null hypothesis that students are
randomly distributed across classrooms within schools along six different observable student
characteristics: race, gender, subsidized lunch receipt, parental education, previous year test
score, and previous year school attendance. The tests are based on data on the composition of
classes for up to three grades in each school; significance is based on the 10 percent level.
See text for further details.




                                                39
               Table 5 : Basic estima tes of teacher q ualification effects, w ith and withou t student contr ols
                               No student covariates                          Including student covariates
                                                            Omitting lagged achievement Including lagged achievement
 Indepen dent Var iable
                               Math           Reading            Math           Reading            Math               Reading

Black teacher                -0.248***        -0.244***         0.061***        -0.059***         -0.019                  -0.016
                              [0.026]          [0.025]          [0.017]          [0.015]          [0.014]                 [0.011]
Hispanic teacher               0.181            0.284*           0.069            0.062            -0.06                   0.072
                              [0.141]          [0.151]          [0.101]          [0.066]          [0.070]                 [0.046]
Other race teacher           -0.243***        -0.294***         0.134***        -0.181***         -0.051              -0.097**
                              [0.081]          [0.080]          [0.049]          [0.048]          [0.043]             [0.045]
Male teacher                 -0.057**         -0.090***          0.007           -0.031**          0.004              -0.034***
                             [0.027]           [0.025]          [0.019]          [0.016]          [0.014]              [0.012]
Teacher exp erience (base=0 yea rs)
1-2 years experience          0.060 *           0.046            0.029            0.017           0.058***            0.046***
                              [0.035]          [0.032]          [0.023]          [0.020]          [0.019]             [0.015]
3-5 years experience         0.108 ***         0.081**          0.074***         0.049**          0.082***            0.055***
                             [0.035]           [0.032]          [0.023]          [0.020]          [0.018]             [0.015]
6-12 years experience         0.170 ***        0.142***         0.084***         0.064***         0.086***            0.067***
                              [0.034]          [0.030]          [0.022]          [0.019]          [0.018]             [0.014]
13-20 years                   0.181 ***        0.178***         0.085***         0.085***         0.077***            0.078***
experience                    [0.035]          [0.032]          [0.023]          [0.020]          [0.018]             [0.015]
20-27 years                   0.179 ***        0.172***         0.086***         0.086***         0.093***            0.091***
experience                    [0.035]          [0.032]          [0.023]          [0.020]          [0.018]             [0.015]
>27 years experience          0.160 ***        0.147***         0.094***         0.081***         0.104***            0.092***
                              [0.039]          [0.035]          [0.026]          [0.023]          [0.021]             [0.017]
Quality of teacher's college (base=less competitive)
competitive college           0.083 ***        0.097***          0.01            0.026***          0.000                   0.014*
                              [0.018]          [0.016]          [0.012]          [0.010]          [0.009]                 [0.007]
very competitive              0.123 ***        0.111***          0.028            0.025            0.024                   0.017
college                       [0.031]          [0.029]          [0.019]          [0.017]          [0.015]                 [0.013]
unranked college              -0.018            0.019           -0.023            0.003           -0.032                  -0.003
                              [0.094]          [0.096]          [0.053]          [0.048]          [0.041]                 [0.043]
Teache r with                  0.010            0.015           -0.028**         -0.023**         -0.028***           -0.023***
advanced degree               [0.020]          [0.018]          [0.013]          [0.011]           [0.010]             [0.008]
Teacher Nat'l Board            0.026            0.035            0.004            0.018            0.008                   0.024
Certified                     [0.047]          [0.041]          [0.031]          [0.022]          [0.024]                 [0.016]
Teacher's licensure           0.060 ***        0.048***         0.023***         0.015***         0.018***                0.011**
test score                    [0.010]          [0.009]          [0.007]          [0.006]          [0.005]                 [0.004]
Class size                    0.017 ***        0.018***         -0.001            0.001           -0.002                     0
                              [0.003]          [0.002]          [0.002]          [0.001]          [0.001]                 [0.001]
Student covariates              No               No                Yes             Yes              Yes                    Yes
Lagged student                  No               No                No               No              Yes                    Yes
achievem ent controls
Observations                  68,421           68,071           61,509            61,242           60,656                 60,502
    2
R                              0.027            0.026            0.484            0.449            0.724                   0.687
                                                                                                       * **         ***
Note: stand ard errors , in square br ackets, have been cor rected for w ithin-classroom clustering. , , and denote
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels. Demographic controls include gender, race, and free/reduced price lunch
status. Extended set of controls includes categorical measures of computer use, time spent free reading, time spent
watching TV, parental education, and time spent on homework. Coefficients on extended student controls are
presented in Appendix table A1.


                                                              40
                     Table 6 . Effects of teach er qualification s, with school fixe d effects, full samp le
                                                      Omitting lagged achievement            Including lagged achievement
Indepen dent Var iable                                   Math               Reading              Math             Reading
Black teacher                                           0.030**             -0.020              -0.016            -0.007
                                                        [0.014]             [0.013]             [0.011]           [0.010]
Hispanic teacher                                         0.129              0.165***             0.026             0.052
                                                        [0.107]             [0.046]             [0.069]           [0.045]
Other race teacher                                       0.009                0.02               0.018             0.022
                                                        [0.044]             [0.050]             [0.034]           [0.030]
Male teacher                                             0.019              -0.022*              0.016            -0.023**
                                                        [0.014]             [0.013]             [0.011]           [0.009]
Teacher exp erience (base=0 yea rs)
1-2 years experience                               0.052***                 0.035**             0.051***          0.035***
                                                   [0.018]                  [0.017]             [0.014]           [0.013]
3-5 years experience                               0.077***                 0.045***            0.078***          0.046***
                                                   [0.018]                  [0.017]             [0.014]           [0.013]
6-12 years experience                              0.075***                 0.047***            0.076***          0.051***
                                                   [0.018]                  [0.017]             [0.014]           [0.013]
13-20 years experience                             0.084***                 0.059***            0.089***          0.065***
                                                   [0.019]                  [0.018]             [0.015]           [0.014]
20-27 years experience                             0.096***                 0.077***            0.096***          0.079***
                                                   [0.018]                  [0.017]             [0.014]           [0.013]
>27 years experience                               0.076***                 0.051***            0.090***          0.067***
                                                   [0.020]                  [0.019]             [0.016]           [0.014]
Quality of teacher's college (base=less competitive)
competitive college                                      0.011               0.017*              0.004              0.008
                                                        [0.010]             [0.009]             [0.008]            [0.007]
very competitive college                                 0.022               0.014               0.013              0.002
                                                        [0.016]             [0.014]             [0.012]            [0.011]
unranked college                                         0.026               0.033               0.000              0.011
                                                        [0.040]             [0.037]             [0.027]            [0.032]
Teacher with advanced degree                            -0.023**            -0.024**            -0.016**          -0.018***
                                                        [0.010]             [0.009]             [0.008]            [0.007]
Teacher Nat'l Board Certified                            0.012               0.045**             -0.004             0.030*
                                                        [0.023]              [0.020]            [0.018]            [0.016]
Teacher's licensure test score                          0.017***             0.010**            0.012***            0.005
                                                        [0.005]              [0.005]            [0.004]            [0.004]
Class size                                              0.006**               0.005*              0.002             0.001
                                                        [0.003]              [0.003]            [0.002]            [0.002]
Student covariates                                        Yes                  Yes                 Yes               Yes
School fixe d effects                                      Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes
Lagged stu dent achiev ement con trols                     No                  No                  Yes                  Yes
Observations                                             61,509              61,242              60,656            60,502
R2                                                        0.538               0.486               0.756             0.707
                                                                                                           * **   ***
Note: stand ard errors , in square br ackets, have been cor rected for w ithin-classroom clustering. , , and denote
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels. Demographic controls include gender, race, and free/reduced price
lunch status. Extended set of controls includes categorical measures of computer use, time spent free reading, time
spent watching TV, parental education, and time spent on homework.




                                                                 41
       Table 7 Effects of teach er qualification s, with school fixe d effects; evenly b alanced sc hool subsa mple
                                                  Omitting lagged achievement           Including lagged achievement
Indepen dent variab le                                Math             Reading              Math             Reading
Black teacher                                         0.021             -0.009             -0.008              0.005
                                                     [0.022]            [0.020]            [0.018]            [0.016]
Hispanic teacher                                      0.098              0.056             -0.084              0.057
                                                     [0.113]            [0.070]            [0.094]            [0.059]
Other race teacher                                    0.058              0.042             -0.054              0.042
                                                     [0.068]            [0.056]            [0.057]            [0.042]
Male teacher                                          0.012             -0.022             -0.006             -0.011
                                                     [0.022]            [0.018]            [0.018]            [0.013]
Teacher exp erience (base=0 yea rs)
1-2 years experience                                0.049**              0.001            0.066***             0.017
                                                    [0.023]             [0.022]            [0.020]            [0.017]
3-5 years experience                               0.078***              0.035            0.080***            0.035*
                                                    [0.025]             [0.022]            [0.021]            [0.018]
6-12 years experience                               0.055**              0.034            0.085***           0.064***
                                                    [0.025]             [0.022]            [0.020]            [0.018]
13-20 years experience                             0.081***              0.037            0.113***           0.073***
                                                    [0.026]             [0.024]            [0.022]            [0.019]
20-27 years experience                             0.084***            0.064***           0.101***           0.080***
                                                    [0.024]             [0.022]            [0.021]            [0.018]
>27 years experience                               0.108***            0.070***           0.130***           0.095***
                                                    [0.028]             [0.024]            [0.023]            [0.020]
Quality of teacher's college (base=less competitive)
competitive college                                  -0.011              0.01              -0.013              0.006
                                                     [0.014]            [0.012]            [0.012]            [0.010]
very competitive college                             -0.023             -0.002             -0.005              0.009
                                                     [0.024]            [0.019]            [0.020]            [0.014]
unranked college                                     -0.022              0.072             -0.067*             0.027
                                                     [0.058]            [0.053]            [0.039]            [0.041]
Teacher with advanced degree                         -0.023             -0.009            -0.023**            -0.007
                                                     [0.014]            [0.013]            [0.012]            [0.010]
Teacher Nat'l Board Certified                        -0.044             -0.004             -0.035              0.005
                                                     [0.032]            [0.025]            [0.028]            [0.023]
Teacher's licensure test score                       0.012*              0.001             0.012*              0.002
                                                     [0.007]            [0.007]            [0.006]            [0.006]
Class size                                            0.008              0.003              0.006              0.002
                                                     [0.005]            [0.005]            [0.004]            [0.003]
Student covariates                                     Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
School fixe d effects                                  Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
Lagged stu dent achiev ement con trols                 No                 No                 Yes                Yes
Observations                                         25,147             25,045             24,768             24,711
R2                                                    0.553              0.496              0.766              0.708
Note: stand ard errors , in square br ackets, have been cor rected for w ithin-classroom clustering. *, **, and *** d enote
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels. Demographic controls include gender, race, and free/reduced price
lunch status. Extended set of controls includes categorical measures of computer use, time spent free reading, time
spent watching TV, parental education, and time spent on homework. Sample is restricted to the 521 elementary
schools for which chi-square tests fail to reject the hypothesis of random assignment along six dimensions: race,
gender, parent education, prior year test score, whether a student attended the same school in the previous year, and
free/reduce d price lunc h receipt.



                                                              42
                              Table 8: Do teacher qualification effects vary across students?

Student characteristics:                    Free/reduced price             Parent ed ucation:            4 th grade test score:
                                              lunch: no = 1                    high =1                   above average = 1.
Teacher cred entials:                       Math          Reading          Math         Reading          Math          Reading
Black teacher                              -0.019          0.002          -0.041*         0.002         -0.038          -0.013
                                           [0.023]        [0.026]         [0.023]        [0.028]        [0.028]         [0.032]
Hispanic teacher                           -0.059         -0.016          -0.084         -0.102         -0.221**       -0.234***
                                           [0.097]        [0.200]         [0.085]        [0.163]        [0.060]         [0.109]
Other race teacher                         -0.065          0.009         -0.178**        -0.091          0.071           0.164
                                           [0.061]        [0.102]        [0.078]         [0.072]        [0.081]         [0.111]
Male teacher                                0.010          0.010           0.014         -0.022          0.020           0.013
                                           [0.029]        [0.029]         [0.024]        [0.026]        [0.031]         [0.035]
Teacher experience (base is no experience)
        1-2 years                           0.021          0.012           0.039         -0.016          0.021          -0.039
                                           [0.032]        [0.038]         [0.029]        [0.036]        [0.037]         [0.042]
        3-5 years                           0.038          0.050           0.033         -0.043          0.057          -0.041
                                           [0.032]        [0.036]         [0.029]        [0.034]        [0.036]         [0.039]
        6-12 years                          0.015          0.018           0.041         -0.011          0.042          -0.055
                                           [0.029]        [0.035]         [0.028]        [0.033]        [0.035]         [0.038]
        13-20 years                         0.030          0.020          0.055*         -0.026          0.026          -0.091
                                           [0.031]        [0.037]         [0.029]        [0.035]        [0.037]         [0.041]
        20-27 years                        0.062 **       -0.003         0.083***        -0.028          0.053         -0.052**
                                           [0.030]        [0.036]        [0.029]         [0.035]        [0.036]        [0.041]
        >27 years                           0.063 *        0.054          0.068**        -0.004          0.046          -0.012
                                           [0.034]        [0.040]         [0.034]        [0.037]        [0.042]         [0.042]
Quality of undergraduate institution (Base is less competitive college)
        competitive college                 0.022         -0.017           0.015         -0.014         0.048**          0.030
                                           [0.016]        [0.017]         [0.016]        [0.017]        [0.019]         [0.021]
        very competitive college           -0.021          -0.019         -0.003          0.002          -0.027         -0.019
                                           [0.029]         [0.027]        [0.028]        [0.025]         [0.031]        [0.033]
        unranked college                   0.163 ***        0.019         0.095*         -0.013          0.111*          0.031
                                           [0.061]         [0.064]        [0.049]        [0.056]         [0.061]        [0.077]
Teacher Nat’l Board Certified               0.040           0.001         -0.027          0.029          -0.031          0.001
                                           [0.035]         [0.048]        [0.032]        [0.041]         [0.054]        [0.063]
Teacher with advanced degree                0.010           0.003          0.009          0.004          -0.005          0.026
                                           [0.017]         [0.018]        [0.018]        [0.018]         [0.021]        [0.021]
Teacher’s licensure test score              0.002          -0.002          0.003         -0.014           0.016          0.014
                                           [0.009]         [0.009]        [0.009]        [0.009]         [0.011]        [0.012]


N                                           24,768         24,711         24,970          24,912         25,147         25.045
    2
R                                           0.766           0.708          0.765          0.707           0.654          0.590
Note: Table entries are coefficients on the interaction terms between the teacher characteristic listed in the first column and the
student characteristic named at the top of each row. Standard errors, in square brackets, have been corrected for within-classroom
clustering. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels. Sample is restricted to the 521 elementary schools
for which chi-square tests fail to reject the hypothesis of random assignment along six dimensions: race, gender, parent education,
prior year test score, whether a student attended the same school in the previous year, and free/reduced price lunch receipt.
Regressions also control for all covariates used in Table 7, including school fixed effects and lagged achievement.


                                                               43
Figure 1: Distribution of p-values for parent education chi-squared tests
Figure 2: Distribution of p-values for race chi-squared tests.




                             45
Figure 3: Distribution of p-values for subsidized lunch chi-square tests.




                                   46
                         Table A1: Coefficients on student-level covariates, Table 6 specifications
Indepen dent Var iable                                Math             Reading              Math      Reading
Male                                                 0.074 ***
                                                                       -0.030 ***
                                                                                          0.065 ***
                                                                                                      -0.040***
                                                     [0.006]           [0.006]            [0.004]     [0.005]
Black                                                -0.328***         -0.323***          -0.059***   -0.052***
                                                     [0.008]           [0.009]            [0.006]     [0.007]
Hispanic                                              -0.026             -0.013           0.026**     0.046***
                                                     [0.018]            [0.020]           [0.013]     [0.015]
Other                                                 0.021            -0.053***          0.063***     -0.007
                                                     [0.017]           [0.016]            [0.012]     [0.012]
Gifted                                               1.038***          0.782***           0.336***    0.078***
                                                     [0.009]           [0.008]            [0.008]     [0.007]
Handicapped                                          -0.457***         -0.645***           0.018**    -0.166***
                                                     [0.011]           [0.013]            [0.008]     [0.009]
Limited English proficient                           -0.254***         -0.550***           0.079***   -0.153***
                                                     [0.026]           [0.031]             [0.020]    [0.025]
Free/reduced price lunch recipient                   -0.139***         -0.174***          -0.027***   -0.061***
                                                     [0.008]           [0.008]            [0.005]     [0.006]
Repeated grade                                       -0.215***         -0.261***          -0.636***   -0.676***
                                                     [0.025]           [0.031]            [0.025]     [0.028]
Lagged parental education(omitted=no HS diploma)
High scho ol diplom a only                           0.228***           0.298***           0.038***   0.105***
                                                     [0.010]            [0.012]            [0.008]    [0.009]
Some post secondary                                  0.345***           0.434***           0.059***   0.145***
                                                     [0.013]            [0.015]            [0.009]    [0.011]
College gr aduate                                    0.539***           0.593***           0.138***   0.188***
                                                     [0.013]            [0.014]            [0.009]    [0.011]
Report homework time (omitted=none)
Less than 1 hour per week                            0.199***           0.216***           0.079***   0.088***
                                                     [0.024]            [0.029]            [0.018]    [0.021]
1-3 hours per week                                   0.314***           0.320***           0.123***   0.121***
                                                     [0.024]            [0.028]            [0.018]    [0.021]
3-5 hours per week                                   0.405***           0.366***           0.172***   0.124***
                                                     [0.025]            [0.029]            [0.019]    [0.021]
5-10 hours per week                                  0.455***           0.380***           0.210***   0.128***
                                                     [0.025]            [0.029]            [0.019]    [0.022]
More than 10 hours per week                          0.401***           0.320***           0.216***   0.125***
                                                     [0.029]            [0.034]            [0.021]    [0.025]
Reported home PC use (om itted=almost every day):
Once or twice a week                                 0.138***           0.170***           0.036***   0.066***
                                                     [0.014]            [0.016]            [0.011]    [0.012]
Once o r twice a mon th                              0.237***           0.264***           0.071***   0.098***
                                                     [0.014]            [0.016]            [0.010]    [0.012]
Hardly ever                                          0.171***           0.219***           0.050***   0.097***
                                                     [0.013]            [0.015]            [0.010]    [0.012]
Never                                                0.137***           0.207***            0.025**   0.092***
                                                     [0.014]            [0.016]            [0.010]    [0.012]
No computer at home                                  0.084***           0.150***             0.017    0.084***
                                                     [0.014]            [0.017]            [0.010]    [0.012]
Reported reading time (omitted=none)
30 minutes per day                                   0.088***           0.127***           0.028***   0.067***
                                                     [0.013]            [0.014]            [0.009]    [0.011]


                                                            47
Indepen dent Var iable              Math        Reading      Math       Reading
                                         ***          ***         ***
1 hour per day                     0.196        0.259       0.055       0.119***
                                   [0.014]      [0.015]     [0.010]     [0.011]
1-2 hours per day                  0.261***     0.373***    0.054***    0.165***
                                   [0.014]      [0.016]     [0.010]     [0.012]
More than 2 hours per day          0.265***     0.477***     0.009      0.220***
                                   [0.016]      [0.018]     [0.011]     [0.013]
Reported TV use (om itted=none):
Less than 1 hour per day           0.051***     0.079***      0.003      0.028**
                                   [0.014]      [0.015]     [0.010]     [0.011]
2 hours per day                    0.122***     0.132***     0.023**    0.029***
                                   [0.014]      [0.015]     [0.011]     [0.011]
3 hours per day                    0.114***     0.139***      0.009     0.030***
                                   [0.015]      [0.016]     [0.011]     [0.011]
4-5 hours per day                  0.117***     0.143***      0.008      0.031**
                                   [0.016]      [0.017]     [0.011]     [0.012]
6 hours or more per day             0.000        0.040**    -0.041***    -0.007
                                   [0.016]      [0.018]     [0.012]     [0.013]
Lagged achievement                    ---          ---      0.752***    0.754***
                                                            [0.004]     [0.004]
Constant                           -1.201***    -1.216***   -0.447***   -0.442***
                                   [0.079]      [0.080]     [0.051]     [0.050]




                                           48
  Appendix TableA 2. Effects of tea cher qualifica tions, with schoo l fixed effects; scho ols failing at least on e chi-
                                 squared test of random assignment across classrooms
                                                  Omitting lagged achievement           Including lagged achievement
Indepen dent variab le                                Math             Reading              Math             Reading
Black teacher                                       -0.030*             -0.023             -0.018             -0.014
                                                    [0.018]             [0.017]            [0.015]            [0.012]
Hispanic teacher                                   0.366***            0.279***           0.140***             0.041
                                                    [0.058]             [0.046]            [0.047]            [0.058]
Other race teacher                                   0.042               0.006              0.056              0.009
                                                    [0.055]             [0.070]            [0.041]            [0.039]
Male teacher                                        0.045**             -0.016            0.032**            -0.030**
                                                    [0.018]             [0.018]           [0.014]             [0.012]
Teacher exp erience (base=0 yea rs)
1-2 years experience                                0.051**            0.059**            0.040**            0.049***
                                                    [0.026]            [0.025]            [0.020]             [0.018]
3-5 years experience                               0.069***            0.047**            0.072***           0.054***
                                                    [0.024]            [0.024]             [0.020]            [0.018]
6-12 years experience                              0.086***            0.054**            0.071***            0.042**
                                                    [0.025]            [0.023]             [0.019]            [0.017]
13-20 years experience                             0.084***            0.071***           0.075***           0.062***
                                                    [0.025]             [0.025]            [0.019]            [0.018]
20-27 years experience                             0.103***            0.086***           0.093***           0.079***
                                                    [0.024]             [0.023]            [0.019]            [0.017]
>27 years experience                                0.052*               0.037            0.062***            0.050**
                                                    [0.029]             [0.028]            [0.022]            [0.020]
Quality of teacher's college (base=less competitive)
very competitive college                            0.050**              0.018              0.025             -0.008
                                                    [0.022]             [0.021]            [0.016]            [0.015]
competitive college                                 0.027**              0.020             0.017*              0.008
                                                    [0.014]             [0.013]            [0.011]            [0.009]
unranked college                                     0.054              -0.016              0.049             -0.013
                                                    [0.055]             [0.050]            [0.036]            [0.046]
Teacher with advanced degree                        -0.021             -0.032**            -0.010            -0.023**
                                                    [0.014]             [0.013]            [0.011]            [0.009]
Teacher Nat'l Board Certified                        0.052             0.083***             0.017             0.048**
                                                    [0.033]             [0.029]            [0.025]            [0.021]
Teacher's licensure test score                     0.020***            0.016**            0.011**              0.007
                                                    [0.007]            [0.007]            [0.006]             [0.005]
Class size                                          0.006*              0.007*              0.001              0.001
                                                    [0.004]             [0.004]            [0.002]            [0.002]
Student covariates                                     Yes               Yes                 Yes                Yes
School fixe d effects                                  Yes               Yes                 Yes                Yes
Lagged stu dent achiev ement con trols                 No                 No                 Yes                Yes
Observations                                         36,362             36,197             35,888             35,791
R2                                                   0.528               0.480              0.750              0.706




                                                             49
        Appendix Table A3. Effects of teacher qualifications, with school fixed effects; schools meeting even balance
                                          criteria when significance level is 20%
                                                    Omitting lagged achievement        Including lagged achievement
Indepen dent variab le                                 Math            Reading             Math            Reading
Black teacher                                         -0.034            -0.034            -0.010           -0.008
                                                      [0.028]           [0.024]           [0.024]          [0.020]
Hispanic teacher                                     -0.192***        -0.113***         -0.229***         -0.143***
                                                      [0.039]          [0.036]           [0.032]           [0.029]
Other race teacher                                    -0.151*            0.029            -0.115            0.058
                                                      [0.088]           [0.077]           [0.071]          [0.059]
Male teacher                                           0.009            -0.032*            0.013           -0.027*
                                                      [0.025]           [0.018]           [0.021]          [0.015]
Teacher exp erience (base=0 yea rs)
1-2 years experience                                  0.058*             0.014           0.071***           0.021
                                                      [0.031]           [0.029]           [0.026]          [0.023]
3-5 years experience                                  0.070**            0.044           0.069**            0.036
                                                      [0.033]           [0.029]          [0.028]           [0.023]
6-12 years experience                                 0.073**            0.047           0.096***         0.065***
                                                      [0.034]           [0.029]           [0.028]          [0.024]
13-20 years experience                               0.112***            0.028           0.134***          0.048*
                                                      [0.037]           [0.033]           [0.031]          [0.027]
20-27 years experience                               0.108***          0.068**           0.118***         0.071***
                                                      [0.032]          [0.028]            [0.027]          [0.023]
>27 years experience                                 0.108***            0.046           0.138***         0.072***
                                                      [0.035]           [0.030]           [0.030]          [0.025]
Quality of teacher's college (base=less competitive)
very competitive college                              -0.050            -0.022            -0.016            0.008
                                                      [0.031]           [0.025]           [0.025]          [0.021]
competitive college                                   -0.008             0.014            -0.016            0.008
                                                      [0.018]           [0.016]           [0.015]          [0.013]
unranked college                                      -0.129             0.055            -0.127            0.046
                                                      [0.120]           [0.107]           [0.078]          [0.075]
Teacher with advanced degree                          -0.008             0.006            -0.013            0.001
                                                      [0.017]           [0.016]           [0.014]          [0.013]
Teacher Nat'l Board Certified                         -0.057            -0.004           -0.056*           -0.003
                                                      [0.039]           [0.035]          [0.034]           [0.031]
Teacher's licensure test score                         0.009            -0.005             0.012           -0.003
                                                      [0.010]           [0.009]           [0.009]          [0.007]
Class size                                             0.003             0.005             0.001            0.004
                                                      [0.007]           [0.006]           [0.006]          [0.006]
Student covariates                                      Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
School fixe d effects                                   Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
Lagged stu dent achiev ement con trols                  No                No               Yes               Yes
Observations                                          14,668            14,608            14,457            14,424
    2
R                                                      0.563             0.500            0.769             0.709




                                                               50
                       Appendix Table A4. Full set of coefficients for Table 8 regressions
                             Free/reduced price lunch:        Parent ed ucation:          4th grade test score:
Indepen dent variab le                 no vs. yes                high vs. low           below vs.above average
                                 Math          Reading       Math         Reading        Math          Reading
Male                          0.065***        -0.044***  0.066***        -0.043***   0.072***         -0.035***
                                [0.007]         [0.007]    [0.007]         [0.007]     [0.008]          [0.009]
Black                         -0.058***       -0.056***  -0.061***       -0.057***   -0.197***        -0.199***
                                [0.010]         [0.011]    [0.009]         [0.011]     [0.012]          [0.013]
Hispanic                         0.011           0.016      -0.002          -0.007      -0.028           -0.024
                                [0.020]         [0.022]    [0.019]         [0.021]     [0.025]          [0.028]
Other                          0.080***          0.015    0.079***           0.01     0.077***           0.009
                                [0.018]         [0.019]    [0.018]         [0.019]     [0.023]          [0.023]
Gifted                         0.345***        0.081***   0.351***        0.080***    0.775***         0.517***
                                [0.011]         [0.011]    [0.011]         [0.011]     [0.013]          [0.011]
Handicapped                       0.02        -0.171***      0.02        -0.176***   -0.303***        -0.497***
                                [0.013]         [0.015]    [0.012]         [0.014]     [0.016]          [0.020]
Limited English proficient      0.068**       -0.167***    0.066**       -0.184***   -0.267***        -0.559***
                                [0.030]         [0.038]    [0.030]         [0.037]     [0.039]          [0.048]
Does NOT receive                                          0.034***        0.084***    0.082***         0.128***
free/reduced price lunch                                   [0.008]         [0.009]     [0.010]          [0.012]
Repeated grade                -0.675***       -0.707***  -0.678***       -0.721***   -0.379***        -0.413***
                                 0.041]         [0.045]    [0.040]         [0.044]     [0.039]          [0.048]
Lagged parental education(omitted=no HS diploma)
High scho ol diplom a only     0.033***        0.102***                               0.147***         0.216***
                                [0.012]         [0.014]                                [0.014]          [0.018]
Some post secondary            0.061***        0.154***                               0.222***         0.316***
                                [0.014]         [0.017]                                [0.017]          [0.021]
College gr aduate              0.131***        0.181***                               0.358***         0.415***
                                [0.014]         [0.017]                                [0.017]          [0.020]
Report homework time (omitted=none)
Less than 1 hour per week       0.070**         0.068*     0.072**         0.072**    0.230***         0.236***
                                [0.029]         [0.035]    [0.029]         [0.035]     [0.037]          [0.045]
1-3 hours per week             0.118***        0.098***   0.119***        0.102***    0.311***         0.297***
                                [0.028]       [0.035]        [0.028]     [0.035]       [0.036]        [0.045]
3-5 hours per week            0.173***     0.095***          0.175***   0.099***      0.385***       0.317***
                               [0.029]      [0.036]           [0.029]    [0.035]       [0.037]        [0.045]
5-10 hours per week           0.186***     0.094***          0.189***   0.096***      0.405***       0.318***
                               [0.030]      [0.036]           [0.030]    [0.036]       [0.038]        [0.045]
More than 10 hours per week 0.211***        0.085**          0.212***    0.089**      0.388***       0.275***
                               [0.033]      [0.042]           [0.033]    [0.042]       [0.042]        [0.052]
Reported home PC use (om itted=almost every day):
Once or twice a week           0.040**     0.085***          0.041***   0.086***      0.102***       0.143***
                               [0.016]      [0.019]           [0.016]    [0.020]       [0.019]        [0.023]
Once o r twice a mon th       0.080***     0.107***          0.080***   0.108***      0.168***       0.194***
                               [0.016]      [0.018]           [0.016]    [0.019]       [0.019]        [0.022]
Hardly ever                   0.064***     0.105***          0.063***   0.106***      0.135***       0.174***
                               [0.015]      [0.018]           [0.015]    [0.018]       [0.018]        [0.022]
Never                          0.034**     0.102***           0.033**   0.105***      0.103***       0.170***
                               [0.015]      [0.019]           [0.015]    [0.019]       [0.019]        [0.023]
No computer at home             0.022      0.097***            0.018    0.092***      0.062***       0.134***
                               [0.015]      [0.019]           [0.015]    [0.019]       [0.019]        [0.023]


                                                        51
Reported reading time (omitted=none)
30 minutes per day               0.036**      0.070***         0.037**    0.070***   0.078***   0.112***
                                  [0.014]      [0.017]          [0.014]    [0.017]    [0.018]    [0.020]
1 hour per day                   0.072***     0.119***         0.074***   0.120***   0.155***   0.200***
                                  [0.015]      [0.017]          [0.015]    [0.017]    [0.019]    [0.021]
1-2 hours per day                0.066***     0.182***         0.065***   0.183***   0.167***   0.285***
                                  [0.016]      [0.018]          [0.016]    [0.018]    [0.020]    [0.022]
More than 2 hours per day          0.026      0.233***           0.025    0.234***   0.169***   0.377***
                                  [0.018]      [0.021]          [0.018]    [0.021]    [0.022]    [0.024]
Reported TV use (om itted=none):
Less than 1 hour per day           0.001       0.038**          -0.003    0.038**      0.022    0.066***
                                  [0.016]      [0.017]          [0.016]    [0.017]    [0.020]    [0.021]
2 hours per day                   0.029*      0.058***           0.023    0.057***   0.084***   0.120***
                                  [0.017]      [0.017]          [0.017]    [0.017]    [0.020]    [0.021]
3 hours per day                    0.008      0.047***           0.001    0.047***   0.061***   0.109***
                                  [0.017]      [0.018]          [0.017]    [0.018]    [0.021]    [0.022]
4-5 hours per day                  0.000      0.053***           -0.006   0.051***   0.061***   0.121***
                                  [0.018]      [0.019]          [0.018]    [0.019]    [0.022]    [0.024]
6 hours or more per day           -0.036*        0.014         -0.040**     0.014      -0.004    0.050*
                                  [0.019]      [0.021]          [0.019]    [0.021]    [0.023]    [0.026]
Lagged achievement               0.758***     0.752***         0.762***   0.758***
                                  [0.006]      [0.006]          [0.006]    [0.006]
Class size                         0.008*        0.003          0.007*      0.002     0.002       0.000
                                  [0.004]      [0.004]          [0.004]    [0.004]   [0.005]     [0.004]
Black teacher                      -0.016        0.006           -0.034     0.007     0.008       0.009
                                  [0.021]      [0.021]          [0.023]    [0.023]   [0.023]     [0.026]
Hispanic teacher                   -0.100        0.063           -0.098     0.029     0.096     0.249***
                                  [0.092]      [0.096]          [0.077]    [0.102]   [0.135]     [0.088]
Other race teacher                 -0.071        0.042         -0.143**     -0.004    -0.079       -0.03
                                  [0.063]      [0.056]          [0.065]    [0.041]   [0.080]     [0.104]
Male teacher                       -0.002      -0.031*            0.006     -0.023    -0.022      -0.028
                                  [0.022]      [0.017]          [0.023]    [0.020]   [0.025]     [0.027]
Teacher exp erience (base=0 yea rs)
1-2 years experience             0.071***        0.021         0.092***     0.009     0.049*      0.035
                                  [0.023]      [0.021]          [0.026]    [0.026]    [0.030]    [0.034]
3-5 years experience             0.094***     0.054***         0.103***     0.009      0.046     0.058*
                                  [0.024]      [0.021]          [0.027]    [0.026]    [0.030]    [0.033]
6-12 years experience            0.089***     0.071***         0.113***   0.060**      0.046    0.077**
                                  [0.023]      [0.021]          [0.027]    [0.025]    [0.030]    [0.033]
13-20 years experience           0.122***     0.080***         0.149***   0.061**    0.082***   0.103***
                                  [0.025]      [0.023]          [0.029]    [0.027]    [0.032]    [0.035]
20-27 years experience           0.123***     0.078***         0.153***   0.065**     0.072**   0.107***
                                  [0.024]       [0.021]         [0.027]    [0.026]    [0.030]    [0.033]
>27 years experience             0.152***     0.116***         0.173***   0.096***   0.100***   0.096***
                                  [0.027]       [0.024]         [0.031]    [0.027]    [0.034]    [0.035]
Quality of teacher's college (base=less competitive)
very competitive college           -0.012        0.003          -0.005      0.010      0.000      0.016
                                  [0.023]       [0.017]         [0.025]    [0.019]    [0.026]    [0.026]
competitive college                -0.005        -0.001         -0.006     -0.004    -0.037**    -0.005
                                  [0.013]       [0.012]         [0.015]    [0.014]    [0.016]    [0.017]
unranked college                   -0.008        0.033           -0.025     0.013      -0.104     0.036


                                                          52
                                 [0.036]      [0.041]          [0.038]    [0.036]    [0.069]    [0.077]
Teacher with advanced            -0.020       -0.004           -0.018     -0.005     -0.018     -0.020
degree
                                 [0.014]      [0.012]          [0.015]    [0.014]    [0.016]    [0.017]
Teacher Nat'l Board              -0.022        0.006           -0.055      0.019     -0.030     -0.007
Certified
                                  [0.033]      [0.029]         [0.034]    [0.032]    [0.040]     [0.044]
Teacher's licensure test score    0.013*        0.001          0.015*     -0.006      0.008      -0.001
                                  [0.007]      [0.007]         [0.008]    [0.008]    [0.009]     [0.010]
subgroup dummy                    -0.097*       0.036           0.024      -0.100   0.522***    0.657***
                                  [0.059]      [0.069]         [0.059]    [0.066]    [0.074]     [0.000]
Interactions with subgroup dummy
Class size                          0.003       0.001          -0.002      0.000    0.009***     0.005*
                                  [0.002]      [0.003]        [0.002]     [0.003]    [0.003]     [0.003]
Black teacher                      -0.019       0.002         0.041*      -0.002      -0.038     -0.013
                                  [0.023]      [0.026]        [0.023]     [0.028]    [0.028]     [0.032]
Hispanic teacher                   -0.059       -0.016          0.084      0.102    -0.221***   -0.234**
                                  [0.097]      [0.200]        [0.085]     [0.163]    [0.060]     [0.109]
Other race teacher                 -0.065        0.009        0.178**      0.091       0.071      0.164
                                  [0.061]      [0.102]        [0.078]     [0.072]    [0.081]     [0.111]
Male teacher                        0.010      -0.050*         -0.014      0.022        0.02      0.013
                                  [0.029]      [0.029]        [0.024]     [0.026]     [0.031]    [0.035]
Teacher exp erience (base=0 yea rs)
1-2 years experience                0.021        0.012           -0.039    0.016      0.021      -0.039
                                  [0.032]      [0.038]          [0.029]   [0.036]    [0.037]     [0.042]
3-5 years experience                0.038         0.05           -0.033    0.043      0.057      -0.041
                                  [0.032]      [0.036]          [0.029]   [0.034]    [0.036]     [0.039]
6-12 years experience               0.015        0.018           -0.041    0.011      0.042       -0.055
                                  [0.029]      [0.035]          [0.028]   [0.033]    [0.035]     [0.038]
13-20 years experience              0.030         0.02          -0.055*    0.026      0.026     -0.091**
                                  [0.031]      [0.037]          [0.029]   [0.035]    [0.037]     [0.041]
20-27 years experience            0.062**       -0.003        -0.083***    0.028      0.053       -0.052
                                  [0.030]      [0.036]          [0.029]   [0.035]    [0.036]     [0.041]
>27 years experience               0.063*        0.054         -0.068**    0.004      0.046       -0.012
                                  [0.034]      [0.040]          [0.034]   [0.037]    [0.042]     [0.042]
Quality of teacher's college (base=less competitive)
very competitive college           -0.021       -0.019          0.003     -0.002      -0.027     -0.019
                                  [0.029]      [0.027]         [0.028]    [0.025]    [0.031]     [0.033]
competitive college                 0.022       -0.017          -0.015     0.014     0.048**      0.030
                                  [0.016]      [0.017]         [0.016]    [0.017]    [0.019]     [0.021]
unranked college                 0.163***        0.019         -0.095*     0.013      0.111*      0.031
                                  [0.061]      [0.064]         [0.049]    [0.056]    [0.061]     [0.077]
Teacher with advanced               0.010        0.003          -0.009     -0.004     -0.005      0.026
degree                             [0.017]     [0.018]         [0.018]    [0.018]    [0.021]     [0.021]
Teacher Nat'l Board                 0.040        0.001           0.027     -0.029     -0.031      0.001
Certified                          [0.035]     [0.048]         [0.032]    [0.041]    [0.054]     [0.063]
Teacher's licensure test score      0.002       -0.002          -0.003      0.014      0.016      0.014
                                   [0.009]     [0.009]         [0.009]    [0.009]    [0.011]     [0.012]
Observations                       24,768       24,711          24,970    24,912      25,147     25,045
R2                                  0.766        0.708           0.765      0.707      0.654      0.590
Note: Robu st standard errors in brackets.


                                                         53
* denotes a coefficient significant at the 10% level; ** 5%; *** 1%




                                                        54
