                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      EVALUATING THE DIFFERENTIAL EFFECTS OF
                           ALTERNATIVE WELFARE-TO-WORK
                        TRAINING COMPONENTS: A RE-ANALYSIS
                          OF THE CALIFORNIA GAIN PROGRAM

                                           V. Joseph Hotz
                                            Guido Imbens
                                          Jacob A. Klerman

                                        Working Paper 11939
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w11939


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2006


We wish to thank Julie Mortimer, Wes Hartmann and especially Oscar Mitnik for their able research
assistance on this project. Jan Hanley, Laurie McDonald, and Debbie Wesley of RAND helped with
the preparation of the data. We also wish to thank Howard Bloom, Jim Riccio, Hans Bos, John
Wallace, David Ellwood, and participants in the IRP and NBER Summer Institutes, a workshop at
Berkeley and the Tenth International Conference on Panel Data for helpful comments on an earlier
draft of this paper and to two referees who provided valuable comments and suggestions on an
earlier draft of this paper. This research was funded, in part, by NSF Grant SES 9818644.
Development of the methodological approaches used in this research also was funded by a contract
from the California Department of Social Services to the RAND Corporation for the conduct of the
Statewide CalWORKS Evaluation. All opinions expressed in this paper and any remaining errors
are the sole responsibility of the authors. In particular, this paper does not necessarily represent the
position of the National Science Foundation, the State of California or its agencies, RAND, or the
RAND Statewide CalWORKS Evaluation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by V. Joseph Hotz, Guido W. Imbens and Jacob A. Klerman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Evaluating the Differential Effects of Alternative Welfare-to-Work Training Components: A Re-
Analysis of the California GAIN Program
V. Joseph Hotz, Guido W. Imbens and Jacob A. Klerman
NBER Working Paper No. 11939
January 2006
JEL No. C1, C5, I3

                                           ABSTRACT

In this paper, we explore ways of combining experimental data and non-experimental methods to
estimate the differential effects of components of training programs. We show how data from a
multi-site experimental evaluation in which subjects are randomly assigned to any treatment versus
a control group who receives no treatment can be combined with non-experimental regression-
adjustment methods to estimate the differential effects of particular types of treatments. We also
devise tests of the validity of using the latter methods. We use these methods and tests to re-analyze
data from the MDRC Evaluation of California’s Greater Avenues to Independence (GAIN) program.
While not designed to estimate the differential effects of the Labor Force Attachment (LFA) training
and Human Capital Development (HCD) training components used in this program, we show how
data from this experimental evaluation can be used in conjunction with non-experimental methods
to estimate such effects. We present estimates of both the short- and long-term differential effects
of these two training components on employment and earnings. We find that while there are short-
term positive differential effects of LFA versus HCD, the latter training component is relatively more
beneficial in the longer-term.
V. Joseph Hotz                                        Jacob A. Klerman
Department of Economics                               RAND
UCLA                                                  jacob_klerman@rand.org
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
hotz@econ.ucla.edu

Guido W. Imbens
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
549 Evans Hall, #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
imbens@econ.berkeley.edu
1.   Introduction

         In this paper, we explore ways of combining experimental data and non-experimental

methods to estimate the differential effects of components of training programs. In particular, we

show how data from a multi-site experimental evaluation in which subjects are randomly as-

signed to any treatment versus a control group who receives no treatment can be combined with

non-experimental regression-adjustment methods to estimate the differential effects of particular

types of treatments. Our methods allow the implemented programs to vary across sites and

across subjects within a site. The availability of such experimental data allow us to test, in part,

the plausibility of our regression-adjustment methods for eliminating selection biases that result

from non-random assignment of program components to individuals in the various sites. We use

our method to adjust for across-site differences in background and pre-program variables as well

as post-randomization local economic conditions and validate our methods on experimentally-

generated control groups is a spirit similar to the approaches taken in Lalonde (1986), Heckman

and Hotz (1989), Friedlander and Robins, (1995), and Heckman, Ichimura, and Todd (1997,

1998) Heckman, Ichimura, Smith and Todd (1998), and Dehejia and Wahba (1999) and Hotz,

Imbens and Mortimer (2005).

         An example of why determining how to properly compare the effects of different treat-

ments across sites in order to assess the relative effectiveness of specific treatments arises in the

case of evaluating welfare reform. Over the last three decades, as the United States has sought to

reform its welfare system, states have sought to design their mandated welfare-to-work programs

in order to reduce dependency on welfare and promote work among disadvantaged households.

Over this period, states differed in the components, or approach, they emphasized in these pro-

grams.




                                                 1
          One approach, the “Human Capital Development” (HCD) approach, emphasizes educa-

tion and vocational training programs, such as GED and English as Second Language (ESL)

programs and vocational training in the health care industry. The HCD approach seeks to im-

prove the basic and job-related skills of welfare recipients. Advocates of this approach argue that

acquiring such skills are necessary for adults on welfare to “get a job, especially one that is rela-

tively stable, pays enough to support their children and leaves them less vulnerable during an

economic downturn.” 1

          The other primary approach used in designing welfare-to-work programs is the “Labor

Force Attachment” (LFA), such as job clubs, which teaches welfare recipients how to prepare

résumés and interview for jobs, and assistance in finding jobs. The LFA approach seeks to move

adults on welfare quickly into jobs, even if they are low paying jobs. Supporters of the LFA ap-

proach “see work as the most direct route to ending … the negative effects of welfare on families

and children.” 2 The advocates of the LFA approach also argue that it is a better than the formal

classroom training stressed in the HCD approach to build the skills of most low-skilled adults. A

natural question is: “Which approach is better?”

          The MDRC GAIN Evaluation was one of the most influential evaluations that shed light

on the impacts of these two approaches. Welfare recipients in six California counties were ran-

domly assigned to either a “treatment” group that was to receive services in a county based and

designed “welfare-to-work” program, or to a “control” group to which these services were de-

nied. Under the GAIN program, California’s counties had considerable discretion designing their

welfare-to-work programs and counties emphasized the LFA versus HDC approaches to differ-

ent degrees. Thus, the MDRC study conducted separate evaluations of each county’s program,

1
    Gueron and Hamilton (2002).
2
    Gueron and Hamilton (2002).



                                                   2
where the training components of the program, the populations served and the prevailing local

economic conditions varied across counties.

          To date, the results of this experimental evaluation often have been interpreted as favor-

ing the LFA relative to the HCD approach. Based on an analysis of data, three years after after

random assignment, MDRC found that the largest effects on participants were for Riverside

County’s GAIN program, a program that emphasized the LFA approach. 3 In contrast, the GAIN

participants in the three largest of the other counties in the MDRC Evaluation (Alameda, Los

Angeles and San Diego counties), that placed much greater emphasis on HDC, had much smaller

gains. 4 The LFA, or “work-first,” approach of Riverside received national (and international) ac-

claim for its success 5 and has become the model for welfare-to-work programs across the na-

tion. 6

          The fallacy of this conclusion stems from attributing all of the differences in results

across counties to differences in the treatment approaches used. For example, treatment effects

could vary across programs due to differences in the populations treated, in the strategies used to

assign various treatment components across that population and to differences in the economic

environments and local labor markets conditions. 7 While MDRC made clear in its reports that its


3
  Among female heads of households on Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) in Riverside’s GAIN
program, the number of quarters in which recipients worked were 63 percent higher than those for the control group,
and trainees’ labor market earnings were 63 percent higher over the three-year evaluation period. Riverside
County’s GAIN program emphasized the LFA approach with tightly focused job search assistance, as well as pro-
viding participants with the consistent message “that employment is central and should be sought expeditiously and
that opportunities to obtain low-paying jobs should not be turned down.” See Hogan (1995) for details.
4
  These counties experienced only a 21 percent increase in quarters of work and a 23 percent increase in earnings
relative to the outcomes for the control group members in these counties.
5
  For example, the Riverside GAIN program was awarded the Harvard Kennedy School of Government’s “Innova-
tions in American Government Award” in 1996.
6
 For example, the State of California strongly encouraged all of the state’s counties to adopt the Riverside LFA ap-
proach in its GAIN programs.
7
 See Hotz, Imbens and Mortimer (2005) for a systematic development and treatment of this issue. Also see Bloom,
Hill and Riccio (2005).



                                                         3
experimental design did not allow one to directly draw inferences about the differential impact of

alternative types of welfare-to-work components such as LFA and HCD, the results have been

consistently interpreted by policy makers in exactly that way. Thus, the second objective of this

paper is to use our methods to address directly whether LFA worked better than HCD based on

data for subjects in the MDRC GAIN Evaluation.

           A third objective of our paper is to distinguish the short-run from the long-run effects of

LFA versus HCD training components. The formal MDRC GAIN Evaluation was based on ex-

perimental estimates of program impacts for a three-year post-randomization period. 8 Extrapo-

lating from such short run estimates of social program impacts to what will happen in the longer

run can be misleading, as Couch (1992) and Friedlander and Burtless (1995) have noted. This is

especially true for assessing the effectiveness of HCD relative to LFA training approaches, since

HCD training components tend to be more time-intensive treatments and typically take longer to

complete relative to LFA programs. As such, there is a strong presumption that results from

short-term evaluations will tend to favor work-first programs over human-capital development

ones. 9 Estimates of program effects over a longer post-enrollment period are needed to fairly as-

sess the relative long-run benefits of these alternative welfare-to-work strategies.

           To address the above substantive concerns, we apply our methods to estimate both short-

and long-term differential effects of the LFA versus HCD training components in a re-analysis of

the data from the MDRC evaluation of California’s GAIN program. We focus our analysis on

four of the six California counties (Alameda, Los Angeles, Riverside and San Diego counties)


8
    An unpublished MDRC report presents estimates for the first five years after randomization.
9
  A similar point is made by Mincer (1974) in his model of schooling decisions. Therein, Mincer notes that at early
ages the earnings of individuals who choose additional schooling will be lower than those who choose to go to work
at early ages, simply because attending school inhibits going to work, even if all alternative activities yield the same
present value of lifetime earnings. See also Ham and LaLonde (1996).



                                                           4
analyzed in original GAIN Evaluation 10 and estimate differential effects for the post-random as-

signment employment, labor market earnings, and welfare participation outcomes of participants

in this evaluation. We make use of data on these outcomes for a period of nine years after ran-

dom assignment, data that was not previously available. We exploit the data for the control

groups in this Evaluation to implement the tests of some of the assumptions that justify the use of

non-experimental regression-adjustment methods. Finally, we consider the extent which infer-

ences about the temporal patterns of training effect estimates are sensitive to post-randomization

variation in local labor market conditions. As we establish below, our re-analysis of the GAIN -

data leads to a substantively different set of conclusions about the relative effectiveness of LFA

versus HCD training components.

        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide a brief de-

scription of California’s GAIN program and the original MDRC evaluation. In Section 3, we

characterize several alternative treatment effects, including average differential treatment effects

of two different treatment components, consider the conditions for their identification and dis-

cuss alternative strategies for estimating each. In Section 4, we present estimates of the effects of

being assigned to receive some training component for four of the six counties in the MDRC

GAIN Evaluation for a nine-year post-randomization follow-up period. We then present short-

and long-term estimates of the average differential effects of LFA versus HCD training compo-

nents using regression-adjustment methods on these data and the results for tests on control

group data that provide a partial assessment of the validity of these methods for estimating aver-

age differential treatment effects. Finally, we offer some conclusions about the implications of

our findings in Section 5.

10
  We omit the two rural counties included in the original MDRC evaluation, (Butte and Tulare), because these rural
economies are quite different from the four urban counties.



                                                        5
2.      The GAIN Program and the MDRC GAIN Evaluation

           The GAIN program began in California in 1986 and, in 1989, became the state’s official

welfare-to-work or Job Opportunities and Basic Skills Training (JOBS) Program, authorized by

the Family Support Act. 11 Except for female heads with children under the age of 6, all adults on

welfare were required to register in their county-of-residence GAIN program. 12 Each registrant

was administered a screening test to measure a registrant’s basic reading and math skills, with

the same test being used in all counties. Registrants with low test scores and who did not have a

high school diploma or GED were deemed “in need of basic education” and targeted to receive

HCD training components, such as Adult Basic Education (ABE) and/or English as a Second

Language (ESL) courses. Those judged not to be in need of basic education were to bypass these

basic education services and either move into LFA, such as job search assistance, or HCD, such

as vocational or on-the-job training. Decisions about which activities GAIN registrants received

were under the control of county GAIN administrators. In fact, the legislation that established the

GAIN program gave California’s 58 counties substantial discretion and flexibility in designing

their programs, including the types and mix of training components they offered to GAIN regis-

trants. 13

           MDRC conducted a randomized evaluation of the impacts and cost-effectiveness of the

GAIN program in six research counties (Alameda, Butte, Los Angeles, Riverside, San Diego,

11
   The legislation that created the GAIN program represented a political compromise between two groups in the
State’s legislature with different visions of how to reform the welfare system. One group favored the “work-first”
approach, i.e., use of a relatively short-term program of mandatory job search, followed by unpaid work experience
for participants who did not find jobs. The other group favored the “human capital” approach, i.e., a program pro-
viding a broader range of services designed to develop the skills of welfare recipients. In crafting the GAIN legisla-
tion, these two groups compromised on a program that contained work-first as well as basic skills and education
components in what became known as the GAIN Program Model. See Riccio and Friedlander (1992) for a more
complete description of this model.
12
     See Riccio, et al. (1989) for a more complete description of the criteria for mandated participation.
13
     See Riccio and Friedlander (1992), chapter 1.



                                                             6
and Tulare). Beginning in 1988, MDRC randomly assigned a subset of the GAIN registrants in

these counties, either to an experimental group, which was eligible to receive GAIN services and

subject to its participation mandates or to a control group, which was ineligible for GAIN ser-

vices but could seek (on their own initiative) alternative services in their communities. Control

group members were embargoed from GAIN services until June 30, 1993 and, for two years af-

ter this date they were allowed, but not required, to participate in GAIN. MDRC collected data

on experimental and control group members in the research counties, including background and

demographic characteristics and pre-random assignment employment, earnings, and welfare

utilization. Originally, MDRC gathered data on employment, earnings and welfare utilization, 14

for a three-year post-randomization period and reported on the findings for these outcomes in

their primary GAIN Evaluation reports. 15

           Descriptive statistics and sample sizes for the participants in the MDRC evaluation in the

four counties analyzed here (Alameda, Los Angeles, Riverside and San Diego) are provided in

Table 1. We focus on GAIN registrants who were members of single-parent households on

AFDC—which are referred to as AFDC Family Group or AFDC-FG households—at the time of

random assignment. 16 Such households constitute over 80 percent of the AFDC caseload in Cali-

fornia and the nation and almost all are female-headed. 17 As shown at the bottom of Table 1, in


14
     Most of these data were obtained from state and county administrative data systems.
15
  See Riccio and Friedlander (1992) and Riccio, et al. (1994). In an unpublished paper, Freedman, et al. (1996) pre-
sent impact estimates for five years post-randomization period, based on additional outcomes data gathered from
administrative data sources.
16
  The samples we utilize for three of the four counties (Alameda, Riverside and San Diego counties) are slightly
smaller than the original samples used by MDRC due to our inability to find records for some sample members in
California’s Unemployment Insurance Base Wage system (administered by the California Economic Development
Department) or because we were missing information on the educational attainment of the sample member. The
number of cases lost in these three counties is very small, never larger than 1.1 percent of the total sample, and does
not differ by experimental status.
17
   Descriptions and results for the much smaller group of two-parent households on AFDC (AFDC-U cases) are
given in the working paper version of the paper (Hotz, Imbens and Klerman, 2000).



                                                           7
all but Alameda county, the counties assigned a larger (and varying) fraction of cases to the ex-

perimental group. Finally, we provide, in Table 1, T-statistics for the differences between experi-

mental and control group means for the background variable. In most cases, there are no statisti-

cally significant differences in these variables by treatment status. The one exception is the year

and quarter in which cases were enrolled into the MDRC GAIN Evaluation. In particular, there

are rather large and statistically significant differences in the proportions of experimental and

control cases enrolled by quarter in Los Angeles and San Diego counties. 18 These were the result

of changes in the rates of randomization to the control status over the period in these counties as

MDRC attempted to meet targeted numbers of control cases in these counties.

        Table 1 reveals notable differences in the demographic and pre-randomization character-

istics of the cases enrolled in the GAIN registrants across counties. These differences stem from

two factors. First, the composition of the AFDC caseloads varies across counties. Second, the

strategies that counties adopted for registering participants from their existing caseloads into

GAIN activities also varied. The GAIN programs in Riverside and San Diego counties sought to

register all welfare cases in GAIN while the programs in Alameda and Los Angeles counties fo-

cused on long-term welfare recipients. For example, Alameda County, which began its GAIN

program in the third quarter of 1989, first registered its long-term cases and then registered cases

that had entered the AFDC caseload more recently. The GAIN program in Los Angeles County

initially only registered those cases that had been on welfare for 3 consecutive years. The conse-

quences of these differences in selection criteria can be seen in Table 1. In Alameda and Los An-

geles, over 95 percent of the cases had been on welfare a year prior to random assignment; in

San Diego and Riverside, fewer (for some cells much fewer) than 65 percent had been.

18
  There are smaller discrepancies between fractions of experimentals and controls by year and quarter in Riverside
County.



                                                        8
        These differences in selection criteria also contributed to substantial differences in the

employment histories and individual characteristics of the registrant populations across these

four counties. As shown in Table 1, the registrants in Alameda and Los Angeles counties had, on

average, much lower levels of earnings prior to random assignment relative to those in Riverside

and San Diego. Furthermore, the registrants in Alameda and Los Angeles were, on average,

older, had lower levels of educational attainment, and were more likely to be assessed as “in

need of basic education” when they entered the GAIN program than the average registrants in

Riverside and San Diego. The fact that Alameda and Los Angeles counties focused on its “hard

to treat” cases is a stark example of how the caseload composition within the GAIN experiment

varied across counties and why it is implausible that all of the differences across counties in

treatment effects are solely due to the various treatment components.

        The counties in the GAIN Evaluation also differed with respect to the conditions in the

labor market immediately prior to random assignment and these differences also may account for

the across-county differences in the Evaluation subjects displayed in Table 1. Figures 1-4 display

the time series of two sets of measures of labor market conditions for each of the four counties in

the GAIN Evaluation. Figure 1 plots the county-level ratio of total employment to the adult

population and Figure 2 displays the average annual earnings per worker for those employed.19

These measures provide indicators of the across-county and over time differences in the labor

markets for the four counties in the years prior to random assignment. Figures 3 and 4 display the

corresponding employment-to-population ratios and average annual earnings per work for those

employed in the retail trade sector, a sector of the economy in which many low-skilled workers

19
  These county-level measures were constructed from data from the Regional Economic Information System
(REIS) maintained by the Bureau of Economic Activity (BEA) in the U.S. Department of Commerce. We note that
Hoynes (2000) uses versions of both of these measures in her analysis of the effects of local labor market conditions
on welfare spells for the California AFDC caseload during the late 1980s and early 1990s. See her paper for a dis-
cussion of these and other county-level measures of local demand conditions.



                                                         9
are employed. 20 In the periods prior to random assignment, overall employment and employment

in retail trade were increasing in all four counties, although employment had begun to stagnate in

many of the counties. Furthermore, one notes substantial differences across the four counties in

these ratios, with Riverside county having a much lower total employment to adult population ra-

tio than the other three counties. 21 Over this same period, average annual earnings per worker

was increasing in all but Alameda county (Figure 2), while earnings per worker in the retail trade

sector was declining (in real terms) in all four counties (Figure 4). Moreover, one sees that over-

all earnings, as well as earnings in the retail sector, were higher in Alameda and Los Angeles

counties relative to Riverside and San Diego counties. Towards the end of the next section, we

shall comment further on the post-randomization trends in these Figures.

         Finally, as we noted above, the four analysis counties in the GAIN Evaluation differed in

the way they ran the programs and in the training components they emphasized. In Table 2, we

display the proportions of GAIN registrants in the four analysis counties that participated in vari-

ous training components during the period in which subjects were enrolled in the MDRC GAIN

Evaluation. 22 One can see that Riverside county placed less of its GAIN registrants in HCD

training components than did the administrators of the GAIN programs in the other four counties

during the period of enrollment into the MDRC Evaluation. This is especially true relative to the

proportions of GAIN registrants enrolled in the MDRC Evaluation that were deemed “In Need of

Basic Skills,” presumably the group in greater need of HCD training components. (The propor-


20
  Another sector of the economy which employs low-skilled workers is the service sector. Based on measures com-
parable to those in Figures 3 and 4, similar trends and differences across counties were found for this sector as those
for the retail trade sector.
21
  This difference reflects, in part, the fact that many people residing in Riverside county commute to other counties,
especially Los Angeles, for their employment compared to residents of the other four counties.
22
  The rows in boxes in this table show the quarters in which the random assignment of registrants into the MDRC
experimental evaluation was conducted for each of the four counties.



                                                         10
tions of these groups, by year/quarter of enrollment into the MDRC Evaluation, are found in the

last column of Table 2.) As a crude indicator of the relationship between HCD services relative

to those registrants in need of basic skills, one can take the ratio of the last two columns of Table

2. By this measure, the GAIN programs in San Diego, Los Angeles and Alameda counties appear

to provide HCD training services roughly in a 1-to-1 proportion with the fraction of registrants in

need of basic skills in their counties. In contrast, the corresponding proportion for Riverside

county’s GAIN program is 2-to-3.

            The estimates in Table 2 provide a clear indicator of what was a major finding of the

MDRC GAIN Evaluation, namely that Riverside’s GAIN program had a decidedly “work-first”

orientation, especially relative to the other three counties in the Evaluation that we analyze

here. 23 In contrast, program staff in the other research counties placed less emphasis on getting

registrants into a job quickly. For example, Alameda’s GAIN managers and staff “believed

strongly in ‘human capital’ development and, within the overall constraints imposed by the

GAIN model’s service sequences, its staff encouraged registrants to be selective about the jobs

they accepted and to take advantages of GAIN’s education and training to prepare for higher-

paying jobs.” 24


23
   There were other indicators of Riverside’s emphasis on getting GAIN registrants quickly into jobs and on using
LFA relative to HCD training components. For example, Riverside staff required that their registrants that were en-
rolled in basic skills programs continue to participate in Job Club and other job search activities. In a survey of pro-
gram staff conducted by MDRC at the time of its evaluation, 95 percent of case managers in Riverside rated getting
registrants into jobs quickly as their highest goal while fewer than 20 percent of managers in the other research
counties gave a similar response. In the same survey, 69 percent of Riverside case managers indicated that they
would advise a welfare mother offered a low-paying job to take it rather than wait for a better opportunity, while
only 23 percent of their counterparts in Alameda county indicated they would give this advice. See Riccio and Fried-
lander (1992) for further documentation of the differences in distribution of training components and other features
of the full set of six counties in the MDRC GAIN Evaluation. As Ricco and Friedlander (1992) concluded from their
study of the implementation of GAIN programs by the various counties in the MDRC Evaluations, “What is perhaps
most distinctive about Riverside’s program, though, is not that its registrants participated somewhat less in education
and training, but that the staff’s emphasis on jobs pervaded their interactions with registrants throughout the pro-
gram.” (Riccio and Friedlander, 1992, p. 58)
24
     See Riccio, et al. (1994), p. xxv.



                                                          11
3.   Alternative Treatment Effects and Estimation Strategies

       In this section, we consider the identification of alternative treatment effects and strate-

gies for estimating them. We begin with a review of binary treatment effects which characterize

the effect of receiving some training component for enrollees in a welfare-to-work program.

Such effects were the focus of the experimental design of the MDRC GAIN Evaluation. We then

define and consider the estimation of average differential treatment effects (ADTE). The latter

effects are the focus of our re-analysis of the GAIN data. We examine the identification of and

strategies for estimating ADTEs when the econometrician has information on which treatment

components each subject was assigned and when such subject-level information is not known.

(The latter case is true for the MDRC GAIN Evaluation data we re-analyze and is true for many

data sources used to evaluate training programs.) Finally, while we show that experimental data

on subjects that are randomly assigned to some versus no treatment component is not sufficient

to identify (or consistently estimate) ADTEs, we show how such data can be exploited to assess

the validity of non-experimental methods for estimating the ADTEs.

3.1 Alternative Average Treatment Effects

       Let Di be an indicator of the program/location of a training program in which subject i is

enrolled (registered). In the MDRC GAIN Evaluation, D denotes a county-run welfare-to-work

program, d. Let s denote the number of periods (years) since a subject enrolled in a welfare-to-

work program. Let Ti denote the training (treatment) component to which subject i is assigned,

with Ti ∈ {0,1,..., k ,..., K } and where Ti = 0 denotes the null (no) treatment component. Let Ti

denote the assignment of the ith subject to some treatment component, i.e., Ti = 1{Ti ≥ 1} . Finally,

Let Yis (W = w) denote subject i’s potential outcome as of s periods after enrollment that is asso-




                                                 12
ciated with the subject being assigned to treatment W, where W=T or T . Thus, Yis (T = 0) is the

potential outcome associated with the receipt of no treatment, Yis (T = 1) is the potential outcome

associated with the assignment to some treatment component and Yis (k ) ≡ Yis (T = k ) is the poten-

tial outcome associated with the assignment to treatment component k.

           The focus of the MDRC GAIN Evaluation, and many other training evaluations, was on

estimating the average treatment effect on the treated (ATET) associated with assignment to

some treatment component in program/location d. This treatment effect is defined as

                                       α sd ≡ E (Yis (1) − Yis (0) Ti = 1, Di = d )
                                                                                               ,           (1)
                                             = E ( Δ is Ti = 1, Di = d )

where Δis is subject i’s “gain” in outcome Y from being assigned to some training component. 25

Analogously, the average treatment effects associated with assignment to treatment component k

for those assigned to this component is given by

                                      α sd (k ) ≡ E (Yis (k ) − Yis (0) Ti = 1, Di = d )
                                                                                                           (2)
                                               = E ( Δ is (k ) Tis = 1, Di = d )

           As noted in Hotz, Imbens and Mortimer (2005), α sd may differ across programs/locations

(d), due to differences in: (a) the populations treated; (b) treatment heterogeneity (differences in

the distribution of treatment components); and/or (c) differences in economic conditions (“macro

effects”). In the case of treatment heterogeneity, one typically wishes to distinguish between the

impacts of alternative treatment components—such as the LFA and HCD training components—

in order to isolate this source of differences in α sd across programs and to isolate why some pro-

25
     One also can define versions of α sd that condition on some set of exogenous variables, X,
                                       α sd ( X ) ≡ E (Yis (1) − Yis (0) Ti = 1, D i = d , X i )
                                                                                                   .
                                                = E ( Δ is Ti = 1, D i = d , X i )
Conditional versions of the other treatment effects defined in this subsection can be defined similarly.



                                                                 13
grams are more effective than others. As noted in the Introduction, and as will be documented in

Section 4, the impacts of the Riverside GAIN program were markedly different from, and more

effective than, those in the other counties of the MDRC GAIN Evaluation. Accordingly, consider

the average differential treatment effect (ADTE) of two treatment components, k and k′, among

those who are treated (i.e., those assigned to receive some treatment) which is defined as:

                                 γ s (k , k ′) ≡ E (Yis (k ) − Yis (k ′) Ti = 1)
                                                                                   ,                 (3)
                                            = E ( Δ is (k ) − Δ is (k ′) Ti = 1)

where the second equality in (3) follows from the definition of Δis(j) in (2). Note that γ s (k , k ′) is

defined for subjects assigned to receive some treatment, i.e., for subjects characterized by Ti = 1.

For reasons that will be made clear below, conditioning on this expansive set of subjects is ap-

propriate for our re-analysis of the MDRC GAIN Evaluation data. Imbens (2000) and Lechner

(2001) consider alternative definitions of differential treatment effects, including conditioning on

those subjects who would otherwise receive either treatment components k or k′. In general, dif-

ferences in such conditioning imply different treatment effects. Also note that we have not con-

ditioned (3) on a particular program/location (d), as our interest is in estimating the differential

effects of treatment components that are available—and comparable—across county welfare-to-

work programs included in the MDRC GAIN Evaluation.

3.2 Identification and Estimation of α sd

        As is well understood, the identification (and thus consistent estimation) of α sd in (1) re-

quires additional conditions to be met. In general, non-random and selective assignment of po-

tential trainees to training programs and/or the use of non-comparable comparison groups to

measure Y(0) gives rise to problems in identifying (and obtaining unbiased estimates of) such




                                                        14
treatment effects. 26 In the context of the MDRC GAIN Evaluation, the identification problem is

“solved by design” in that this evaluation randomly selected a group of the GAIN registrants to a

control group in which subjects, who would otherwise have been assigned to some welfare-to-

work activity, were embargoed from receipt of treatment. That is, design of this evaluation as-

sured that the following condition holds:

(RANDOM ASSIGNMENT)                                   Ti ⊥ (Yis (0), Yis (1) ) Di = d ,                         (C-1)

for all d, where z ⊥ y denotes that z is (statistically) independent of y. Condition (C-1) insures

the identification of α sd as it implies that

                                        E (Yis (0) Ti = 1, Di = d ) = E (Yis (0) Ti = 0, Di = d ) ,            (C-1′)

i.e., the mean value of Y(0) in period s for those who receive some treatment component (T = 1)

in county d would be equal to the mean of observed outcomes for control group members (T = 0)

in the same period and county. As a result, (C-1) implies that the ATET associated with pro-

gram/location d is identified by

                                      α sd = E (Yis (1) Ti = 1, Di = d ) − E (Yis (0) Ti = 0, Di = d )            (4)

and can be consistently estimated by using sample analogues to the conditional expectations in

(4), i.e., Ys (t ) =      ∑
                       i∈{i Ti = t}
                                      Yis N t for all s, where Nt is the sample size for the Ti = t group, t = 0,1. In


Section 4, we present county-specific estimates of the ATET for a range of post-randomization

outcomes for each of the nine years after random assignment.

3.3 Identifying Average Differential Treatment Effects

           We next consider the identification (and estimation) of the average differential treatment

effect, γ s (k , k ′) . For now, we assume that we know (and can condition on) the treatment compo-


26
     See, for example, Heckman, LaLonde and Smith (1999) for a survey of the evaluation literature.



                                                                    15
nents to which each subject was assigned. Below, we consider the case in which a subject’s

treatment component assignment is unknown. Random assignment of subjects to Ti = 1 or 0

[Condition (C-1)], the condition that holds in the MDRC GAIN Evaluation, is not sufficient to

identify ADTEs. To see why, consider the following characterization of the differences in ex-

pected potential outcomes for treatment components, k and k′:

                     (                             ) (
                   E Yis (k ) Ti = k , Di = d − E Yis (k ′) Ti = k ′, Di = d ′   )
                               (                               ) (                                        )
                          = E Yis (0) + Δ is (k ) Ti = k , Di = d − E Yis (0) + Δ is (k ′) Ti = k ′, Di = d ′
                                                                                                                      (5)
                          = { E ( Δ (k ) T = 1, T = k , D = d ) − E ( Δ (k ′) T = 1, T = k ′, D = d ′ )}
                                   is      i        i           i            is            i       i           i


                           + { E (Y (0) T = 1, T = k , D = d ) − E (Y (0) T = 1, T = k ′, D = d ′ )} ,
                                    is         i        i           i        is        i       i           i


for all k, k′, k ≠ k′, and all d, d′. While (C-1) implies that E (Yis (0) Ti = 1, Di = d ) =


E (Yis (0) Ti = 0, Di = d ) , it does not imply that the last term in braces in (5) equals zero, even for

the same program/location (i.e., d = d′). Furthermore, (C-1) implies nothing about the first term

in braces. As such, the mean difference between the outcomes of those receiving treatment com-

ponent k and those receiving k′ does not, in general, equal γ s (k , k ′) . Additional assumptions are

required. In particular, we require:

                           (                                    ) (
                         E Yis (0) Ti = 1, Ti = k , Di = d − E Yis (0) Ti = 1, Ti = k ′, Di = d ′ = 0 ,  )       (A-1)

i.e., there is no difference in Y(0), the no-treatment outcome, for subjects that were assigned to

treatment components k and k′, in a given program/location, and

               (                                    )       (                                          )
            E Δ is (k ) Ti = 1, Ti = k , Di = d = E Δ is (k ) Ti = 1, Ti = k ′, Di = d ′ = E ( Δ is (k ) Ti = 1) , (A-2)

for all k, k′, k ≠ k′, and all d, d′, i.e., the expected gross treatment effects for treatment component

k is the same for those assigned to components k and k′. 27 Given (A-1) and (A-2), it follows that

27
     We ignore the possibility that both (A-1) and (A-2) are violated with off-setting biases.



                                                                        16
                                (
the difference between E Yis (k ) Ti = k , Di = d        )          (                            )
                                                              and E Yis (k ′) Ti = k ′, Di = d ′ in (5) is equal to

γ s (k , k ′) . Note that potentially weaker versions of (A-1) and (A-2) in which these assumptions

hold only within a program/location (d = d′) could be assumed, although then only program-spe-

cific γ s (k , k ′) ’s would be identified. In short, the random assignment design used in evaluations,

such as the MDRC GAIN Evaluation, is not sufficient to identify ADTEs.

        In order to secure identification (and a consistent estimator) of γ s (k , k ′) , we consider the

use of non-experimental methods which imply that (A-1) and (A-2) hold under some set of cir-

cumstances. In our discussion, we describe the use of statistical matching methods in conjunction

with data in which subjects are randomly assigned to receive some treatment or a control group.

Matching methods assume that by controlling (adjusting) for a set of pre-treatment characteris-

tics, Zi, in a non-parametric way, conditional versions of (A-1) and (A-2) will hold. 28 More pre-

cisely we assume that there exists a vector, Zi, such that: 29

(UNCONFOUNDEDNESS) Y (0), Y (1),..., Y (k ),..., Y ( K ) ⊥ T Z , ∀k and ∀d .                                 (C-2)
That is, the potential outcomes associated with treatment components are independent of the as-

signment mechanism for these components conditional on Z. It follows from (C-2) that

                      (                              ) (                                      )
                E ⎡ Yis (0) Ti = 1, Ti = k , Di = d − E Yis (0) Ti = 1, Ti = k ′, Di = d ′ Z i ⎤ = 0
                Z ⎣                                                                              ⎦
                                                                                                              (A-1′)

and

                  (                                 ) (                                       )
               E ⎡ Δ is (k ) Ti = 1, Ti = k , Di = d − E Δ is (k ) Ti = 1, Ti = k ′, Di = d ′ Z i ⎤ = 0 ,
               Z ⎣                                                                                  ⎦
                                                                                                              (A-2′)

for all k, k′, k ≠ k′, and all d, d′. It follows that assumptions (A-1′) and (A-2′) imply that the dif-


28
  See Rubin (1973a, 1973b, 1977, 1979) for the initial formalization of the use of matching methods to reduce bias
in causal inference using non-experimental data. See also Heckman, Ichimura, and Todd (1997, 1998a) for further
refinements on these methods.
29
 See Imbens (2000) and Lechner (2001) for formal treatments of matching methods in the context of multiple treat-
ments.



                                                           17
ference     between        the       conditional       (on    Z)       versions   of     (
                                                                                       E Yis (k ) Ti = k , Di = d   )      and


     (                           )
E Yis (k ′) Ti = k ′, Di = d ′ identify γ s (k , k ′) and justify the use of matching methods—and, in cer-

tain cases, parametric regression techniques—to (consistently) estimate this ADTE.

          Condition (C-2)—and, thus, (A-1′) and (A-2′)—is not directly verifiable, at least not for

situations in which treatment components are not randomly assigned. As such, matching methods

are inherently more controversial than reliance on a properly designed random assignment ex-

periment. Nonetheless, recent studies by Dehejia and Wahba (1999), Heckman, Ichimura, and

Todd (1997, 1998a), and Hotz, Imbens and Mortimer (2005) suggest that such adjustments, with

sufficiently detailed pre-treatment characteristics, can produce credible non-experimental esti-

mates of average treatment effects.30 Here we extend the use of these methods to estimating the

differential effects of alternative treatment components.

          The availability of data for a randomly assigned control group that receives no treatment,

such as is the case with the MDRC GAIN Evaluation, does provide scope for assessing the va-

lidity of assumption (A-1′) in the case where there are only two treatment components, k and k′.

In this case, it follows that (C-1) can be written as

             E (Yis (0) Ti = 0, Di = d ) = E (Yis (0) Ti = 1, Di = d )

                   (                                    )          (                                )
               = E Yis (0) Ti = 1, Ti = k , Di = d Pdk + E Yis (0) Ti = 1, Ti = k ′, Di = d ⎡⎣1 − Pdk ⎤⎦
                                                                                                                         (C-1′′)
                       (                                    ) (                                 )
               = ⎡ E Yis (0) Ti = 1, Ti = k , Di = d − E Yis (0) Ti = 1, Ti = k ′, Di = d ⎤ Pdk
                 ⎣                                                                          ⎦
                            (
                     + E Yis (0) Ti = 1, Ti = k ′, Di = d ,   )
                                 (                 )
for all d, where Pdk ≡ Pr Ti = k Di = d is the proportion of subjects receiving treatment compo-



30
  See Smith and Todd (2005) for a critical re-analysis of Dehejia and Wabba (1999). Smith and Todd conclude that
matching methods can be used to estimate simple treatment effects, but care must be taken as to what pre-treatment
characteristics are used in the matching.



                                                              18
nent k in program/location d. It follows from (A-1′) [and (C-1)] that the term in square brackets

after the last equality in (C-1′′) is equal to 0, for all d. That is, the mean of Y for the control group

should not depend on (vary with) Pdk . Thus, to test (A-1′), one can regress the outcomes, Y, on

Pdk , exploiting the variation in the mix of treatment components across programs/locations, and

where the regression conditions on Zi, either non-parametrically using matching methods or para-

metrically using regression methods, and test whether the coefficient on Pdk equals zero for all d.

We implement this test in our empirical analysis to assess the validity of (A-1′) with the MDRC

GAIN Evaluation data. 31

        A similar test of the validity of (A-2′) is not available. Thus, this assumption must be

maintained when using matching methods to estimate ADTEs. Nonetheless, the validity of such

methods in the estimation of ADTEs is more plausible, although not guaranteed, if (A-1′) is

shown to hold in the data.

        Until now, we have assumed knowledge of the treatment component assignments ( Ti ) to

each subject who actually receives treatment. This is not the case for the MDRC GAIN Evalua-

tion data that we use to analyze the differential effects of LFA and HCD treatment components.

Individual-level treatment component assignments are unknown in these data. Lack of treatment

component assignment information is a common situation in other data sources used to evaluate

the effects of training programs. However, one may have information on the proportions of sub-

jects that received various treatment components ( Pdk ) for particular programs. For the GAIN

programs in California, we have information on these proportions for the four counties we ana-


31
  For other examples of assessing the validity of non-experimental methods with data from experimental data, see
Lalonde (1986), Rosenbaum (1987), Heckman and Hotz (1989), Dehejia and Wahba (1999), Heckman, Ichimura,
Smith and Todd (1997, 1998a), Hotz, Imbens and Mortimer (2005) and Smith and Todd (2005).



                                                      19
lyze from the MDRC GAIN Evaluation. In fact, we have it at the quarterly level for the quarters

in which GAIN registrants were randomly assigned to treatment or control status.

        As first noted by Heckman and Robb (1985), and subsequently extended by Mitnik

(2004b) to the case of differential treatment effects, estimation of causal effects in the case of

unknown treatment status at the subject level can still proceed with data on treatment component

probabilities under certain assumptions and with sufficient variation in these probabilities across

programs and/or subgroups. Assumptions (A-1′) and (A-2′)—and, thus, (C-2)—are sufficient to

allow one to estimate γ s (k , k ′) with only data on treatment assignment proportions, rather than

individual-level treatment assignment status, since conditional on Z, the identification (consistent

estimation) of γ s (k , k ′) only requires identifying (consistently estimating) the mean differential

of outcomes for trainees who receive treatment components k and k′. Furthermore, we exploit the

variation in Pdk across counties, as well as across entry cohorts, to consistently estimate these

conditional mean differences.

3.4 Estimating Average Differential Treatment Effects

        In the empirical analysis presented below, we make use of parametric regression meth-

ods, rather than non-parametric matching techniques, to condition on the Z’s as implied by as-

sumptions (A-1′) and (A-2′) 32 to estimate the average differential treatment effect of the LFA

versus HCD treatment components. 33 For sake of clarity, we need to augment the notation used

above. Let Yis,dc denote the outcome of GAIN registrant i for post-randomization period s that is


32
   While not presented herein, we also used non-parametric matching techniques, controlling for the same set of X’s
listed above, to estimate the differential treatment effects between Riverside and the various comparison counties.
The estimates, especially the inferences drawn, are quite similar to the regression-based estimates reported below.
33
  See Hirano, Imbens and Ridder (2003) for a discussion of efficient estimation of average treatment effects using
propensity score methods. Also see Abadie and Imbens (2006) who characterize the asymptotic properties of match-
ing estimators for average treatment effects.



                                                        20
located in county d and entered the MDRC Evaluation in quarter c; Ti,dc = 1 if this GAIN regis-

trant located in county d and from entry cohort c was (randomly) assigned to the experimental

group and equal to zero otherwise; Ti ,dc denote the treatment component to which a GAIN regis-

trant is assigned, where the components in the GAIN context are A for the LFA treatment com-

ponent and h for the HCD treatment component; Zi,dc denote the vector of pre-randomization

characteristics for this subject; and PdcA denote the proportion of trainees—those for which Ti,dc =

1—that were assigned the LFA treatment component ( Ti ,dc = A ) component.

       One potential strategy for estimating γ s (A, h) would be to estimate the following regres-

sion model using only data on GAIN registrants in the experimental group (Ti,dc = 1):

                               Yis , dc = β 0 s + γ s (A, h) PdcA + β1′s Z i ,dc + ε is , dc ,      (6)

where εis,dc is a stochastic disturbance assumed to have mean zero and the coefficient on PdcA is

the ADTE of interest, γ s (A, h) . (The elements in Zis,dc are listed in the Notes to Table 5.) Estimat-

ing (6) with the experimentals subsample will generate consistent estimates of γ s (A, h ) if both as-

sumptions (A-1′) and (A-2′) hold and that the population regression function for Yis,dc is linear in

PdcA and Zi. We present estimates of γ s (A, h) based on only using data for the experimental group

of the MDRC GAIN Evaluation in Table 6 below.

       To test assumption (A-1′), one can estimate the regression specification in (6) using data

for the subsample of controls in the four counties of the MDRC GAIN Evaluation and then test

the hypothesis that γ s (A, h) = 0. We present results for this test in Table 4 below. A potentially

more rigorous version of this test allows for the possibility that γ s (A, h) varies across counties,

i.e., estimating the following regression specification in place of (6),




                                                            21
                                   Yis ,dc = β 0 s +        ∑
                                                       j∈{ A, L , R , S }
                                                                            γ sj (A, h) PjcA I i j + β1′s Z i ,dc + ε is ,dc ,          (6′)

where I i j denotes the indicator function for Di = j and the four values for j are A for Alameda

county, L for Los Angeles county, R for Riverside county and S for San Diego county. In this

case, we test the null hypothesis that γ sA(A, h) = γ sL (A, h) = γ sR (A, h) = γ sS (A, h) = 0, where now

the alternative hypothesis is that γ sd (A, h) can be non-zero in any county. We also present results

from this second test of (A-1′) in Table 4 below.

           In one sense, finding that we cannot reject the null hypotheses in the above tests justifies

the maintenance of assumption (A-1′), and, thus, the reliance on the estimator of γ s (A, h) derived

from estimating (6) with data for registrants that were randomly assigned to the experimental

group in the MDRC GAIN Evaluation. But, as is always true, the results from such tests are sub-

ject to estimation error. That is, the power of any test may not be sufficient to avoid Type II er-

rors, i.e., failing to reject null hypotheses when they are false. To guard against this possibility,

we also present results from a “difference-in-differences” (DID) estimator of γ s (A, h) that relies

on using data for experimental and control groups in estimation. In particular, this DID estimator

of γ s (A, h) is formed by estimating the following regression function: 34

                 Yis ,cd = β 0 s + β1s PdcA + β 2 sTi ,dc + γ s (A, h) PdcA Ti ,dc + β 3′s Z i ,dc + β 4′s Z i ,dcTi ,dc + ν is ,dc ,   (7)

Using (7) to estimate γ s (A, h) with data for the experimental and control groups in the MDRC

GAIN Evaluation still relies on assumptions (A-1′) and (A-2′) to hold but allows the data on

“controls” to empirically adjust for across-program differences in populations and treatment

component assignment mechanisms to help isolate a consistent estimate of γ s (A, h) . Furthermore,

the DID estimator allows for any estimation error that may affect the tests of (A-1′) described

34
     Non-parametric versions of (7), based on matching methods, also are possible.



                                                                                22
above to explicitly affect the precision of the estimate of γ s (A, h) , which is not the case for the

estimator of γ s (A, h) based solely on data for experimentals. Accordingly, we view the DID esti-

mator as a more “conservative” method for estimating γ s (A, h) . Estimates based on this DID esti-

mator are presented in Table 5 below.

3.5 Post-Randomization Variation in Labor Market Conditions

       To this point, we have implicitly assumed that temporal variation in treatment effects re-

flects the profile of “returns” to training. For example, the relative effects of receiving vocational

training course received at s = 0 may decline over time as skills acquired in such a course depre-

ciate. How rapidly the effects of alternative treatments decline with s, if they decline at all, can

provide important insights into the long-term effectiveness of alternative training strategies. But,

treatment effects also may vary over time due to post-training changes in environmental factors,

such as local labor market conditions. Recall that Yis,dc(k), the outcome of the ith subject residing

in county d and in GAIN entry cohort c that occurred s periods after receiving treatment k, can be

written as

                                       Yis ,dc (k ) = Yis ,dc (0) + Δ is ,dc (k ) ,               (8)

where Yis,dc(0) is the potential outcome associated with the null treatment and Δis,dc(k) is the gain

in Y from receiving treatment k relative to the null treatment. Let Mds denote the labor market

conditions that prevail in county d in the calendar period corresponding to s. Suppose that labor

market conditions affect post-training outcomes. For example, a trainee’s probability of being

employed in period s (s > 0) depends with the extent of the local demand for labor in that period.

We represent this dependence by rewriting (8) as follows

                            Yis , dc (k , M ds ) = Yis ,dc (0, M ds ) + Δ is ,dc (k , M ds ) .    (9)

The right-hand side of (9) allows both the potential outcome for the null treatment and the gain



                                                          23
associated with treatment k to vary with Mds.

       The dependence of treatment effects on labor market conditions hinges on whether

Δis,dc(k) varies with Mds. Allowing Yis,dc(0) to depend on Mds need not compromise the ability to

identify or estimate labor market invariant treatment effects so long as Δis,dc(k) is independent of

Mds. If the latter condition holds, evaluation data in which all treatments, including a null treat-

ment, are randomly assigned can be used to generate unbiased estimates of Yis,dc(0,Mds) and

Δis,dc(k), for all k, and, thus, unbiased estimates of labor market invariant treatment effects. In the

absence of data with randomly assigned treatments, additional conditions, such as (C-2) and/or

(A-1′) and (A-2′), would be required to obtain consistent estimates of labor market invariant

treatment effects.

       However, if Δis,dc(k) does vary with Mds, data for which treatments are randomly assigned

or for which an unconfoundedness condition holds will not be sufficient to isolate (identify) la-

bor market invariant treatment effects. In this case, all one can identify non-parametrically is

Δis,dc(k,Mds) which implies that average treatment effects will, in general, depend on the distribu-

tion of post-training labor market conditions, both across localities and over time.

       To explore the potential importance of heterogeneity in γ s (A, h) with respect to post-

treatment labor market conditions, we estimate the following modified version of the DID esti-

mating equation in (7):

                 Yis ,cd = δ 0 s + δ1s PdcA + δ 2 sTi ,dc + γ s 0 (A, h) PdcA Ti ,dc + δ 3′s Zi ,dc + δ 4′s Zi ,dcTi ,dc
                                                                                                                           ,   (10)
                           + θ1′M ds + θ 2′M dsTi ,dc + θ3′M ds PdcA Ti ,dc + υis ,dc
which include interactions of a vector of county-specific, post-training labor market conditions,

Mds, with Ti,dc and PdcA Ti ,dc . The specification of the interactions of local labor market conditions

with the differential effects of LFA versus HCD training in (10) is somewhat arbitrary. However,



                                                                   24
it does allow us to examine the possible dependence of treatment effects on Mds by testing the

significance of the interactions of Mds with Ti,dc and PdcA Ti ,dc . Moreover, the estimates of γ s 0 (A, h)

based on (10) provide a measure of the differential effects of LFA versus HCD training compo-

nents net of across time and across county differences in labor market conditions. We present the

latter estimates in Tables 5 and 6 below.

        Adjusting for post-random assignment labor market conditions may be important in the

context we analyze. The four counties in the MDRC GAIN Evaluation that we analyze experi-

enced notable changes in labor market conditions over the nine-year post-randomization period.

Moreover, there are notable differences in these conditions across counties over this period. Such

differences are evident in Figures 1-4, which display, in addition to pre-random assignment val-

ues, county-specific trends in four different measures of labor market conditions over the 9-year

post-random assignment period. As shown in Figure 1, the employment rates for all sectors of

the economy declined markedly in the first three to five years after random assignment in each of

the four counties we analyze and did not recover until years 6 through 9 after random assign-

ment. This temporal pattern in employment reflects the recession that California experienced in

1990 and 1991 and the State’s economic recovery in the latter half of the 1990s. A similar pat-

tern characterized the employment in the State’s retail trade sector over the post-randomization

period (Figure 3) with one notable exception, Riverside county, where retail trade employment

grew steadily throughout the post-randomization period at an average annual rate of one percent.

        Over the same period, there was little change in the average real earnings per worker of

all workers in the four counties, although Alameda county experienced an average annual im-

provement per year in earnings per worker of almost one percent and Riverside county experi-

enced a slight decline throughout the post-randomization period (Figure 2). The earnings per




                                                    25
worker in the retail trade sector (Figure 4)—a sector which employs a sizeable fraction of low-

skilled workers—steadily declined over the first 5-6 years after random assignment and showed

some recovery after year 6, especially in Alameda county. We explore whether these across

county and temporal differences in the labor market conditions affected the temporal patterns in

the unadjusted estimates of the differential treatment effects of LFA versus HCD training on the

labor market outcomes of enrollees in the MDRC Gain Evaluation.

4.   Re-Analyzing the Effects of the California GAIN Welfare-to-Work Program, the
     MDRC Evaluation and GAIN Evaluation Counties

4.1 Estimates of Nine-Year, County-Specific GAIN Impacts

         In this section, we present estimates of the short- and longer-run impacts of being as-

signed to some GAIN training component ( α sd ) for AFDC-FG derived from the county-specific

experiments of the MDRC GAIN Evaluation. 35 We present impact estimates for three different

outcomes: (1) ever employed during year; (2) number of quarters worked per year; and (3) an-

nual labor market earnings. 36 Mean differences between the experimental and control groups for


35
   In a previous version of this paper, we examined the average (and differential) treatment effects for an additional
set of outcomes and for other subgroups of the caseloads for the four counties. In particular, we also examined the
treatment effects on two measures of post-randomization welfare participation, namely, whether the registrant re-
ceived AFDC benefits—or benefits from AFDC’s successor program, the Temporary Assistance to Needy Families
(TANF) program, that began in California in 1998—during the year; and the number of quarters in the calendar year
that she received AFDC/TANF benefits For these outcomes and those for employment and earnings, we also gener-
ated treatment effect estimates separately for AFDC-FG cases determined to be in need and not in need of basic
education.      The       results      for    these      additional     analyses       can      be       found      at
www.econ.ucla.edu/hotz/GAIN_extra_results.pdf.
36
   The employment and earnings outcomes were constructed with data from the State’s UI Base Wage files provided
by the California Employment Development Department (EDD). These data contain quarterly reports from employ-
ers on whether individuals were employed in a UI-covered job and their wage earnings for that job. These quarterly
data were organized into four-quarter “years” from the quarter of enrollment in the MDRC GAIN evaluation. The
“Ever Employed in Year” outcome was defined to be = 1 if the individual had positive earnings in at least one quar-
ter during that year and = 0 otherwise. The “Annual Earnings” outcome was the sum of the four-quarter UI-covered
earnings recorded for an individual in the Base Wage file. All income variables were converted to 1999 dollars using
cost-of-living deflators.
The AFDC/TANF variables were constructed using data from the California statewide Medi-Cal Eligibility Data
System (MEDS) files, which contain monthly information on whether an individual received AFDC (before 1998)
or TANF (starting in 1998) benefits in California during a month. These monthly data were organized into 3-month



                                                         26
3-year averages of these outcomes are found in Table 3. As noted above, MDRC has published

such estimates for these outcomes for the first 3 years of post random assignment data and re-

leased corresponding estimates based on 5 years of post-random assignment data in a working

paper. 37 While the actual estimates presented in Table 3 are similar to the MDRC 5-year results,

they differ slightly due to slight differences in the samples used and, more importantly, the use of

a different “dating” convention when calculating the measured outcomes. 38 Given that these

shorter-term estimates have been thoroughly discussed in MDRC publications, we focus most of

our discussion on the longer-term impacts for 5 through 9 years after random assignment.

         Consider first the estimated GAIN impacts on employment outcomes. Regardless of

whether one uses annual employment rates or the number of quarters employed in a year, the es-

timated impacts of Riverside’s program are consistently larger, and more likely to be statistically

significant, compared to the effects for the other three counties over the first three years after

random assignment. Over this period, the GAIN registrants in Riverside had annual employment

rates that were, on average, 13.6 percentage points (39 percent) higher than members of the con-

trol group and worked 0.43 more quarters per year (48 percent) higher than did control group

members. The employment impacts of the GAIN programs in the GAIN programs of the other

three counties are considerably smaller in magnitude and often are not statistically significant.

This apparent relative success of the Riverside GAIN training components in improving the em-


“quarters” from the quarter of enrollment in the MDRC GAIN evaluation and then organized into “years” since en-
rollment, as was done with the employment and earnings data. The “Ever Received AFDC/TANF Benefits in Year”
variable was defined to be = 1 if the individual received AFDC or TANF benefits in at least one month during that
year and = 0 otherwise.
37
  See Riccio, et al. (1994) for 3-year impact estimates and Freedman, et al. (1996) for estimates based on five years
of follow-up data.
38
   In their analysis, MDRC defined the first year of post-random assignment to be quarters 2 through 5, year two as
quarters 6 through 9, etc. In our analysis, we define year one as quarters 1 through 4, year two as quarters 5 through
8, etc. This difference in definitions results in relatively minor differences between our years 1 through 5 estimates
relative to those produced by MDRC.



                                                         27
ployment outcomes of its registrants contributed to why this program, and its work-first orienta-

tion, has been heralded nationally as a model welfare-to-work program.

         In the longer run, however, the impacts on employment for the Riverside GAIN program

diminished in magnitude and in statistical significance. In years 4 through 6 after random as-

signment, Riverside’s GAIN registrants experience a 6.9 percentage point annual average gain in

annual rates of employment (down from 13.6 percentage points) and 0.25 quarters worked (down

from 0.43 quarters) over their control group counterparts. For years 7 through 9, the Riverside

GAIN registrants have an average annual gain of only 1.5 percentage points in annual rates of

employment and 0.08 quarters worked per year relative to the control group and these latter im-

pacts estimates are no longer significantly different from zero. 39 The employment effects of the

GAIN programs in Alameda and San Diego also decline in magnitude and statistical significance

and the impacts attributable to GAIN in these counties remain substantially smaller than those

for Riverside. In contrast, the estimated GAIN impacts for the Los Angeles program increased in

magnitude in years 4 through 9 relative to those in the first three years for both measures of em-

ployment. On average, the GAIN program in Los Angeles was estimated to increase annual em-

ployment rates 3.3 (3.8) percentage points per year and the number of quarters worked by 0.10

(1.3) per year in years 4 through 6 (years 7 through 9) after random assignment. These later-year

estimate impacts for Los Angeles are all statistically significant and are larger than the effects

found for the first three years after random assignment. Recall that the Los Angeles county

GAIN program concentrated its services on long-term welfare recipients at the time our sample

members were randomly assigned. Further recall that this program assigned the highest propor-

tion of its registrants to HCD training components of the four counties we analyzed from the
39
   We also note that the average employment rates and quarters worked per year for experimentals in Riverside con-
sistently decline in magnitude over the nine-year. This is in contrast to the other 3 counties, where comparable out-
comes for experimentals in each of the other three counties increased over the nine-year follow-up period.



                                                         28
MDRC GAIN Evaluation.

           The impacts of GAIN programs on annual earnings also are displayed in Table 3. As with

the impacts on employment, the effects of receiving some training component on annual earnings

for the Riverside and San Diego GAIN programs were sizeable—$1,416 per year in Riverside

and $411in San Diego—and statistically significant in the first 3 years after random assignment.

But, as we found for the estimated impacts on employment, the effects in these two counties both

declined in magnitude and statistical significance over time. In contrast, the effects of the GAIN

programs in Alameda and Los Angeles counties were not large in magnitude in any of the peri-

ods after random assignment and were never statistically significant.

           A closer inspection of Table 3 indicates that the mean employment and earnings out-

comes for the control groups are improving more rapidly over the nine-year period than they are

for the experimental group in all counties but Los Angeles. In fact, in Riverside County both of

the employment outcomes decline over time for the experimental group. 40 In particular, in all but

Los Angeles County, the declines and/or stagnation in the experimental experimental impacts on

economic outcomes after Years 1 through 3 result from more rapid improvements of the control

group outcomes relative to those for the experimental group. Moreover, the economic outcomes

for the experimental group in Riverside County actually declined after Year 3. In contrast, the

means economic outcomes for the experimental group in Los Angeles county improved relative

to this county’s control group after Year 3.

           The fact that the economic outcomes of the control groups in Alameda, Riverside and

San Diego Counties were improving more rapidly than the experimental group raises the possi-

bility that our longer-run impacts are “contaminated” because the control groups benefited from


40
     This also is true for the annual employment outcome in San Diego.



                                                          29
GAIN services after the embargo on these services was lifted for this group. (Recall that the pro-

hibition of eligibility for any GAIN services to control group members was lifted on June 30,

1993 and cases in this group could elect, but were not required, to participate in GAIN until July

1, 1995.) Depending on when they were enrolled into the MDRC evaluation, control group mem-

bers were eligible to participate in GAIN activities anywhere from 3 to 4.5 years after their en-

rollment in this evaluation and actually were subject to a GAIN mandate from 5 to 6.5 years after

enrollment if they were on AFDC. Thus, the decline in the Riverside experimental impacts in

Years 4 through 9, for example, could be the result of some of the Riverside controls receiving

GAIN training components after their embargo from services was lifted. This same source of

“contamination” could afflict our long-term estimates of GAIN impacts for the other three coun-

ties. 41 If this occurred at sufficiently high rates among the control groups in these counties, it

could compromise the interpretation of the estimated impacts for Years 4-6 and 7-9 presented in

Table 3 as long-term impacts of GAIN.

         In the Appendix we examine whether the improvements in control group economic out-

comes is likely to be explained by control group members being “contaminated” in Years 4

through 9 by the fact that they received GAIN services after their embargo expired. While we

cannot rule out this explanation, the calculations presented in the Appendix (see Table A-1) cast

doubt upon its affect on the longer term experimental training effect estimates. We also note that,

unlike the economic outcomes, the mean estimates for experimentals and controls decline over

time in all four counties which is not consistent with the control group contamination explana-

tion.


41
   The possibility of this “control group contamination” is quite salient, given that the early findings for Riverside
County from MDRC’s evaluation led other counties in California to re-orient their GAIN programs towards the Riv-
erside work-first approach. For example, in 1995 Los Angeles County re-oriented its GAIN program to a “work-
first” program, attempting to model its program after Riverside’s.



                                                         30
         In summary, our examination of the long-term experimental estimates of the impacts of

the GAIN programs in these four counties indicate some noticeable differences between the es-

timated experimental effects in the years immediately following random assignment (years 1

through 3) compared to those at longer intervals after randomization (years 7 through 9). Fur-

thermore, the longer run impacts of Riverside’s GAIN program are somewhat less supportive of

the view that the Riverside’s program, which placed greater emphasis on LFA versus HCD train-

ing components, dominated the training strategies in the other three counties, especially in the

longer run. However, drawing the latter conclusion, while tempting, is subject to the flaw noted

in the Introduction and Section 3, namely that the MDRC GAIN Evaluation experimental design

does permit direct inferences about the differential effects of LFA versus HCD training compo-

nents. In the next section, we present evidence that attempts to shed light on such differential ef-

fects.

4.2 Estimates of Differential Effects of LFA versus HCD Training Components

         In this section we present estimates of the average differential effects of LFA versus

HCD training components ( γ s (A, h) ) for the same set of outcomes considered in the previous sec-

tion with the data from the MDRC GAIN Evaluation. We present year-by-year estimates of

γ s (A, h) for the 9-year post-randomization period to facilitate the examination of how they vary

with time since enrollment in GAIN training programs.

         We begin by examining the results for the various tests of assumption (A-1′) using data

for the control groups in the four MDRC GAIN Evaluation counties. The results of these tests

are presented in Table 4. For each outcome, we present estimates of γ s (A, h) , and their standard

errors, based on data pooled for all four counties (columns labeled “Four County Ave. γ s (A, h) ”)

as well as P-values for the year-specific tests of whether all of the county-specific estimates of


                                                31
γ s (A, h) equal zero (columns labeled “P-Value, γ sd (A, h) =0 for all d”). The first two columns for

each outcome contain results from regressions that do not adjust for control variables, while the

third and fourth columns contain results that control for Z using regression specifications in (6)

and (6′), respectively.

        Several consistent patterns for the various outcomes emerge from these tests. First, with

no controls for background characteristics or pre-random assignment outcome variables, the test

for whether the differential effects of LFA versus HCD are zero is always rejected for the All

County estimates of γ s (A, h) and typically rejected when we allow for county specific effects of

γ s (A, h) . Recall that these tests are being conducted on data for members of the controls groups,

who did not receive any GAIN training component for at least the first three years after random

assignment. As such, there should be no differential effects of one training component over an-

other for these groups. The results of these tests provide clear evidence that there were selective

differences in the populations and/or strategies for assigning LFA versus HCD training compo-

nents across counties which implies that assumption (A-1) does not hold across counties.

        Second, after controlling for background characteristics and pre-random assignment out-

come variables, we cannot reject the hypothesis that the All County γ s (A, h) ’s equal zero for any

of the employment or earnings outcomes. The same conclusion holds for the county-specific es-

timates of γ s (A, h) for most years. That is, after controlling for Z, the test results in Table 4 pro-

vide substantial support for the validity of assumption (A-1′) for the employment and earnings

outcomes. The latter findings help to justify the application of the regression-adjustment methods

we use to estimate the differential effects of LFA versus HCD training on these outcomes. 42


42
   While not reported here, we conducted the same tests of assumption (A-1′) for outcomes that measured post-
randomization welfare participation. These results are found at www.econ.ucla.edu/hotz/GAIN_extra_results.pdf.



                                                     32
         Given the test results in Table 4, we next consider estimates of the average training ef-

fects of LFA versus HCD training components derived from regression-adjustment methods. In

Table 5, we present the Difference-in-Differences (DID) estimates of γ s (A, h) based on the re-

gression specification in (7), where we use data for the experimental and the control groups of

the MDRC GAIN Evaluation. Corresponding estimates derived from estimating the regression

specification in (6) with only experimental group data are presented in Table 6. As we noted

above, the DID estimates in Table 5 represent, in our view, more conservative estimates of the

average differential effects of LFA versus HCD training. Accordingly, we pay more attention to

them in our discussion. Where appropriate, however, we do discuss some of the differences in

the estimates across these two tables. We present three sets of estimates for each outcome in Ta-

ble 6. The first set, in the first column, does not adjust for Z; the second set, in the second col-

umn, adjusts for Z; the third set, in third column, adjusts for Z and post-random assignment val-

ues of the county-specific labor market conditions.

         Consider the estimates of γ s (A, h) for annual employment and earnings outcomes in Ta-

ble 5. Without controlling for Z, the estimates of γ s (A, h) for all three outcomes are positive and

statistically significant in the first four to five years after random assignment, with the positive

(and significant) estimates of γ s (A, h) persisting through year 6 for the annual earnings outcome.

In the later years (after random assignment), the estimates turn negative and statistically insig-

nificant for the annual employment and annual number of quarters worked outcomes and become

statistically insignificant for the annual earnings outcome, although the latter effects remain posi-

Using the same testing strategy, we found that while the tests of the All County and county-specific values of the
γ s (A, h) = 0 hypothesis were typically not rejected, there are many more rejections of these tests for welfare parti-
ciaption, especially in years 8 and 9 after random assignment, than for the employment and earnings outcomes.
Thus, it is less clear that using the regression-adjustment methods to estimate the differential effects of LFA versus
HCD training is appropriate for estimating the differential treatment effects for post-randomziation welfare partici-
pation outcomes.



                                                         33
tive. Note that these unadjusted DID estimates of γ s (A, h ) implicitly assume that assumptions (A-

1) and (A-2) hold without any adjustments for population and/or training assignment differences

across counties, and that labor market conditions are comparable over time and across counties.

Based on these estimates, one would conclude that being assigned to LFA training components

initially had stronger effects on these outcomes than did being assigned to HCD training compo-

nents, but that the advantage of LFA relative to HCD training largely vanishes in the longer run.

       These results are entirely consistent with the experimental estimates produced by the

original MDRC evaluation of GAIN Evaluation. As noted at the end of Section 4.1, such find-

ings have been inappropriately interpreted as implying that welfare-to-work programs that stress

LFA training—as emphasized in Riverside county—are more effective in improving the eco-

nomic outcomes of those in welfare-to-work program relative to those that stress HCD training.

Furthermore, the relative advantage of LFA training components appears to persist for a fairly

long period (four to six years), which is notable from a training policy perspective. Finally, we

note that the unadjusted estimates of differential effects of LFA versus HCD training for em-

ployment and earnings outcomes in Table 6, which are estimated using only experimental group

data, are much larger in magnitude, especially in the initial years after random assignment, and

statistically significant in each of the nine years after random assignment, although the estimated

differential impacts appear to be unreasonably large in magnitude.

       We next turn to the estimates of γ s (A, h ) which adjust for the background and pre-random

assignment variables in Z. Recall that our tests of assumption (A-1′) using control group data

provided evidence in support of adjusting for these variables to remove cross-county differences

in population and treatment assignment heterogeneity. Relative to the unadjusted estimates just

discussed, adjusting for Z leads to substantively different estimates of the relative impacts of




                                                34
LFA versus HCD training on the post-random assignment employment and earnings outcomes,

especially in the longer run. Consider the estimates in the second columns for each outcome in

Table 5. While the differential effects of LFA versus HCD training has positive and statistically

significant effects on all three of these outcomes in the first three years after random assignment,

the effects become insignificant after Years 3 or 4, turn negative for the last three or four years

after random assignment and are statistically significant in the case of annual employment. That

is, a different conclusion emerges from this second set of estimates of the relative advantages of

LFA versus HCD training on the employment and earnings of welfare-to-work participants, es-

pecially in the longer run. While the relative benefits of HCD training appear to take a while to

emerge, based on this set of estimates, it does emerge at least for employment rates. Moreover,

the relative advantages of HCD training appear to grow with time. A similar set of conclusions

about the longer term advantages of HCD over LFA training of differential effects are also found

for employment outcome after adjusting for background and pre-random assignment outcomes

based on using only experimental group data (Table 6). We also find statistically significant esti-

mates in favor of HCD relative to LFA training for annual earnings starting six years after ran-

dom assignment.

       Finally, we consider the effects that county-specific, post-randomization labor market

conditions have on one’s inferences about the differential effects of LFA versus HCD training on

employment and earnings outcomes. We present, in Table 5, estimates of γ s 0 (A, h) , based on the

regression specification in (10) and estimated with data for the experimental and control groups,

as well as a corresponding set of estimates, in Table 6, based on a version of (10) that excludes

the terms involving the experimental-control status indicator, T, and using only experimental

group data only. Such estimates are found in the third columns of for each outcome in these ta-




                                                35
bles. These estimates adjust for both Z and for measures of post-random assignment measures of

county-specific total labor-to-population ratios and average real earnings per worker for the retail

trade sector. 43 All of the post-randomization labor market conditions variables included in the

regressions were measured as deviations from mean values for all four counties over the entire

nine-year post-randomization period. Thus, the estimates of γ s 0 (A, h) correspond to what would

prevail at these average all-county, time-invariant labor market conditions. At the bottom of each

of these tables we also present P-values for the tests of the null hypothesis that the interactions of

Mds with Ti,dc and PdcA Ti ,dc (Table 5) and of Mds with PdcA (Table 6) are all equal to zero.

        Consider the findings in Table 5 based on data for both experimental and control group

members. The P-values for the tests of no interactions of labor market conditions with Ti,dc and

PdcA Ti ,dc are rejected for both the annual employment and annual quarters of work outcomes at

conventional levels of significance, although this hypothesis cannot be rejected for annual earn-

ings. Comparing the estimates of γ s (A, h) and γ s 0 (A, h) in columns 2 and 3, respectively, for the

employment and earnings outcomes, there are two notable differences. First, one finds that the

initial post-randomization estimates of γ s (A, h) that control for post-randomization labor market

conditions are reduced in absolute value and are no longer statistically significant. Second, for all

three outcomes, the longer term (seven to nine years after random assignment) estimated nega-

tive effects of LFA versus HCD training are almost twice the size (in absolute value) of the esti-

mates that just control for Z and, are statistically significant for both employment outcome meas-

ures.

43
   While not shown here, we also estimated specifications of (10) in which Mds included county-specific measures of
the employment-to-population ratios for the retail trade sector and the average real earnings per work in all sectors
along with the total employment-to-population ratios and average real earnings per worker for retail trade. Control-
ling for this more comprehensive set of post-randomization county labor market conditions did not change the infer-
ences drawn from the more limited set of conditions used in Tables 5 and 6.



                                                        36
       The findings concerning the importance and consequences of interactions between post-

randomization labor market conditions and the estimated profiles for γ s (A, h) using only data

from the experimental group presented in Table 6 are entirely similar to those found using ex-

perimental and control group data. We reject the null hypothesis of no interactions between post-

randomization labor market conditions and PdcA and, adjusting for these conditions, we again find

evidence of the longer run advantages of HCD over LFA training for the employment prospects

of participants in the GAIN welfare-to-work programs.

5.   Conclusions

       In this paper we propose and implement non-experimental regression-adjustment meth-

ods in an attempt to isolate one of the potentially important reasons for across-program differ-

ences in training effects, namely that programs differ in the mix in and assignment of different

types of training to the participants in its programs. The latter source of treatment heterogeneity

and its potential consequences for across-program differences in training effects has been noted

by Hotz, Imbens and Mortimer (2005) and others who have evaluated the effectiveness of train-

ing programs. We have demonstrated how one might isolate average differential treatment ef-

fects of different treatment components with one set of methods. Moreover, we have shown how

one can exploit the presence of data on control groups—derived from an evaluation in which

subjects are randomly assigned to control status or the receipt of some training component—in

order to assess the validity of these regression-adjustment methods. Finally, using data for which

we have nine years of post-treatment outcomes for participants in a random assignment experi-

ment, which allows us to estimate the longest term post-training effects of training programs of

which we are aware, we have been able to investigate the longer, as well as shorter, run impacts

of welfare-to-work training programs.



                                                37
       As for the substantive implications of our re-analysis of the MDRC GAIN Evaluation

data, our estimates lead to a rather different set of conclusions about the relative advantages of

LFA versus HCD training programs on the post-training outcomes, especially in the longer run,

than exists in the training evaluation literature. Recall from the Introduction that administrators

of welfare-to-work programs across the country and welfare policy makers concluded from the

success of the LFA-oriented Riverside GAIN program documented in the MDRC GAIN Evalua-

tion that the LFA approach was more successful (and cheaper) than the HCD approach for par-

ticipants in welfare-to-work training programs.

       Based on our re-analysis of the MDRC GAIN Evaluation data using the regression-

adjustment methods developed above, we find that the LFA approach, at best, has only short-run

advantages over the HCD approach with respect to the employment and earnings outcomes for

low-skilled participants in California’s welfare-to-work program in the 1990s. Much of what has

been interpreted as the relative advantage of the LFA to the HCD approach appears to stem from

the relatively better local labor market conditions in Riverside county, especially over the first

three to five years after random assignment. Moreover, at least for employment, we present evi-

dence that in the longer run (here some five to six years after training) HCD training components

yield higher employment rates for its participants than does LFA training components. Finally,

our estimates of the differential effects of LFA versus HCD training components indicate that the

longer-term advantages of HCD versus LFA training components for economic outcomes can be

sizeable. It follows that the extent to which welfare-to-work training programs care about more

than quick fixes in their attempts to improve the self-sufficiency of its participants, our findings

suggest that the use of training components that stress the development of work-related skills,

rather than simply getting people jobs, needs to be reconsidered.




                                                  38
References

Abadie, Alberto, and Guido Imbens. 2006. Large sample properties of matching estimators for
      average treatment effects. Econometrica 74, no. 1:235-267.

Bloom, Howard, Carolyn J. Hill and James Riccio. 2005. Modeling cross-site experimental dif-
      ferences to find out why program effectiveness varies. In Learning more from social ex-
      periments: evolving analytic approaches, ed. Howard Bloom. New York: Russell Sage
      Press.

Couch, Kenneth A. 1992. New evidence on the long-term effects of employment training pro-
      grams. Journal of Labor Economics 10, no. 4:380-388.

Dehejia, Rajeev. 2003. Was there a Riverside miracle? A hierarchical framework for evaluating
       programs with grouped data. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 21, no. 1: 1-11.

Dehejia, Rajeev, and Sadek Wahba. 1999. Causal effects in non-experimental studies: re-evalu-
       ating the evaluation of training programs. Journal of the American Statistical Association
       94, no. 448:1053-1062.

Freedman, Stephen, Daniel Friedlander, Winston Lin, and Alan Schweder. 1996. The GAIN
      evaluation: five-year impacts on employment, earnings, and AFDC receipt. Working Pa-
      per 96.1, Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation, New York.

Friedlander, Daniel and Gary Burtless. 1995. Five Years After: The Long-Term Effects of Wel-
       fare-To-Work Programs. New York: Russell Sage.

Friedlander, Daniel, and Philip K. Robins. 1995. Evaluating program evaluations: New evidence
       on commonly used nonexperimental methods. American Economic Review 85, no. 4:923-
       937.

Gueron, Judith and Gayle Hamilton. 2002. The role of education and training in welfare reform.
      Welfare Reform & Beyond Policy Brief No. 22, The Brookings Institution, Washington,
      DC.

Ham, John C., and Robert J. LaLonde. 1996. The effect of sample, selection and initial condi-
      tions in duration models: evidence from experimental data on training. Econometrica 64,
      no. 1:175-206.

Heckman, James, and V. Joseph Hotz. 1989. Choosing among alternative nonexperimental meth-
     ods for estimating the impact of social programs: the case of manpower training. Journal
     of the American Statistical Association 84, no. 408:862-880.

Heckman, James, Hidehiko Ichimura, and Petra Todd. 1997. Matching as an econometric evalua-
     tion estimator: evidence from evaluating a job training program. Review of Economic
     Studies 64, no. 4:605-654.

Heckman, James, Hidehiko Ichimura, and Petra Todd. 1998a. Matching as an econometric



                                               39
       evaluation estimator. Review of Economic Studies 65, no. 2:261-294.

Heckman, James, Hidehiko Ichimura, Jeffrey Smith, and Petra Todd. 1998b. Characterizing se-
     lection bias using experimental data. Econometrica 66, no. 5:1017-1098.

Heckman, James, Robert LaLonde and Jeffrey Smith. 1999. The economics and econometrics of
     active labor market programs. In Handbook of labor economics, Vol. 3A, ed. Orley A-
     shenfelter and David Card. New York: Elsevier Science.

Heckman, James, and Richard Robb. 1985. Alternative methods for evaluating the impact of in-
     terventions. In Longitudinal analysis of labor market data, ed. James Heckman and Bur-
     ton Singer. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Hogan, Lyn A. 1995. Jobs, not JOBS: What it takes to put welfare recipients to work,” Policy
      Briefing, Democratic Leadership Council, Washington, DC.

Hirano, Keisuke, Guido Imbens and Geert Ridder. 2003. Efficient estimation of average treat-
       ment effects using the estimated propensity score. Econometrica 71, no. 4:1161-1189.

Hotz, V. Joseph, Guido Imbens and Jacob Klerman. 2000. The long-term gains from GAIN: A
       re-analysis of the impacts of the California GAIN program,” Working Paper No. 8007,
       National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Hotz, V. Joseph, Guido Imbens, and Julie Mortimer. 2005. Predicting the efficacy of future train-
       ing programs using past experiences. Journal of Econometrics 124:241-270.

Hoynes, Hilary. 2000. Local Labor markets and welfare spells: Do demand conditions matter?”
      Review of Economics and Statistics, 73, no. 3:351-368.

Imbens, Guido. 2000. The role of the propensity score in estimation dose-response functions.
      Biometrika, 87, no. 3:706-710.

Imbens, Guido. 2004. Nonparametric estimation of average treatment effects under exogeneity:
      A review. Review of Economics and Statistics 86, no. 1: 4-29.

LaLonde, Robert. 1986. Evaluating the econometric evaluations of training programs with ex-
      perimental data. American Economic Review 76, no. 4:604-620.

Lechner, Michael. 2001. Identification and estimation of causal effects of multiple treatments un-
      der the conditional independence assumption,” In Econometric evaluation of labour mar-
      ket policies, ed. Michael Lechner and Friedhelm Pfeiffer. Heidelberg, Germany:
      Physica/Springer.

Mincer, Jacob. 1974. Education, Experience, and Earnings, New York: Columbia University
      Press.

Mitnik, Oscar. 2004a. How do training programs assign participants to training? Characterizing
       the optimal assignment rules of government agencies for welfare-to-work programs in



                                               40
       California. Unpublished manuscript, University of Miami.

Mitnik, Oscar. 2004b. Differential effects of welfare to work programs: identification with un-
       known treatment status. Unpublished manuscript, University of Miami, May.

Riccio, James, Barbara Goldman, Gayle Hamilton, Karin Martinson, and Alan Orenstein. 1989.
       GAIN: Early implementation experiences and lessons. Manpower Demonstration Re-
       search Corporation, New York.

Riccio, James and Daniel Friedlander. 1992. GAIN: Program strategies, participation patterns,
       and first-year impacts in six counties. Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation,
       New York.

Riccio, James, Daniel Friedlander, and Stephen Freedman. 1994. GAIN: Benefits, costs, and
       three-year impacts of a welfare-to-work program. Manpower Demonstration Research
       Corporation, New York.

Rosenbaum, Paul. 1987. The role of a second control group in an observational study. Statistical
      Science 2, no. 3:292-316.

Rubin, Donald. 1973a. Matching to remove bias in observational studies. Biometrics 29:159-183.

Rubin, Donald. 1973b. The use of matched sampling and regression adjustments to remove bias
       in observational studies. Biometrics 29:185-203.

Rubin, Donald. 1977. Assignment to treatment group on the basis of a covariate. Journal of Edu-
       cational Statistics 2, no. 1:1-26.

Rubin, Donald. 1979. Using multivariate matched sampling and regression adjustment to control
       bias in observational studies. Journal of the American Statistical Association 74:318-328.

Smith, Jeffrey, and Petra Todd. 2005. Does matching overcome LaLonde’s critique of non-
       experimental estimators? Journal of Econometrics 125:305-353.




                                               41
Table 1
Background Characteristics and Pre-Randomization Histories of GAIN Evaluation Participants from AFDC Caseload
                                                             Alameda                           Los Angeles                    Riverside                     San Diego
                   Variable                        Mean*      Std. Dev. P-Value†       Mean*    Std. Dev. P-Value†    Mean*   Std. Dev. P-Value†   Mean*    Std. Dev. P-Value†
Age                                                34.69        8.61      0.034        38.52      8.43      0.668     33.63     8.20      0.431     33.80     8.59      0.911
White                                               0.18        0.38      0.806         0.12      0.32      0.621      0.52     0.50      0.533      0.43     0.49      0.263
Hispanic                                            0.08        0.26      0.045         0.32      0.47      0.233      0.27     0.45      0.937      0.25     0.44      0.089
Black                                               0.70        0.46      0.562         0.45      0.50      0.600      0.16     0.37      0.323      0.23     0.42      0.345
Other Ethnic Groups                                 0.04        0.20      0.400         0.11      0.31      0.663      0.05     0.22      0.700      0.09     0.29      0.473
Female-Head                                         0.95        0.22      0.978         0.94      0.24      0.043      0.88     0.33      0.633      0.84     0.37      0.349
Only One Child                                      0.42        0.49      0.458         0.33      0.47      0.743      0.39     0.49      0.079      0.43     0.50      0.530
More than One Child                                 0.57        0.50      0.391         0.67      0.47      0.976      0.58     0.49      0.093      0.53     0.50      0.621
Child 0 to 5 Years                                  0.31        0.46      0.340         0.10      0.31      0.353      0.16     0.37      0.922      0.13     0.34      0.778
Highest Grade Completed                            11.18        2.52      0.921         9.54      3.55      0.548     10.68     2.53      0.938     10.66     3.04      0.373
In Need of Basic Education                          0.65        0.48      0.885         0.81      0.40      0.982      0.60     0.49      0.615      0.56     0.50      0.362
Earnings 1 Qtr. before Rand. Assign.                $213        $851      0.797         $221      $874      0.454      $452   $1,404      0.452      $588   $1,485      0.270
Earnings 4 Qtrs. before Rand. Assign.               $264      $1,018      0.012         $216      $866      0.405      $614   $1,603      0.073      $808   $1,879      0.747
Earnings 8 Qtrs. before Rand. Assign.               $220      $1,005      0.460         $181      $796      0.473      $728   $1,840      0.003      $827   $1,958      0.301
Employed 1 Qtr. before Rand. Assign.                0.14        0.34      0.531         0.12      0.33      0.469      0.22     0.42      0.664      0.27     0.44      0.118
Employed 4 Qtrs. before Rand. Assign.               0.14        0.34      0.000         0.13      0.33      0.634      0.25     0.43      0.976      0.29     0.45      0.926
Employed 8 Qtrs. before Rand. Assign.               0.13        0.33      0.896         0.11      0.32      0.565      0.27     0.44      0.044      0.28     0.45      0.149
AFDC Benefits 1 Qtr. before Rand. Assign.         $1,907        $526      0.331       $1,874      $663      0.792    $1,190   $1,043      0.499    $1,159     $903      0.046
AFDC Benefits 4 Qtrs. before Rand. Assign.        $1,822        $551      0.317       $1,867      $662      0.440      $995   $1,027      0.663    $1,008     $928      0.098
On AFDC 1 Qtr. before Rand. Assign.                 0.98        0.14      0.692         0.99      0.10      0.341      0.77     0.42      0.837      0.73     0.44      0.086
On AFDC 4 Qtrs. before Rand. Assign.                0.96        0.19      0.982         0.98      0.14      0.765      0.63     0.48      0.973      0.60     0.49      0.102
Prop. Entered GAIN in 1988:Q3                                                                                          0.11     0.31      0.085      0.15     0.36      0.000
Prop. Entered GAIN in 1988:Q4                                                                                          0.18     0.38      0.073      0.24     0.43      0.000
Prop. Entered GAIN in 1989:Q1                                                                                          0.17     0.38      0.631      0.24     0.42      0.000
Prop. Entered GAIN in 1989:Q2                                                                                          0.17     0.37      0.299      0.21     0.41      0.205
Prop. Entered GAIN in 1989:Q3                        0.26       0.44        0.944       0.56         0.50    0.000     0.13     0.34      0.699      0.16     0.37      0.000
Prop. Entered GAIN in 1989:Q4                        0.21       0.41        0.767       0.26         0.44    0.000     0.13     0.34      0.746
Prop. Entered GAIN in 1990:Q1                        0.32       0.47        0.769       0.18         0.39    0.244     0.11     0.31      0.165
Prop. Entered GAIN in 1990:Q2                        0.21       0.41        0.578
Number of Experimental Cases                          597                              2,995                         4,405                         6,978
Number of Control Cases                               601                              1,400                         1,040                         1,154
Total Number of Cases                               1,198                              4,395                         5,445                         8,132
Fraction of Cases in Experimental Group              0.498                              0.681                         0.809                         0.858
   NOTE—Earnings and AFDC Benefits are deflated by Consumer Price Index; in 1999 dollars.
   * Mean (and standard deviation) for full sample (i.e., experimental and control groups).
   † P-Value for test of difference between experimental and control group means.


                                                                                                42
Table 2
Distribution of Proportion of Participation in Various GAIN Training Components1
                      Labor Force Attachment (LFA)                                                                      Prop. of
                                Activities                       Human Capital Development (HCD) Activities               GAIN
                                                                                                                       Registrants
                                                                                                                         deemed
                  Job Club & All Other                          Basic                      On the Job                   “In Need
                  Job Search Job Search         All LFA       Education     Vocational      Training      All HCD        of Basic
    Yr:Qtr         Activities Activities        Activities    Program        Training        (OJT)        Activities      Skills”
  Alameda
   1988:Q3            0.00           0.00          0.00           0.00          1.00           0.00           1.00
   1988:Q4            0.00           0.00          0.00           0.00          1.00           0.00           1.00
   1989:Q1            0.21           0.00          0.21           0.53          0.26           0.00           0.79
   1989:Q2            0.34           0.02          0.36           0.37          0.27           0.00           0.64
   1989:Q3            0.35           0.02          0.37           0.36          0.27           0.00           0.63         0.700
   1989:Q4            0.33           0.09          0.42           0.44          0.12           0.00           0.56         0.683
   1990:Q1            0.29           0.05          0.34           0.44          0.22           0.00           0.66         0.624
   1990:Q2            0.45           0.03          0.48           0.38          0.13           0.01           0.52         0.610
 Los Angeles
   1988:Q3            N/A           N/A            N/A           N/A            N/A           N/A            N/A
   1988:Q4            0.00          0.00           0.00          0.08           0.92          0.00           1.00
   1989:Q1            0.14          0.00           0.14          0.72           0.14          0.00           0.86
   1989:Q2            0.23          0.01           0.24          0.61           0.15          0.00           0.76
   1989:Q3            0.22          0.02           0.24          0.68           0.08          0.00           0.76          0.797
   1989:Q4            0.23          0.04           0.27          0.65           0.08          0.00           0.73          0.816
   1990:Q1            0.19          0.07           0.26          0.63           0.12          0.00           0.75          0.818
   1990:Q2            0.16          0.05           0.21          0.64           0.15          0.00           0.79
  Riverside
   1988:Q3            0.51           0.09          0.60           0.21          0.20           0.00           0.41         0.658
   1988:Q4            0.62           0.07          0.69           0.20          0.10           0.00           0.30         0.597
   1989:Q1            0.56           0.03          0.59           0.26          0.14           0.00           0.40         0.591
   1989:Q2            0.63           0.05          0.68           0.20          0.12           0.00           0.32         0.599
   1989:Q3            0.64           0.03          0.67           0.19          0.14           0.01           0.34         0.581
   1989:Q4            0.45           0.02          0.47           0.32          0.21           0.00           0.53         0.574
   1990:Q1            0.52           0.03          0.55           0.23          0.22           0.00           0.45         0.627
   1990:Q2            0.52           0.01          0.53           0.24          0.23           0.00           0.47
  San Diego
   1988:Q3            0.41           0.01          0.42           0.28          0.28           0.01           0.57         0.567
   1988:Q4            0.45           0.01          0.46           0.30          0.22           0.01           0.53         0.545
   1989:Q1            0.41           0.01          0.42           0.30          0.24           0.02           0.56         0.585
   1989:Q2            0.42           0.02          0.44           0.31          0.21           0.02           0.54         0.578
   1989:Q3            0.28           0.05          0.33           0.42          0.23           0.01           0.66         0.528
   1989:Q4            0.30           0.06          0.36           0.27          0.28           0.04           0.59
   1990:Q1            0.34           0.08          0.42           0.33          0.21           0.02           0.56
   1990:Q2            0.31           0.06          0.37           0.41          0.15           0.02           0.58
  NOTE—Areas in boxes depict the quarters in which random assignment was conducted in the various counties. PREP stands for “Pre-
Employment Preparation. This was California’s form of Workfare, i.e., it was unpaid work experience.




                                                               43
Table 3
Experimental Estimates of Annual Impacts of GAIN
                      Alameda                                Los Angeles                              Riverside                       San Diego
  Years
 after RA   Exper.    Control          Diff.        Exper.     Control       Diff.           Exper.   Control      Diff.     Exper.    Control     Diff.
Annual Employment (%)
   1-3       30.8         28.1         2.7         26.1        24.5          1.7         49.0         35.3        13.6***    45.1     40.8         4.3***
                                      (2.2)                                 (1.2)                                 (1.3)                           (1.3)
   4-6       37.0         34.7         2.3         29.2        25.8          3.3***      40.4         33.5         6.9***    40.8     38.2         2.6*
                                      (2.4)                                 (1.3)                                 (1.4)                           (1.4)
   7-9       45.3         45.3         0.0         36.9        33.1          3.8***      39.3         37.8         1.5       41.0     40.9         0.1
                                      (2.6)                                 (1.4)                                 (1.4)                           (1.4)
Annual Number of Quarters Worked
   1-3         0.80        0.75        0.05         0.71        0.67         0.04            1.33      0.90        0.43***    1.25     1.09        0.15***
                                      (0.07)                                (0.04)                                (0.04)                          (0.04)
   4-6         1.12        1.02        0.10         0.87        0.77         0.10**          1.23      0.98        0.25***    1.26     1.17        0.09*
                                      (0.08)                                (0.04)                                (0.05)                          (0.05)
   7-9         1.47        1.42        0.05         1.16        1.03         0.13***         1.23      1.15        0.08       1.32     1.28        0.04
                                      (0.09)                                (0.05)                                (0.05)                          (0.05)
Annual Earnings (1999$)
   1-3        2,333       1,849         484        1,843       1,849           -6        3,668        2,253       1,416***   3,781    3,165        616***
                                       (302)                                 (149)                                 (208)                          (208)
   4-6        4,069       3,342         727        2,615       2,493          122        4,363        3,201       1,162***   4,849    4,315        534*
                                       (464)                                 (196)                                 (283)                          (283)
   7-9        5,871       5,206         665        3,689       3,386          302        4,585        4,174         411      5,394    4,948        446
                                       (563)                                 (236)                                 (308)                          (308)
  NOTE—Sample: AFDC-FG Cases in MDRC GAIN Evaluation. Standard errors in parentheses.
  * denotes statistically significant at 10% level.
  ** denotes statistically significant at 5% level.
  *** denotes statistically significant at 1% level.




                                                                                        44
Table 4
Tests of Assumption (A-1′)
                                                          Annual Employment (%)                                     Annual Quarters Worked                                           Annual Earnings (1999$)
                                            Four            P-Value,        Four          P-Value,        Four          P-Value,        Four          P-Value,         Four            P-Value,        Four          P-Value,
                                           County            γ sd (A, h)   County          γ sd (A, h)   County          γ sd (A, h)   County          γ sd (A, h)    County            γ sd (A, h)   County          γ sd (A, h)
                                             Ave.           =0 for all       Ave.         =0 for all       Ave.         =0 for all       Ave.         =0 for all        Ave.           =0 for all       Ave.         =0 for all
  Year after Random Assignment             γ s ( A, h )            d       γ s ( A, h )          d       γ s ( A, h )          d       γ s ( A, h )          d        γ s ( A, h )            d       γ s ( A, h )          d
                 Year 1                     37.5***          0.3322        -21.8           0.4288         0.72***         0.1688        -0.83          0.3122           727             0.2937        -2,263          0.7950
                                            (5.5)                          (21.6)                        (0.15)                         (0.57)                         (522)                          (1,828)
                 Year 2                     42.6***          0.6933         -5.0           0.4577         0.96***         0.5195         0.24          0.2980         2,755***          0.7372         2,448          0.2857
                                            (5.6)                          (23.9)                        (0.17)                         (0.71)                         (718)                          (2,883)
                 Year 3                     44.1***          0.9856         -3.8           0.9826         1.14***         0.6009        -0.40          0.5694         3,376***          0.5741           193          0.2428
                                            (5.4)                          (24.7)                        (0.17)                         (0.76)                         (760)                          (3,155)
                 Year 4                     41.1***          0.7877        -13.1           0.1693         1.14***         0.8604        -0.21          0.3774         4,241***          0.3899           248          0.6496
                                            (5.5)                          (24.6)                        (0.18)                         (0.80)                         (826)                          (3,385)
                 Year 5                     29.0***          0.0337        -20.5           0.0848         0.89***         0.1321        -0.03          0.2912         3,401***          0.1106         1,790          0.5832
                                            (5.5)                          (24.3)                        (0.18)                         (0.82)                         (879)                          (3,760)
                 Year 6                     23.1***          0.0131        -13.1           0.5829         0.77***         0.0119        -0.31          0.5393         3,796***          0.0471         3,225          0.2597
                                            (5.6)                          (25.6)                        (0.19)                         (0.86)                         (923)                          (3,847)
                 Year 7                     25.8***          0.0326        -16.9           0.0735         0.79***         0.0111         0.07          0.1632         3,583***          0.0110         2,569          0.1020
                                            (5.7)                          (26.0)                        (0.19)                         (0.90)                         (938)                          (4,267)
                 Year 8                     19.2***          0.0755        -30.2           0.6259         0.57***         0.0027        -0.55          0.5708         3,794***          0.0020           446          0.4018
                                            (5.8)                          (26.2)                        (0.20)                         (0.92)                         (961)                          (4,753)
                 Year 9                     21.7***          0.3908          3.2           0.9573         0.55***         0.0310        -0.53          0.9511         3,814***          0.0143        -2,625          0.5829
                                            (5.9)                          (26.5)                        (0.20)                         (0.93)                       (1,075)                          (4,947)
Control for:
 Personal/Family Characteristics              No                             Yes                            No                           Yes                             No                             Yes
 Pre-RA Earnings, AFDC & Employ.              No                             Yes                            No                           Yes                             No                             Yes
    NOTE—Sample: AFDC-FG Control Group Cases from MDRC GAIN Evaluation. Standard errors in parentheses. All regressions are weighted by the size of the caseload in County of Residence
in Year/Quarter enrolled in GAIN evaluation. Regressions also include the following covariates:
    Personal/Family Characteristics: Age, Age2; dummy variables for Hispanic, Black, Other Ethnic Group; Only 1 Child; Single, Some High School, High School Graduate, Some College, College
Graduate, College Plus, Registered and Enrolled in GAIN in 1988:Q3, Registered and Enrolled in GAIN in 1988:Q4, Registered and Enrolled in GAIN in 1989:Q1, Registered and Enrolled in GAIN
in 1989:Q2, Registered and Enrolled in GAIN in 1989:Q3, Registered and Enrolled in GAIN in 1989:Q4, Registered and Enrolled in GAIN in 1990:Q1, Resided in Los Angeles County, Resided in
Riverside County, Resided in San Diego County; and Whether Classified as “In Need of Basic Education” by GAIN program; and Growth Rate in Real Earnings per Worker in County of Residence
as of Quarter of Random Assignment and Growth Rate in Employment-to-Population in County of Residence. All variables are measured as of the quarter of random assignment.
    Pre-RA (Random Assignment) Earnings, AFDC, Employment: dummy variables for Not Employed in Any of 8 Quarters prior to RA, Not Employed in Any of 10 Quarters prior to RA, Employed
in Quarter X before RA, X = 1,…,10, and On AFDC in Quarter X prior to RA, X = 1,…,6; and Earnings in Quarter X prior to RA, X = 1,…,10 and Amount of AFDC Payment in Quarter X prior to
RA, X = 1,…,4.
    County Labor Market Conditions: Ratio of Total Employment to Adult Population for County of Residence in Year t and Annual Retail Trade Earnings per Worker (in 1000s of 1999$) for
County of Residence in Year t.
    * significant at 10%;
    ** significant at 5%;
    *** significant at 1%


                                                                                                             45
Table 5
Difference-in-Differences Estimates of Differential Effects of Labor Force Attachment (LFA)
vs. Human Capital Development (HCD) Programs – Experimental and Control Groups
  Year after Random Assignment               Annual Employment (%)              Annual Quarters Worked                 Annual Earnings (1999$)
            γ (A, h) in Year 1               35.6*** 32.3*** 25.6**            1.04*** 0.92*** 0.67*                3,168*** 1,518*            -673
                                             (6.5)   (6.6)   (12.0)           (0.18)   (0.20)  (0.40)                (613)    (815)          (2,033)
            γ (A, h) in Year 2               34.1*** 30.8*** 19.8*             1.24*** 1.12*** 0.74**               4,842*** 3,192***    842
                                             (6.5)   (6.8)   (10.9)           (0.20)   (0.22)  (0.37)                (837)    (973)   (1,892)
            γ (A, h) in Year 3               19.3*** 16.0**          3.6       0.80*** 0.68*** 0.27                 4,305*** 2,656*** 1,028
                                             (6.3)   (6.7)          (9.6)     (0.20)   (0.22)  (0.33)                (899)   (1,020)  (1,684)
            γ (A, h) in Year 4               13.0**       9.7       -2.3       0.54*** 0.42*           0.02         3,431*** 1,781*             707
                                             (6.4)       (6.8)      (9.8)     (0.21)   (0.23)         (0.34)         (963)   (1,074)         (1,758)
            γ (A, h) in Year 5               11.2*        8.0      -6.3        0.40*       0.28       -0.18         3,257*** 1,607              390
                                             (6.5)       (6.8)    (10.0)      (0.21)      (0.23)      (0.35)       (1,025)   (1,127)         (1,812)
            γ (A, h) in Year 6                -1.9       -5.1     -19.5*       0.06       -0.07       -0.52         2,164**        514         -461
                                              (6.6)      (6.9)    (10.1)      (0.22)      (0.24)      (0.35)       (1,077)      (1,182)      (1,833)
            γ (A, h) in Year 7              -11.8*     -15.1** -31.8*** -0.30             -0.42*      -0.93***      1,492         -158       -1,184
                                             (6.7)      (7.1)  (10.2)   (0.22)            (0.24)      (0.36)       (1,098)      (1,210)      (1,860)
            γ (A, h) in Year 8                -9.3     -12.6*     -30.6*** -0.20          -0.32       -0.86**         441       -1,208       -2,275
                                              (6.8)     (7.1)     (10.1)   (0.23)         (0.25)      (0.36)       (1,128)      (1,241)      (1,856)
            γ (A, h) in Year 9              -14.5** -17.8** -32.4*** -0.29                -0.42       -0.85**          23       -1,627       -2,518
                                             (6.9)   (7.3)   (9.6)   (0.24)               (0.26)      (0.34)       (1,250)      (1,346)      (1,823)
P-Value for joint test that coefficients
 on M dsTi , dc and PdcA M dsTi , dc = 0                           0.0173                             0.0605                                 0.1601
Control for:
 Personal/Family Characteristics                No        Yes        Yes          No         Yes         Yes           No           Yes         Yes
 Pre-RA Earnings, AFDC & Employ.                No        Yes        Yes          No         Yes         Yes           No           Yes         Yes
 Post-RA County Lab. Mkt. Cond.                 No        No         Yes          No         No          Yes           No           No          Yes
     NOTE—Sample: AFDC Experimental and Control Group Cases from MDRC GAIN Evaluation. Standard errors in parentheses. All regressions are
weighted by the size of the caseload in County of Residence in Year: Quarter enrolled in GAIN evaluation. Regressions also include the following covari-
ates:
   Personal/Family Characteristics: Age, Age2; dummy variables for Hispanic, Black, Other Ethnic Group; Only 1 Child; Single, Some High School,
High School Graduate, Some College, College Graduate, College Plus, Registered and Enrolled in GAIN in 1988:Q3, Registered and Enrolled in GAIN
in 1988:Q4, Registered and Enrolled in GAIN in 1989:Q1, Registered and Enrolled in GAIN in 1989:Q2, Registered and Enrolled in GAIN in 1989:Q3,
Registered and Enrolled in GAIN in 1989:Q4, Registered and Enrolled in GAIN in 1990:Q1, Resided in Los Angeles County, Resided in Riverside
County, Resided in San Diego County; and Whether Classified as “In Need of Basic Education” by GAIN program; and Growth Rate in Real Earnings
per Worker in County of Residence as of Quarter of Random Assignment and Growth Rate in Employment-to-Population in County of Residence. All of
these variables are interacted with experimental status. All variables measured as of quarter of random assignment.
   Pre-RA (Random Assignment) Earnings, AFDC, Employment: dummy variables for Not Employed in Any of 8 Quarters prior to RA, Not Employed in
Any of 10 Quarters prior to RA, Employed in Quarter X before RA, X = 1,…,10, and On AFDC in Quarter X prior to RA, X = 1,…,6; and Earnings in
Quarter X prior to RA, X = 1,…,10 and Amount of AFDC Payment in Quarter X prior to RA, X = 1,…,4. All of these variables are interacted with ex-
perimental status.
    Post-RA County Labor Market Conditions: Ratio of Total Employment to Adult Population and the Annual Retail Trade Earnings per Worker (in
1000s of 1999$) for County of Residence in Year t. All of these variables are interacted with experimental status and experimental status × Proportion in
LFA Activities based on Case’s County of Residence and Year: Quarter of Entry into GAIN.
    *significant at 10%.
    ** significant at 5%.
    *** significant at 1%.




                                                                        46
Table 6
Difference-in-Differences Estimates of Differential Effects of Labor Force Attachment (LFA) vs.
Human Capital Development (HCD) Programs – Experimental Group Only
  Year after Random Assignment                Annual Employment              Annual Quarters Worked                    Annual Earnings
            γ (A, h) in Year 1              73.1*** 20.5** 29.2**           1.76*** 0.06           0.16         3,894*** -5,305*** -7,375***
                                            (3.3)   (9.2)  (13.5)          (0.09)   (0.33)        (0.48)         (321)   (1,669)   (2,600)
            γ (A, h) in Year 2              76.7*** 24.0*** 25.8*           2.20*** 0.51           0.36         7,597*** -1,603         -4,302
                                            (3.3)   (9.2)   (13.8)         (0.11)   (0.33)        (0.50)         (428)   (1,667)        (2,693)
            γ (A, h) in Year 3              63.4*** 10.8         -0.3       1.94*** 0.25          -0.33         7,681*** -1,518         -5,020*
                                            (3.3)   (9.1)       (15.2)     (0.11)   (0.33)        (0.55)         (479)   (1,669)        (2,988)
            γ (A, h) in Year 4              54.1*** 1.4         -17.4       1.68*** -0.01         -0.86         7,672*** -1,528         -5,619*
                                            (3.3)   (9.1)       (16.7)     (0.11)   (0.33)        (0.60)         (495)   (1,674)        (3,298)
            γ (A, h) in Year 5              40.3*** -12.4       -34.6*      1.29*** -0.40         -1.39**       6,658*** -2,542         -7,117**
                                            (3.4)    (9.1)      (18.1)     (0.11)   (0.33)        (0.65)         (526)   (1,679)        (3,528)
            γ (A, h) in Year 6              21.2*** -31.4*** -56.1*** 0.83*** -0.86*** -1.92***                 5,960*** -3,240*        -7,790**
                                            (3.5)    (9.1)   (18.2)   (0.12)  (0.33)   (0.65)                    (555)   (1,686)        (3,540)
            γ (A, h) in Year 7              14.1*** -38.6*** -64.2*** 0.49*** -1.20*** -2.25***                 5,074*** -4,126**       -8,335**
                                            (3.5)    (9.1)   (17.9)   (0.12)  (0.33)   (0.64)                    (570)   (1,689)        (3,470)
            γ (A, h) in Year 8               9.9*** -42.8*** -69.2*** 0.37*** -1.32*** -2.39***                 4,235*** -4,965*** -9,122***
                                            (3.5)    (9.2)   (17.7)   (0.12)  (0.33)   (0.63)                    (592)   (1,693)   (3,413)
            γ (A, h) in Year 9               7.1** -45.5*** -69.7*** 0.26**            -1.43*** -2.45***        3,837*** -5,363*** -9,525***
                                            (3.6)   (9.2)   (16.6)   (0.13)            (0.33)   (0.59)           (637)   (1,715)   (3,216)
P-Value for joint test that coefficients
 on PdcA M ds = 0                                               0.0420                            0.0828                               0.3462
Control for:
 Personal/Family Characteristics              No        Yes       Yes          No         Yes        Yes          No          Yes          Yes
 Pre-RA Earnings, AFDC & Employ.              No        Yes       Yes          No         Yes        Yes          No          Yes          Yes
 Post-RA County Lab. Mkt. Cond.               No        No        Yes          No         No         Yes          No          No           Yes
    NOTE—Sample: AFDC Experimental Group Cases Only from MDRC GAIN Evaluation. Standard errors in parentheses. All regressions are weighted
by the size of the caseload in County of Residence in Year: Quarter enrolled in GAIN evaluation. Regressions also include the following covariates:
    Personal/Family Characteristics: Age, Age2; dummy variables for Hispanic, Black, Other Ethnic Group; Only 1 Child; Single, Some High School,
High School Graduate, Some College, College Graduate, College Plus, Registered and Enrolled in GAIN in 1988:Q3, Registered and Enrolled in GAIN
in 1988:Q4, Registered and Enrolled in GAIN in 1989:Q1, Registered and Enrolled in GAIN in 1989:Q2, Registered and Enrolled in GAIN in 1989:Q3,
Registered and Enrolled in GAIN in 1989:Q4, Registered and Enrolled in GAIN in 1990:Q1, Resided in Los Angeles County, Resided in Riverside
County, Resided in San Diego County; and Whether Classified as “In Need of Basic Education” by GAIN program; and Growth Rate in Real Earnings
per Worker in County of Residence as of Quarter of Random Assignment and Growth Rate in Employment-to-Population in County of Residence. All
variables are measured as of quarter of random assignment.
    Pre-RA (Random Assignment) Earnings, AFDC, Employment: dummy variables for Not Employed in Any of 8 Quarters prior to RA, Not Employed in
Any of 10 Quarters prior to RA, Employed in Quarter X before RA, X = 1,…,10, and On AFDC in Quarter X prior to RA, X = 1,…,6; and Earnings in
Quarter X prior to RA, X = 1,…,10 and Amount of AFDC Payment in Quarter X prior to RA, X = 1,…,4.
    Post-RA County Labor Market Conditions: Ratio of Total Employment to Adult Population and the Annual Retail Trade Earnings per Worker (in
1000s of 1999$) for County of Residence in Year t.
    * significant at 10%.
    ** significant at 5%.
    *** significant at 1%.




                                                                     47
                           Alameda         Los Angeles             Riverside        San Diego         All 4 Counties

                  1.00




                  0.90
Ratio




                  0.80




                  0.70




                  0.60
                          -3     -2       -1      1           2        3       4       5          6     7        8     9
                                                      Years Before & After Random Assignment




                    FIG. 1—Annual Ratio of Total Employment to Adult Population, All Sectors


                           Alameda         Los Angeles             Riverside        San Diego         All 4 Counties

                  $50.0




                  $45.0
 1000s of 1999$




                  $40.0




                  $35.0
                           -3        -2    -1      1           2        3      4       5          6     7        8     9
                                                         Years Before & After Random Assignment




                                      FIG. 2—Annual Earnings per Worker, All Sectors




                                                                      48
                         Alameda        Los Angeles            Riverside        San Diego          All 4 Counties

                 0.150
Ratio




                 0.125




                 0.100
                         -3        -2   -1      1          2        3       4        5         6      7           8       9
                                                      Years Before & After Random Assignment




         FIG. 3—Ratio of Annual Employment in Retail Trade Sector to Adult Population


                         Alameda        Los Angeles            Riverside        San Diego          All 4 Counties

                 $27.0
1000s of 1999$




                 $22.0




                 $17.0
                         -3        -2   -1      1          2        3       4       5          6     7        8       9
                                                    Years Before & After Random Assignment



                              FIG. 4—Annual Earnings per Worker, Retail Trade Sector




                                                                  49
                                            Appendix

Potential Contamination of Long-Term Experimental GAIN Estimates due to Expiration of
               Embargo from GAIN Services for Control Group Members

       To investigate the potential importance of the possibility that the improvement in the con-

trol group outcomes over Years 4 through 9 after random assignment can account for the decline

in the longer-term estimated impacts of GAIN on economic outcomes, we examine the extent to

which the improvements in control group economic outcomes might be explained by control

group members receiving and benefiting from GAIN services in Years 4 through 9. In Table A-

1, we compare the trends in actual control group economic outcomes for each of the four coun-

ties with estimates of these outcomes based on the assumption that all control group members

that were on AFDC experienced the mean outcomes for their county’s experimental group, with

a three year lag due to the initial embargo. The notes in Table A-1 explain exactly how we cal-

culated these latter estimates. In that Table, we reproduce the actual mean outcomes for the con-

trol groups of each county from Table 3 and compare them with what we estimate their outcomes

would have been if the fraction of these groups that were on AFDC in Years 4 through 6 experi-

enced the mean outcome for the experimental group with a three year lag. As seen from Table A-

1, we find that for most of the economic outcomes—especially for the earnings outcomes—and

in most of the counties these estimated outcomes are, on average, less than the actual outcomes

experienced by control group members. That is, it appears that only part of the improvement in

the economic outcomes for control group members could be explained by the control group re-

ceiving and benefiting from GAIN services after their embargo from receipt of these services

was lifted. The one exception to this conclusion is for the annual employment outcome in River-

side County, where the estimates based on this explanation either over-predict or slightly under-

predict the actual rise for the control group in this county. We note that this exception is of some




                                                50
importance, given that Riverside’s GAIN program was demonstrated to be effective at increasing

employment rates in the MDRC 3-Year study.

       While we cannot rule out the “contaminated control group” explanation for the decline in

the longer-term impacts of GAIN in Riverside County shown in Table 3, the calculations pre-

sented in Table A-1 certainly raise questions about its validity. As a final consideration, we note

that we do not find any differences by experimental-control group status in the trends for the

AFDC participation outcomes in Table 3. In particular, for both the Ever-Received AFDC/TANF

and Number of Quarters on AFDC/TANF outcome measures, we find that the mean estimates

for experimentals and controls decline over time at approximately the same rate in Riverside

County as in the other three counties.




                                                51
Table A-1
Comparison of Control Group Outcomes with Estimates under Assumption that Controls on AFDC had the Same Mean Out-
comes as Experimental Group
                             Alameda                                                                               Riverside                                  San Diego
Years af-
ter Ran- Observed  Est.   % Diff. Observed   Est.   % Diff. Observed   Est.   % Diff. Observed   Est.   % Diff.
dom As- (Mean) (Mean)     (Est.–   (Mean) (Mean)    (Est.–   (Mean) (Mean)    (Est.–   (Mean) (Mean)    (Est.–
signment Outcome Outcome Observed) Outcome Outcome Observed) Outcome Outcome Observed) Outcome Outcome Observed)
Ever Employed in Year (%)
   1-3     28.1      28.1       0.0%                        24.5          24.5           0.0%           35.3          35.3           0.0%          40.8          40.8           0.0%
   4-6     34.7      29.8     -14.3%                        25.8          25.4           1.7%           33.5          41.4          23.7%          38.2          42.7          11.7%
   7-9     45.3      31.6     -30.1%                        33.1          26.1         -21.1%           37.8          36.8          -2.8%          40.9          40.8          -0.3%
Number of Quarters Worked in Year
   1-3      0.75      0.75      0.0%                         0.67          0.67          0.0%           0.90          0.90           0.0%          1.09          1.09           0.0%
   4-6      1.02      0.78    -23.3%                         0.77          0.69        -10.4%           0.98          1.09          10.9%          1.17          1.16          -1.0%
   7-9      1.42      0.90    -36.9%                         1.03          0.74        -28.1%           1.15          0.99         -13.9%          1.28          1.14         -10.8%
Annual Earnings (1999$)
   1-3     $1,849    $1,849     0.0%                        $1,849        $1,849         0.0%           $2,253        $2,253         0.0%         $3,165        $3,165          0.0%
   4-6     $3,342    $2,155 -35.5%                          $2,493        $1,846       -25.9%           $3,201        $2,885        -9.9%         $4,315        $3,439        -20.3%
   7-9     $5,206    $2,733 -47.5%                          $3,386        $2,122       -37.3%           $4,174        $2,853       -31.6%         $4,948        $3,651        -26.2%
   NOTE—The values for the “Est. (Mean) Outcome” are calculated as follows. In Years 1-3 (t=1_3), Yˆt =1_ 3 (0) = Yt =1_ 3 (0) and for Years 4-6 and 7-9 (t=4_6 and
7_9), Yˆt (0) ≡ Pt −AFDC
                     1   × Yt −1 (kd ) + (1 − Pt −AFDC
                                                   1   ) × Yt =1_ 3 (0) ,where Yt =1_ 3 (0) is the mean outcome for the control group in period Years 1-3; Pt −AFDC
                                                                                                                                                                1   is the proportion of
control group on AFDC in period t-1; and Yt −1 (kd ) is the mean outcome for experimental group in period t-1 (t-1 = 1_3 and 4_6, respectively).




                                                                                           52
