                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    GLOBALIZATION AND DEVELOPING COUNTRIES - A SHRINKING TAX BASE?

                                         Joshua Aizenman
                                          Yothin Jinjarak

                                       Working Paper 11933
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w11933


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2006




© 2006 by Joshua Aizenman and Yothin Jinjarak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Globalization and Developing Countries - A Shrinking Tax Base?
Joshua Aizenman and Yothin Jinjarak
NBER Working Paper No. 11933
January 2006, Revised May 2007
JEL No. F15,H21

                                                ABSTRACT

This paper evaluates the impact of globalization on the tax bases of countries at varying stages of development.
We see globalization as a process that induces countries to embrace greater trade and financial integration.
This in turn should shift their tax revenue from "easy to collect" taxes (tariffs and seigniorage) towards
"hard to collect" taxes (value added and income taxes). We find that trade and financial openness have
a positive association with the "hard to collect" taxes, and a negative association with the "easy to
collect" taxes.

Joshua Aizenman
Department of Economics; E2
1156 High St.
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
jaizen@cats.ucsc.edu

Yothin Jinjarak
NTU
Division of Economics
S3-B2A-06 Nanyang Avenue
Singapore 637698
yjinjarak@ntu.edu.sg
                                                          1


1.       Introduction
         A salient feature of the last twenty years has been the phenomenal increase in trade and
financial integration of developing countries alongside dropping inflation rates. The greater
openness has been reflected both in de-facto and de-jure measures of trade and financial
integration. These trends are consistent with developing countries recognizing that, in the era of
globalization, the opportunity costs of inward orientation have increased to a level justifying
outward oriented reforms. These reforms include trade liberalization (reducing tariffs, quotas,
and other non-tariff trade barriers); financial liberalization (reducing capital controls, and
financial repression); and macroeconomic stabilizations (reducing inflation, reducing thereby the
financial spread and the cost of borrowing). All of these reforms have a common fiscal
denominator – they erode the tax rates from what we call “easy to collect” taxes. These are the
traditional sources of revenue used by developing countries including tariffs, inflation tax, and
financial repression.1 Some of these effects may be compensated by the higher tariff tax base
induced by higher imports volume propagated by trade liberalizations. Yet, for countries that
start with very high tariff rates, reducing drastically tariff rates, the tax cut effect may dominate
the tax base expansion effect.2 In these circumstances, globalization may entail a negative fiscal
shock to developing countries, shrinking the tax revenue from traditional taxes. Short of
matching the drop in these taxes by a corresponding cut in fiscal expenditure, affected countries
need to increase revenue. To do this, they must rely on alternative “hard to collect” sources
such as Value Added Taxes (VAT), income taxes, sales taxes, etc. These “hard to collect” taxes,
unlike tariff administered at centralized locations (seaports, airports, etc.) and implicit taxation
by means of seigniorage and financial repression, need significant investment in tax collection
infrastructure, and spending resources on monitoring and enforcement.



1
 Developing countries’ reliance on “easy to collect” taxes has been explained by their limited institutional
capacities, political instability, and polarization. Studies explaining the reliance on “easy to collect” taxes in
developing countries include Phelps (1973), Vegh (1989), Cukierman et al. (1992), Giovannini and De-Melo (1993),
Aizenman and Guidotti (1994), Emran and Stiglitz (2005), and Gordon and Li (2007). The impact of globalization
on the pattern of taxation in the OECD countries has been the focus of Rodrik (1998). See also Tanzi and Zee
(2000); and Ebrill et al. (2002).
2
 This would be the case in countries where, due to political economy considerations, the initial tariff rate was set in
order to maximize the tariff revenue. One purpose of our analysis is to quantify the ultimate revenue impact of tariff
cuts, allowing us to test which of the two effects dominate. Similarly, macroeconomic stabilization may increase
economic growth, with ambiguous effects on seigniorage. Yet, if most countries operate on the “proper” part of
Laffer’s tax curve, one expects that globalization would reduce the tariff and the seigniorage revenue/GDP ratios.
                                                        2

        The purpose of this paper is to evaluate empirically the impact of globalization
throughout the 1980s – 1990s on the vector of taxes collected by countries at varying stages of
development. We view the greater trade and financial integration as the outcome of deeper
processes often dubbed “globalization.” Taking the globalization process first as exogenous for
the purpose of the present investigation, we trace its impact on the tax base, and the ultimate
collection of taxes. The factors explaining globalization include faster, more reliable, and
cheaper delivery of goods and services across borders, and advances in information technology
that allow cheaper fragmentation of production via FDI and outsourcing, etc. Specifically, we
quantify and explain the degree to which globalization has contributed to the diminishing fiscal
base of developing countries, and the degree to which these countries managed to switch from
the traditional “easy to collect” taxes to new, “hard to collect” taxes. We trace factors
explaining the heterogeneity of the negative fiscal shock induced by globalization and thus
explaining the depth of the fiscal adjustment accomplished already by countries at varying levels
of development.
        Figures 1.a and 1.b compare trade openness and financial integration between the 1980s
and the 1990s for developing countries segregated into five regions.3 The comparison confirms
that the globalization trend is indeed global – openness increased remarkably in all regions.
Figures 1.c and 1.d report the decline in the tariff and inflation rates during that period. On
balance, the average tariff and inflation rates declined more in regions where the rates were
above the average during the 1980s, indicating convergence of rates to a lower common
denominator. Further insight about these developments is gained by comparing the
revenue/GDP during the first 5 years of 1980s to that during the last 5 years of 1990s. Figure 1.e
indicates, as percentages of GDP, a major drop in the revenue from “easy to collect” taxes
[seigniorage + tariff], and a sizable increase - though at a smaller rate - in the revenue from


3
  Developing countries are Africa: Cameroon*, Gabon***, Guinea*, Lesotho*, Mauritius***, Namibia**, South
Africa***, Zambia*, Zimbabwe*; East Asia: Indonesia**, Korea***, Malaysia***, Myanmar*, Thailand**; Eastern
Europe: Azerbaijan**, Belarus**, Bulgaria**, Croatia***, Czech Republic***, Estonia***, Hungary***,
Latvia***, Lithuania***, Poland***, Romania**, Russian Federation***, Turkey***; Latin America:
Argentina***, Bolivia**, Brazil**, Chile***, Colombia**, Costa Rica***, Mexico***, Nicaragua*, Paraguay**,
Peru**, Trinidad and Tobago***, Uruguay***, Venezuela***; Middle East and North Africa: Iran**, Morocco**,
Tunisia**, South Asia: India*, Nepal*, Pakistan*, Sri Lanka**. High-Income Countries are: Australia, Canada,
Cyprus, Denmark, Iceland, Israel, Japan, Malta, Norway, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom. Low*,
middle**, and upper income*** developing countries classification is based on income and regional classification of
the World Bank (http://www.worldbank.org/data/countryclass).
                                                          3

“hard to collect” taxes [VAT + income]. While the drop in “easy to collect” effective tax rates is
more pronounced for high income countries, the greater initial base of “hard to collect” taxes in
these countries relative to developing countries implies a net increase in total taxes of 6 percent
in the first group, and a drop of 2 percent in the second. The position of four South Asian
countries4 is in between the high income and the developing countries: the large increase in the
revenue from “hard to collect” taxes more than offset the drop in the revenue from the “easy to
collect” taxes, increasing total tax revenue by 4 percent. These figures mask significant
heterogeneity of the adjustment across countries, an issue that will be investigated in this paper
using regression analyses.
             Before turning to the empirical work, we note the sizable theoretical literature and
growing empirical research on tax effort, tax evasion and avoidance, and administration [see
Slemrod and Yitzhaki (2002) and Slemrod (2007) for a comprehensive survey and discussion].
Applying cost benefit analysis, models inspired by Allingham and Sandmo (1972) [see also
Sandmo (2005)] explained the interplay between tax underpayment and the tax authority’s effort
to identify and limit tax frauds. This occurs in circumstances where agents gamble by
underpaying taxes, and where the probability of detection and the resultant penalties are
determined by the resources committed by the regulator, and the efficacy of institutions. These
models identify several factors explaining tax underpayment, including the tax burden, the
stringiness and efficacy of enforcement, the penalties associated with tax underpayment, and the
degree of risk aversion. Using Chilean tax revenues to estimate the impact of changes in
enforcement spending, Engel et al. (2001) find that 1 USD of additional enforcement spending
increases VAT revenues by 31 USD, and a 10 percent increase in spending could reduce evasion
from its current rate of 23 to 20 percent. Reliable evasion estimates are difficult to obtain
because the availability of data. The empirical assessment of tax effort and avoidance frequently
rely on macro estimates of the “black economy,” quantifying the revenue lost due to
underpayment of taxes.5 Some studies moved beyond inferring tax underpayment by means of

4
    India, Nepal, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka.
5
  A review of these methods can be found in Schneider (2004) and Alm et al. (2006). The methods include
evaluations of the discrepancy between national expenditure and income statistics and the discrepancy between the
official and actual labor forces [see Thomas (1992) for further discussion]; currency demand approach, exploiting
the fact that black market transactions are intermediated mostly using cash [see Tanzi (1983)]; and the electric-
power consumption, using it as an indicator of “overall” economic activity [Kaufmann and Kaliberda (1996)].
Unavoidable limitations of these methods are the inability to control properly for idiosyncratic differences across tax
                                                         4

macro methods, using information from tax audits evaluating compliance. Not surprisingly, the
estimates of VAT non-compliance vary across countries, from about 2.5 percent in the
Netherlands to over 34 percent in Italy on average during 1994-96 [Nam et al. (2003)]. While
informative, the above methods provide us with little guidance for dealing with the impact of a
common macro shock, like globalization, on the tax revenue in a panel of countries. Our
approach is to implement an extended version of the methodology used by Cukierman et al.
(1992) for the assessment of international use of inflation tax, adding controls associated with the
impact of globalization on “easy to collect” taxes.
          We outline the conceptual framework in the following section. Data and descriptive
statistics are presented in Section 3. Section 4 reports the benchmark panel regressions. We
provide robustness check together with quantification of economic significance in Section 5.
Section 6 closes the paper with concluding remarks.


2.      Conceptual Framework

        Our empirical specification controls for variables suggested by a model outlined in
Appendix A. Our benchmark model is adopted from Cukierman et al. (1992), explaining the
obstacles to tax reforms in polarized countries, characterized by political instability. They
focused on the case where fiscal revenue can be raised by taxes associated with collection costs
[income taxes], and implicit taxes where the collection cost is zero [inflation tax]. They assumed
implementation lags – the present policy maker determines the efficiency of the tax system next
period. This implies strategic choice of tax system's efficiency – the current policy maker may
choose an inefficient future tax system in order to constrain the fiscal revenue available to future
policy makers. This prevents future policy makers from spending in ways that are viewed as
inferior from the vantage point of the present policy maker. We add endogenous tax evasion,
and model the optimal enforcement of the “hard to collect” taxes. Similarly to Cukierman et al.
(1992), the model suggests the following types of controls:
i. Macro variables dealing with the tax base, and with the level of economic development.




codes due to differential exemptions and relevant provisions of the tax code, and the measurement errors and
omissions in national accounts.
                                                         5

ii. Controls dealing with the sectoral composition of the economy, reflecting differential costs of
tax evasion and collection across economic activities.6
iii. Variables dealing with political instability, polarization and quality of institutions, reflecting
the model's prediction that the present tax infrastructure reflects past public investment, which in
turn is affected by the incentives facing the previous administrations.7


Specifically, the variables we use are
(a) Globalization Factors: Our conjecture is that, if globalization cut the fiscal revenue from
traditional taxes, it would set in motion forces that will increase the collection from alternative,
less traditional taxes, including the VAT. Consequently, we expect the globalization factors,
measured by Trade Openness and Financial Openness, to increase VAT collection, and reduce
seigniorage and cut tariff revenue (the last result would hold if the adverse revenue effect of
lower tariffs dominates the increase in tariff revenue due to the growth of imports, a conjecture
that is verified as part of the empirical study).8 Slemrod (2004) finds that up to the early 1990s
measures of openness are negatively associated with statutory corporate rates, although not with
revenues collected as a fraction of GDP. One problem with using statutory rates in the
developing countries context has to do with tax incentives [Zee et al. (2002)]. At any rate, our
study is closely related to that of Slemrod (2004), but we emphasize on effective tax collection.
(b) Agriculture Share: “easy to collect” taxes should be applied more heavily in a country with
larger agricultural share in GDP, where the collection of income and VAT is challenged by the
widespread distribution of production among geographically diffused farmers. Another
possibility is that in countries where manufacturing sector is relatively small, it is optimal for

6
  See also Crocker and Slemrod (2005) for an examination on corporate tax evasion in the context of the contractual
relationship between the shareholders of a firm and a tax manager; Hines (2004) for a study on endogenous private
adoption of tax avoidance technology in response to tax reforms.
7
  Other political considerations include Anesi (2006) who argues that the electoral pressure may favor the existence
of tax-earmarking equilibria, but that it sometimes creates a tendency against earmarked taxation even when
incumbent governments have strong incentives to use earmarking rules to constrain future policymakers. Bizer and
Durlauf (1990) find that there is a cyclical component to tax changes corresponding to changes in political party
administration. See also Roine (2006) for an analysis on redistributive as well as political consequences of tax
avoidance, and Kenny and Winer (2006) for empirical evidence on democracies and reliance on income taxation.
8
 See Fisman and Wei (2004) and Aizenman (2004) for fiscal implications of trade mis-invoicing. In addition cross-
border shopping tends to make taxation even more challenging [see for example Christiansen (1994), Asplund et al.
(2007), and Goolsbee (2000)].
                                                           6

firms either to have small size to evade official detection and taxes, or to have a very large size to
overwhelm the system and extract more than proportionate benefits.9
(c) Urbanization: We expect that it is more difficult to administer and collect “hard to collect”
taxes in less urbanized and more rural countries. However, it is also possible that urbanization is
associated with underground economy, inducing the use of seigniorage to tax such informal
sector. Equally important in industrial countries is the issue of income shifting through
incorporation by high-income individuals, though it is still an open question to what degree this
practice applies to developing countries.10
(d) Institutional Quality and Political Durability: We expect countries with better institutional
quality and more stable politics tend to invest more in the tax collation infrastructure, collecting
more from “hard to collect” taxes, and less from “easy to collect” taxes.11


3. Data and Descriptive Statistics
         Our sample spans from 1980 to 1999 over 60 countries. Data Appendix provides sources
and details of the sample. A third of these countries have observations across the 1980s and the
1990s sufficient for panel regressions. Figure 2.a reports total tax/GDP in the early 1980s

9
 Though interesting, there has yet any formal test on the relationship between firm size distribution and tax evasion
across countries. For specific country studies, see for example Gauthier and Reinikka (2006) for a study on firms in
Uganda and Sleuwaegen and Goedhuys (2002) on firms in Cote d'Ivoire.
10
  Koreshkova (2006) finds some evidence on the relationships between the size of an underground economy,
inflation rate, income tax rate and the share of seigniorage in the government revenue in the U.S. and cross-country
data. Across 107 countries over 1960-2001, Catao and Terrones (2005) find a positive association between deficits
and inflation among high-inflation and developing country groups, but not among low-inflation advanced
economies. On the analysis of taxes and informal sector, see also Dessy and Pallage (2003) and Fortin et al. (1997).
Urbanization may also facilitate income shifting in response to tax changes. Using a panel of high-frequency VAT
data from Israel, Romanov (2006) traces income shifting through incorporation by high-income individuals who
convert their labor income into less-taxed dividends. He finds that a rise in the personal income tax rates resulted in
more than 4500 companies-a 5 percent addition to the corporate sector-being registered in the 12 months following
the tax change, mainly by self-employed professionals in the industries of business activities and health services;
behavioral response to taxation was found only in the top percentile of the income distribution. Firms may also self-
select into a black market and various organization forms as an optimal response to taxation [Davidson et al. (2005),
Goolsbee (2004), Kopczuk and Slemrod (2006), and Mackie-Mason and Gordon (1997)]. Another important
consideration is the distribution of the VAT and sales tax burden between consumers and producers [see for example
Carbonnier (2007) for a study on VAT reforms in France].
11
  Admittedly, Institutional Quality covers a wide range of aspects. Torgler (2005) finds in a survey data that tax
burden, lacking honesty, and corruption are seen as the main factors of tax evasion in Latin America. Political
Durability can also be viewed as the strength of an incumbent government. In the case of Spain, Esteller-More
(2005) finds that the system of unconditional grants from the central layer of government provokes an “income
effect” which disincentivises the efforts of the regional tax administration, but the importance of these disincentives
decreases according to the parliamentary strength of the incumbent.
                                                  7

(measured horizontally) and in the late 1990s (measured vertically). The further away is a
country from the 45-degree ray, the greater is the change over time in that country. Figures 2.b
and 2.c report the GDP share of revenue colleted by “easy to collect” taxes and by “hard to
collect” taxes. For most developing countries, the share of “easy to collect” declined, whereas
the share of “hard to collect” taxes increased. The average total tax revenue/GDP declined from
0.182 to 0.176. The average revenue/GDP of “easy to collect” taxes declined during the period
from 0.060 to 0.046 [see Figure 2.b]; whereas average tax revenue/GDP of “hard to collect”
taxes increased slightly from 0.086 to 0.093 [see Figure 2.c]. Interestingly, the overall cross
country patterns are non-linear, characterized by an inverted U-shape curve [see the quadratic
regression lines in Figures 2.b and 2.c]. In both figures, the left arch of the fitted U curve is close
to the 45-degree ray for countries below the sample mean, with increasing divergence from the
45-degree ray for countries above the sample mean. The concavity of the cross-country patterns
is more pronounced in figure 2.b suggesting that countries that had previously relied heavily on
the “easy to collect” taxes confronted greater losses. Figure 2.c suggests that countries below the
mean of revenue from “hard to collect” taxes in the early 1980s ended up increasing the revenue
in the late 1990s. Both figures are consistent with the notion that globalization entails fiscal
convergence. Figure 2.d compares the total government expenditure/GDP between the early
1980s and the late 1990 and shows that the average drops from 0.264 to 0.234.
       To gain perspectives about the net adjustment, Figure 3.a reports tax revenues as
percentages of GDP in the early 1980s across income groups. Most of the variation across the
four income groups was in the revenue from “hard to collect” taxes, which was about 8 percent
of GDP for the low income, progressing upward and reaching 17 percent of GDP in the high
income countries. In contrast, there was little variation in the revenue from “easy to collect”
taxes across the income groups: it was 6 percent of GDP for the low income and 5 percent of
GDP for the high income countries. The total official tax collection to GDP in these four income
groups mimics the patterns of the “hard to collect” taxes: it was about 16 percent of GDP for the
low income group, progressing upward with GDP per capita and reaching 28 percent of GDP for
the high income group. Figure 3.b reports the changes in total taxes/GDP, and in “easy to
collect” and “hard to collect” taxes/GDP between the early 1980s with the late 1990s across the
four income groups. Overall, the record is mixed. The drop in the revenue from “easy to collect”
taxes was larger for the higher income groups [in fact the revenue from “easy to collect” taxes
                                                            8

went up for the middle income group by 8.4 percent]. Both the high income and the middle
income managed to increase the revenue from the “hard to collect” taxes significantly [11
percent and 40 percent, respectively] and increasing the total tax/GDP by 6 percent and 10
percent, respectively. The increase in revenue from the “hard to collect” taxes was rather timid
for the upper and the low income countries [13 percent and 12 percent, respectively], less than
what was needed to compensate for the drop in the revenue from “easy to collect” taxes. This
induced a drop in the total tax revenue of 3 percent for the upper income countries and 17
percent for the low income developing countries. Seemingly countries exhibit complex non-
linear patterns of adjustment, where the middle-income developing countries adjust more easily
than the upper and the lower income developing countries.
         Figures 3c-3d summarize the changes in the tax revenues in the 1990s. Figure 3c reports
the patterns of tax revenues in the early 1990s, and Figure 3d traces the tax revenue changes
between the 1990-1994 and 1995-1999. The middle income countries experienced a sizable
contraction in the easy to collect tax revenue (by about 35 percent), reducing the overall tax
revenue by about 1 percent. The low income countries experienced similar drop of the tax
revenue, accounted by smaller drop in the easy to collect tax revenue (by about 10 percent), and
a drop in total official tax collection to GDP by about 1 percent.
         Globalization, being a common shock, may induce fiscal convergence across countries.
Figure 4 confirms this conjecture. It shows a gradual decline in the coefficient of variation of tax
revenues/GDP during 1980s – 1990s. This effect differs across taxes: the coefficients of variation
of seigniorage and tariff revenue/GDP during 1980s - 1990s declined by about 40 percent, as
opposed to only about 4 percent for the “hard to collect” taxes. At any rate, the reductions in the
coefficients from 1980-84 to 1995-99 are statistically significant at 0.1 percent level. Apparently,
improving the performance of the “hard to collect” taxes seems more challenging than reducing
the use of “easy to collect” sources of revenue. 12

12
   We should also note that there is another, hard to measure, “easy to collect” tax – government revenue from
financial repression. Government can impose controls on international capital flows and domestic financial
intermediaries as a form of taxation. The resultant wedge between effective external and domestic interest rates of
public debt is the financial repression tax, which is essentially a subsidy on interest payments on government
liabilities. As discussed in Giovannini and De-Melo (1993), there are also potential complementarities between
financial repression revenue and seigniorage because (i) inflation implies low real interest rates facing savers, and
thus interest savings on government liabilities, and (ii) negative real interest rates on savings increase money
demand, that is, the inflation tax base. Financial repression revenue is calculated by multiplying the stock of
outstanding domestic debt by the financial repression tax rate, which is the interest rate differential in local currency
between the effective external and domestic interest rates. Financial repression revenue may be negative (i.e. the
                                                            9


4. Benchmark Panel Estimation
           For our regression analysis, an important issue is how to measure globalization factors.
While we take the globalization process, measured by trade and financial openness, as
exogenous factors inducing fiscal adjustment in the next periods, we use instrumental method to
control for endogeneity of trade openness to geographic and structural factors advanced in the
gravity equation literature.13 Elsewhere, applying instrumental variables for trade openness has
been used by Frankel and Romer (1999) to study the impact of trade openness on income per
capita, Hall and Jones (1999) to study the impact of social infrastructure on income per capita,
and Persson and Tabellini (2003) to study the impact of political institutions on productivity and
growth. Following Frankel and Romer (1999), we use the gravity instrument for trade openness,
which is constructed from geographical determinants of bilateral trade, including log of distance,
log of partner country population, log of land area, dummy variables for common language,
common land border, and landlocked status. After estimating the gravity model, we aggregate
the exponent of the fitted values across bilateral trading partners to arrive at an estimate of total
trade share for a given country, dubbing it as the “gravity trade share.” Our gravity trade share
estimation explains around 35 percent of variation in the actual trade shares from 1975 to 1999.
The correlation between the actual and gravity trade shares is 44 percent across countries. There
is also an increasing trend of the gravity trade share across countries over the sample period.14 In
what follows throughout, we shall use this gravity trade share as a measure of trade openness to
estimate its impact on tax base adjustments. Definition of other variables in the regressions can
be found in the Data Appendix.
           Table 1 reports the benchmark panel regressions. For each of the tax equations, we use
fixed effects estimation controlling for first-order autoregressive in the disturbances. We take

effective foreign interest rate is smaller than the effective domestic interest rate), reflecting a lower cost of foreign
borrowing relative to domestic borrowing facing a government. We focus on seigniorage because there is a high
positive correlation between seigniorage and government revenue from financial repression (about 0.50). See
Giovannini and De-Melo (1993) for reports of the financial repression revenue in the 1970s and early 1980s,
Jinjarak (2006) for the 1990s, and Roubini and Sala-i-Martin (1995) for a growth model of tax evasion and financial
repression. Limited data availability on a panel of tax revenue from financial repression prevents us from adding
this implicit tax to the figures dealing with “easy to collect” taxes. Hence, these figures tend to understate the
shrinking of “easy to collect” taxes in our sample.
13
     See for example Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) and Helpman et al. (2007).
14
  A simple fixed effect regression of gravity trade share on time trend shows a statistically significant increase of
0.3 percent per year from 1980 to 1999.
                                                        10

into account reverse causality from fiscal adjustment by lagging one year the globalization
factors and explanatory variables in the regression analysis.15 Because our estimation is quite
information demanding, twenty of sixty countries have enough data.16 At any rate, the
benchmark panel estimation yields encouraging results. We find that trade and financial
openness have a positive relationship with “hard to collect” taxes, and negative relationship with
the “easy to collect” taxes. As a group, “hard to collect” tax revenue responds positively to trade
and financial openness. VAT and Income Taxes are also associated with the globalization factors
with the expected positive sign. Though the coefficient of Trade Openness on Income Taxes and
the coefficient of Financial Openness on VAT are found to be insignificant, these findings are
not entirely surprising given the ongoing debates on how to effectively tax corporations and
financial services [see, for example, taxation on financial services in Auerbach and Gordon
(2002), Caminal (1997), and Whalley and Zhang (2005), and taxation on transfer pricing and
multinationals in Bartelsman and Beetsma (2003) Desai et al. (2004), and Desai et al. (2006)].17
        Of the “easy to collect” taxes expected to be hard hit by globalization factors, only
Seigniorage is found to respond significantly in statistical term to Trade Openness. Except the
coefficient of Financial Openness on Tariffs, the components of “easy to collect” taxes respond
to globalization with a correct negative sign. A negative association between Trade Openness
and Tariffs is consistent with previous studies on trade liberalization and tariff revenue [see, for
example, Baunsgaard and Keen (2005)]. Financial Openness is negatively associated Seigniorage
but positively with Tariffs; the latter, though insignificant, may be justified by a possibility that
openness and development of the financial system help improving trade mis-invoicing problems.
As a group, “easy to collect” tax revenue responds strongly negative to Trade Openness, but
insignificantly positive to Financial Openness.



15
  A future step would be an investigation on the two-way causality between tax base adjustment and global
macroeconomy. Some leads in this direction can be found in Frenkel and Razin (1989), Mendoza and Tesar (1998),
and Mendoza and Tesar (2005).
16
  Argentina, Cameroon, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Mexico, Morocco, Pakistan,
South Africa, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uruguay, Venezuela, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.
17
  Notwithstanding the reliability issue of corporate tax data available; see Desai (2005) and Desai and Dharmapala
(2006) on how firms could simultaneously be inflating profits reported to the capital markets and understating
profits reported to tax authorities.
                                                        11

        Turning to other control variables, we find that better Institutional Quality is associated
with a lower use of “easy to collect” taxes. VAT and Tariffs respond negatively to Political
Durability. Although the negative relationships of VAT with Political Durability and Institutional
Quality seem counterintuitive, it is not impossible given the difficulty in implementing and
adjusting VAT collection technicality for industrial countries facing even more organized and
sophisticated tax frauds.18 As expected, Urbanization increases VAT collection, and we have yet
to find supportive evidence that Urbanization facilitates the use of Seigniorage to tax informal
sector. Tariff revenue is found to be increasing with the Agriculture Share in GDP, in line with
the theoretical prediction.
        Overall the benchmark regressions are supporting our conjecture that above and beyond
institutional, political, and structural factors, the globalization forces influence the size and
composition of tax base and tax revenue. One issue with this set of estimation is that we have
only twenty countries each with six or seven years of observations. The Jarque-Bera and
Shapiro-Wilk residuals tests reject the null of normality in all except for residuals from the VAT
equation. With such the data availability, our hope lies on a more robust estimation technique on
this sample, the empirical task that we take in the following section.


5. Robustness and Economic Significance
        One way to improve upon the benchmark regressions is to take into account a joint
determination among “easy to collect” and “hard to collect” taxes, and that different taxes have
different evasion characteristics, so that optimal tax mix and its transitions emerge naturally
[Boadway et al. (1994), Caselli (1997), Kaplow (2006), Levinsohn and Slemrod (1993), and
Naito (2006)].19 Zellner (1962)’s Seemingly Unrelated Regression (SUR) is appropriate in this
context because it captures the efficiency due to the correlation of the disturbances across
equations [Baltagi (2005)]. Since we do not model tax equations as having structural


18
  The pan-European VAT system and tax base harmonization debated in the European communities is a good
example. See for example FT (2006) and FT (2007).
19
  For example Gordon and Bo Nielsen (1997) note that ignoring tax evasion possibilities, a VAT and a cash-flow
income tax have similar behavioral and distributional consequences, yet the available means of tax evasion under
each can be very different: under a VAT, avoidance occurs through cross-border shopping, whereas under an
income tax it can occur through shifting taxable income abroad – a country would make use of both taxes in order to
minimize the efficiency costs of evasion activity, relying relatively more on whichever tax is harder to evade. They
provide some supportive evidence that VAT is more effective in the case of Denmark.
                                                  12

relationship in the sense that one type of taxes appears as an explanatory variable in the others,
each revenue equation is, by itself, a classical regression, and therefore the parameters could be
estimated consistently, if not efficiently, by the OLS [Ruud (2000)] as we do in the previous
section. In a cross-section context, the OLS and generalized least squares (GLS) on the whole
system are identical when the equations have identical explanatory variables [Greene (2002)]. In
a panel data framework, Baltagi (2005) shows that a block-diagonal covariance matrix between
the disturbances of different equations makes GLS on the whole system equivalent to GLS on
each equation separately, but not when the same explanatory variables appear in each equation.
To directly apply SUR with a set of our benchmark regressions of the previous section, we use
the same explanatory variables. In order to gain estimation efficiency from SUR, we develop a
two-step approach. In the first step, we generate a new set of interaction variables between
globalization factors and other control variables based on their statistical significance in the
benchmark regressions of Table 1. In the second step, we apply SUR to the set of benchmark
regressions adding the interaction variables, the inclusion of which varies across regressions. Not
only does this two-step procedure allow us to capture estimation efficiency from SUR, but we
also get a further insight from interacting globalization factors with institutional, political, and
structural variables. Essentially, we can then understand, for example, whether economic
integration affects differently to countries with a high level of institution compared to countries
with a low level.
       Table 2 reports SUR estimates with interactions. Besides the control variables outlined
above, we also include a one-year lag of the dependent variables to improve the fit and control
for possible dynamics of tax collection. Coefficients of the main explanatory variables are
similar to those found in the benchmark regressions. The coefficient of Political Durability on
Income Taxes and the coefficient of Urbanization on Seigniorage are now statistically
significant. The latter thus supports the conjecture that urbanization is associated with
underground economy, inducing the use of seigniorage to tax such informal sector. SUR with
interaction variables explain well around 40-90 percent of variation in the data. We also find
that the normality of residuals cannot be rejected for VAT equation based on the Jarque-Bera and
Shapiro-Wilk tests, and that the variance of the residuals are independent of the explanatory
variables for the “hard to collect” and “easy to collect” SUR regressions based on the Breusch-
Pagan test. Although the improvement of these SUR estimates upon the benchmark estimation is
                                                         13

rather small across the board in term of residuals normality, we believe that the inclusion of
control variables suggested in the literature is comprehensive and thus a future expansion of
country-year observations beyond the current sample will help increase the overall efficiency of
the estimation.
         Fortunately we gain several further insights from the interaction variables. Seigniorage
responds more negatively to higher Trade Openness and Institutional Quality. That is, countries
with low level of Institutional Quality have found the fiscal adjustment more challenging,
frequently ending with a diminishing tax revenue. When Political Durability is longer, Trade
Openness has a larger positive impact on VAT and “hard to collect” tax revenues, and a larger
negative impact on Tariffs. Furthermore VAT also responds favorably to Trade Openness when
countries have a high level of Urbanization. Countries with a higher Agriculture Share in GDP
scale down Tariff revenue in response to Trade Openness, and Income Taxes in response to
greater Financial Openness. Income Taxes of countries with higher level of Urbanization tend to
respond positively to Financial Openness. We are intrigued to find that “hard to collect” tax
revenue tends to fall when Political Durability and Financial Openness are both at a high level.
The rapid financial liberalizations of the 1990s seem to pose a greater fiscal challenge on a
relatively durable government to reform.
         We conclude our empirical analysis with quantifying economic significance of the
globalization factors. Table 3 summarizes the impact of a one standard deviation change of the
globalization factors on taxes/GDP. The calculation is based on the SUR estimates reported in
Table 2.20 Summing up its individual and interaction effects, Trade Openness increases “hard to
collect” tax revenue by 4.5 percent, of which two-third of the impact comes from its interactions
with Political Durability. The individual effect of Trade Openness is responsible for a reduction
of 8 percent in “easy to collect” tax revenue. In response to Trade Openness, VAT increases 3.1
percent, Tariffs and Seigniorage drop by 2.4 percent and 4.1 percent, respectively. About two-
third of the impact on VAT is a result of the interactions, further highlighting the role of
administration costs in its collection facing the developing country governments. Financial
Openness has a small negative effect on “hard to collect” tax revenue, mainly from its

20
  For example, a standard deviation of the Trade Openness for developing countries is 2.2 percent. Using the
coefficient estimate of Trade Openness on “hard to collect” taxes from Table 2, which is 0.8 and statistically
significant, the effect of a one standard deviation change of Trade Openness is to increase “hard to collect” taxes by
2.2×0.8 = 1.7 percent of GDP.
                                                        14

interactions with Political Durability and Agriculture Share, partially an intriguing result
discussed earlier. In total, the globalization factors increase, as percentages of GDP, “hard to
collect” revenue by 3 percent and decrease “easy to collect” revenue by 8 percent. Following a
one standard deviation increase of globalization factors, VAT increases by 3.1 percent, Income
Taxes increase by 0.7 percent, Tariffs drop by 2.4 percent, and Seigniorage drops by 4.6 percent.
Taken together with our earlier discussion on the overall tax revenue adjustment, these numbers
imply that the globalization factors are responsible for about a fifth of the 16 percent increase of
“hard to collect” base/GDP and two-third of the 12 percent drop of “easy to collect” base/GDP
in developing countries.


6. Concluding Remarks
        Our study found that globalization has imposed new fiscal challenges on developing
countries, forcing them to scale down traditional “easy to collect” revenue sources. A good
share of developing countries managed the adjustment by shifting the tax revenue to the “hard to
collect” taxes. Yet, countries with low level of institutional quality have found the adjustment
more challenging, frequently ending with a drop in the net tax revenue/GDP. Trade and
financial openness exert economically significant impact on tax revenue/GDP over the period of
our investigation. A fifth of the increase in “hard to collect” taxes/GDP and two-third of the
drop in “easy to collect” taxes/GDP can be traced back to the individual and interaction effects of
globalization factors.
        This paper is another step in understanding the evolution of tax revenue, tax base, and tax
effort across countries. Among fiscal issues in the global context, we have yet to touch on the
consequences of competition over tax revenue among fiscal institutions.21 Our study has also
focused only on half of the adjustment, as we do not include government expenditure as a
potential determinant of the tax policy. It is possible that part of the adjustment of “hard to
collect” and “easy to collect” tax to globalization is accomplished by opening a larger fiscal gap,
or by scaling down government spending.22 At this point, we do not have sufficient data that will

21
  This issue is particularly important in fiscal federalism. See for example Berkowitz and Li (2000), Boadway et al.
(2002), Brulhart and Jametti (2006), Cremer and Gahvari (2000), and Devereux et al. (2007).
22
  See Rodrik (1998) and Shelton (forthcoming) for some discussion on globalization and the size of government
expenditures. In addition, the ramification of fiscal adjustment on macroeconomy in general is less well understood
in the case of developing countries. Talvi and Vegh (2005) study the association between tax base volatility and
                                                          15

allow us to do more rigorous analysis beyond a simple period comparison reported in Figure 2.d.
Another possible empirical extension is to directly quantity tax effort across countries.23 We
should also note that the presence of informal economy may overstate the effective tax rates used
throughout the paper. The association between tax revenue and the informal sector in
developing countries warrants future investigations.24


                                                  Data Appendix
Tax Revenues: The effective rate of actual revenue collection as a percentage of GDP. VAT (value added taxes),
Income Taxes (corporate and personal taxes), and Tariffs (imports and exports trade taxes) are from Office of Tax
Policy Research at University of Michigan; http://www.bus.umich.edu/OTPR/. Following Cukierman et al. (1992),
Seigniorage is constructed from changes in high-powered (reserve) money from line 14…ZF… of International
Financial Statistics (IFS). By tax effort, Tariffs and Seigniorage are “easy to collect” taxes, whereas VAT and
Income Taxes are “hard to collect” taxes. All of the taxes are divided by GDP.
Globalization variables: Trade Openness is constructed from gravity regression methodology, using data from
NBER-UN World Trade Flows (http://www.nber.org/data/; values of exports and imports), Frankel and Rose (2002)
(distance, common official language, common borders, land-area product), World Development Indicators (WDI;
population of trading partners, real GDP). Financial Openness is imputed Quinn index from Edwards (forthcoming).
Control variables: Institutional Quality is the composite index of good governance from International Country Risk
Guide (http://www.prsgroup.com/). Political Durability is the number of years in power of incumbent government,
from Political IV Project (http://www.cidcm.umd.edu/polity/). Urbanization and Agricultural Share are from WDI.
Government expenditure is from IFS. Weighted tariff rates are derived from reports of the World Bank-Operations
Evaluation Department.




macroeconomic policies in developing countries. For OECD, Alesina et al. (2002) find that various types of taxes
also have negative effects on profits, but, interestingly, the effects of government spending on investment are larger
than those of taxes.
23
     See Leuthold (1991) for an application on some African countries.
24
  See Schneider and Enste (2000), Friedman et al. (2000), Dabla-Norris et al. (forthcoming) for attempts to
measure of informal economy in the early 1990s. Garcia-Penalosa and Turnovsky (2005) consider optimal capital-
labor income tax structure in the presence of informal economy.
                                                               16


                                                         Appendix A
         Our benchmark model is adopted from Cukierman, et al. (1992), which explains the obstacles to tax
reforms in polarized countries, characterized by political instability. They focused on the case where fiscal revenue
can be raised by taxes associated with collection costs [income taxes], and implicit taxes where the collection cost is
zero [inflation tax]. They assumed implementation lags – the present policy maker determines the efficiency of the
tax system next period. This implies that the choice of the tax system efficiency may be strategic – the current
policy maker may choose an inefficient future tax system in order to constrain the fiscal revenue available to future
policy makers. This prevents future policy makers from spending in ways that are viewed as inferior from the
vantage point of the present policy maker.
         We extend Cukierman et. al. model by adding endogenous tax evasion, and modeling the optimal
enforcement of the “hard to collect” taxes. The economy at time t is described by two representative budget
constraints: the government, (A1) and the private sector, (A2):


                            gt + f t + θ t ≤ τ at + st                                                      (A1)

                            ct = 1 − τ ta − st − δ (τ~t ) − γ ( st ) .                                      (A2)


Each individual is endowed with one unit of output in each period. The variables g t ; f t represent two different

public goods [say guns and butter] in per capita terms, and ct is per-capita private consumption. The term            θ t is the
fiscal investment in tax capacity, the impact of which is discussed below. The government collects from each

individual an amount s t , in the form of easy to collect taxes [seigniorage, tariff, etc.] and an amount τ t of actual
                                                                                                               a



hard to collect taxes [like, income, VAT, etc]. The statutory tax rate is τ~t . Easy to collect taxes carries no

administrative costs, whereas the hard to collect taxes are associated with costly enforcement, described below.
Both types of taxes impose convex deadweight losses on the private sector, equal to      δ (τ~t ); γ ( st ) , satisfying
δ ' > 0, δ " > 0, γ ' > 0, γ " > 0 .      Underpaying taxes is costly: with probability pt , the agent is audited. If she

is found paying τ t below the statutory rate, she would be penalized, paying τ~t   + 0.5φt [τ~t − τ t ]2 . Hence,

underpaying is associated with a quadratic penalty of 0.5φt [τ~t − τ t ] , paid with probability pt . The period t
                                                                          2



utility from the private consumption is U (ct ) . The representative agent would submit tax payment τ t ,
                                                                                                               s


maximizing her expected utility:


     ⎡    ⎛1 − {τt + 0.5φt [τt − τ t ]2 } − ⎞                                                         ⎤
MAX ⎢ ptU ⎜
          ⎜ s − δ (τ ) − γ ( s )                                    (
                                              ⎟⎟ + (1 − pt )U 1 − τ t − st − δ (τt ) − γ ( st )   )   ⎥
    ⎢⎣    ⎝ t        t         t               ⎠                                                       ⎥⎦          (A3)

 τt
                                                                        17


                                                                                             1 − pt
Optimizing (A3), the optimal submitted tax, denoted by τ t , is: τ t = τ~t −                        (1 − λ ) where λ is the risk
                                                                        s      s

                                                                                              ptφt
                                   U ' (ct , a ) − U ' (ct , n )
premium adjustment,           λ=                                 ≥ 0 , and U ' (ct ) is the marginal utility associated with
                                         U ' (ct , a )

consumption ct . The risk term,           λ,   is the percentage gap of the marginal utilities between the audit and no-audit

                                                                              (1 − pt ) 2
cases. The resultant expected tax payment is E[τ t ] = τ~t − 0.5                          (1 − λ2 ) . In practice, the risk
                                                                                 p t φt
adjustment term, λ , is of second order magnitude in circumstances where the tax gap between the increases in tax
payment associated with audit, is small relative to total consumption. Thus, for simplicity, we henceforth ignore this
                                                                                   ct , n − ct , a − U " (ct , a )
risk adjustment term, assuming λ ≅ 0 [It is easy to verify that              λ≅                                    , hence, λ is negligible
                                                                                         ct , a     U ' (ct , a )

       ct ,n − ct ,a
when                   is small]. The economy is populated with a large number of atomistic agents. Hence, from the
           ct ,a
point of view of the authorities, the idiosyncratic risk associated with tax evasion is diversified away – in the macro

budget constraints (A1) - (A2), the actual tax revenue τ t is the expected tax payment of the atomistic agent,
                                                                    a



                                     (1 − pt )      2
                                                                     (1 − pt )           2
                       τ = τ~t − 0.5
                          a
                                               (1 − λ2 ) ≅ τ~t − 0.5           .                                       (A4)
                                        p t φt                          p t φt
                         t


The policy maker problem
          There are two possible policymaker types, L and R, who randomly alternate in office. The policy maker of
type i, i = L, R maximizes welfare:


                                                       ⎧ min[α g , (1 − α ) f ]
                                                       ⎪                                                           i=L
      ⎧ ∞      ⎡U (ct + k ) +        ⎤⎫                      α (1 − α )
 t    ⎪      k ⎢                     ⎥ ⎪   i          ⎪⎪
w =E ⎨ ∑ β                             ⎬; H (g, f ) = ⎨                                                                     .     (A5)
 i  t
      ⎪k = 0   ⎢   i (g      ,     ) ⎥
                        t + k t + k ⎦ ⎪⎭              ⎪ min[α g , (1 − α ) f ]
                 H             f
      ⎩        ⎣
                                                       ⎪                                                           i=R
                                                       ⎪⎩    α (1 − α )

where Et denotes the expectation operator, U is a concave utility function, H ( g , f ) corresponds to the utility
                                                                                                i



associated with the public good, as evaluated by policy maker type i, 1 >                β > 0, 1>α > 0.            The political system

is described as a Markov process with transition probabilities π and 1 – π : the government in office at time t has a
fixed probability 1 – π of being reappointed next period. With probability π, it is thrown out of office and the other
policymaker type is appointed.
                                                               18

            Let x ≡ g + f denote the total amount of government spending. For concreteness, we assume               α > 0 .5 .
While the private agent views the probability of an audit, and the penalty rate at time t, as exogenous, these variables
are pre-determined by the policy maker at time t -1. The efficiency of the tax system is determined by the
probability of an audit, and by the penalty associated with tax evasion, p and φ, respectively. We assume that both p
and φ are determined by the investment in tax capacity, θ . To capture the greater inertia in reforming the tax

system than in changing fiscal policy, assume that the investment in tax efficiency,        θ , along with p and φ, but not
the other policy variables ( τ~t ; st ; g t ; f t ), must be chosen one period in advance. Thus,   θ t −1 was chosen at time t-
1, but exerts an influence on the efficiency of the tax system only at time t:


                                         pt = pt (θ t −1 ; ST );    p' > 0;   p" < 0;
                                                                                        .                   (A6)
                                         φt = φt (θ t −1 ; ST ); φ ' > 0; φ " < 0;

where ST is the vector of structural factors impacting the cost of tax collection. Specifically, high urbanization rate,
lower share of agriculture and higher trade openness may reduce the effective cost of monitoring and collecting
information, implying greater efficiency of the collection system. As these structural factors are changing slowly,
we view them beyond the control of the policy maker, and focus on the determination of optimal investment in tax

capacity,   θt .   As in proposition 1 in Cukierman, et al. (1992), optimal choices of consumption, aggregate public

good, easy and hard taxes are a function of the efficiency of the tax system:


            c* = C (θ ); x* = X (θ ); s* = S (θ ); (τ a )* = T (θ );                                         (A7)


satisfying C ' (θ ) < 0; X ' (θ ) > 0; S ' (θ ) < 0; T ' (θ ) > 0 , where z* denotes the optimal value of z. The

equilibrium value of the tax rate chosen,    θ , satisfies the first order condition:

                                             ⎡             1−α ⎤
                      βU ' (C (θ ))C ' (θ ) + ⎢1 − π + π         X ' (θ ) = 1                                (A8)
                                             ⎣              α ⎥⎦

The main results of the model are summarized by the following proposition:
    I.      If the current government is certain of being reappointed, or if there is no polarization ( π = 0 or
α = 0.5 ), then it brings about the most efficient tax system.
    II. The lower the probability that the current government will remain in office and the greater the polarization,
the more inefficient is the tax system left as a legacy to the future administration. This inefficiency is manifested by
lower investment in tax capacity, inducing a lower probability of auditing, and a lower penalty on tax evasion,
reducing thereby the tax collection associated with a given statutory tax rate. Structural factors that increase the ease
of tax evasion reduce the equilibrium tax collection, and increase the share of the “easy to collect” taxes.
                                                         19

                                                   References
Aizenman, J. & Guidotti, P. E. (1994) Capital Controls, Collection Costs, and Domestic Public Debt. Journal of
          International Money and Finance, 13, pp. 41-54.
Aizenman, J. & Jinjarak, Y. (2006) Globalization and Developing Countries - A Shrinking Tax Base? , NBER
          Working Papers No. 11933.
Aizenman, J. (2004) Financial Opening and Development: Evidence and Policy Controversies, American Economic
          Review, May, pp. 65-70.
Alesina, A., Ardagna, S., Perotti, R. & Schiantarelli, F. (2002) Fiscal Policy, Profits, and Investment. The American
          Economic Review, 92, pp. 571-589.
Allingham, M. G. & Sandmo, A. (1972) Income tax evasion: a theoretical analysis. Journal of Public Economics, 1,
          pp. 323-338.
Alm, J., Martinez-Vazques, J. & Schneider, F. (2006) Sizing the Problem of the Hard to Tax. IN Alm, J., Martinez-
          Vazquez, J. & Rider, M. (Eds.) The Challenges of Tax Reform in a Global Economy. Springer.
Anderson, J. E. & van Wincoop, E. (2003) Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border Puzzle. American
          Economic Review, 93, pp. 170-192.
Anesi, V. (2006) Earmarked Taxation and Political Competition. Journal of Public Economics, 90, pp. 679-701.
Asplund, M., Friberg, R. & Wilander, F. (2007) Demand and distance: Evidence on cross-border shopping. Journal
          of Public Economics, 91, pp. 141-157.
Auerbach, A. J. & Gordon, R. H. (2002) Taxation of Financial Services under a VAT. AEA Papers and
          Proceedings, 92, pp. 411-416.
Baltagi, B. H. (2005) Econometric Analysis of Panel Data, Chichester, John Wiley & Sons, LTD.
Bartelsman, E. J. & Beetsma, R. M. W. J. (2003) Why pay more? Corporate tax avoidance through transfer pricing
          in OECD countries. Journal of Public Economics, 87, pp. 2225-2252.
Baunsgaard, T. & Keen, M. (2005) Tax Revenue and (or?) Trade Liberalization. IMF.
Berkowitz, D. & Li, W. (2000) Tax rights in transition economies: a tragedy of the commons? Journal of Public
          Economics, 76, pp. 369-397.
Bizer, D. S. & Durlauf, S. N. (1990) Testing the positive theory of government finance. Journal of Monetary
          Economics, 26, pp. 123-141.
Boadway, R., KatherineCuff & Marceau, N. (2002) Inter-Jurisdictional Competition for Firms. International
          Economic Review, 43, pp. 761-782.
Boadway, R., Marchand, M. & Pestieau, P. (1994) Towards a theory of the direct-indirect tax mix. Journal of Public
          Economics, 55, pp. 71-88.
Brulhart, M. & Jametti, M. (2006) Vertical versus horizontal tax externalities: An empirical test. Journal of Public
          Economics, 90, pp. 2027-2062.
Caminal, R. (1997) Financial intermediation and the optimal tax system. Journal of Public Economics, 63, pp. 351-
          382.
Carbonnier, C. (2007) Who pays sales taxes? Evidence from French VAT reforms, 1987-1999. Journal of Public
          Economics, 91, pp. 1219-1229.
Caselli, F. (1997) On the distribution of debt and taxes. Journal of Public Economics, 65, pp. 367-386.
Catao, L. A. V. & Terrones, M. E. (2005) Fiscal Deficits and Inflation. Journal of Monetary Economics, 52, pp.
          529-554.
Christiansen, V. (1994) Cross-Border Shopping and the Optimum Commodity Tax in a Competitive and a
          Monopoly Market. The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 96, pp. 329-341.
Cremer, H. & Gahvari, F. (2000) Tax evasion, fiscal competition and economic integration. European Economic
          Review, 44, pp. 1633-1657.
Crocker, K. J. & Slemrod, J. (2005) Corporate Tax Evasion with Agency Costs. Journal of Public Economics, 89,
          pp. 1593-1610.
Cukierman, A., Edwards, S. & Tabellini, G. (1992) Seigniorage and Political Instability. American Economic
          Review, 82, pp. 537-555.
Dabla-Norris, E., Gradstein, M. & Inchauste, G. (forthcoming) What causes firms to hide output? The determinants
          of informality. Journal of Development Economics, pp.
Davidson, C., Martin, L. W. & Wilson, J. D. (2005) Tax evasion as an optimal tax device. Economics Letters, 86,
          pp. 285-289.
Desai, M. A. (2005) The Degradation of Reported Corporate Profits. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19, pp.
          171-192.
                                                         20

Desai, M. A. & Dharmapala, D. (2006) Corporate tax avoidance and high-powered incentives. Journal of Financial
          Economics, 79, pp. 145-179.
Desai, M. A., Foley, C. F. & Hines, J. J. R. (2004) Foreign direct investment in a world of multiple taxes. Journal of
          Public Economics, 88, pp. 2727-2744.
Desai, M. A., Foley, C. F. & Hines, J. R., Jr. (2006) The Demand for Tax Haven Operations. Journal of Public
          Economics, 90, pp. 513-531.
Dessy, S. & Pallage, S. (2003) Taxes, inequality and the size of the informal sector. Journal of Development
          Economics, 70, pp. 225-233.
Devereux, M. P., Lockwood, B. & Redoano, M. (2007) Horizontal and vertical indirect tax competition: Theory and
          some evidence from the USA. Journal of Public Economics, 91, pp. 451-479.
Ebrill, L., Keen, M., Bodin, J.-P. & Summers, V. (2002) The allure of the value-added tax. Finance and
          Development, 39, pp. 2002.
Edwards, S. (forthcoming) Capital Controls, Sudden Stops and Current Account Reversals. IN Edwards, S. (Ed.)
          Capital Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies: Policies, Practices and Consequences.
          NBER.
Emran, S. M. & Stiglitz, J. E. (2005) On Selective of Indirect Tax Reform in Developing Countries. Journal of
          Public Economics, 89, pp. 599-623.
Engel, E. M. R. A., Galetovic, A. & Raddatz, C. E. (2001) A Note on Enforcement Spending and VAT Revenues.
          Review of Economics and Statistics, 83, pp. 384-387.
Esteller-More, A. (2005) Is there a connection between the tax administration and the political power? International
          Tax and Public Finance, 12, pp. 639-663.
Fortin, B., Marceau, N. & Savard, L. (1997) Taxation, wage controls and the informal sector. Journal of Public
          Economics, 66, pp. 293-312.
Frankel, J. & Rose, A. (2002) An Estimate of the Effect of Common Currencies on Trade and Income. Quarterly
          Journal of Economics, pp. 437-466.
Frankel, J. A. & Romer, D. (1999) Does Trade Cause Growth? American Economic Review, 89, pp. 379-399.
Frenkel, J. A. & Razin, A. (1989) International Effects of Tax Reforms. Economic Journal, 99, pp. 38-58.
Friedman, E., Johnson, S., Kaufmann, D. & Zoido-Lobaton, P. (2000) Dodging the grabbing hand: the determinants
          of unofficial activity in 69 countries. Journal of Public Economics, 76, pp. 459-493.
FT (2006) Evasion and exemptions erode VAT's own value added. Financial Times. London, United Kingdom, June
          19.
FT (2007) Business is blind to the risks of a shared tax system. Financial Times. London, United Kingdom, May 15.
Garcia-Penalosa, C. & Turnovsky, S. J. (2005) Second-best optimal taxation of capital and labor in developing
          economy. Journal of Public Economics, 89, pp. 1045-1074.
Gauthier, B. & Reinikka, R. (2006) Shifting Tax Burdens through Exemptions and Evasion: an Empirical
          Investigation of Uganda. Journal of African Economies, 15, pp. 373-398.
Giovannini, A. & De-Melo, M. (1993) Government Revenue from Financial Repression. American Economic
          Review, 83, pp. 953-963.
Goolsbee, A. (2000) In a World without Borders: The Impact of Taxes on Internet Commerce. The Quarterly
          Journal of Economics, 115, pp. 561-576.
Goolsbee, A. (2004) The impact of the corporate income tax: evidence from state organizational form data. Journal
          of Public Economics, 88, pp. 2283-2299.
Gordon, R. H. & Bo Nielsen, S. (1997) Tax evasion in an open economy:: Value-added vs. income taxation. Journal
          of Public Economics, 66, pp. 173-197.
Gordon, R. H. & Li, W. (2007) Puzzling Tax Structures in Developing Countries: A Comparison of Two Alternative
          Explanations. IN Ito, T. & Rose, A. K. (Eds.) Fiscal Policy and Management in East Asia, National Bureau
          of Economic Research-East Asia Seminar on Economics. University of Chicago Press.
Greene, W. H. (2002) Econometric Analysis, New Jersey, Prentice Hall.
Hall, R. E. & Jones, C. I. (1999) Why do some countries produce much more output per worker than others?
          Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, pp. 83-116.
Helpman, E., Melitz, M. & Rubinstein, Y. (2007) Estimating Trade Flows: Trading Partners and Trading Volumes.
          Harvard University.
Hines, J. R. (2004) On the Timeliness of Tax Reform. Journal of Public Economics, 88, pp. 1043-1059.
Kaplow, L. (2006) Capital Levies and Transition to a Consumption Tax. NBER Working Papers No. 12259.
                                                         21

Kaufmann, D. & Kaliberda, A. (1996) Integrating the unofficial economy into the dynamics of post-socialist
         economies: a framework of analysis and evidence. IN Kaminski, B. (Ed.) The International Politics of
         Eurasia, Economic Transition in Russia and the New States of Eurasia. London, M.E. Sharpe.
Kenny, L. W. & Winer, S. L. (2006) Tax Systems in the World: An Empirical Investigation into the Importance of
         Tax Bases, Administration Costs, Scale and Political Regime. International Tax and Public Finance, 13,
         pp. 181-215.
Kopczuk, W. & Slemrod, J. (2006) Putting firms into optimal tax theory. American Economic Review Papers and
         Proceedings, 96, pp. 130-34.
Koreshkova, T. A. (2006) A Quantitative Analysis of Inflation as a Tax on the Underground Economy. Journal of
         Monetary Economics, 53, pp. 773-796.
Leuthold, J. H. (1991) Tax shares in developing economies: a panel study. Journal of Development Economics, 35,
         pp. 173-185.
Levinsohn, J. & Slemrod, J. (1993) Taxes, tariffs, and the global corporation. Journal of Public Economics, 51, pp.
         97-116.
Mackie-Mason, J. K. & Gordon, R. H. (1997) How Much Do Taxes Discourage Incorporation? The Journal of
         Finance, 52, pp. 477-505.
Mendoza, E. G. & Tesar, L. L. (1998) The International Ramifications of Tax Reforms: Supply-Side Economics in a
         Global Economy. The American Economic Review, 88, pp. 226-245.
Mendoza, E. G. & Tesar, L. L. (2005) Why hasn't tax competition triggered a race to the bottom? Some quantitative
         lessons from the EU. Journal of Monetary Economics, 52, pp. 163-204.
Naito, T. (2006) Tariff and tax reform: Dynamic implications. Journal of International Economics, 68, pp. 504-517.
Nam, C. W., Gebauer, A. & Parsche, R. (2003) Is the Completion of the EU Single Market Hindered by VAT
         Evasion? . CESifo Working Paper Series No. 974.
Persson, T. & Tabellini, G. (2003) The Economic Effects of Constitutions, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
Phelps, E. S. (1973) Inflation in the Theory of Public Finance. Swedish Journal of Economics, 75, pp. 67-82.
Rodrik, D. (1998) Why Do More Open Economies Have Bigger Governments? Journal of Political Economy, 106,
         pp. 997-1032.
Roine, J. (2006) The Political Economics of Not Paying Taxes. Public Choice, 126, pp. 107-134.
Romanov, D. (2006) The corporation as a tax shelter: Evidence from recent Israeli tax changes. Journal of Public
         Economics, 90, pp. 1939-1954.
Roubini, N. & Sala-i-Martin, X. (1995) A growth model of inflation, tax evasion, and financial repression. Journal
         of Monetary Economics, 35, pp. 275-302.
Ruud, P. A. (2000) An Introduction to Classical Econometric Theory, New York, Oxford University Press.
Sandmo, A. (2005) The Theory of Tax Evasion: A Retrospective View. National Tax Journal, 58, pp. 643-663.
Schneider, F. & Enste, D. H. (2000) Shadow Economies: Size, Causes, and Consequences. Journal of Economic
         Literature, 38, pp. 77-114.
Schneider, F. G. (2004) The Size of the Shadow Economies of 145 Countries all over the World: First Results over
         the Period 1999 to 2003. IZA Discussion Paper No. 1431.
Shelton, C. A. (forthcoming) The size and composition of government expenditure. Journal of Public Economics,
         pp.
Slemrod, J. (2004) Are corporate tax rates, or countries, converging? Journal of Public Economics, 88, pp. 1169-
         1186.
Slemrod, J. (2007) Cheating Ourselves: The Economics of Tax Evasion. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21, pp.
         25-48.
Slemrod, J. & Yitzhaki, S. (2002) Chapter 22 Tax avoidance, evasion, and administration. IN Auerbach, A. J. &
         Feldstein, M. (Eds.) Handbook of Public Economics. Elsevier.
Sleuwaegen, L. & Goedhuys, M. (2002) Growth of firms in developing countries, evidence from Cote d'Ivoire.
         Journal of Development Economics, 68, pp. 117-135.
Talvi, E. & Vegh, C. A. (2005) Tax base variability and procyclical fiscal policy in developing countries. Journal of
         Development Economics, 75, pp. 156-190.
Tanzi, V. (1983) The Underground Economy in the United States: Annual Estimates, 1930- 1980. IMF Staff Papers,
         30, pp. 283-305.
Tanzi, V. & Zee, H. (2000) Tax policy for emerging markets: developing countries. National Tax Journal, 53, pp.
         299-322.
Thomas, J. J. (1992) Informal Economic Activity. London, Wheatsheaf.
Torgler, B. (2005) Tax Morale in Latin America. Public Choice, 122, pp. 133-157.
                                                        22

Vegh, C. (1989) Government Spending and Inflationary Finance: A Public Finance Approach. IMF Staff Papers, 36,
         pp. 657-677.
Whalley, J. & Zhang, S. (2005) VAT base broadening when the location of some consumption is mobile. Economics
         Letters, 87, pp. 199-205.
Zee, H. H., Stotsky, J. G. & Ley, E. (2002) Tax Incentives for Business Investment: A Primer for Policy Makers in
         Developing Countries. World Development, 30, pp. 1497-1516.
Zellner, A. (1962) An efficient method of estimating seemingly unrelated regression and tests for aggregation bias.
         Journal of the American Statistical Association, 57, pp. 348-368.
                                                               23


Table 1: Benchmark Panel Regressions a
        Dependent Variables       Tax Revenue by Tax Effort            Hard to Collect                      Easy to Collect
                               Hard to Collect Easy to Collect     VAT          Income Taxes           Tariffs        Seigniorage
Explanatory Variables              β (s.e.)        β (s.e.)       β (s.e.)          β (s.e.)           β (s.e.)         β (s.e.)
Trade Openness                   0.7 (0.3)**    -2.8 (1.4)*     0.3 (0.2)*        0.4 (0.2)         -0.2 (0.1)       -0.6 (0.3)*
Financial Openness               2.9 (1.4)**     2.7 (7.5)      0.8 (0.8)         2.2 (1.0)**        0.4 (0.6)       -2.2 (1.7)
Institutional Quality           -1.1 (2.9)     -24.1 (12.3)*   -0.1 (1.6)        -1.1 (2.1)          0.7 (1.4)       -1.2 (2.6)
Political Durability            -1.2 (3.2)      20.1 (14.3)    -3.0 (1.8)*        1.8 (2.3)         -3.9 (1.5)**      0.9 (3.1)
Urbanization                    13.2 (10.2)     17.3 (39.9)    10.5 (5.8)*        2.9 (7.3)          0.2 (5.2)       11.2 (9.1)
Agriculture Share               -5.9 (6.2)      13.0 (25.7)    -3.8 (3.5)        -2.2 (4.5)          7.5 (3.0)**     -1.0 (5.6)
Countries/Obs.                      20/127         20/127         20/127            20/127             20/127           20/127
Jarque-Bera chi-sq(2)[prob.]   40.83[0.00000] 39.81[0.00000] 5.38[0.06800] 70.70[0.00000]           70.7[0.00000] 13.83[0.00100]
Shapiro-Wilk z-stat[prob.]       4.86[0.00000] 5.11[0.00000] 2.79[0.00260] 6.54[0.00000]            6.78[0.00000] 2.95[0.00150]
a
  The dependent variables, all divided by GDP, are the effective rates of collection of “hard to collect” taxes (VAT
and Income Taxes revenues/GDP) and “easy to collect” taxes (Tariffs and Seigniorage revenues/GDP). Each of the
explanatory variables are lagged by one year. The estimation procedure is fixed effects controlling for first-order
autoregressive in the disturbances. Standard errors are in parentheses, with *[**,***] denoting statistical
significance at 10[5,1] percent. Jargue-Bera and Shapiro-Wilk are residuals tests under the null of normality. The
sample period is 1980-1999.




Table 2: Seemingly Unrelated Regressions with Interaction Variables b
           Dependent Variables     Tax Revenue by Tax Effort               Hard to Collect                   Easy to Collect
                                 Hard to Collect Easy to Collect       VAT          Income Taxes        Tariffs        Seigniorage
Explanatory Variables                β (s.e.)        β (s.e.)         β (s.e.)          β (s.e.)        β (s.e.)         β (s.e.)
  Trade Openness                   0.8 (0.3)***   -3.7 (1.2)***     0.5 (0.2)***      0.1 (0.2)      -0.6 (0.2)***    -1.0 (0.3)***
  Financial Openness               2.2 (1.3)*     -2.2 (5.6)        0.5 (0.7)        1.4 (1.0)       -0.6 (0.8)       -2.4 (1.2)*
  Institutional Quality           -2.7 (2.1)      -0.1 (9.8)       -2.4 (1.2)*        0.8 (1.6)      -1.5 (1.2)        3.4 (2.1)
  Political Durability             3.6 (2.8)      10.4 (13.0)       0.0 (1.6)         4.3 (2.0)**    -4.4 (1.7)**      1.0 (2.8)
  Urbanization                    17.1 (8.7)*     36.3 (34.3)      20.3 (5.1)***      3.0 (6.5)      -3.5 (4.5)       12.2 (7.1)*
  Agriculture Share                4.6 (4.6)      12.7 (21.6)      -0.6 (2.7)         3.1 (3.7)       9.3 (2.8)***     6.0 (4.7)
Trade Openness Interactions:
  × Institutional Quality         -5.9 (6.2)      -13.6 (20.6)      -1.1   (2.4)                                    -13.0   (4.2)***
  × Political Durability         34.6 (7.8)*** -29.9 (26.9)          9.7   (4.3)**                   -7.9 (3.8)**     0.4   (5.7)
  × Urbanization                   8.8 (8.0)      -32.0 (31.7)       8.2   (3.9)**                                    2.1   (6.5)
  × Agriculture Share            10.6 (12.0)       15.8 (42.1)       0.7   (5.5)                    -10.4 (6.0)*      9.0   (9.2)
Financial Openness Interactions:
  × Institutional Quality          3.5 (4.6)      -10.0 (7.6)                      -0.2 (2.4)
  × Political Durability          -9.2 (3.9)**                       0.3 (1.9)     -0.0 (2.3)       0.5 (1.7)
  × Urbanization                   0.6 (0.4)                        -0.2 (0.2)      0.5 (0.3)*
  × Agriculture Share             -1.7 (0.9)*                                      -1.2 (0.5)**     0.7 (0.5)
Countries/Obs.;R-sq                20/147;0.95      20/147;0.41     20/147;0.92     20/147;0.93     20/147;0.90   20/147;0.49
Breusch-Pagan test                chi-sq(1) = 0.126, Pr = 0.7227                  chi-sq(6) = 15.075, Pr = 0.0197
Jarque-Bera chi-sq(2)[prob.]     11.97[0.00250] 51.90[0.00000]      2.97[0.22610] 24.85[0.00000] 13.77[0.00100] 22.77[0.00100]
Shapiro-Wilk z-stat[prob.]        3.25[0.00057] 5.83[0.00000]       0.87[0.19072] 4.78[0.00000] 3.04[0.00117] 3.87[0.00005]
b
  The dependent variables, all divided by GDP, are the effective rates of collection of “hard to collect” taxes (VAT
and Income Taxes revenues/GDP) and “easy to collect” taxes (Tariffs and Seigniorage revenues/GDP). Each of the
explanatory variables are lagged by one year. The estimation procedure is Seemingly Unrelated Regressions (SUR)
including one-year lagged dependent and country dummies. Standard errors are in parentheses, with *[**,***]
denoting statistical significance at 10[5,1] percent. Jargue-Bera and Shapiro-Wilk are residuals tests under the null
of normality. The sample period is 1980-1999.
                                                         24

Table 3: Quantifying Economic Significance of Globalization on Tax Revenue/GDP c
                                  Tax Revenue by Tax Effort Hard to Collect   Easy to Collect
      Globalization Factors           Hard to      Easy to           Income
                                                              VAT            Tariffs Seigniorage
                                       Collect     Collect             Taxes
Trade Openness                             4.5         -8.0    3.1       0.0   -2.4         -4.1
   Individual effects:                     1.7         -8.0    1.1       0.0   -1.3         -2.2
   Interaction effects, of which:          2.8          0.0    2.0       0.0   -1.1         -1.9
        × Institutional Quality            0.0          0.0    0.0       0.0    0.0         -1.9
        × Political Durability             2.8          0.0    0.8       0.0   -0.6          0.0
        × Urbanization                     0.0          0.0    1.2       0.0    0.0          0.0
        × Agriculture Share                0.0          0.0    0.0       0.0   -0.5          0.0
Financial Openness                        -1.5          0.0    0.0       0.7    0.0         -0.5
   Individual effects:                     0.4          0.0    0.0       0.0    0.0         -0.5
   Interaction effects, of which:         -2.0          0.0    0.0       0.7    0.0          0.0
        × Institutional Quality            0.0          0.0    0.0       0.0    0.0          0.0
        × Political Durability            -1.4          0.0    0.0       0.0    0.0          0.0
        × Urbanization                     0.0          0.0    0.0       1.1    0.0          0.0
        × Agriculture Share               -0.6          0.0    0.0      -0.4    0.0          0.0
Total Globalization Impact (%)             3.0         -8.0    3.1       0.7   -2.4         -4.6
c
  Calculation based on the estimates reported in Table 2. For example, a standard deviation of the Trade Openness
for developing countries is 2.2 percent. Using the coefficient estimate of Trade Openness on “hard to collect” taxes
from Table 2, which is 0.8 and statistically significant, the effect of a one standard deviation change of Trade
Openness is to increase “hard to collect” taxes by 2.2×0.8 = 1.7 percent of GDP.
                                                                                            25

Figure 1.a: (Exports + Imports)/GDP                                                             Figure 1.b: Index of Capital Mobility
The actual trade share ranges from 0 to 1.                                                      The index ranges from 0 to 100.
  0.8                                                                                              70                                        66
                                  1980s       1990s                 0.69                                                                                    1980s    1990s
  0.7          0.66                                                                                                            58.2
                                                             0.62                                  60
                                 0.58                                                                            52.9
                                                     0.58
  0.6   0.55                                                                                                                                              47.9
                                                                                                   50     44.4                        45.9
                                                                                                                        42.5
  0.5                                         0.43                                                                                                                             39.7
                          0.42                                                                     40
  0.4
                                                                                  0.32
                                                                           0.28                    30                                               25
  0.3                                                                                                                                                                21.3
                                                                                                   20
  0.2

  0.1                                                                                              10

   0                                                                                                  0
         AFR(6)               EAP(5)          LAC(12)        MNA(2)        SAR(2)                           AFR(6)      EAP(5)        LAC(12)       MNA(2)               SAR(2)


Figure 1.c: Tariff Rates                                                                        Figure 1.d: Inflation
Weighted average rates.                                                                         Logarithms of the CPI inflation rates.
  60                                                                                               4.5
                                                                                                                                      4.0
                                                                           51.4
                                                                                                      4
  50                                                                                                                                                       1980s    1990s
                      1980s     1990s                                                              3.5
                                                                                                                                             3.0
  40                                                                                                  3     2.8 2.7

                                                             29.4                                  2.5
  30                                                                                                                                                                           2.0
                                                                                                      2                  1.8 1.9                    1.9                  1.8
                          20.8
  20    17.7                                                                                       1.5                                                    1.3
                                              13.4
                                                                                                      1
  10
               2.8                                    4                                            0.5
                                 1.8                                1.9           1.8
   0                                                                                                  0
        AFR(6)            EAP(5)              LAC(12)        MNA(2)        SAR(2)                           AFR(6)      EAP(5)        LAC(12)       MNA(2)               SAR(2)




Figure 1.e: Tax/GDP Adjustment (%) from 1980-1984 to 1995-1999
                         DEVELOPING(31)                                                    South Asian(4)                                    HIGH INCOME(9)
  60
                                                                                               41.1
  40

  20                                   16.1
                                                                                                                                                   11.4
                                                                                                            4.5                                                    5.9
    0
                                                      -2.2
 -20                  -12.2
                                                                                   -17.1

 -40

 -60             Seigniorage+Tariff              Income Tax+VAT             Total Official Tax Collection

 -80

-100                                                                                                                                  -95.5

-120
                                                                                                                                  26

                                Figure 2.a: (Total Official Tax Collection)/GDP                                                                                              Figure 2.b: (Seigniorage + Tariff)/GDP
                                        y=0.04+0.71x; R2=0.71, obs.=22                                                                                                          y=1.29x-7.35x2; R2=0.85, obs.=22
                                                                                                            URY                                                                                                                     MYS
                                                                                                                                TUN
                                                                                                            ZAF
                                                                                                          ZWEMAR
                  .238




                                                                                                                                                                              IRN
                                                                                                                                                                                          ZWE                                                                    MUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TUN
                                                                                                                   MYS
                  Mean = .176




                                                                                                                          CHL
                                                                                                          MUS
Years 1995-1999




                                                                                                                                       Years 1995-1999
                                                                               TUR               CRI               ZMB
                                                                                              LKA
                                                                               THA                   IDN




                                                                                                                                                         .046 .051
                                                                                                                                                                                                    MMR             MAR
                                                                                                                                                                                             NP L                           P AK
                                                                           P AK                                                                                                                                  CMR
                  .125




                                                                            MEX                                                                                                                  IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                THA
                                                     IRN                                         CMR                                                                                                                                         LKA                       HU N
                                                                                                                                                                                                TUR                                         CRI




                                                                                                                                                         .034
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             URY
                                                           IND                                                                                                                      IDN
                                               NP L
                                                                                                                                                                                CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                           ZMB

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MEX
                                                           MMR                                                                                                         ZAF
                                                                         .134               Mean = .182    .208                                                                       .038                Mean = .060            .081
                                                                        Years 1980-1984                                                                                                                       Years 1980-1984

                                      Figure 2.c: (Income Tax + VAT)/GDP                                                                                                     Figure 2.d: (Total Expenditure)/GDP
                                      y=0.01+1.17x-1.86x2; R2=0.75, obs.=22                                                                                                     y=1.03x-0.50x2; R2=0.95, obs.=22
                                                                                                                  ZAF                                                                                                                      ZWE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TUN
                                                                                                           ZWE                                                                                                                     URY                         MAR


                                                                                                                                                         .298
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TUR
                                                                                                                           HU N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LKA
Years 1995-1999




                                                                                                                                       Years 1995-1999


                                                                                                                    IDN
                                                                                                                                                         Mean = .234

                                                                        TUR                                                                                                                                                                                    ZMB
                  .125




                                                                                       ZMB                CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MUS
                                                                                MAR                                                                                                                       P AK                                     IRN
                                                              URY                       MYS                                                                                                                                                                            MYS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CHL
                  Mean = .093




                                                             TUN
                                                       THA
                                                                                                                                                                                                        THA          IDN
                                                                                                                                                         .168




                                                              LKA                                                                                                                                   NP L
                                                     CRI      MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                    IND             CRI              MEX
                                                                           CMR                                                                                                                                CMR
                  .058




                                           P AK
                                               MUS

                                    NP L
                                 IRN
                                  IND                      MMR                                                                                                                                   MMR
                                                .053             Mean = .086         .113                                                                                                              .186                  Mean = .264             .332
                                                                        Years 1980-1984                                                                                                                       Years 1980-1984
                                                                27

Figure 3.a: Tax/GDP, 1980-1984
0.30                          0.28
                                                                 Seigniorage+T ariff   Income T ax+VAT       T otal Official T ax Collection

0.25                                                     0.23

0.20                                                                                              0.18
                     0.17
                                                                                                                                               0.16
0.15                                            0.13

                                                                                        0.09
0.10                                                                                                                                 0.08
                                     0.06                                     0.06                                         0.06
           0.05
0.05


0.00
                    HIGH(9)                  UPPER(13)                               MIDDLE(11)                                   LOW(11)

Figure 3.b: Adjustment of Tax/GDP, % change of 1995-1999 from 1980-1984
  60
                                                                                        39.7
  40

  20                  10.6                      12.7                           8.4                10.1                               12.2
                              6.1
                                                                                                                           0.3
      0
                                                         -2.5
 -20
                                                                                                                                               -16.9
 -40
                                     -38.7
 -60
                                                                                Seigniorage+T ariff     Income T ax+VAT     T otal Official T ax Collection
 -80

-100
           -95.5
-120
                    HIGH(9)                  UPPER(13)                               MIDDLE(11)                                   LOW(11)

Figure 3.c: Tax/GDP, 1990-1994
0.30
                              0.27                               Seigniorage+T ariff   Income T ax+VAT       T otal Official T ax Collection

0.25                                                     0.23
                                                                                                  0.2
0.20
                                                                                                                                               0.16
                      0.15
0.15
                                                0.12
                                                                                        0.09                               0.09
0.10                                                                          0.08
                                      0.06                                                                                           0.06
0.05       0.03


0.00
                   HIGH(13)                  UPPER(21)                               MIDDLE(16)                                   LOW(10)

Figure 3.d: Adjustment of Tax/GDP, % change of 1995-1999 from 1990-1994
 20                                                                                     14.4
                     12.3
                                                9.2                                                                                  7.7
 10                           4
                                                                                                  1.5
  0
                                                         -0.6                                                                                  -1.1
-10
                                                                                                                          -10.1
-20

                                                                             -23.4
-30
                                                                                Seigniorage+T ariff     Income T ax+VAT     T otal Official T ax Collection
-40                                  -34.5

          -43.3
-50
                   HIGH(13)                  UPPER(21)                               MIDDLE(16)                                   LOW(10)
                                                                                          28


Figure 4: Fiscal Convergence
Coefficients of variation, measured over non-overlapping five-year periods from 1980-1999.
  1.4
               1.25
        1.21
                      1.18
  1.2                                                                                                              1980-1984          1985-1989         1990-1994      1995-1999
                             1.06

  1.0


  0.8                                                                                                                                                               0.72
                                                                                                                                                                           0.68 0.7 0.69
                                                                                                                    0.6
  0.6                                                                                                                     0.52 0.51 0.5
                                                                                              0.51
                                                                                       0.47
                                                                0.4 0.39                             0.42
                                           0.38                          0.37                                                              0.38
  0.4                                                                                                       0.32                                  0.32 0.32 0.34
                                    0.27                                        0.27
                                                  0.22
  0.2                                                    0.16



  0.0
        T otal Official T ax         {a} Seigniorage            {b} T ariff Revenue     {a}+{b}=EASY                 {c} Income T ax              {d} VAT            {c}+{d}=HARD
            Collection
