                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF A GENEROUS INCOME
                   SUPPORT PROGRAM: UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE
                       IN NEW BRUNSWICK AND MAINE, 1940-1991

                                                Peter Kuhn
                                               Chris Riddell

                                          Working Paper 11932
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11932


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2006




This research was funded by the Canadian Studies Faculty Research Grant Program of the Canadian Embassy
in Washington, D.C. We thank seminar participants at the University of British Columbia, University of
Toronto, Queen’s University, The Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA), the 2004 European Economics
Association meetings, Madrid; 2004 European Association of Labour Economists meetings, Lisbon; and the
2005 IAB Conference on the Evaluation of Labour Market Programs, Nuremburg. We thank Matt Rice for
assistance with maps and Elizabeth Beatty and Dong Hun Cho for research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2006 by Peter Kuhn and Chris Riddell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Long-Term Effects of a Generous Income Support Program: Unemployment Insurance in
New Brunswick and Maine, 1940-1991
Peter Kuhn and Chris Riddell
NBER Working Paper No. 11932
January 2006
JEL No. J22, J64

                                            ABSTRACT

Using data spanning a half century for adjacent jurisdictions in the U.S. and Canada, we study the

long-term effects of a very generous unemployment insurance (UI)program on weeks worked. We

find large effects. For example, in 1990, about 6 percent of employed men in Maine's northernmost

counties worked fewer than 26 weeks per year; just across the border in New Brunswick that figure

was over 20 percent. According to our estimates, New Brunswick's much more generous UI system

accounts for about two thirds of this differential. Even greater effects are found among women and

less-educated men. We argue that our longer-run, crossnational perspective generates more

substantial estimates of program effects because it captures workers' abilities to make a wider variety

of adjustments to programs they expect to be permanent.

Peter Kuhn
Department of Economics
UC, Santa Barbara
2127 North Hall
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER
pjkuhn@econ.ucsb.edu

Chris Riddell
School of Policy Studies
Queen’s University
138 Union Street, Room 217
Kingston, Ontario K7L 3N6
Canada
riddellc@post.queensu.ca
“The members of our association are absolutely convinced that many persons voluntarily make
what amounts to a way of life out of working only long enough to establish benefits, then
drawing them for the maximum period, and then repeating the cycle.” (Canadian Construction
Labor Relations Association)

“UI…has created a dependency. People say ‘I am going to get a job…and work 10 or 20 weeks
or whatever I need for UI’. I find in lot of people that that seems to become a mentality where
they continually think that way.” (New Brunswick Association of Métis)

“The point we were trying to make, Mr. Chairman, is that many people deliberately choose to
have seasonal employment and don’t wish to work the rest of the year.” (Canadian Electrical
Distributors Association)

(All quotes taken from the Commission of Inquiry on Unemployment Insurance, 1986)

1. Introduction

      Most existing studies of the labor market effects of income support programs share the

following features: they focus on short-term responses to relatively small changes in a single

program parameter, in a restricted subpopulation of workers. For example, a typical research

paper on the incentive effects of unemployment insurance (UI) might examine the effects of the

benefit replacement rate on unemployment durations using historical state-by-year variation in

replacement rates for a sample of persons who have entered a spell of unemployment.1 To avoid

confounding the effects of these (typically small) policy changes with business cycles and other

factors, attention is generally restricted to measuring effects that occur within a year or less of

the implementation of a policy change. Studies of other income support programs share similar

features. For example, a welfare study might measure the effects of the benefit level on length of

claim for a sample of single mothers.

      For the most part, the above limitations are not only unavoidable, but desirable: tightly-

defined situations such as these are likely to yield the most precise estimates of policy effects.

However, these limitations have led a number of critics (e.g. Murray 1994) to argue that existing


1
    See Krueger and Meyer (2002) for an up-to-date literature review on unemployment insurance and labor supply.
                                                                                                                      2


econometric studies may understate the long-term work incentives of generous income support

programs. According to such arguments, individuals may be poorly informed about small policy

changes – the incentives to acquire this information are relatively low – and may (rationally)

choose not to make large behavioral adjustments if they expect program changes to be

temporary. Over a longer time horizon, individuals eligible for generous programs that they

expect to be permanent may make larger behavioral adjustments, adjust on a wider number of

margins, and build a ‘lifestyle’ around the program. Such effects tend not to be captured by

studies focusing on short-term responses to modest changes in a single program parameter.2

    In this paper we take a different approach. Our goal is to estimate the long-term labor supply

effects of large-scale changes in the overall generosity of an income support program for the

entire population of workers in a region. Specifically, we exploit a dramatic natural experiment

resulting from a national border – between the Canadian province of New Brunswick and the

U.S. state of Maine – that divides a relatively homogeneous region. This strategy allows us to

examine the effects of much larger policy changes. For example, in 1940, Maine had a modest

UI system, but New Brunswick had none. By 1950, the two regions had quite similar UI

systems. Since then, New Brunswick’s system experienced two major expansions, and is

currently much more generous than Maine’s. By 1980, for example, 10 weeks worked per year

in New Brunswick yielded, on average, an annual income (including UI benefits) equivalent to

33 weeks worth of earnings (in Maine, only 13 weeks). This could be done year after year,

without penalty. Using the five decennial censuses spanning the period 1940-1991, we use this

dramatic policy divergence to estimate the long-term effects of UI program generosity on labor

supply.


2
 In regards to negative income tax experiments, Murray states: “Presumably people are less likely to burn bridges
behind them if they know that the guaranteed income ends in three years than if it is legislated for life” (p.153).
                                                                                                                 3


    Our focus in this paper is on annual weeks worked by workers (i.e., by persons who work at

least one week per year).3 We conduct two types of statistical analysis. First, we examine the

incidence of part-year work (defined as less than 40 weeks per year) using cell mean data for the

1940-91 Census years. For this analysis, the entire state of Maine serves as a “control group” for

New Brunswick. Second, we estimate a more disaggregated distribution of annual work weeks

using Census microdata for the period 1970-91.4 In this case, we can restrict attention to Maine’s

six northernmost counties for an even tighter control group. Both our cell-level and individual-

level analyses generate large estimates of UI program effects. For example, by 1990, 6.1 percent

of employed men in Maine’s six northernmost counties worked fewer than 27 weeks per year; in

New Brunswick that figure was 20.8 percent. Our estimates imply that New Brunswick’s more

generous UI policy accounts for about two thirds of this differential. For women, 13.8 percent

worked less than half the year in Northern Maine compared to 26.2 percent in New Brunswick,

with UI policy differences accounting for essentially all of the difference. Overall, our findings

suggest that a ten percent UI-induced increase in the income associated with working less than

half-year raises the number of persons working less than half year by about ten percent, for an

elasticity of one. Estimated elasticities of UI program participation with respect to the income

available to part-year workers are about .75 for men and .5 for women.

    Methodologically, this paper may be of interest in that it incorporates some advantages of

cross-national studies (large and long-lasting variation in program parameters) while avoiding

many of their disadvantages. The latter include large and uncontrolled differences in culture and

3
  Unemployment insurance has implications for other dimensions of labor supply, including labor force
participation. Because much of the useful variation in UI generosity in this paper stems from industry-time
interactions (and because non-workers cannot be linked with any particular industry) we chose not to examine these
effects in this paper. Trends in annual non-work are also much more likely to be affected by other income support
programs (e.g. welfare and disability insurance) that are not explicitly modeled here.
                                                                                                               4


the economic environment, major differences in data collection procedures, and the widespread

use of one-dimensional “summary” indicators of program generosity which neglect important

details of how policies work (Hamermesh 2002). Our approach examines two very similar

regions in different countries – where data collection procedures have been highly comparable

for a long time – using a multidimensional measure of program generosity that incorporates

virtually all key aspects of the two region’s unemployment insurance systems.

2. Some Facts: Maine, New Brunswick and UI

      Maine is the northeastern most state in the U.S.A, known for its coastal scenery, cold climate,

rural character and relatively low incomes. New Brunswick is the Canadian province that

borders directly on Maine, known for similar traits. In fact, New Brunswick is a unique province

in that it shares a longer border with the United States than with other Canadian provinces. The

locations of both regions, including Maine’s six ‘northern counties’, are shown in Figure 1. Both

regions are overwhelmingly white and native-born. In 1990, Maine and New Brunswick had

total populations of 1.2 million and 740,000 respectively. Over the preceding 50 years, these

populations grew by 54 and 59 percent respectively, well behind their respective national

averages of 90 and 135 percent. Both regions’ incomes were below their national averages as

well: from 1945-1991, personal income per capita in Maine was on average 20% below that of

the U.S. while New Brunswick was 27% below the Canadian average.

      Compared to other Canadian provinces that adjoin the United States, New Brunswick is of

particular interest for the study of UI for several reasons. First, its relatively low income level

means UI replacement rates will be higher, which in turn generates a more dramatic natural

experiment. Second, in combination with these low incomes, New Brunswick’s small

4
    2001 Canadian Census microdata became publicly available in 2004. Between 1991 and 2001, Canada’s UI Act
                                                                                                                     5


population and the federal nature of UI in Canada generates levels of program generosity that

would likely be unsustainable if UI was self-financing within the region. Thus, New Brunswick

offers a rare look at the effects of a very generous income support system relative to the average

income level in a jurisdiction. Finally, because of their similar resource bases, New Brunswick

and Maine share a history of seasonal employment that predates the introduction of UI to either

economy. Thus, the study of these jurisdictions also sheds some light on the process of labor

force adjustment. For instance, we can examine the extent to which expansion of UI in Canada

helped preserve a (seasonal) “way of life” that was forced into extinction by market forces

elsewhere.

    Figure 2 provides some indicators of the historical importance of UI in Maine and New

Brunswick. Part (a) shows UI expenditures as a share of provincial/state GDP. For New

Brunswick, there were large increases during the 1950s and early 1970s, likely reflecting the two

major increases in program generosity (to be described in the following section).5 In contrast, UI

expenditures in Maine were (a) roughly constant over the entire time period, and (b) much

smaller as a share of state GDP. By the end of our sample period, the UI share of GDP in New

Brunswick, at 6 percent, was about six times the share in Maine.

    Part (b) of Figure 2 compares expenditures on UI to spending on a comprehensive list of

other income support programs in both jurisdictions. This Figure clearly shows that UI played a

much larger role in New Brunswick’s income transfer system than in Maine’s. By the end of our

sample period, UI constitutes over 25 percent of all transfer income received by individuals in

New Brunswick, compared to about 5 percent in Maine. As we argue in more detail below, this


was revised several times; while administratively quite complex, these revisions were quantitatively insignificant
(especially when compared to earlier changes in the system). For that reason we omitted 2000/01 data.
                                                                                                                    6


dominant role for UI in New Brunswick helps explain why the labor supply effects of this single

program are detectable at the economy-wide level.

    Further confirmation of the pervasive influence of UI in New Brunswick is provided by

Table 1. Because Canadian Census years end in ‘1’ while U.S. Census years end in ‘0’, and the

Census weeks-worked questions refer to the previous year, all our analysis focuses on years

ending in ‘9’ for Maine and ‘0’ for New Brunswick. Table 1 introduces the convention of

referring to, for example, 1989 Maine and 1990 New Brunswick data simply as applying to

1990. Defining ‘workers’ as anyone with positive weeks worked in the calendar year, Table 1

shows that about 30 percent of New Brunswick’s workers received some UI benefits in 1990.

This corresponds to about 6 percent for men in Maine, and about 3 percent for women in Maine.

Dropping the restriction to workers, Table 1 also reveals that an astonishing 23 percent of all

New Brunswick men aged 25-59 received some UI income in 1990. This large fraction of

persons receiving UI may also lessen any social stigma attached to it – another factor that might

contribute to a larger labor supply response. Finally, Table 1 compares UI participation with that

in other income support programs. Only 5 to 6 percent of New Brunswick’s workers received

transfers other than UI, and only 4 percent of Maine’s did. Thus, the number of New

Brunswick’s workers receiving UI was five to six times the number receiving all other transfers

combined, further motivating our focus on UI as the income support program that is most likely

to explain weeks-worked differences between these two jurisdictions.

    Figure 3 provides historical unemployment statistics for the two jurisdictions under study.

Prior to 1953, Maine had a higher unemployment rate than New Brunswick. The unemployment

rate in New Brunswick then rose substantially above Maine’s in the 1950’s, a gap which closed

5
  By far the most severe recession during this period took place in the early 1980s. The effect of this recession on
total UI expenditures in New Brunswick is clearly visible in Figure 3(a), but is much smaller than the increases that
                                                                                                                  7


somewhat by 1970. After 1970, a large and apparently permanent gap re-emerged, with New

Brunswick’s rate consistently above 12 percent from 1982 onwards, and Maine’s consistently

below 8 percent from 1984 onwards.6 Clearly, these trends are suggestive of increases in

unemployment that took place in response to the two major increases in New Brunswick’s UI

benefit generosity in the 1950’s and 1970s.

3. Unemployment Insurance Policy

    Our statistical analysis will focus on the calendar years preceding the decennial Censuses in

both the U.S. and Canada, from 1940/1 through 1990/1. While we attempt to provide an overall

sense of the evolution of UI policy, our primary focus in what follows will be on years ending in

‘9’ for Maine, and years ending in ‘0’ for New Brunswick. A detailed discussion of UI policy in

the two regions is provided in Appendix 1 with the highlights only described below.

a. Maine

   Compared to New Brunswick, the most salient feature of Maine’s UI system is its relative

stability over the half century between 1939 and 1989. For example, as a result of the 1935

federal Social Security Act, all U.S. states including Maine had an operational UI program in the

first year of our data (1939). As in all other states, this program has been state-run and state-

funded since its inception. Also since inception, eligibility for Maine’s UI benefits (and the

weekly benefit amount) is based on total earnings during a one-year-long base period preceding

an unemployment spell. The key changes made between 1939 and 1989 include two increases in

maximum benefit duration (from 16 to 20 weeks between 1939 and 1949; to 26 weeks by 1959);

a shift from calendar-year to a four quarter base period (between 1959 and 1969); extension of


occurred in the 1950s and 1970s.
6
  The emergence of this large gap mirrors, in a considerably magnified fashion, the well-known emergence of the
Canada-US unemployment rate gap (for instance, see Ashenfelter and Card, 1986)
                                                                                                    8


coverage to federal government employees by 1959; to state and local government workers by

1979; the introduction of a dependents’ allowance (by 1969), and federal income taxation of UI

benefits (by 1979).

b. New Brunswick

   In contrast to the U.S., UI in Canada is administered and financed at the federal level. Thus,

UI is not required to be self-funding within New Brunswick, in sharp contrast to the situation in

Maine. Also in contrast to most states in the U.S., eligibility in Canada is determined by the

number of weeks worked (or, historically, days) rather than total earnings during a base period.

Finally, the Canadian program underwent some dramatic changes during our sample period.

   As noted, Canada had no operating UI system in 1940. By 1950, UI eligibility depended on

the number of days worked during the two years preceding a claim. The 1950 system also

included a so-called ‘ratio rule’, which imposed significant limits on benefit duration for

seasonal workers (i.e., those with claims in successive years). In terms of overall generosity, we

show below that New Brunswick’s UI system was more similar to Maine’s in 1950 than in any

other year of our data. Aside from converting to a weeks-based qualifying requirement, the key

change to the system between 1950 and 1960 was the introduction of an explicit system of

Seasonal Benefits, payable only during the winter months but under quite broad conditions

(including exhaustion of regular benefits). As we demonstrate quantitatively below, Seasonal

Benefits constituted a significant enrichment of Canada’s UI program for persons with short

work histories.

   While Canada’s UI system remained relatively unchanged between 1960 and 1970, a second

significant expansion of benefits occurred in 1972. While abolishing the explicit Seasonal

Benefit program, the new system based weeks of benefit entitlement on weeks worked in the past
                                                                                                                   9


year, with very generous benefits at low levels of weeks, especially in high unemployment

regions (including New Brunswick). In such regions, it was possible to qualify for 40 weeks of

UI benefits with just 10 weeks of work. Further, workers could continue such a pattern of part-

year work year after year, without penalty.7 The 1972 reforms also made UI benefits taxable,

and extended the waiting period for benefits (which was one week throughout our sample period

for Maine) from one to two weeks. The 1980s saw little change to Canada’s UI program.

4. Empirical Analysis: Cell means, 1940-91

a. Conceptual Framework

    As noted, a distinguishing feature of this paper is our interest in UI’s effects on the

distribution of annual weeks worked in the entire population of a region’s workers. This differs

from most studies, which focus on a number of outcomes (such as unemployment duration)

conditional on a worker’s becoming unemployed. In these studies, the population potentially

affected by UI is by definition a relatively small share of the workforce.8 We are interested in

estimating impacts that could operate both through the extension of existing unemployment

spells, and through processes that lead to the initiation of unemployment spells.

    With the above goal in mind, we use a simple static labor supply model as our basic

conceptual framework. This model is in the spirit of Moffitt and Nicholson’s (1982) with a

(significant) change of interpretation. Moffitt and Nicholson consider a decision made by

workers at the time of job loss. Thus, their analysis applies only to workers who have already

initiated an unemployment spell, and assumes that workers can choose to end that spell at any


7
  In some parts of the country this practice became known, unofficially, as “Lotto 10-40”, i.e. work ten weeks, then
claim UI for 40.
8
  As Krueger and Meyer (2002) point out, a much smaller number of studies focus on the effect of the UI system
(for the most part its experience-rating provisions) on the rate of layoffs. A few Canadian studies (e.g. Baker and
Rea 1998) examine UI’s effects on the length of employment or job spells, but do not combine this analysis with UI
effects on unemployment spell length.
                                                                                                               10


point by taking a job. We abstract even further from the dynamics of job search, hires and

layoffs by assuming that any worker, whether employed or unemployed, can choose the number

of weeks worked per year with any non-work weeks compensated – according to benefit

eligibility formulas – by unemployment insurance.

    Maine and New Brunswick severely restrict UI eligibility for workers who quit their job. We

ignore these restrictions in the analysis, and thus our framework implicitly assumes that workers

can find seasonal or limited-term contract jobs that match their desired durations (or indeed that

such jobs are supplied by the labor market in response to the UI system). Equivalently, our

model also describes an environment where workers can induce firms to lay them off when this

is convenient to the worker, or that employers agree to “re-label” quits as layoffs.9 Incidentally,

there is evidence of all these practices in Canada. For example, Green and Sargent (1998) show

how jobs tend to end (via layoffs) when UI eligibility is established; Kuhn and Sweetman (1998)

provide evidence of the “relabelling” of separations. Harris (1998) shows how some employers

even created a job-sharing system to maximize employees’ UI eligibility.10 Since it may take

time for markets to adapt in such a sophisticated way to the UI program, our longer-run

perspective may yield different results than most existing approaches.

    We recognize that this is a highly abstract model that ignores the job search, hiring and layoff

processes. To an important extent, however, worker’s limited control over the length of their

employment or unemployment spells is addressed in our analysis by the broad weeks-worked

categories used. For example, in this section we model workers as choosing between ‘part year’


9
  Canada’s UI system has no experience rating; thus employers face no marginal tax cost when they re-label a
separation. This is not the case in Maine, where at least a minimal amount of experience rating does occur.
Relatedly, we note that quits are a small fraction of separations leading to unemployment in both Canada and the
US; thus UI disqualifications due to quitting are unlikely to be quantitatively important in either region.
10
   According to Harris, “In some cases fish plants and make-work projects would hire workers for a certain number
of weeks and then lay off those workers and hire others, so they’d all have qualification for unemployment
insurance” (p. 176).
                                                                                                               11


and ‘full-year’ work, with the attractiveness of these broad weeks-worked categories depending

on the income and leisure available to a typical worker in that category.11 Also, note that if we

detect a strong and significant effect of UI on weeks-worked distributions using this highly

abstract voluntary labor supply model, workers may have more control over both their job and

unemployment durations than we might otherwise suspect.

     Our aggregate pre-1970 data only allows us to consistently distinguish two annual weeks

worked categories. Suppose that each worker, i, faces two labor supply options: ‘full year’ or

‘part year’. Each of these options is associated with a fixed annual amount of leisure, denoted LF

and LP. Let the annual income received by full- versus part-year workers respectively be Yi F and

YiP. These income levels vary across individuals for a variety of reasons including changes in

policy, skill differences across workers, and UI’s differential impact by skill level, region, and

industry. Next, let the utility of working full year be given by the Cobb-Douglas function:


        U (Yi F , LFi ) = α ln Yi F + β ln LF + ε F ≡ α yiF + β l F + ε F
                                                                                                         (1)

Similarly, let the utility of working part year be given by:


        U (Yi P , LPi ) = α ln Yi P + β ln LP + θ P X i + ε iP ≡ α yiP + β l P + θ P X i + ε iP
                                                                                                         (2)

In equation (2), θPXi represents the effects of observable personal characteristics on the relative

utility of part-year work (any X’s that affect the utility of both choices the same way do not

change observed behavior; thus only relative effects are identified). Combining (1) and (2),

individual i prefers to work part-year iff:


11
  In fact, in a world where workers have limited control over exact job duration, the search in some studies (e.g.
Green and Riddell 1997, Green and Sargent 1998) for “spikes” in very narrow weeks-worked categories (essentially
single weeks of unemployment duration) could lead to significant underestimates of workers’ responses to UI. All
told, we view our use of a multinomial choice model among broad weeks-worked categories as a useful alternative
                                                                                                                12


         ε iF − ε iP < α ( yiP − yiF ) + β (l P − l F ) + θ P X i                                         (3)

Given specifications for the distributions of εiF and εiP, (3) can be estimated via maximum

likelihood from microdata. In the latter case, a dichotomous dependent variable (whether an

individual works part-year) is regressed on a vector of personal characteristics (X) and on (yi P –

yiF) – the log of the ratio of part-year to full-year income.12 UI policy enters our model by

changing the ratio of part-year to full-year income (henceforth ‘relative income’). For grouped

data, (3) implies a relation between the fraction working part year in a cell and the regressors on

the right-hand side, whose functional form depends on the distributions of εiF and εiP.


b. Data

    We collected information on the fraction of employed persons working between 1 and 39

weeks, and between 40 and 52 weeks, for every census year between 1940 and 1990 in both

regions. For Maine in all years, and for New Brunswick beginning in 1970, this information was

constructed from public-use microdata files. Because census microdata do not exist for Canada

prior to 1970, we rely on published sources for those years. Across countries and years, the

finest level of disaggregation available is by gender and broad industry group. The unit of

observation for this exercise is therefore industry/gender/region/year cells. Appendix 2 discusses

data comparability across census years and between countries.

    Sample sizes in the 1971 Canadian census, and limited industry disaggregation in all the

post-1970 Canadian public use files, limit the number of industries for which we can calculate



to hazard models, which has the additional advantage of allowing us to combine choices affecting both job durations
and unemployment durations into a single summary estimator.
12
   Because the terms β(lP – lF) are absorbed into the constant term in θP, β is not identified. The model is easily
extended beyond Cobb-Douglas preferences by allowing the effect of (yi P – yiF) to be nonlinear. Experiments with
higher-order polynomial terms of this variable yielded similar results.
                                                                                                                  13


cell means with a reasonable degree of precision. Given these constraints, we are left with 6

industries per year for women (trade, services, finance/insurance/real estate, transportation/

storage/communication/utilities, manufacturing, and public administration) and 9 for men (the

above plus agriculture, construction and primary) for a total of 6 industries * 6 years * 2 regions

= 72 female observations and 9 * 6 * 2 = 108 male observations. The sample is all wage earners

over the age of 15 with at least one week of work in the previous calendar year.13

     Table 2 presents employment-weighted means of the relative income variable. These are

computed using each cell’s weekly wage and various weeks worked assumptions. We use 52

weeks to represent the ‘full-year’ (40-52 weeks) option, and two alternative reference points (20

and 30 weeks) to represent the part-year (1-39 weeks) option.14 UI benefits are added to part-year

income based on prevailing UI parameters.15 Part-year income varies cross-sectionally within a

region because wage levels (and hence UI replacement rates) vary across industries, and because

not all industries are covered by UI in all years. It varies over time both due to UI policy

changes and to wage level changes at the industry level.

     One policy change that is clearly visible in Table 2 is the introduction of UI in New

Brunswick after 1940. New Brunswick has the minimum possible values of the relative income

variable (20/52 = .385; 30/52 = .577) in 1940, and higher levels afterwards. Maine’s UI system

was already in place by 1940, and according to our measures remained slightly more generous

than New Brunswick’s in 1950 as well. That said, Table 2 reveals that – especially using the 20-

13
   Self-employed persons are excluded. With the exception of fishermen in Canada, the self-employed are not
eligible for UI in either region. In both regions and all years, industry designations refer to the longest job held
during the previous calendar year.
14
   We examined the continuous distribution of weeks worked for those years where it was available; the median
within the 1-39 weeks category was between 20 and 30 weeks in all cases. We also replicated the analysis using 15,
25 and 35 weeks to represent the 1-39 weeks category. There were no major differences.
15
   In reality not all eligible workers actually apply for and receive UI benefits (see for example Blank and Card,
1991). Since take-up is endogenous (Anderson and Meyer 1997), we simply use the legislated benefits an eligible
                                                                                                               14


week parameters – 1950 is the Census year in which the overall UI subsidy to part-year work

was most similar between New Brunswick and Maine.

    By 1960, New Brunswick’s UI system had become more generous than Maine’s; particularly

for women whose lower wages generated higher benefit replacement rates. The decline in

generosity between 1960 and 1970 is attributable to an inflation-induced decline in the real value

of a fixed nominal maximum benefit level. Canada’s 1971 UI Act is also clearly visible in Table

2. Interestingly, according to the 20-week specification, the largest decadal change in UI’s

subsidy to part-year work occurred not in 1971, but between 1950 and 1960 – a rise of (.580-

.441=) .139 for men, and (.614-.455=) .159 for women, both in New Brunswick.16 Converting

these numbers into total weeks of income received per week worked gives a clearer perspective

on the magnitude of these policy changes. As an example, for New Brunswick women in 1950,

20 weeks of work yielded (52 x .455=) 23.7 weeks of income when UI benefits are included; by

1960 this was (52 x .614=) 31.9 weeks. The statistical analysis which follows addresses whether

the benefit changes shown in Table 2 affected the tendency to work part-year.

    Table 3 shows employment-weighted means of our dependent variable by gender, region and

year. In 1940, despite a modest UI program in Maine, employed men exhibited roughly similar

propensities to work part-year in the two jurisdictions under study: 36 percent in New Brunswick

and 33 percent in Maine. Over the next five decades, men’s part-year work continued at this

high level in New Brunswick, while declining substantially (to 22 percent) in Maine. For

women, the divergence between New Brunswick and Maine is more dramatic. In 1940, before

the advent of UI in New Brunswick, working women in Maine were 8 percentage points more



worker would receive if he/she applied for them as a more exogenous measure of benefit generosity. Our estimates
can therefore be seen as underestimates of the response that would occur if all eligible workers claimed UI.
16
   Coincidentally, a change of exactly the same magnitude occurred between 1970 and 1980 for women; for New
Brunswick’s men the 1970-1980 change was .135.
                                                                                                                    15


likely to work part-year than women in New Brunswick (38 versus 30 percent). Five decades

later, part-year work had fallen to 31 percent in Maine, while increasing to 40 percent in New

Brunswick. Thus, by the end of the period the rankings of the regions were dramatically

reversed.

c. Results

     Weighted least-squares estimates of equation 3 are presented in Table 4.17 All specifications

include fixed effects for industry, year, and region; separate regressions are estimated for men

and women.18 To produce estimates that are representative of the entire labor force, all

regressions are weighted by year-specific industry shares in employment. The results in all

columns show that part-year work is more common in agriculture, construction and primary

industries relative to manufacturing (the omitted category), and less common in the finance,

government, and transportation industries. Time trends in part-year work implied by the

estimated year effects are mostly downward, but vary across specifications. Finally, note that

while the estimates using 20- versus 30-weeks to represent part-year work are quite similar, the

20-week version of the model fits our data considerably better for women. This could be

because, relative to men, a larger share of part-year women work 20 weeks rather than 30 weeks.

In the discussion below, we will primarily refer to the 20-week results.

     Concerning the UI policy variable, row 1 of Table 4 shows that the relative income

associated with part-year work has a positive effect on the share of workers working part year in

17
   Results based on a logistic specification (i.e. using the log-odds ratio in the cell as the dependent variable) were
very similar; we show the linear results for greatest ease in interpretation. Grouped-data logit is not feasible
because, for those cells based on published data, we do not have access to the underlying number of observations
from which the cell proportions were calculated.
18
   We experimented with specifications that included a full set of region-year interactions; here identification would
come only from those aspects of region-specific UI changes that had differential impacts across industries. For both
men and women, the resulting coefficients were statistically insignificant with very high standard errors. Thus, in
the cell-level analysis, there does not appear to be enough cross-industry, within-jurisdiction variation in UI
replacement rates to use this identification strategy.
                                                                                                    16


all specifications; this effect is highly significant when the 20-week UI parameters are used. To

interpret the size of these coefficients, recall from Table 2 that the largest decadal change in the

20-week version of our policy variable occurred between 1950 and 1960; in log terms, these

translate into a change in ln(YiP/YiF) of ln(.580) – ln(.441) = .274 for men and ln(.614) – ln(.455)

= .300 for women. Applying the relative income coefficient from Table 4, this translates into a

predicted change in the share working part year of .047 for men and .143 for women. Using

actual 1950 part-year shares as a base, this would raise the share working part-year from 28 to 33

percent for men, and from 15 to 29 percent for women.

   Clearly, the above effects are large and economically meaningful, especially for women. Are

these magnitudes plausible? To examine this question, it is important to first consider the nature

of the implicit wage change associated with the UI policy changes studied in this paper. This is

illustrated in Figure 4. If a person works all year, they will not receive any UI benefits regardless

of the generosity of the UI system. Normalize income in this situation to 1. UI changes in New

Brunswick between 1950 and 1960 raised men’s relative income from part-year work from .441

to .580. Thus, in contrast to the usual case of a wage increase, wage changes associated with

more generous UI have unambiguous predicted effects on labor supply: assuming leisure is a

normal good, both income and substitution effects imply a greater incidence of part-year work.

   Next, consider the magnitudes of the effective wage changes implied by the UI reforms in

our data. For the case illustrated in Figure 4 (New Brunswick men between 1950 and 1960), the

implicit percentage wage change is about 27 percent ((.580-.441)/(1-.5(.580+.441)). Assigning

20 weeks of work to part-year workers and 52 to full-year workers, our predicted increase of 4.7

percentage points in part-year work translates into a predicted decline in 1.5 weeks of work per

year, (from 43 to 41.5) which in turn translates into a labor supply elasticity of 0.13. The same
                                                                                                                   17


calculation yields an elasticity of 0.30 for women. While these are economically meaningful,

they are not implausible in magnitude. Overall, despite the obvious search frictions affecting

weeks worked in the real world, and the large array of UI program regulations designed to

prevent workers’ labor supply adjustments to the UI system (including disqualifications for job

quitters and job search requirements for the unemployed), substantial labor supply responses are

estimated. Further, even the relatively modest labor supply elasticities estimated here can

correspond to large responses of the incidence of part-year work to policy changes, with

correspondingly dramatic implications for the number of persons participating in an income-

support program and for the costs of running such programs.

     To see the latter point, note that – by definition – full-year workers cannot claim UI, and

suppose (as Anderson and Meyer 1997 have shown) that the UI take-up rate responds positively

to benefit generosity. It follows that the elasticity of part-year work with respect to UI benefit

levels provides a lower bound estimate of the elasticity of program participation with respect to

the benefit level.19 For men, we estimate that a 27 percent increase (from .441 to .580) in the

amount of income associated with part-year work generates a 15.5 percent (from 28 to 33)

increase in the share of men choosing this option, for an elasticity of .57. For women, this

elasticity is much higher at 2.09. Clearly, responses of this magnitude cast major doubt on

forecasts of program expenditures that assume no behavioral responses by workers.

     Although direct comparisons are hard to make (existing estimates tend to focus on very

specific outcomes, such as employment durations), the above elasticities seem large compared to

previous studies of the Canadian UI system (e.g. Green and Riddell 1997, Baker and Rea 1998),

including those which focus on seasonal work and the Atlantic Provinces (e.g. Green and Sargent


19
   Let P = T * PY, where P is UI program participation, PY is the share working part-year, and T is the take-up rate.
It follows that dlogP/dlogB = dlogT/dlogB + dlogPY/dlogB, where B is an indicator of UI benefit generosity.
                                                                                                     18


1998). We attribute this difference to three main factors. First, as in other countries, existing

studies of Canadian UI also tend to restrict their attention to short-run responses.20 Second, the

use of Maine as a control group holds constant a secular downward trend in part-year work in

both jurisdictions. In a study focused on New Brunswick only, such time trends would lead to an

underestimate of true UI policy effects. Finally, existing Canadian studies pay relatively little

attention to the dramatic increases in seasonal UI benefits that occurred before the well-known

1971 Act. Not accounting for these earlier subsidies tends to overstate the magnitude of

Canada’s 1971 reforms, thus understating the labor supply elasticities associated with them.

5. Empirical analysis: Microdata, 1970-91

a. Conceptual Framework

      As noted, public-use microdata files are only available for Canada from 1970 onwards. Thus,

for the years 1970-91, we can examine the determinants of part-year work at the individual

worker level. To compensate for this shorter (but still long compared to most other studies) time

span, the microdata have four principal advantages. First, we can exploit more sources of

variation across individuals and time in our relative income variable; in particular, we can now

allow relative income to vary with the respondent’s education and the presence of dependents.

Second, as noted, we restrict our attention throughout this section to Maine’s ‘northern counties’,

which are even more similar (than Maine as a whole) to New Brunswick. Third, we can conduct

a separate analysis of a low-education sample, to see whether responses to UI are higher in this

subpopulation. Finally, and most importantly, we can examine a more detailed distribution of

weeks worked than the under and over 40 weeks split. 21 If we can show that the particular

weeks-worked categories where UI subsidies increased the most also experienced the largest

20
     One exception is MacLeod and Lemieux ‘s (2001) study of learning effects among repeat users.
                                                                                                                   19


increases in ‘popularity’ among workers, our confidence that UI policy changes had causal

effects on the weeks-worked distribution would be considerably increased.

     The weeks worked information available allows us to assign every individual to one of four

weeks worked options: 1-13, 14-26, 27-39 and 40-52. These are the most detailed categories that

are consistent across regions and time. Thus, we require a method of estimating the distribution

of workers across four weeks-worked categories. Fortunately this is possible via a

straightforward generalization of equations (1) - (3). Instead of two weeks-worked categories (P

and F, for part- and full-year), let there now be four; labeled with superscripts 1, 2, 3 and 4. Let

category 1 continue to represent full-year work (still defined as 40-52 weeks). Continuing to use

this as the reference category, equation (1) remains unchanged except for a change of

superscript. The remaining three categories each will have utility given by their own version of

equation (2). If the four ,’s have independent and homoskedastic Weibull distributions22,

equation (3) becomes McFadden’s conditional logit model, where the X’s represent

characteristics that vary across persons only, while the income (Y) variables vary both across

persons and the four choice categories. Finally, since an equal increase in ln(Y) across all four

categories leaves optimal choices unchanged, we can normalize ln(YF) to 1 in (1), which

transforms the income variables in (2) to αlnYij – αlnYi1 = αln(Yij / Yi1), j = 2,3,4. Thus, the

correct choice-specific policy variable is the log of the ratio of person i’s income if he/she

chooses the relevant weeks-worked category to his/her income if she worked full year.




21
   Some more minor advantages of the microdata are a more detailed set of control variables, and the ability to
incorporate additional UI rules in each region.
22
   Most other specifications for the distribution of the errors are computationally impractical. In early work on this
data, we estimated a Cobb-Douglas model with only a single error term (representing the person’s “tastes for work”)
rather than four. This single- , model consistently did a poorer job of fitting empirical weeks-worked distributions.
                                                                                                                 20


     Two practical issues arise in computing the above relative income variables. One is the level

of weeks to “represent” each category in computing UI benefits.23 We use the midpoints (20 and

33) for the 14-26 and 27-39 weeks-worked categories respectively, and assume full-year work

(52 weeks) for the final category – as we did in the cell-level analysis. The data imposes an

important constraint on our analysis with respect to the 1-13 week category. If we adopt a

midpoint of 7 weeks then no individual in this category would receive UI in any region or year.

However, with 13 weeks of work, a substantial proportion of Maine workers would qualify –

albeit with a relatively minor amount of UI income – and all workers in New Brunswick in 1980

would qualify for a very generous benefit.24 To address this issue, we examined the continuous

distribution of weeks worked within the 1-13 week category in both New Brunswick and Maine

for 1980. Based on this, we model all workers in the 1-13 category as working for 12 weeks, but

model UI income in this category as equal to half of what such a worker would qualify for.25

     A second practical consideration – specific to microdata – is the effect of measurement error

in weeks worked on our estimates (this is largely eliminated in the cell data by the law of large

numbers). For distinct but related reasons to the classic “division bias” problem (Borjas 1980),




23
   Data constraints (in particular the categorical nature of New Brunswick’s 1970 weeks-worked information)
prevent us from computing benefits for every integer level of weeks worked, then taking a weighted average thereof.
In addition, using a fixed number of weeks avoids the endogeneity associated with changing weeks distributions
with in a category. Finally, focusing on just a few representative weeks levels has allowed us to ensure that all
details of a very complex UI system are accurately modeled in each region and year.
24
   Further, in 1990 for New Brunswick, the unanticipated and ‘accidental’ suspension of the variable entrance
requirement in Canada results in individuals who previously qualified with 10-13 weeks worked being ineligible for
the 1990 benefit year only (see Green and Riddell, 1997; Baker and Rea, 1998). Given that the weeks worked
variable in the 1991 Canadian census refers to the 1990 calendar year, we need to handle this in some way. As
described below, we allocated some UI to people in the 1-13 weeks category in 1990 – specifically, a weighted
average of what they would have had with and without the suspension – on the grounds that their behavior cannot
have perfectly reflected this unanticipated and temporary policy change.
25
   In New Brunswick, 50% of men in this category were at 9 weeks or less (where no one would qualify for UI in
either region), with 20% at 10 weeks, 5% at 11 weeks, 20% at 12 weeks, and 5% at 13 weeks. The distribution is
virtually identical for women, and also very similar for Maine – where men and women have an identical
distribution at 54% at 9 weeks or less, 13% at 10 weeks, 3% 11 weeks, 25% at 12 weeks, and 5% at 13 weeks.
                                                                                                                   21


this may bias our estimates of UI program effects.26 To address this problem, we use the

individual’s predicted rather than actual relative earnings, where predictions are based on the

following variables in addition to the X’s: a New Brunswick dummy interacted with 1980 and

1990, all the industry dummies interacted with New Brunswick, all the industry dummies

interacted with New Brunswick and a post-1970 dummy, and education interacted with New

Brunswick and a post-1970 dummy.27 This strategy is based on the notion that New Brunswick’s

1971 UI policy changes had effects on the relative attractiveness of weeks-worked categories

that varied by jurisdiction, industry and worker skill level. These across-group policy change

differentials are plausibly exogenous to the measurement error in individual weeks worked and

can therefore be used to identify the effects of the relative income variable.28

b. Data

     We use the New Brunswick observations in the 1%, 2%, and 3% national Public Use

microdata files for 1970, 1980 and 1990 respectively. For Maine, we use the 1% sample in 1970




26
 Recall that the relative income variable is calculated, for each individual using that individual’s estimated average
weekly earnings. Further, average weekly earnings are computed by dividing annual earnings by annual weeks
worked. Loosely speaking, our regression in the dichotomous case is thus specified as follows:
         Prob(Part-year) = f(γ0 + γ1R [annual earnings/annual weeks] + γ2 X),
where the function determining relative income, R, is decreasing in its argument because of the maximum UI benefit
level. Suppose that an individual’s weeks worked were misclassified below their true level. This raises our
computed weekly wage (the argument of R) and reduces the computed relative income from working part year.
Since the same negative measurement error raises the dependent variable, a spurious negative correlation between
relative income and the incidence of non-work is introduced.
27
  To reduce the impact of measurement error we also eliminated weekly wage outliers; specifically, in each
region/year we drop the top 1 percent and bottom 5 percent of the calculated wage distribution.
28
  Another advantage of using predicted relative earnings is that it addresses estimation problems stemming from
unobserved individual ‘ability’ as well. If unexplained individual weekly wage differences (‘ability’) are positively
correlated with unobserved differences in tastes for work, a cross-sectional OLS coefficient on our relative income
variable will overstate the causal effects of relative income on weeks worked. By removing the idiosyncratic portion
of individual earnings from the calculation of an individual’s relative earnings in different weeks worked categories,
our procedure eliminates this form of ‘ability bias’ as well.
                                                                                                                       22


and the 5% state samples for 1980-90.29 In addition, we restrict our sample to persons living in

Maine’s six ‘northern counties’ only; we henceforth refer to this area as Northern Maine. As

noted, details of variable construction for both the cell-means and microdata, including issues of

comparability across countries and across years, are provided in Appendix 2.

     Some basic descriptive statistics of our estimation sample are provided in Tables 5 and 6.30

For context, these Tables also show statistics for all of Maine in addition to the six northern

counties. On virtually all dimensions, Northern Maine is more similar to New Brunswick than is

Maine as a whole. In addition, the working populations of Northern Maine and New Brunswick

were of almost identical ages, and had similar levels of education. There were some differences

in family structure (marriage and children are more common in New Brunswick, perhaps as a

consequence of generous UI31) which are expected to raise men’s annual work weeks, but to

reduce women’s. While there were some differences in industry mix – in particular, the primary

sector was more important in New Brunswick while manufacturing was more important in

Northern Maine, at no time in either jurisdiction under study did the primary sector (essentially

fishing and logging) employ more than nine percent of men, or two percent of women.

c. Results

     Coefficients from conditional logit estimation of equation 3 are reported in Table 7. In

addition to the control variables shown (whose role is to allow for a different choice-specific

intercept for each year of data and each jurisdiction), all columns of Table 7 include a full set of


29
  We use Stata’s “p-weight” option to adjust our estimates for these differences in sampling rates across countries
and years. Thus our estimates are representative of a worker drawn at random from the combined populations of
Northern Maine and New Brunswick over all three years of our data.
30
  Note that the statistics reported in Tables 1 and 2 pertain to persons aged 25 through 59 with at least one week of
employment in the relevant calendar year—the sample used in Section 5 of the paper below.
31
  Our estimates of UI effects will condition on these family variables; of course to the extent that these variables
respond to UI incentives our estimates will tend to understate long-run UI effects on weeks worked.
                                                                                                                    23


industry effects for each weeks-worked category. Further, columns 2 and 4 include controls for

all the variables summarized in Tables 1 and 2: age, marital status, children, school attendance,

education, part-time work. While not reported, these variables have effects on the choice-

specific propensities that are, in almost all cases, strongly in line with expectations (e.g. higher

education reduces the attractiveness of all part-year categories relative to the baseline, full-year

category).

     Turning to the UI policy variable, the results in Table 7 provide strong evidence that, ceteris

paribus, a UI-induced increase in the relative income in a weeks-worked category makes it more

likely to be chosen (t-statistics on this variable vary across specifications from 2.8 to 9.1).32 As

conditional logit coefficients do not provide useful measures of the effects of a regressor on the

expected distribution of outcomes, Tables 8 through 10 display various actual and predicted

weeks-worked distributions calculated from the coefficients in Table 7.

     Table 8 assesses how closely the conditional logit model fits the actual weeks-worked

distribution across time and regions. Part (a) focuses on men and shows that full-year work was

more common in Northern Maine than in New Brunswick in all years under examination (this is

not surprising given the pre-existing UI differences studied in the previous section). By 1990,

only about 72 percent of employed 25 to 59-year old New Brunswick men worked full year,

compared to about 88 percent in Northern Maine.33 In addition, while full-year work declined

over time in both regions between 1970 and 1990, it declined to a greater extent in New

Brunswick than Northern Maine (about 7 versus 3 percentage points) despite starting at a lower


32
  As in Section 4’s analysis of cell means, we experimented with a specification that included controls for a full set
of year- region interactions. In contrast to the cell-level results (see note 18), in the microdata case the estimated
policy effects did not attenuate or lose statistical significance when these interactions were included.
33
  These figures for full-year work differ from those in Table 3 for two reasons: the restriction to ages 25-59 and the
restriction to Northern Maine. We find it noteworthy that the interregional differences remain so stark even when
these restrictions are imposed.
                                                                                                                 24


base. Moreover, substantial increases occurred in the two lowest weeks-worked categories, 1-13

and 14-26, in New Brunswick. Part (a) also shows the weeks-worked distributions predicted by

our model for men.34 Overall, the model fits these distributions very well. In 15 of 24 possible

cases the prediction is within a single percentage point of the actual, and in no case is the model

off by more than three percentage points.

     Actual versus predicted values for women are shown in part (b) of Table 8. Similar patterns

are evident, but against the background of an overall increase in labor force participation and

full-year work. There are large increase in the fraction of New Brunswick women working 1-13

weeks (particularly between 1970 and 1980), and 14 to 26 weeks per year; an amount of work

that entitles one to a full year of UI benefits in New Brunswick, but much less in Maine. As for

men, the model fits the actual weeks-worked distributions remarkably well in both jurisdictions.

d. Predicted Policy Effects: New Brunswick’s 1971 UI Act

     To examine the role of UI policy, Table 9 poses the following question: what would have

happened in New Brunswick if the 1971 UI Act had not been implemented? The results are

striking. For men, the simulation indicates that instead of declining by 7 percentage points, full-

year work would have remained relatively constant at around 80 percentage points over the next

two decades. Thus, the 1971 UI Act can account for virtually all of New Brunswick’s (absolute

and relative) decline in full-year work among men. Moreover, absent the 1971 UI Act, the large

increases in the 1-13 weeks worked (from 1.3 to 4.5 percentage points) and 14-26 weeks worked

(9.3 to 15.6) categories would not have occurred.




34
  Predicted probabilities across all four choices were computed for every person in our sample, then averaged across
persons by year and region.
                                                                                                 25


   For women, a somewhat different story emerges. Instead of a relatively minor increase in

full-year work, the fraction of women working full-year would have increased by 14 percentage

points if New Brunswick’s 1971 policy change had not occurred. The 1970 part-year weeks

worked distribution in New Brunswick is still skewed towards 14-26 weeks (relative to Northern

Maine), but, as the previous Section suggests, this could be due to pre-existing UI policy

differences between the regions. In summary, the 1972 UI reforms appear to have dramatically

increased the incidence of part-year work in New Brunswick. For women in particular, these

effects would not be apparent in a single-country study that did not use Northern Maine as a

control group.

   As in the two-outcome model, it is instructive to compute the labor-supply and other

elasticities implied by our estimates. To derive a summary metric of the overall effective wage

change associated with New Brunswick’s 1972 UI reforms, consider the budget constraints

facing an average New Brunswick woman in 1980 under two different legislative regimes, 1980

and 1970. These budget constraints are depicted in Figure 5 (the numbers entered into the Figure

are the means of the policy variables used in the Table 9 simulations). Under 1970 rules, the

implicit weekly wage associated with the 1-13 weeks worked category, measured in weeks of

income per week of work, is one. This is because no individual working between 1 and 13

weeks was entitled to UI under New Brunswick’s 1970 rules, 12 weeks of work yielded 12

weeks, or 12/52 = .231 years worth of income (recall that 12 weeks represents the 1-13 week

category).

   Under the 1980 rules, this implicit wage rate had fallen from one to (1-.448)*[52/(52-12)] =

.72 weeks of income per week worked, a 33 percent effective wage decrease (using an average of

initial and final values as a base to calculate percentages). The same calculations applied to the
                                                                                                                 26


14-26 and 27-39 weeks worked categories yield percentage wage declines of 58 and 41 percent

respectively. Taking a simple average of these, New Brunswick’s women faced roughly a 44.1

percent effective decline in the returns to working an extra week of the year, due to the 1972 UI

reforms. What elasticities does this imply? Continuing to use 52, 33, 20 and 12 weeks to

represent the four weeks-worked categories, the 1980 policy reforms led to a 9.6 percent decline

in annual weeks worked (from 42.5 to 38.7), implying a labor supply elasticity of 9.6/44.1 = .22.

For men, the same calculations yield an elasticity of .13. These values are remarkably close to

our estimates from the previous section’s model, .30 and .13 for women and men respectively.

     As before, we also compute frequency-of-choice elasticities with respect to the income

associated with a choice. Focusing on the bottom two weeks-worked categories (1-13 and 14-

26), women’s elasticities are 1.06 and .68 respectively; men’s are 1.34 and 0.99 respectively.

Thus, a ten percent increase in the total income associated with working 1-13 weeks implies an

increase of more than ten percent in the share of workers in that category. Combining the bottom

two categories, we estimate an elasticity of about one (1.04 for men, .91) for both men and

women. Thus, for both men and women, increasing the income associated with working less

than half year by ten percent raises the number of men or women working under half year by

about ten percent as well.35 Clearly, these estimates suggest large responses of UI program

participation, and expenditures, with respect to program generosity.

     On one level, we should not be surprised if New Brunswick’s 1972 UI reforms led to an

increase in UI program participation. The new rules extended UI entitlements to workers with

very short histories who previously did not qualify for the program. Thus, a participation (and

expenditure) increase would have occurred even in the absence of any behavioral responses to

35
   Combining the bottom three categories yields an estimate of UI effects on ‘part-year’ (under 40 weeks) work that
is comparable to those obtained in our cell-level analysis. These elasticities are .90 for men and .74 for women.
                                                                                                                     27


the policy change. Since our interest here is in behavioral adaptation to legislation, we net out

the above, purely mechanical “entitlement” effects by computing changes in UI participation

under a fixed (1980) set of UI rules. Since, under the 1980 rules, about half the workers in the 1-

13 week category qualifed for UI, our estimate of the number of UI program participants equals

the number of workers in the 14-26 and 27-39 week categories, plus half the number in the 1-13

week category.36 Under that definition, our estimates imply an elasticity of UI program

participation with respect to the wage of .47, and of paid UI weeks with respect to the wage of

.34 for women. For men, these numbers are .72 and .67. Elasticities with respect to the average

income associated with “part-year” (under 40 weeks) work are similar: .80 and .74 for men, and

.57 and .41 for women. In other words, raising the income associated with part-year work by 10

percent is predicted to raise the number of men receiving UI benefits by 8 percent, and the

number of UI benefit weeks paid to men by 7.4 percent.37

e. Predicted Policy Effects: International Comparisons

     In the spirit of understanding the contribution of income support policies to international

differences in work activity (e.g. Prescott 2004; Alesina et al 2005), we also ask: “What would

happen if New Brunswick adopted Maine’s UI system?” The results, presented in Table 10,

show that 80 percent of New Brunswick’s working men would be working full year in 1990

(compared with 72 percent who actually did so, and compared with 88 percent of Northern

Maine men who did so). Thus, UI policy alone explains half of men’s 16 percentage point cross-

sectional gap in full-year work between these two jurisdictions in 1990. If New Brunswick had


36
  If only a fixed fraction of UI-qualified workers actually participate in the program, our computed elasticities are
unaffected. If the UI take-up rate among qualified workers increases with the benefit level, the elasticities presented
below underestimate the magnitude of the response.
37
  These UI take-up elasticities are larger for men than those obtained from the previous section’s two-outcome
model, but smaller for women (they were .57 and 2.09 respectively for men and women). We place more weight on
the current numbers since they are based on a more detailed simulation of the change in predicted work weeks.
                                                                                                   28


Maine’s UI system, 75 percent of its working women would have worked full year in 1990

(compared to 65 percent who actually did so, and compared with 76 percent of Northern Maine

women who did so). UI policy therefore explains all of women’s 16 percentage point cross-

sectional gap in full-year work between these two jurisdictions in 1990.

   Focusing on the share of workers who put in less than a half year of work, Table 10’s

predictions are even more dramatic. For example, according to Table 8, in 1990 (2.2+3.9=) 6.1

percent of Northern Maine’s working men worked fewer than 27 weeks; in New Brunswick that

figure was more than three times as high at 20.8 percent. From Table 10, only (1.0+10.4=) 11.4

percent of New Brunswick’s working men would work less than half year if New Brunswick had

Maine’s UI system. Thus, UI policy differences explain about two thirds ((20.8-11.4)/(20.8-6.1)

of this differential. For women in 1990, 13.8 percent worked less than half year in Northern

Maine, compared to 26.2 percent in New Brunswick. Similar calculations imply that UI policy

differences can account for essentially all of this difference.

   As noted, it is striking that the effects of UI on weeks-worked distributions described above

are observed at the level of the entire labor force (not just for the highly restricted samples often

analyzed in income-support studies, such as single mothers, former welfare recipients, or

workers who have just initiated an unemployment spell). That said, it is useful to investigate

whether a sample of less-skilled workers would be more responsive to UI incentives than the

population as a whole, particularly since UI replacement rates are higher among the less-skilled.

To that end, we replicated the entire analysis underlying Table 10 for a sample of workers with a

high-school degree or less. The results are shown in Table 11.38 Compared to all men, there is a

larger inter-regional difference in the 1990 share working part-year (under 40 weeks) among the

less-educated at (100-82=) 18 percent in Northern Maine versus (100-66=) 34 percent in New
                                                                                                                    29


Brunswick. According to Table 11, UI policy explains 80.3-66.3= 14 percentage points of this

16 point difference. The results are even more dramatic for the share of men working less than

half the year. In 1990 more than a quarter of New Brunswick’s men (5.5 + 20.2 = 25.7 percent)

fell into this category, compared to 10.3 percent in Northern Maine. Imposing Maine’s UI

system on New Brunswick reduces this 25.7 percent to 11.4 percent. The model therefore

attributes almost the entire international gap in 1990 to the UI policy differential.

       For less-educated women, Table 11 shows an interregional gap in the 1990 incidence of part-

year work (under 40 weeks) equal to 68.9 – 60.3 = 8.6 percentage points. Under Maine’s rules

women in New Brunswick would have worked part-year 72.1-60.3 = 11.8 percentage points less

frequently. The interregional gap in the share working half-year or less is 11.3 percentage

points, essentially all of which is again attributed to UI policy differences. In contrast to men,

these predicted UI effects for less-educated women are not unambiguously greater than those for

the entire female labor force. Perhaps because of women’s lower wages overall, and perhaps

because of a greater desire to spend time with their children, better- educated women appear to

be just as likely to respond to the UI program as less-educated women.

6. Conclusions

       In 1990, six percent of 25-59-year-old men in Maine’s Northern Counties worked fewer than

26 weeks. Just across the Saint Croix River in New Brunswick, that figure was more than three

times as high, at 20 percent. Our results suggest that a large share of this difference can be

explained by the much more generous Canadian Unemployment Insurance system. These results

are derived from a unique and dramatic natural income-support experiment spanning 50 years,

during which we see a close link between these jurisdictions’ relative weeks-worked


38
     Predicted distributions correspond very closely to the actual ones; for brevity, we report predictions only.
                                                                                                  30


distributions and New Brunswick’s UI policy changes. Further, the fact that our very

parsimonious model accurately predicts which particular weeks-worked categories became

relatively more common after New Brunswick’s 1971 UI reforms considerably strengthens the

case for a causal role of UI policy.

   In more detail, we identify large effects of UI program generosity on the likelihood of

working a relatively small number of weeks per year – for example, 1 to 13 weeks or 14 to 26

weeks. For both men and women, a ten percent UI-induced increase in the income associated

with working less than half-year is estimated to raise the number of persons working less than

half year by about the same ratio. These large UI-induced changes in the incidence of part-year

work in turn suggest large elasticities of program participation – and therefore program

expenditures – with respect to program generosity. For instance, raising the income associated

with part-year work by 10 percent raises the number of men receiving UI benefits by 8 percent,

and the number of UI benefit weeks paid to men by 7.4 percent. Needless to say, such responses

should play important roles in the cost-benefit analysis of any income support policy.

   The approach taken in this paper differs from most existing studies of the labor market

effects of income support programs which (for good reason) restrict their attention to the short-

run effects of small policy changes on the labor supply of specific at-risk groups (e.g. former

welfare recipients; workers who have just become unemployed). In contrast, we evaluate the

long-run impact of a very generous unemployment insurance program on the amount of work

performed by a region’s entire workforce. Clearly, because they allow both workers and firms to

make larger adjustments on a greater number of margins, both the size and permanence of the UI

policy changes studied here may help account for the relatively large responses estimated here.

Among the margins of adjustment that are likely to play a larger role in the long run are
                                                                                                                     31


education decisions, occupational choices, fertility decisions, migration (workers with high tastes

for leisure may be induced to remain in New Brunswick by UI policy), learning effects (it takes

time and/or experience to understand the workings of the UI system), and the development of

informal institutions (such as relabelling of separations and the job-sharing example discussed in

Section 4) to take most effective advantage of the UI program.39

     Finally, two additional factors may contribute to the large estimated responses in this paper.

One is social effects: the large UI participation rates generated by the Canadian program may

themselves help disseminate knowledge about how the program works, and may effectively

eliminate any stigma associated with benefit receipt. We do not attempt to distinguish such

induced social effects from ‘first-order’ program effects in this paper; we simply note that any

such social multipliers may help explain the size of our estimates.40 The second possible

contributing factor to our large estimated effects is the pre-existing pattern of seasonal work in

both these jurisdictions. Clearly, to the extent that a program’s main effect is to preserve a pre-

existing way of life, any adjustment costs will work in favor of, rather than against, large

program effects. That said, our estimates attribute large increases in women’s part-year work to

New Brunswick’s UI system. Importantly, these effects are observed in sectors such as services

(which accounts for half of female employment), not just in ‘inherently’ seasonal activities such

as primary industries. Thus, for women, it appears that UI has not just preserved an existing

lifestyle, but actually created a new one based on chronic seasonal unemployment.




39
   Of course, some of these margins (in particular education decisions, occupational choices, and fertility decisions)
are at least partially controlled for in our estimation procedure. To the extent they are held constant in our analysis,
even the large estimates in this paper are likely to understate the overall magnitude of responses to UI.
40
   See for example Bertrand et al. (2000) for a recent study of social effects on income support program participation
                                                                                            32


                                         References

Alesina, A., E. Glaeser, and B. Sacerdote. 2005. “Work and Leisure in the U.S. and Europe: Why
       so Different?” NBER Macroeconomics Annua.

Anderson, Patricia M. and Bruce D. Meyer. 1997. “Unemployment Insurance Take-up Rates and
      the After-tax Value of Benefits” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Volume 112, Number
      3, pp. 913-37.

Ashenfelter, Orley and David E. Card. 1986. “Why have Unemployment Rates in Canada and
      the United States Diverged?” Economica, Volume 53, pp.171-95

Baker, Michael and Samuel A. Rea. 1998. “Employment Spells and Unemployment Insurance
       Eligibility Requirements” Review of Economics and Statistics, Volume 80, Number 1,
       pp.80-94.

Bertrand, Marianne, Luttmer, Erzo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2000. “Network Effects and
       Welfare Cultures” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Volume 115, Number 3, pp. 1019-
       55.

Blank, Rebecca M., and David E. Card. 1991. “Recent Trends in Insured and Uninsured
       Unemployment: Is There an Explanation?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Volume
       106, Number 4, pp. 1157-89.

Borjas, George. 1980. “The Relationship between Wages and Weekly Hours of Work: The Role
        of Division Bias” Journal of Human Resources, Volume 15, Number 3, pp. 409-423.

Commission of Inquiry on Unemployment Insurance. 1986. Report. Ottawa: Minister of Supply
     and Services.

Dingledine, Gary. 1981. A chronology of response: The evolution of unemployment insurance
       from 1940 to 1980. Ottawa: Minister of Supply and Services.

Green, David A. and W. Craig Riddell. 1997. ‘Qualifying for Unemployment Insurance: An
       Empirical Analysis” Economic Journal, Volume 107, Number 440, pp. 67-84.

Green, David A. and Timothy Sargent. 1998. “Unemployment Insurance and Job Durations:
       Seasonal and Non-seasonal Jobs” Canadian Journal of Economics, Volume 31, Number
       2, pp. 247-78.

Hamermesh, Daniel S. 2002. “International Labor Economics” Journal of Labor Economics,
     Volume 20, Number 4, pp. 709-32.

Harris, Michael. 1998. Lament for an Ocean: The Collapse of the Atlantic Cod Fishery: A True
        Crime Story. Toronto: McClelland & Stewart.
                                                                                        33


Human Resources Development Canada. 2005. “Unemployment Insurance in Canada”
     http://www.hrdc-drhc.ca/ae-ei/hist/chapter4.shtml

Kuhn, Peter and Arthur Sweetman. 1998. “Unemployment Insurance and Quits in Canada”
       Canadian Journal of Economics, Volume 31, Number 3, pp. 549-72.

Krueger, Alan and Bruce Meyer. 2002. “Labor Supply Effects of Social Insurance”, in A.
      Auerbach and M. Feldstein, eds. Handbook of Public Economics, Volume 4. Amsterdam:
      Elsevier, pp. 2327-2392.

MacLeod, W. B. and Thomas Lemieux. 2001. ‘Supply Side Hysteresis: The Case of the
     Canadian Unemployment System” Journal of Public Economics, Volume 78, Number 2,
     pp.139-170.

Murray, Charles A. 1994. Losing ground: American social policy, 1950-1980. New York: Basic
      Books.

Prescott, E. C. 2004. “Why do Americans Work So Much More than Europeans?” Federal
       Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Volume 28, Number 1.
                                                                                                                34


Table 1
Government Transfer Payments in Maine and New Brunswick, 1990

A. All Persons:

                                 Men                                     Women
1. Fraction receiving unemployment insurance
New Brunswick                    .228                                       .182
Maine                            .056                                       .031
2. Fraction receiving other transfer payments1
New Brunswick                    .117                                       .117
Maine                            .062                                       .082

B. Workers2 Only:

                                 Men                                     Women
1. Fraction receiving unemployment insurance
New Brunswick                    .295                                       .297
Maine                            .057                                       .033
2. Fraction receiving other transfer payments1
New Brunswick                    .054                                       .058
Maine                            .039                                       .040

1. In Maine, “other transfer payments” include public assistance, veterans’ benefits and food stamps only. In New
Brunswick, it includes social assistance, veterans pensions, workers compensation, disability benefits, mothers'
allowances, Canada manpower training and mobility allowances, and provincial income supplements.

2. ‘Workers’ includes all individuals with positive weeks worked in the reference calendar year.

Age is restricted to 25 to 59 years.

Sources: Authors’ calculations from 1991 Census of Canada and March 1990 Current Population Survey.
CPS figures are weighted by CPS final weight.
                                                                                                               35


Table 2
Estimated total annual income from part-year work, as a fraction of income earned from
full-year work, Cell-level census data 1940-91

                         1940         1950         1960       1970      1980                1990
                                                   Part-year = 20 weeks
MEN:
 New Brunswick              .385         .441         .580          .551         .680         .713
 Maine                      .454         .456         .479          .495         .509         .509
WOMEN:
 New Brunswick              .385         .455        .614        .579            .731         .731
 Maine                      .474         .478        .511        .509            .513         .513
                                                   Part-year = 30 weeks
MEN:
 New Brunswick              .577         .688         .761          .734         .774         .796
 Maine                      .673         .672         .680          .702         .718         .720
WOMEN:
 New Brunswick              .577         .716         .793          .760         .808         .808
 Maine                      .697         .693         .709          .763         .769         .769

NOTES: Standard errors are in parentheses. All means are based on 9 industries for men and 6 industries for
women, and are weighted by the underlying number of observations. The sources are the 1940/50/60/70/80/90 U.S.
censuses for Maine and the 1941/51/61/71/81/91 Canadian censuses for New Brunswick. See text for discussion of
the computation of the relative income variable, and further discussion of the data.



Table 3
Percent of workers working part year, Census data 1940-91

                          1940          1950          1960          1970          1980          1990

MEN:
 New Brunswick             .36           .27           .33           .34           .35           .36
 Maine                     .31           .25           .25           .24           .24           .22

WOMEN:
 New Brunswick             .20           .14           .31           .44           .47           .40
 Maine                     .37           .37           .50           .48           .40           .31

NOTES: Part-year work is defined as working less than 40 weeks. The sources are the 1940/50/60/70/80/90 U.S.
censuses for Maine and the 1941/51/61/71/81/91 Canadian censuses for New Brunswick. See text for further
discussion of the computation of part-year work, and discussion of the data.
                                                                                                                     36


Table 4
Regression estimates of the incidence of part year work, Cell data 1940-91

Variable                            20-week UI parameters           30-week UI parameters
                                      MEN        WOMEN                MEN        WOMEN
                                        (1)          (2)                (3)          (4)
Relative income                        .172         .476               .221         .316
                                      (2.27)       (5.99)             (1.66)       (1.51)
New Brunswick                          .042        -.135               .055        -.076
                                      (2.18)       (5.45)             (3.34)       (2.73)
Agriculture                            .277                            .279
                                      (7.91)                          (7.48)
Construction                           .224                            .223
                                      (6.35)                          (6.11)
Finance                               -.111        -.204              -.107        -.212
                                      (5.21)       (6.03)             (4.68)       (5.26)
Government                            -.071        -.044              -.070        -.063
                                      (2.61)       (0.89)             (2.37)       (1.16)
Primary                                .335                            .333
                                     (10.87)                         (10.86)
Services                               .031        -.006               .030        -.016
                                      (0.97)       (0.18)             (0.91)       (0.35)
Trade                                 -.010        -.011              -.013        -.018
                                      (0.43)       (0.30)             (0.59)       (0.44)
Transportation                        -.034        -.143              -.034        -.148
                                      (1.72)       (3.72)             (1.77)       (3.40)

1950                                  -.071           -.065           -.079           -.057
                                      (2.57)          (1.55)          (2.64)          (0.98)
1960                                  -.044            .003           -.036            .078
                                      (1.36)          (0.05)          (1.10)          (1.16)
1970                                  -.035            .071           -.028            .127
                                      (1.15)          (2.10)          (0.90)          (2.29)
1980                                  -.058           -.008           -.039            .096
                                      (1.56)          (0.19)          (1.12)          (1.42)
1990                                  -.068           -.089           -.048            .015
                                      (1.71)          (2.19)          (1.27)          (0.21)

R2                                    .785             .712            .779            .581
N                                     108               72             108              72

NOTES: Coefficients are derived from a WLS regression of the fraction of workers working fewer than 40 weeks
per year on the independent variables shown. Marginal effects –i.e. the predicted change in the part-year share at
the means of the data—are reported. Robust t-statistics are in parentheses (in absolute value). The ‘relative
income’ variable is defined as the log of (part-year income / full-year income). Manufacturing is the omitted
industry group and 1940 is the omitted year. All regressions include a constant term, and are weighted by annual
industry shares in employment.
                                                                                                                  37


Table 5
Descriptive Statistics: Men

Variable                  New Brunswick               Maine-Northern Counties                    Maine
                      1970     1980     1990           1970    1980     1990           1970       1980       1990
Age                  40.96    38.24    39.22          41.09   39.23    38.92          40.97      39.15      38.99
                     (.362)   (.214)   (.149)         (.462)  (.187)   (.154)         (.258)     (.107)     (.089)

Agriculture           .010       .009       .016       .031      .031       .032       .029       .019       .020
                     (.003)     (.002)     (.002)     (.009)    (.003)     (.003)     (.004)     (.001)     (.001)
Primary               .079       .085       .081       .044      .037       .043       .022       .023       .029
                     (.009)     (.006)     (.004)     (.009)    (.003)     (.003)     (.004)     (.002)     (.002)
Construction          .084       .115       .115       .108      .091       .120       .091       .091       .126
                     (.009)     (.007)     (.005)     (.014)    (.005)     (.005)     (.007)     (.003)     (.003)
Transportation        .171       .156       .133       .101      .096       .070       .082       .084       .073
                     (.013)     (.008)     (.006)     (.014)    (.005)     (.004)     (.007)     (.003)     (.003)
Trade                 .126       .126       .127       .142      .132       .152       .163       .143       .157
                     (.011)     (.007)     (.005)     (.016)    (.006)     (.006)     (.010)     (.004)     (.004)
Finance               .018       .025       .029       .021      .023       .015       .025       .029       .025
                     (.005)     (.003)     (.003)     (.007)    (.003)     (.002)     (.004)     (.002)     (.001)
Services              .134       .155       .174       .145      .170       .178       .129       .168       .183
                     (.012)     (.008)     (.006)     (.016)    (.007)     (.006)     (.009)     (.004)     (.004)
Manufacturing         .209       .204       .197       .296      .298       .253       .369       .334       .284
                     (.014)     (.009)     (.006)     (.021)    (.008)     (.007)     (.012)     (.005)     (.004)
Public                .167       .126       .127       .108      .122       .137       .089       .109       .102
                     (.013)     (.007)     (.005)     (.014)    (.006)     (.006)     (.007)     (.003)     (.003)

Married               .856       .828       .810       .902      .812       .751       .863       .804       .742
                     (.012)     (.008)     (.006)     (.014)    (.007)     (.007)     (.009)     (.004)     (.004)
Children              .710       .714       .692       .699      .630       .564       .686       .620       .562
                     (.016)     (.009)     (.007)     (.021)    (.009)     (.008)     (.012)     (.005)     (.005)
Attending school      .056       .069       .072       .009      .033       .058       .026       .038       .052
                     (.008)     (.006)     (.004)     (.004)    (.003)     (.004)     (.004)     (.002)     (.002)

High school or        .882       .575       .524       .835      .670       .584       .799       .642       .550
less                 (.011)     (.011)     (.008)     (.017)    (.009)     (.008)     (.010)     (.005)     (.005)
Some post-            .049       .311       .340       .086      .156       .250       .100       .172       .253
secondary            (.008)     (.010)     (.008)     (.013)    (.007)     (.007)     (.008)     (.004)     (.004)
Four-year degree      .069       .114       .135       .077      .174       .166       .101       .186       .198
                     (.009)     (.007)     (.006)     (.012)    (.007)     (.006)     (.008)     (.004)     (.004)

Part-time (under      .031       .061       .043       .032      .023       .029       .023       .023       .024
30 hours/week)       (.006)     (.005)     (.003)     (.008)    (.003)     (.003)     (.004)     (.002)     (.001)

Sample size           832       2111       3811        462       2922       3681       1499       8891      10813

NOTES: Standard errors are in parentheses. The sample is restricted to individuals of age 25 to 59, with at least one
week of work in the calendar year preceding the Census.
                                                                                                                  38


Table 6
Descriptive Statistics: Women

Variable                  New Brunswick               Maine-Northern Counties                    Maine
                      1970     1980     1990           1970    1980     1990           1970       1980       1990
Age                  40.48    37.59    38.46          42.41   39.27    39.15          42.05      39.30      38.97
                     (.497)   (.263)   (.160)         (.573)  (.214)   (.162)         (.312)     (.122)     (.090)

Agriculture           .007       .010       .018       .020      .021       .020       .021       .012       .013
                     (.004)     (.003)     (.002)     (.008)    (.003)     (.002)     (.005)     (.001)     (.001)
Primary               .005       .017       .014       .000      .007       .007       .004       .003       .004
                     (.003)     (.004)     (.002)     (.000)    (.002)     (.002)     (.002)     (.001)     (.001)
Construction          .007       .017       .011       .007      .007       .010       .009       .006       .013
                     (.004)     (.004)     (.002)     (.005)    (.002)     (.002)     (.003)     (.001)     (.001)
Transportation        .043       .038       .039       .020      .022       .023       .023       .026       .026
                     (.010)     (.005)     (.003)     (.008)    (.003)     (.003)     (.005)     (.002)     (.002)
Trade                 .204       .158       .157       .215      .170       .201       .207       .166       .197
                     (.020)     (.010)     (.006)     (.024)    (.008)     (.007)     (.013)     (.004)     (.004)
Finance               .048       .064       .066       .027      .047       .052       .050       .060       .070
                     (.011)     (.007)     (.004)     (.009)    (.004)     (.004)     (.007)     (.003)     (.003)
Services              .468       .487       .489       .414      .448       .487       .323       .410       .463
                     (.024)     (.013)     (.009)     (.029)    (.011)     (.009)     (.015)     (.006)     (.005)
Manufacturing         .127       .132       .096       .269      .210       .128       .323       .250       .154
                     (.016)     (.009)     (.005)     (.026)    (.009)     (.006)     (.015)     (.005)     (.004)
Public                .089       .077       .108       .027      .069       .072       .040       .067       .061
                     (.014)     (.007)     (.006)     (.009)    (.005)     (.005)     (.006)     (.003)     (.002)

Married               .731       .770       .783       .778      .743       .737       .767       .727       .716
                     (.022)     (.011)     (.007)     (.024)    (.009)     (.008)     (.013)     (.005)     (.004)
Children              .728       .625       .691       .596      .638       .622       .626       .631       .609
                     (.022)     (.013)     (.008)     (.029)    (.010)     (.009)     (.015)     (.006)     (.005)
In school             .058       .077       .078       .020      .044       .086       .019       .044       .078
                     (.011)     (.007)     (.005)     (.008)    (.004)     (.005)     (.004)     (.002)     (.003)

High school or        .870       .531       .485       .788      .636       .539       .786       .654       .506
less                 (.016)     (.013)     (.009)     (.024)    (.010)     (.009)     (.013)     (.006)     (.005)
Some post-            .077       .352       .375       .138      .191       .273       .139       .185       .279
secondary            (.013)     (.013)     (.009)     (.020)    (.008)     (.008)     (.011)     (.005)     (.004)
Four-year degree      .053       .117       .140       .074      .173       .187       .076       .161       .215
                     (.011)     (.009)     (.006)     (.015)    (.008)     (.007)     (.008)     (.004)     (.004)

Part-time (under      .226       .276       .233       .200      .185       .172       .173       .184       .175
30 hours/week)       (.021)     (.012)     (.007)     (.023)    (.008)     (.007)     (.012)     (.005)     (.004)

Sample size           416       1384       3147        297       2210       3229       1031       7018      10098

NOTES: Standard errors are in parentheses. The sample is restricted to individuals of age 25 to 59, with at least one
week of work in the calendar year preceding the Census.
                                                                                                                  39


Table 7
Estimated Coefficients from McFadden choice model among weeks-worked categories:
Using Northern Maine counties only

Variable                                  Men                                          Women
                                 (1)                   (2)                     (3)                    (4)
Relative income               5.791                  1.775                  2.155                  1.424
                              (9.08)                 (2.78)                 (6.32)                 (4.10)
New Brunswick *               -1.632                  .146                   -.683                  -.469
1-13 weeks                    (5.50)                 (0.50)                 (4.05)                 (2.74)
New Brunswick *                -.458                  .830                   -.079                  .102
14-26 weeks                   (2.24)                 (3.94)                 (0.59)                 (0.75)
New Brunswick *                .349                   .384                   -.233                  -.256
27-39 weeks                   (5.14)                 (5.50)                 (3.65)                 (3.93)
1980 * 1-13 weeks              -.498                  .326                   -.621                  -.427
                              (1.92)                 (0.97)                 (3.99)                 (2.50)
1980 * 14-26                   -.637                  .102                   -.365                  -.232
weeks                         (4.07)                 (0.59)                 (2.85)                 (1.76)
1980 * 27-39                   -.096                  .052                   -.262                  -.284
weeks                         (0.79)                 (0.42)                 (2.16)                 (2.30)
1990 * 1-13 weeks              -.584                  .368                  -1.311                 -1.049
                              (2.25)                 (1.07)                 (8.26)                 (6.00)
1990 * 14-26                   -.524                  .356                   -.556                  -.366
weeks                         (3.24)                 (2.00)                 (4.44)                 (2.83)
1990 * 27-39                   -.293                 -.089                   -.662                  -.667
weeks                         (2.46)                 (0.73)                 (5.62)                 (5.52)
Socio-economic                  No                    Yes                     No                     Yes
controls
Pseudo R2                     .539                   .560                    .285                   .313
χ2                           20634.5                21422.5                 8450.9                 9249.9

NOTES: t-statistics are in parentheses (in absolute value). The dependent variable equals one for the weeks worked
category realized, zero for each other weeks worked category. Estimation is by conditional logit. The number of
individuals in the sample is 13819 for men and 10683 for women. The ‘relative income’ variable is defined as the
log of (part-year income / full-year income). In all cases, we use the predicted values of relative income, where the
predictors include the following variables in addition to the regressors in the table: New Brunswick interacted with
1980, New Brunswick interacted with 1990, all the industry dummies interacted with New Brunswick, all the
industry dummies interacted with New Brunswick and a post-1970 dummy, and education interacted with New
Brunswick and a post-1970 dummy. Manufacturing is the omitted industry group, high school diploma or less is
the omitted education group, and 1970 is the omitted year. The sample is restricted to individuals of age 25 to 59.
All equations include a full set of industry dummies. Standard errors are corrected for clustering on (year * region
* industry * education) cells.
                                                                                  40


Table 8
Actual versus Predicted Weeks-Worked Distributions, Conditional Logit Model

a. Men

                         New Brunswick                    Northern Maine
                    Actual          Predicted        Actual           Predicted
1970:
  1-13 weeks          1.7                1.3           1.1               1.7
  14-26 weeks        10.0               9.3           2.2               3.6
  27-39 weeks        10.0               8.6           5.1               6.5
  40-52 weeks        78.4               80.8          91.5              88.2

1980:
  1-13 weeks          4.5                4.5           2.0               2.2
  14-26 weeks        11.2               12.5          3.8               3.8
  27-39 weeks         8.2                8.9          6.7               7.2
  40-52 weeks        76.1               74.1          87.6              86.9

1990:
  1-13 weeks          4.5                4.5           2.2               2.5
  14-26 weeks        16.3               15.6          3.9               5.0
  27-39 weeks         7.6                7.5          5.5               6.5
  40-52 weeks        71.7               72.4          88.4              86.0

b. Women

                          New Brunswick                   Northern Maine
                     Actual          Predicted       Actual           Predicted
1970:
  1-13 weeks          10.1               8.8          11.6               12.3
  14-26 weeks         16.6              18.0          11.4               12.4
  27-39 weeks         11.5              14.1          13.6               14.8
  40-52 weeks         61.8              59.1          63.3               60.5

1980:
  1-13 weeks          14.7              13.6           8.4                8.5
  14-26 weeks         16.2              18.0          10.1               10.8
  27-39 weeks         11.3              11.3          12.8               12.8
  40-52 weeks         57.8              57.1          68.8               67.9

1990:
  1-13 weeks           7.5               8.2           6.0                6.8
  14-26 weeks         18.7              17.7          7.8                8.9
  27-39 weeks          9.1               8.8          9.7                10.1
  40-52 weeks         64.7              65.4          76.4               74.2
                                                                                            41


Table 9
Predicted Effects of Hypothetical Changes to New Brunswick’s UI System: Simulation with
1971 UI Act Removed

                                  Men                                 Women
                    NB Baseline      Without the 1971   NB Baseline      Without the 1971
                                         UI Act                              UI Act
1970:
  1-13 weeks            1.3                 1.3             8.8                  8.8
  14-26 weeks          9.3                 9.3             18.0                 18.0
  27-39 weeks          8.6                 8.6             14.1                 14.1
  40-52 weeks          80.8                80.8            59.1                 59.1

1980:
  1-13 weeks            4.5                 2.0            13.6                  6.7
  14-26 weeks          12.5                 8.7            18.0                 14.2
  27-39 weeks           8.9                 8.1            11.3                 11.8
  40-52 weeks          74.1                81.2            57.1                 67.3

1990:
  1-13 weeks            4.5                 1.9             8.2                  3.8
  14-26 weeks          15.6                10.4            17.7                 13.6
  27-39 weeks           7.5                 7.3             8.8                  8.9
  40-52 weeks          72.4                80.4            65.4                 73.7

Table 10
Predicted Effects of Hypothetical Changes to New Brunswick’s UI System: Simulation with
Maine’s UI Rules Imposed on New Brunswick

                                  Men                                 Women
                    NB Baseline      With Maine’s UI    NB Baseline      With Maine’s UI
                                         system                              system
1970:
  1-13 weeks            1.3                 1.0             8.8                   6.0
  14-26 weeks          9.3                 8.0             18.0                  16.2
  27-39 weeks          8.6                 9.5             14.1                  15.8
  40-52 weeks          80.8                81.9            59.1                  62.0

1980:
  1-13 weeks            4.5                 1.0            13.6                   3.8
  14-26 weeks          12.5                 8.8            18.0                  13.8
  27-39 weeks           8.9                10.2            11.3                  13.9
  40-52 weeks          74.1                80.1            57.1                  68.5

1990:
  1-13 weeks            4.5                 1.0             8.2                   2.2
  14-26 weeks          15.6                10.4            17.7                  12.3
  27-39 weeks           7.5                 8.3             8.8                  10.1
  40-52 weeks          72.4                80.3            65.4                  75.4
                                                                                                        42


Table 11
Predicted Effects of Hypothetical Changes to New Brunswick’s UI System: Simulation with
Maine’s UI Rules Imposed on New Brunswick, Less-educated sample

                                      Men                                       Women
                      New           Northern       NB with         New          Northern    NB with
                    Brunswick        Maine        Maine’s UI     Brunswick       Maine       Maine’s
                     Baseline       Baseline       system         Baseline      Baseline    UI system
1970:
  1-13 weeks            1.3            1.9            1.0            9.1             18.0      6.2
  14-26 weeks           9.7            4.1            8.0           18.4             13.5     16.5
  27-39 weeks           8.5            7.0            9.5           13.4             15.7     15.0
  40-52 weeks          80.5           87.0           81.8           59.0             52.8     62.2

1980:
  1-13 weeks            5.6            2.6            1.0           16.0             13.5      4.7
  14-26 weeks          16.1            4.7            8.9           21.0             12.3     16.3
  27-39 weeks           9.6            7.7           10.1           10.2             14.1     13.4
  40-52 weeks          68.7           85.0           80.0           52.7             60.1     65.7

1990:
  1-13 weeks            5.5            3.2            1.0           10.5              8.5      2.9
  14-26 weeks          20.2            7.1           10.4           21.2             11.9     15.3
  27-39 weeks           8.0            7.7            8.4            8.0             10.8      9.7
  40-52 weeks          66.3           82.0           80.3           60.3             68.9     72.1

Note: Sample is restricted to persons with a high school degree or less education.
                                                               43




Figure 1: New Brunswick, Maine and Maine’s Northern Counties
                                                                                                                                                     44



                          Figure 2: UI Expenditures in Maine and New Brunswick


a)
                                            UI expenditures as a percentage of provincial/state GDP


     0.07




     0.06




     0.05




     0.04

                                                                                                                                     New Brunswick
                                                                                                                                     Maine

     0.03




     0.02




     0.01




     0.00
        51


              53


                    55


                          57


                                59


                                      61


                                            63


                                                  65


                                                        67


                                                              69


                                                                    71


                                                                          73


                                                                                75


                                                                                      77


                                                                                            79


                                                                                                  81


                                                                                                        83


                                                                                                              85


                                                                                                                    87


                                                                                                                          89


                                                                                                                                91
      19


             19


                   19


                         19


                               19


                                     19


                                           19


                                                 19


                                                       19


                                                             19


                                                                   19


                                                                         19


                                                                               19


                                                                                     19


                                                                                           19


                                                                                                 19


                                                                                                       19


                                                                                                             19


                                                                                                                   19


                                                                                                                         19


                                                                                                                               19
                                                                                                                 45


b)
                    UI expenditures as a fraction of total transfer payments to individuals


 0.30




 0.25




 0.20




                                                                                                 New Brunswick
 0.15
                                                                                                 Maine




 0.10




 0.05




 0.00
        48


         0

               52


                4

                       6

                             58

                             60

                             62

                             64

                             66


                              8

                             70

                                                      72

                                                      74

                                                      76

                                                      78


                                                                       0

                                                                              2

                                                                             84


                                                                                     6

                                                                                    88

                                                                                    90
      95




              95

                     95




                             6




                                                                     98


                                                                             8




                                                                                    8
             19




                           19

                           19

                           19

                           19

                           19

                           19

                           19

                                                    19

                                                    19

                                                    19

                                                    19




                                                                           19

                                                                           19

                                                                                  19

                                                                                  19

                                                                                  19
     19

     1




             1

                    1




                                                                    1




Notes:

In New Brunswick, “Total transfer payments to individuals” consist of: family and youth allowances; veterans’
allowances, unemployment insurance benefits; scholarships and research grants; old age security; pensions to
government employees (federal and provincial); adult education and training payments; provincial transfers such as
direct relief, workers compensations, disability-related payments and grants to post-secondary institutions; CPP/QPP
and miscellaneous federal/provincial/municipal transfer payments. For Maine, it consists of: all forms of
retirement & disability insurance benefit payments; worker's compensation payments; medical payments; income
maintenance benefit payments; all UI-related benefit payments; all veteran-related payments; federal education and
training payments; and miscellaneous federal/state/local transfers payments. For consistency between the
jurisdictions, we include federal UI payments to individuals in Maine, which includes (depending on the year)
payments for federal civilian government employees (after they became covered), railroad employees, and ‘other’
federal UI payments. These federal payments are a small fraction (about 10%) of state payments.

Sources:

UI expenditures and total transfer payments for New Brunswick are from the National Income and Expenditure
Accounts (and can be obtained through CANSIM, table number 3800047). GDP for New Brunswick was obtained
from the Historical Statistics of New Brunswick (Ottawa: Statistics Canada, 1984). UI expenditures and total
transfer payments for Maine are from the Regional Economic Accounts and were obtained from the Bureau of
Economic Analysis.
                                                                                                                                                                                46


Figure 3: Unemployment Trends in Maine and New Brunswick
                                                                                Unemployment rates


  18




  16




  14




  12




  10
                                                                                                                                                                New Brunswick

                                                                                                                                                                Maine
   8




   6




   4




   2




   0
    48


           50


                  52


                         54


                                56


                                       58


                                              60


                                                     62


                                                            64


                                                                   66


                                                                          68


                                                                                  70


                                                                                         72


                                                                                                74


                                                                                                        76


                                                                                                                78


                                                                                                                       80


                                                                                                                              82


                                                                                                                                      84


                                                                                                                                             86


                                                                                                                                                    88


                                                                                                                                                           90
  19


         19


                19


                       19


                              19


                                     19


                                            19


                                                   19


                                                          19


                                                                 19


                                                                        19


                                                                               19


                                                                                       19


                                                                                              19


                                                                                                     19


                                                                                                             19


                                                                                                                     19


                                                                                                                            19


                                                                                                                                   19


                                                                                                                                           19


                                                                                                                                                  19


                                                                                                                                                         19
Sources: Historical Statistics of New Brunswick (Ottawa: Statistics Canada, 1984), and U.S. Bureau of Economic
Analysis.
                                                                                                                          47


Figure 4: Budget Constraints in the Two-Outcome Model

                   1
     income (relative to full year)
              .6             .8       Men's Budget Constraints, New Brunswick, 1950 vs 1960




                                                                                                           .580
   .4




                                                                                                           .441


                                      0                 10                     20                       30
                                                        leisure (weeks, relative to full year)

                                               1960 budget constraint                  1950 budget constraint



Figure 5: Budget Constraints in the Four-Outcome Model


                       Women's Budget Constraints, New Brunswick, 1970 vs 1980
                1




                                                                      .834
   income (relative to full year)
                             .8




                                                                                                 .737
                                                                      .748
                    .6




                                                                                                    .520
            .4




                                                                                                                  .448
     .2




                                                                                                              .231



                                      0            10                    20                    30                    40
                                                        leisure (weeks, relative to full year)

                                               1980 budget constraint                  1970 budget constraint
                                               earned income
                                                                                                                   48


                                             Appendix 1:
                           UI policy in Maine and New Brunswick, 1939-1991


A. Maine

    In 1939, 1949 and 1959, Maine’s base period for the computation of UI benefits was the calendar
year preceding the date of the claim. If eligible, a worker was entitled to 16 weeks of benefits in 1939,
20 weeks in 1949 and 26 weeks in 1959. Eligible workers’ weekly benefit amount (wba) was related to
base period earnings via a fixed schedule (expressed in nominal dollars).41 The original federal Act
excluded from coverage workers in small firms, as well as agricultural and government workers.42 In
1954, federal civilian employees became included in the UI system under a separate program created
especially for them. Self-employed workers have never been covered under Maine’s UI system.
     Maine’s UI program underwent some further changes between 1959 and 1969. By 1969, the base
period was defined as the first four of the previous five calendar quarters immediately prior to an
application for benefits. Workers still needed to earn a minimum amount in the base period to be eligible
for benefits, but now also needed positive earnings in at least two quarters of the base period. Total
benefits were simply calculated as 1/3 of base period earnings, within a minimum and maximum. The
specific weekly benefit amount paid was determined by a fraction of high quarter earnings with benefit
durations being determined residually (i.e., as total benefits/wba). The program parameters were such
that benefit durations were restricted to a maximum of 26 weeks, with a minimum that ranged from 8 to
11 weeks depending on the year.43 A dependents’ allowance also became available, provided that the
claimant’s spouse was not employed full-time. In addition, in 1969 and 1979 special restrictions applied
to individuals working in firms that systematically employed their work force for 40 weeks or less; this
was reduced to 26 weeks by 1989.44
    Two other changes that are relevant to our analysis occurred in the U.S. unemployment insurance
system between 1969 and 1979. First, coverage was extended to all employees of state and local
governments.45 Also, agricultural employers with ten or more workers or a payroll of at least $20,000
were required to pay UI taxes. Second, benefits for high income earners became subject to federal
income taxation.46 Apart from some changes in the benefit parameters and some other minor changes,
the UI program in Maine has retained the above features to this day.



41
     Benefit schedules are posted at http://www.econ.ucsb.edu/~pjkuhn/Data/NBMaine/NBMaineIndex.html.
42
 To be included, an employer needed to employ eight or more workers during at least 20 weeks of the year; this
was reduced to four or more workers in 1954 and to one or more in 1970.
43
  Another change in UI in the United States was the implementation of federal-state extended benefits. This
program extends benefits to worker during a defined period of high unemployment. Essentially, extended benefits
are triggered if the insured unemployment rate equals or exceeds 120 percent of the average insured unemployment
rate for the corresponding period in each of the two preceding calendar years (and must also be above 5%).
Extended benefits were not in effect during any of the relevant census years for Maine.
44
  Maine has had a long history of special seasonal regulations, which restrict benefits to unemployment that
occurred during the seasonal operating period. For example, in 1989, an employee of a designated seasonal
employer who worked 20 weeks would only be able to collect six weeks of benefits.
45
  In the estimates of UI benefits used in the cell data analysis, we assume that all government workers became
covered in Maine between 1969 and 1979, and that agricultural workers remained uncovered during the entire
period.
46
  In 1979 UI benefits in the U.S. became taxable at one-half the recipient’s normal tax rate, for recipients who
income exceeded $20,000 ($30,000 for married couples, assuming joint filing). For our analysis we incorporate
                                                                                                                   49



B. New Brunswick
     Canada’s first Unemployment Insurance Act was passed in August 1940. According to Human
Resources Development Canada’s (2005) own history of UI, this made Canada “the last western
industrialized nation to have unemployment insurance”. Because Canada’s system did not pay benefits
until 1942, no UI system existed in New Brunswick in the first year of our data (1940).47 By 1950,
Canadian workers had to prove 180 contribution days within the preceding two years to qualify for
regular UI benefits. Further, 60 of these days must have occured within the year (or 45 days within the 6
months) prior to the current claim.48 Weekly benefit amounts (which included a dependents’ allowance),
were a function of nominal weekly earnings; the maximum duration of benefits was one day of benefits
for each five daily contributions made in the previous five years.49 This formula allowed a claimant with
five years of continuous employment to get one year of benefits. A final key feature of New
Brunswick’s 1950 UI system was the so-called ‘ratio rule’, which reduced the maximum benefit duration
by one day for each three days of benefits received in the previous three years. For seasonal workers,
this imposed significant limits on benefit duration. Indeed the ratio rule was, to some extent, viewed in
the early years of the plan as a way of ensuring that the seasonally unemployed would not draw out large
amounts of benefit, thereby upsetting the actuarial basis of the plan.50
     In 1960, aside from being converted from a daily to a weekly basis, the qualifying requirement for
regular UI in Canada was essentially unchanged from 1950: 30 weeks of work in the two years preceding
the date of the claim, 12 of which must be in the past year. Between 1950 and 1960, however, significant
changes occurred that dramatically expanded benefits available to persons with short work histories. In
particular, the 1955 Unemployment Insurance Act introduced an explicit program of Seasonal Benefits.51
These benefits, payable only during the winter months, were available under quite broad conditions to
workers unable to qualify for regular benefits, including those whose benefit rights had been exhausted.
Workers attempting to qualify for a second regular or seasonal claim within two years, however, had also
to satisfy a set of repeat user rules, leading to a very complex set of requirements, summarized in the
final section of this Appendix. As we demonstrate quantitatively in the paper, the system of seasonal
benefits available in 1960 constituted a significant enrichment of Canada’s UI program for persons with
short work histories, and marked a clear departure from the traditional insurance principles that had been
its original foundation. Between 1960 and 1970, the main parameters of Canada’s UI system remained
virtually the same, though the real value of maximum weekly benefits was eroded somewhat by inflation.



taxes, for both regions, by assuming that the worker’s only income is from wages and salary (i.e. due to data
constraints, we ignore other income in the household).
47
  Interestingly, the 1940 Act specifically excluded a long list of detailed occupations and groups from UI coverage,
including agriculture, forestry, fishing, logging, hunting, teachers, part-time workers, and most government workers.
With the exception of agricultural and workers, these restrictions were eliminated by 1950, the first year in our data
with an operational Canadian UI system.
48
   Beginning in 1951, workers who failed to meet these criteria were – under certain circumstances – eligible for a
program of Supplementary Benefits. These benefits were paid only during the winter months, at 80 percent of a
worker’s regular weekly benefit amount. Since these benefits were not yet available in the winter of 1950, we do
not include them in our measure of benefit generosity for that year.
49
   Benefit schedules are posted at http://www.econ.ucsb.edu/~pjkuhn/Data/NBMaine/NBMaineIndex.html
50
   For a review of many of the key aspects of Canada’s UI system over the 1942 to 1980 period see Dingledine
(1981).
51
   The Seasonal Benefits program replaced the Supplementary Benefits program that was in place from 1951
through 1954. Another interesting feature introduced in the 1950s was a requirement for married women to
demonstrate that they had not willingly left the labor market as a consequence of marriage, in order to qualify for
UI.
                                                                                                                  50

    The second major enrichment of UI benefits pertaining to Canada’s part-year workers during our
sample period was contained in the 1971 Unemployment Insurance Act (Bill C-229), which came into
effect in 1972. Benefit schedules that made the wba a function of the nominal weekly wage were
abolished, as was the seasonal benefits system. By 1980, UI in Canada had taken on the following
features. There were now three types of benefits available: regular benefits, labor force extended benefits
and regional extended benefits. To qualify for regular benefits, workers were required to have worked 10
to 14 weeks, depending on the regional unemployment rate, in the last 52 weeks. Once eligible, each
week worked qualified the worker for one week of regular benefits, up to a maximum of 25 weeks.
Workers with longer attachment to the labor force were rewarded with one extra week of labor force
extended benefits for each two additional weeks worked beyond the first 26 weeks. For harder hit areas,
regional extended benefits offered an additional 2 weeks of benefits for every .5% the regional rate
exceeded 4%, up to a maximum of 50 weeks.52

    The method of determining the wba had also changed. By 1980, the wba was calculated as (up to a
maximum) 60% of average insurable earnings in the most recent 20 paid weeks prior to unemployment,
and 67% for individuals with dependents.53 Benefits were also, by this time, subject to taxation.54 In
contrast to the 1950s, 1960s and early 1970s, the 1980s saw little change to Canada’s UI program.


C. Canada’s Regular and Seasonal UI programs in 1960

i) Qualifying for UI:

    To qualify for regular benefits, claimants must have made at least 30 weekly contributions in the two
years preceding the date of the claim; 8 of these must have occurred since the start of the last preceding
regular benefit period or within the year preceding the claim, whichever is the shorter period; and 24 of
these since the start of the last preceding benefit period, either regular or seasonal, or in the year
preceding the claim, whichever is the longer period.

     Workers who failed to qualify for regular benefits could qualify for Seasonal Benefits (payable only
between from December 1 to mid-May) in two ways. “Class A” seasonal claimants must have failed
regular benefit requirements, and have made 15 contributions since the Saturday preceding the 31st of
March immediately prior to the date of the claim. “Class B” claimants must have failed regular and
seasonal class A requirements, and have had a regular benefit terminate since the Saturday following the
15th of May immediately prior to the claim. Weekly Seasonal benefit amounts were equal to the regular
benefit amount.




52
   As well, a new entrants/re-entrants rule was introduced in 1979, which established a 20 week entrance
requirement for individuals who had less than 14 weeks worked in the 52 weeks prior to the start of their qualifying
period. A repeater rule was also introduced in 1979. Coupled with the new entrants/re-entrants restriction, the
repeater rule was an attempt to decrease the ease of entry for low attachment workers. However, since regions (such
as New Brunswick) with an unemployment rate over 11.5% were exempted from the repeater rule, this rule does not
enter into our analysis.
53
   All weeks were used if the period was less than 20 weeks.
54
   UI benefits first became taxable, as ordinary income, in 1972. As well, in 1979, recipients with annual net income
greater than $20,670 (1.5 times maximum insurable earnings) had to reimburse 30% of the benefits that made up the
excess. For example, a person who received $3000 in UI, and whose net income exceed the threshold ($20, 670 for
the 1980 census year) by $3000 had to repay $900 (.3*$3000).
                                                                                                         51

ii) Benefit Duration:

     A claimant was entitled to receive one week’s regular benefit for every two contribution weeks in the
two year period prior to the claim. However, if there was a regular or seasonal benefit period within this
period of two years, only contribution weeks in the last year, or in the period since the start of the last
benefit period, whichever was longer, could be used for computing benefit. The minimum duration of
benefit is 12 weeks. The duration of Class A Seasonal Benefits was determined by either five benefit
weeks for every 6 contribution weeks made since the last March 31st or the number of possible benefit
weeks from the claim to May 15, whichever is less. The duration of Class B Seasonal benefits was the
number of weeks in the immediately previous regular benefit period, or the number of possible benefit
weeks from the claim to May 15, whichever is less. The minimum duration for Class A benefits was 13
weeks; for Class B it was 12 weeks unless the number of possible weeks from the claim to May 15 was
less than that.

iii) Repeat-user rules:

     For persons classed as “repeat claimants”, Section 45(2) of the 1955 UI Act restricted the degree to
which contributions could be used a second time as qualifying credits. Section 45(2) of the Act applied
to all persons for whom a previous benefit period (either regular or seasonal) was established within the
two year period preceding the current claim. The operation of this Section is best illustrated by three
examples:

        Claimant I had no previous benefit period within the last two years. To qualify for regular benefit
        he was required to prove 30 contribution weeks in two years, of which eight must be shown in the
        year immediately preceding the claim.

        Claimant II had a previous benefit period 18 months ago. He also must prove the 30 and 8
        weeks requirement. However, 24 of the 30 contribution weeks must occur since the
        commencement date of that previous benefit period 18 months ago. In addition, only the 24
        weeks count in calculating the duration formula, the remaining contribution weeks within the two
        years having been used to calculate the previous benefit rights may not be used a second time.

        Claimant III had a previous benefit period 10 months ago. He must prove the 30 week
        requirement, but in this case, the 24 weeks must have been accumulated within the last year. The
        eight week test is automatic upon the fulfillment of the 24 week test.

    Failures resulting from these tests during December to mid-May were considered for Seasonal
benefit. The contribution record since the preceding March 31 was be examined first and if at least 15
contribution weeks were shown, a Class A Seasonal benefit period was established. Failing this, the
benefit record was examined and if a regular benefit period was shown as terminated since the previous
mid-May, then eligibility could be established under Class B.

    If it is assumed that all three examples cited above were failures for regular benefit and that this
occurred during the months when seasonal benefit was operative, the following adjudications were
possible: Claimant I could qualify under class A provided he had at least 15 contribution weeks since the
preceding March 31. He would not be eligible under class B. Claimants II and III would be tested first
for the 15 contribution weeks since the preceding March 31 and failing that, they could qualify under
class B provided the termination date of their previous benefit periods was subsequent to the preceding
May 15.
                                                                                                           52



                                            Appendix 2: Data

A. Weeks Worked and Part-Year Work

    In all cases except Canada in 1941 and 1951, the weeks worked variables refer to annual weeks
worked in the year prior to the census year, and are used to compute the part-year work variables. In
1941-51 Canadian censuses, weeks worked referred to the one year period prior to the June reference
week (i.e., June 1940-June 1941 instead of January 1940 to December 1940). Prior to 1980, the U.S.
census coverage was individuals14+, which changed to 16+ in 1980; in the Canadian census, coverage
changed from 14+ to 15+ in 1971. In addition, prior to 1971 only wage-earners were asked their weeks
worked in Canada (i.e., self-employed and unpaid family workers were excluded). In the cell-level
analysis this variable is the proportion of individuals in the gender/industry/region/year cell that work less
than 40 weeks.

     Weeks worked are available as continuous variables only in the 1980/81 and 1990/91 U.S. and
Canadian censuses. In previous years, in each country, weeks worked were categorized as follows: U.S.
(all years) 1-13, 14-26, 27-39, 40-47, 48-49, 50-52; Canada (1961, 1971) 1-13, 14-26, 27-39, 40-48, 49-
52; Canada (1941, 1951) 1-19, 20-29, 30-39, 40-49, 50-52. In the 1940 U.S. census and the 1941 and
1951 Canadian censuses, individuals who worked part-time had their weeks worked converted into full-
time equivalent weeks worked (i.e., an individual working 40 weeks at 20 hours per week would appear
in the data as 20 weeks worked). We convert reported weeks worked into an estimated actual weeks
worked for these three sets of cells using the hours worked information in the U.S. census. We rely on
the assumption that the propensity to work part-time was the same in Canada as it is was in the U.S.
Individuals in the 1940 U.S. census who worked 15-29 hours and had weeks worked of 14-26 or 27-39
were reallocated to full-year work. The net adjustments made to the 1940 numbers were then made by
industry and gender to the New Brunswick numbers (the 1950 U.S. census is used for the 1950 New
Brunswick adjustments).


B. Relative Income

    Computation of relative income begins with deriving weekly wages. For Maine, weekly wages are
based entirely on census micro-data. For 1940, 1950, 1980 and 1990 the respondent’s weekly wage is
annual income from wages and salary divided by the number of weeks worked. For 1960 and 1970, a
continuous weeks-worked variable was not available in the public use microdata files, and thus the
weekly wage equals wage and salary income divided by the midpoint of the weeks worked category.
The categories available in the 1960 and 1970 censuses (and midpoint value adopted) are 1-13 (6), 14-26
(20), 27-39 (33), 40-47 (43), 48-49 (49), and 50-52 (51). For New Brunswick, weekly wages are based
on published census data for 1941-61, and census micro-data for 1971, 1981 and 1991 (a categorical
weeks worked variable is available in the 1971 census – see section above – and a continuous weeks
worked variable is available in both 1981 and 1991; weekly wages are calculated in the same manner as
above for Maine). For 1951, weekly earnings itself was not available and so categorical earnings
information (total of seven categories, we use the midpoints) are used to compute a weighted weekly
earnings average.

     For the cell-level analysis, relative income under the 20 weeks worked assumption is then calculated
as: relative income = [(weekly wages{g,y,i,c}*20) + UI{y,c}] / (weekly wages{g,y,i,c}*52) where g is
gender, y is census year, i is industry and c is country. UI is income from unemployment insurance, and
equals the weekly benefit amount times benefit duration. UI for Maine is calculated based on the weekly
wage (either the individual’s or the cell value) and prevailing UI rules. Benefit durations in Maine are
discussed in the text of the paper. For New Brunswick, UI is calculated based on the prevailing UI rules
                                                                                                         53

for a given weeks worked assumption (20 or 30 weeks) with the weekly benefit amount computed based
on the schedules available in the on-line appendices, or as 60%/67% (without/with dependents) for post-
1971 UI Act census years. In the cell-level analysis (where the presence of dependents is not observed),
a 50 percent probability of having dependents is assigned when that affects benefits. For benefit
durations for New Brunswick, see Appendix 1.

    As Appendix 1 made very clear, weeks of UI eligibility in New Brunswick sometimes depend not just
on the number of work weeks in the past year, but on weeks in earlier years as well. In those (relatively
rare) cases, we compute eligibility under the assumption the worker has the same annual weeks-worked
pattern every year. In addition, a person’s UI eligibility sometimes depends not just on the number of
weeks worked in a year, but on their precise distribution over time. Whenever the precise distribution
matters, we calculate UI benefits for the distribution of weeks that maximizes a worker’s UI benefits.

     Also, as noted in the paper, our imputed benefit levels focus on an individual who works part-year
every year. Under the 1955 UI Act, some “chronic” part-year workers would never qualify for regular
benefits, but would qualify for seasonal benefits. To incorporate this policy feature, when regular
benefits under the 1955 UI Act enter our analysis, we compute the average number of benefit weeks that
the individual would receive over the 1942 - X period (where X is the census year in question) assuming
they worked a certain number of weeks every year.


C. Education

    For education, the Canadian censuses are the richer source and thus the U.S. variable is used as the
base. In general, prior to 1990, the U.S. census tends to report years of education while the Canadian
census has a combination of years of education and credential information. The only education variable
available in the 1970 and 1980 U.S. censuses used in the micro-data analysis is the ‘highest grade of
school’ variable, which has the following categories: a category for each grade from kindergarten through
grade 12 where grade 12 includes both individuals who graduated with a high school diploma and those
who did not; and categories for each year of university completed (to a maximum of eight). The 1990
U.S. census changed the education question to a highest level of attainment (i.e., credential). As such,
education in the 1990 census is not comparable to previous census years. IPUMS provides a recoded
variable, which we use, where they place grade 12 (with and without high school diploma) in a single
category, equate 1 to 3 years of college with all post-secondary categories under a Bachelor’s, and then
equate 4+ plus years of college with a Bachelor’s or greater. In the Canadian census, we set grade 11 and
under as “less than high school” and grade 12 as “high school”, keeping in mind that this includes some
individuals without a high school diploma. We set 1 through 3 years of post-secondary schooling as
“some post-secondary” and 4+ years as “degree”.

    Creating education variables from the Canadian census that are as consistent as possible with the U.S.
is done as follows. For 1971, we use grade 11 and under for “less than high school” and grade 12 plus
grade 13 as “high school” (includes those with and without a high school diploma); university 1 to 2 years
plus university 3 to 4 years, no degree as “some post-secondary”; university 3 to 4 years with degree, and
university 5+ years (with and without degree categories) as “degree”. For 1981 and 1991, we use two
education variables -‘highest level of school’ and ‘highest level of elementary and secondary’ - in order to
create a “high school” variable that includes both high school graduates and grade 12/13 non-graduates.
“Some-post secondary” includes all non-university groups (trades certificates, etc.) as well as some
university without a degree and university with certificate/diploma while “degree” includes any university
graduate. The only difference in the ‘highest level of schooling’ variable between the 1981 and 1991
Canadian censuses is that university graduates are separated into BAs, masters and doctorates in the 1991
census.
                                                                                                                  54

D. Basic Demographics

    Age, gender, marital status and school enrollment are virtually all consistent across years within
country and across country. Common-law couples are considered as married in both countries for the
1970 to 1990 census years. For our “children in household” variable, we use the ‘number of children in
household’ variable for the U.S. A ‘number of children in household’ variable does exist in the Canadian
census, but was only asked of women (and only married or once married women prior to the 1991
census). Thus, for the 1981 and 1991 Canadian censuses we use household type, which indicates the
presence of never married children in the household, and should yield a variable that is consistent with the
U.S. variable. For 1971, we are forced to use a combination of marital status, size of census family, and
– for women only – the children in household variable. For men, we define children as equaling one if
family size is greater than two and the individual is married.

E. Part-time work

     In the Canadian census, a question is asked, from 1981 through 1991, about whether the weeks
worked in the previous year were full-time weeks or part-time weeks. In 1971 ‘usual hours worked’ is
available, which asks the individual their usual hours worked from the previous year and should be fairly
comparable to the full-time/part-time weeks worked variables in 1981 and 1991. One issue, however, is
that the part-time weeks worked question in 1981 did not specifically attach a number of hours to part-
time status whereas the 1991 census attached a less than 30 hours per week value. For the U.S. census,
‘usual hours worked’ – based on the previous year – was first asked in 1980, while ‘hours worked last
week’ (i.e., hours worked in the census reference week) is consistently available. We use usual hours
worked for the 1980 and 1990 U.S. census, but are forced to use hours worked in the reference week for
the 1970 U.S. census. Regardless of which hours variable is used, part-time work is defined as less than
30 hours per week in all cases.

F. Industry

     We are forced to use the 1971-1991 Canadian census industry variables as the base. Some
improvements were made to the industry variables in 1981 and 1991, but for consistency across time we
must use the 1971 industry definition which was made available in all three Canadian micro-data
censuses. In both countries, industry refers to the individual’s main job (based on hours worked) and is
only asked of those working since January 1 of the year previous to the census year (e.g., January 1 1980
in the case of the 1981 Canadian census data). In both countries, for individuals not working during the
census reference week, industry refers to the job of longest duration. The 1971 industry variable has 12
categories available: agriculture, forestry, fishing, mining, manufacturing, construction,
transportation/storage/communication/utilities, wholesale/retail trade, finance/insurance/real estate,
community/business/personal/recreational services, and public administration in addition to a ‘not
specified’ (or not classifiable) category. Given the merging of forestry/fishing/mining (the latter being
negligible in both New Brunswick and Maine) we are left with eight categories for both the aggregate
data and micro-data analyses. We drop the ‘not specified’ category.

    For the U.S., we use the IPUMS ‘Industry, 1950 basis’ recode, which is a highly consistent across
years. The only across-time inconsistency in this variable was following the 1970 census where coverage
was changed from individuals 14+ who had worked in the previous ten years to individuals 16+ who had
worked in the previous five years. A total of 148 categories are available. For Canada, the 1970 industry
classification is highly comparable to the industries in the 1960 census.55 The key inconsistencies arise

55
  Given our focus on part-year work, it is worth noting that it is unclear how teachers’ summers have been treated
over time. For instance, in the U.S. census in 1940, school teachers were not to count their summer vacations as
time worked, but in 1950 teachers were to report all weeks paid (including paid absences, vacations, and sick time).
                                                                                                                  55

when comparing the U.S. 1950 industry codes with the 1971 Canadian industry codes. Given the rich
nature of the U.S. data we are able to create reasonably comparable industries across countries after re-
coding ‘logging’ from manufacturing (in the U.S.) into primary (for Canada). With public-use data,
however, there are some inconsistencies that cannot be corrected for. Our reading of the U.S. 1951
classification (see U.S. Bureau of Census, Alphabetic Index of Occupations and Industries: 1950,
Washington, D.C., 1950) relative to the Canadian 1971 classification is that most inconsistencies come
from specialized services specific to an industry. For instance, the U.S. places oil and gas field services in
mining while Canada places it in professional services. On the other hand, Canada places research and
testing services incidental to agriculture in agriculture while the U.S. places them in professional services.
Various examples go both ways, but they are largely limited to highly specialized services, which are
unlikely to amount to substantive inconsistencies overall. Manufacturing, trade, finance etc., and the
primary sector (after re-coding logging) are highly consistent across the two countries.

G. Wage and salary income

    Our measures of wage income are highly consistent, both over time and between countries. The
level at which these variables are top-coded however does vary however. In both countries, wage
income refers to gross wages and salaries, before deductions (for items such as income tax, pensions,
union dues, unemployment insurance), for the previous calendar year (i.e., the year to which the weeks
worked variables refer). Payments-in-kind or reimbursements for business expenses are excluded in both
countries. Commissions, tips, bonuses, piece-rate payments, and military pay are included in both
countries (military bonuses were excluded in the U.S. for 1950 – 1970 censuses).




In later years, there were no specific instructions, and it would seem that teachers who received pay over the summer
would have considered this to be paid vacation and therefore would have included it as weeks worked.
