                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   A 'RECIPROCAL DUMPING' MODEL
                      OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE




                          James A. Brander

                            Paul Krugman




                      Working Paper No. 11914




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           August 1983




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies and program in Productivity (World
Econonr). Any    opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                              NBER Working Paper #1194
                                              August 1983




               A 'Reciprocal Dumping' Model of International Trade



                                ABSTRACT



      This paper develops a model in which the rivalry of oligopolistic

firms serves as an independent cause of international trade. The model

shows how such rivalry naturally gives rise to "dumping" of output in

foreign markets, and shows that such dumping can be "reciprocal" ——   that
is, there may be two—way trade in the same product. Reciprocal dumping

is shown to be possible for fairly general specification of firm   behaviour.
The welfare effects of this seemingly pointless trade are ambiguous. On

one hand, resources are wasted in the cross—handling of goods; on the

other hand, increased competition reduces monopoly distortions. Surprisingly,

in the case of free entry and Cournot. behaviour reciprocal dumping is

unanibiuously beneficial.

       James A. Brander                     Paul Krugman
       Department of Economics              Sloan School of Management
       University of British                Massachusetts Institute of Technology
       Columbia                             50 Memorial Drive
       Vancouver, British Columbia          Cambridge, MA 02139
       V6T 1Y2 Canada
                A 'Reciprocal Dumping' Model of International Trade
                          James Brander and Paul Krugman




      The phenomenon of "dumping" in international trade can be explained

 by the standard theory of monopolistic price discrimination.' If a profit

 maximizing firm believes it faces a higher elasticity of demand abroad

 than at home, and it is able to discriminate between foreign and domestic

 markets, then it will charge a lower price abroad than at home. Such an

 explanation seems to rely on "accidental" differences in country demands.

 In this paper, however, we show how dumping arises for systematic reasons

 associated with oligopolistic behaviour.


      Brander (1981) develops a model in which the rivalry of oligopolistic

 firms serves as an independent cause of international trade and leads to

 two—way trade in identical products.2 In this paper we build on Brander

 (1981) to argue that the oligopolistic rivalry between firms naturally

gives rise to "reciprocal dumping": each firm dumps into other firms'

home markets.


     We generalize Brander (1981) in that reciprocal dumping is shown to

be robust to fairly general specification of firms' behaviour and market

demand. The crucial element is what Helpman (1982) refers to as a

'segmented markets' perception: each firm    perceives     each country as a

separate market and makes distinct quantity decisions for each.

     Reciprocal dumping is rather striking in that there is pure waste in

the form of unnecessary transport costs.3 Without free entry, welfare may

improve as trade opens up and reciprocal dumping occurs, but it is also

possible that welfare may decline. One wonders, therefore, if such a model

might not provide a rationale for trade restirction. With free entry, the

contrary seems to be true. We derive the fairly strong result that with
                                      —2—

 free entry both before and after trade, the opening of trade (and the

 resultant reciprocal dumping is definitely welfare improving for the

 Cournot case. The procompetitive effect of having more firms and a

 larger overall market dominates the loss due to transport costs in this

 second best imperfectly competitive world.


      Section 2 develops a simple model of Courriot duopoly and trade which

 shows how reciprocal dumping can occur, and presents the associated welfare

 analysis. Section 3 describes the free entry zero profit equilibrium and

 derives the result the trade is welfare—improving in this case. Section 4

 contains concluding remarks.


 2. The Basic Model

      Assume there are two identical countries, one "domestic" and one

 "foreign"; and that each country has one firm producing commodity Z. There

are transport costs incurred in exporting goods from one country to the

• other. The main idea is that each firm regards each country as a separate

market and therefore chooses the profit—maximizing quantity for each

country separately. Each firm has a Cournot perception: it assumes the

other firm will hold output fixed in each country.


     The domestic firm produces output x for domestic consumption and

output x* for foreign consumption. Marginal cost is a constant, c, and

transport costs of the "iceberg" type imply that the marginal cost of

export is c/g where 0    g      1. Similarly, the foreign firm produces

output y for export to the domestic country and output y* for its own

market, and faces a symmetric cost structure. Using p and p to

denote domestic and foreign price, domestic and foreign profits can be
                                                 —3—



     written,      respectively

               =   xp(Z) + x*p*(Z*)   —
                                          c(x + x*Ig) — F                            (1)
               = yp(Z) + y*p*(Z*) —
                                          c(y/g + y*) — F*                           (2)

 where asterisks generally denote variables associated with         the foreign

 country and F denotes fixed costs. A little inspection reveals that the

 profit—maximizing choice of x is independent of x and similarly for            y   and

 y*:  each country can be considered separately.4 By symmetry we need
 consider only the domestic country.
         Each firm maximizes profit with respect to own output, which     yields
 first        order conditions


                                                                                    (3)

         it    = ypt + p — c/g        0                                             (4)

where     primes or subscripts denote derivatives. These are tibestreplit

functions in implicit          form. Their solution is the trade equilibrium.
Using the variable a to denote y/Z, the foreign share in the domestic
market, and letting c = _p/Zpt, the elasticity of domestic demand, these
implicit        best—reply functions can be rewritten:

        p=cc/(c+cy—l)                                                           (3')
        p =     cc/g(6 —a)                                                      (4')
        Equations    (3') and (4') are two equations that can be solved for p and
0.     The    solutions are
        p = cc(l+g)/g(2c—l)                                                         (5)

        a = (c(g—l) + l)/(l+g)                                                      (6)
                                               —4—

 These solutions are an equilibrium only if second order conditions are

 satisfied:

          =   xr"   + 2r' < 0;
                                  lTyy
                                           =     + 2t < 0                      (7)


We also impose the following conditions

          =   xp"                      =
                    + pt < 0;    11*        yp't + p' < 0                      (8)


Conditions (8) mean that own marginal revenue declines when

the other firm increases its output, which seems a very reasonable require-

ment. They are equivalent to reaction functions (or best—reply functions)

being downward sloping. They imply stability and, if they hold globally,

uniqueness of the equilibrium. It is not inconceivable that (8) might be

violated by possible demand structures, but such cases would have to be

considered unusual. In any case, pathological examples of noncooperative

models are well understood (see, for example, Seade (1980) and Friedman

(1977)) and we have nothing new to say about such problems here. Accordingly

we assume (7) and (8) are satisfied.5

     Positive solutions to (5) and (6) imply that two—way trade arises in

this context. A positive solution will arise if             < l/(l—g) at the

equilibrium since this implies that price exceeds the marginal cost of

exports (p > c/g) and that 0 > 0. Subject to this condition, and given (7)

and (8), a unique stable two—way trade equilibrium holds for arbirary demand.

(Brander (1981) considered the case of linear demand only.) It can be easily

shown6 that, at equilibrium, each firm has a smaller market share of its

export market than of its domestic market. Therefore, perceived marginal rev-

enue is higher in the export market. The effective marginal cost of delivering

an exported unit is higher than for a unit of domestic sales, because of
                                        —5—


 transport costs, but this is consistent with the higher marginal revenue.

 Thus perceived marginal revenue can equal marginal cost in both markets at

 positive output levels. This is true for firms in both countries which

 gives rise to two—way trade. Moreover each firm has a smaller markup over

 cost in its export market than at home: the f.o.b. price for exports is

 below domestic price: reciprocal dumping.

        The case of constant elasticity demand,p = AZ            is   a useful special

 case which is illustrated in Figure 1.


                                      FIGURE 1


For profit—maximization by the domestic firm (condition (3')), p is decreas-

ing in 0,   while   condition (4') for the foreign firm has price increasing

in 0.    The intercepts on the price axis are, respectively, c/(E—l) and

c/g so provided cc/(c—l) >    c/g   (or 6   < l/l—g))   the intersection nust be

at a positive foreign market share. This condition has a natural economic

interpretation, since c6/(6—l) is the price which would prevail if there

were no trade, while c/g is the marginal cost of exports. That the

condition says is that reciprocal dumping will occur if monopoly markups

in its absence would exceed transport costs.


     Clearly the reciprocal dumping solution is not pareto efficient.

Some monopoly distortion persists even after trade, and there are socially

pointless transportation costs incurred in cross—hauling. What is less

clear is whether, given a second best world of imperfect competition, free

trade is superior to autarky. This is a question with an uncertain answer,

because there are two effects. On one hand, allowing trade in this model

leads to waste in transport, tending to reduce welfare. On the other
                                              —6—

hand, international competition leads to lower prices, reducing the mono-

poly distortion.


      If demand is assumed to arise from a utility function that can be

approximated by the form U =        u(Z) + K where K represents consumption of a
numeraire competitive good, then the welfare effects of trade can be

measured by standard surplus measures.


     Figure 2 illustrates the point that there are conflicting effects on

welfare. In the figure Z is the pre—trade output of the monopolized

good, p is the pre—trade price, and c is marginal cost. After trade

consumption rises to Z and price falls to p1. But output for domestic

consumption falls to x, with imports y. As the figure shows there is a

gain from the "consumption creation" Z1 —               Z,   but a loss from the "consump-

tion diversion" Z — x.
                0

                                             FIGURE 2


     There are two special cases in which the welfare effect is clear.

First, if transport costs are negligible, the cross—hauling, though

pointless, is also costless and the pro—competitive effect insures that

there will be gains from trade.


     At the other extreme if transport costs are just at the prohibitive

level, then decline slightly so that trade takes place, such trade is

welfare reducing. This is easily shown as follows. Overall welfare is

given by

     W =   2[u(Z)   — cZ —   ty]   — F   —   F*                                       (9)


where we now use t to denote per unit transport costs instead of the iceberg
                                            —7—

notation. The 2 arises because there are two symmetric countries. A

slight change in t alters welfare as indicated.

     dW/dt = 2[(p—c) dZldt —        t dy/dt — y]                       (10)


Starting at the prohibitive level p = c + t and y = 0 so since

dZ/dt =    dx/dt   + dy/dt, (10) reduces to


     dW/dt =       2(p—c) dx/dt =     2t   dx/dt > 0                   (11)


A slight fall in transport costs tends to make x7 fall as imports y come in,

implying that dW/dt is positive. Therefore, a slight fall in t

from the prohibitive level would reduce welfare. The intuition runs along

the following lines. A decrease in transport costs has three effects.

First, costs fall for the current level of imports, which is a gain.

Second, consumption rises so, for each extra unit consumed, there is a

net gain equal to price minus the marginal cost of imports. Finally, there

is a loss due to the replacement of domestic production with high cost

imports. For near prohibitive levels of transport costs the first two

effects are negligible, leaving only the loss.

3. Welfare Effects Under Free Entry

     The Cournot duopoly model of Section 2 is quite specific. However,

the existence result is robust to a wide variety of generalizations. One

important generalization is to the free entry case. Moreover, this case

has strong welfare properties. Maintaining the assumptions and notation

of Section 2, except that there will now be n firms in each country in

equilibrium, the after trade price and foreign market share ny/Z, are given by

     p =      ccn(l+g)/g(2nc—l)                                        (12)


          =   (nc(g—l) + 1)1(1 + g)                                    (13)
                                              —8—

where n is the number of firms that sets profits equal to zero for each

firm i.


     We now prove that, under free entry, trade improves welfare. Consider

a pre—trade free entry equilibrium.8 In the domestic industry each firm

maximizes profit so that the following first order condition is satisfied.


     x.p' + p — c = 0                                                          (14)


Also, each firm        earns    zero profit

     ir. =   x.p   —   cx.1   — F   0                                          (15)
      1       1

After trade opens price changes, and the direction of price movement

determines whether consumer surplus rises or falls, and therefore determines

the direction of welfare movement since profits remain at zero by free

entry. If price falls, welfare rises. The main step in the argument, then,

is that price must fall with the opening of trade.


     This is most easily seen by contradiction. From (14), x. = —(p—c)/p'

so


     dx./dp ( —p' + (p—c)p" dZ/dp)/(p')2                                      (16)


              =     —(p' + x.p")/(P')2                                        (17)


since dZfdp =      lip'   and (p—c) =   —p'x,.
                                            1
                                                 But (17) is strictly positive by (8)

which means that x must rise if p rises. Also x.1 must stay constant if p
                  1
remains constant , so as to satisfy (14). However, profits are now given by

     ir. =   (p—c)x. — F + (p*c/g)x.                                          (18)


If price and quantity both rise or remain constant then (p—c)x1 — F is

nonnegative by (15), and (p*_c/g)x is strictly positive since p* > c/g
                                     —9—


 if trade is to take place. Therefore, 1T must be strictly positive which

 is a contradiction. Price must fall and welfare must rise.

      The structural source of welfare improvement is that firms move down
                                                      *
 their average cost curves. Although x• falls, x +
                                       1         1
                                                     x.1   must exceed the

 original production levels and average cost must fall. Profits remain at

 zero and consumer surplus rises.


 3. Concluding Remarks

      This paper has shown that oligopolistic interaction between finns can

 cause trade in the absence of any of the usual motivations for trade;

 neither cost differences nor economies of scale are necessary. The model

 provides possible explanations for two phenomena not well explained by

 standard neoclassical trade theory: intra—industry trade and dumping.

We refer to such trade as reciprocal dumping. The welfare effects of such

trade are interesting. If firms earn positive profits, the opening of

trade will increase welfare if transport costs are low. On the other

hand, if transport costs are high, opening trade may actually

cause welfare to decline because the procompetitive effect is dominated by

the increased waste due to transport costs. However, in the free entry

Cournot model, opening trade certainly increases welfare.

     Reciprocal dumping is much more general than the Cournot model. One

direction of generalization (either with or without free entry) is to a

generalized conjectural variation model, of which the Cournot model is a

special case. The essential element of the conjectural variation model is

that each firm has a non—zero expectation concerning the response of other

firms to its own output. Letting A denote the expected change in industry
                                       — 10 —




 output as Own output    changes, so that A = 1 is the Cournot case, and letting

 foreign and domestic numbers of firms be n and n respectively, yields

 a = (nn* c(g—l) + n*A)/A(n* + ng) for the case of syimnetric linear conjectural

 variations. This is positive for some range of transport costs. As long

 as A >   0,   so that firms believe that their behaviour can affect price, the

 possibility of reciprocal dumping arises.9 In general the conjectures need

 not be symmetric and, for that matter, they need not be linear. An easily

 developed special case is the Stackelberg leader —    follower   model in which

 each firm is, for example, a leader in its home market and a follower

 abroad.'°


     If price is the strategy variable, reciprocal dumping does not arise

 in the homogeneous product case. However, a slight amount of product

 differentiation will restore the reciprocal dumping result in which case

 the intra—industry trade motives described here augment the usual product

differentiation motives for intra—industry trade. The important element

is just that firms have a segmented markets perception. Given this per-

ception, the possibility of the kind of two—way trade described here is

relatively robust.


     Finally, we should briefly note another application of our basic

analysis. Throughout this paper we have assumed that firms must produce in

their home country. Given the assumed equality of production costs, however,

firms clearly have an incentive to save transport costs by producing near

the market, if they can. But if we allow them to do this, each firm will

produce in both countries —— and we will have moved from a model of

reciprocal dumping in trade to a model of two—way direct foreign investment.
                                             - 11   —



*We would like to thank an anonymous referee for very helpful comments.

J. Brander wishes to gratefully acknowledge financial support from a

Social Sciences and Humanities Research Councilof Canada postdoctoral

fellowship.


1. For an exposition of dumping as monopolistic price discrimination see

    Caves and Jones (1977, pp. 152—154).

2. Two—way trade in similar (but not necessarily identical) products is

    often referred to as intra—industry trade. Standard references on the

    importance of intra—industry trade are Balassa (1966) and Grubel and

    Lloyd (1975). Alternative explanatory models include Krugmafl (1979)

    and Lancaster (1980).

3. The "basing point" pricing literature of the l930s and 1940s was

    concerned largely with the waste due to cross—hauling in spatial

    markets. Of special interest is a paper by Smithies (1942) which

    contains a model of spatial imperfect competition in which cross—

    hauling arises. It is a short step to extend this model to an inter-

    national setting. Smithies' model differs from ours in that he takes

    price as the strategy variable, but the basic insight that imperfect

    competition can cause cross—hauling is central to both.

4. This separation is a very convenient simplification that arises from

    the assumption of constant marginal cost. It is not essential to the

    results.

5. Conditions (7) and (8) taken together imply, if they hold globally,
                   *             * >0
    that   ir    ir    —    iT          globally, which in turn implies that reaction
                xxyy       xyyx
    functions cross only once and that they do so such that the equilibrium
                                        — 12 —




       is   stable. Allowing violation of (8) and the possibility of multiple

       equilibria clearly does not upset the result that a two—way trade

       equilibrium exists. It would, however, complicate welfare analysis in

       the usual way: one could not be sure which equilibrium would obtain so

      welfare comparisons of different regimes would usually be ambiguous.


 6. Expression (3) implies that c > (1 — a) while (4) implies that C > 0.

      Adding these it follows that C > 1/2 at equilibrium. It is then

      clear from (6) that a < 1/2 if g < 1-.       (   a =   1/2   if g =   1.   )




 7.   The fact that x does fall is easily shown by totally differentiating (3)

      (4) and using (7) and (8).

 8. Demonstrating existence and uniqueness of free entry Cournot equilibrium

      is a general problem to which we have nothing to add. Clearly, there

      may be "integer" problems in small numbers cases. The interested

      reader might consult Friedman (1977) and the references cited there.

 9. If X = 0, the first order conditions become p = c for domestic firms

      and p =   c/g   for foreigners. Clearly these cannot both hold. There is

      a corner solution at p = c and a =    0, where the Kuhn—Tucker condition
      y(p —   c/g)   = 0 holds. Ignoring the lower bound at y = 0 leads to the

      nonense result that foreign firms would want to produce negative out-

      put in the domestic market, which is why the expression for a approaches

         as A approaches 0. a should of course be bounded below at 0.

10. Brander and Spencer (1981) examine the implications for tariff policy

      of a market structure in which the foreign firm is an entry—deterring

      or potentially Stackelberg leader in both markets.
                                    — 13 —



                                 References


Balassa, Bela, 1966, Tariff reductions and trade in manufactures,

  American Economic Review 56, 466—73

Brander, James A., 1981, Intra—industry trade in identical commodities,

  Journal of International Economics 11,1—14

Brander, James A. and Barbara J. Spencer, 1981, Tariffs and the extraction

  of foreign monopoly rents under potential entry, Canadian Journal of

  Economics 14, 371—89

Caves, Richard and Ronald W. Jones, 1977, World trade and payments, 2nd ed.

  (Little, Brown and Company, Boston)

Ethier, Wilfred, 1982,Dumping, Journal of Political Economy 90, 487—506

Friedman, James w., 1977, Oligopoly and the theory of games (North—Holland,

  Amsterdam)

Grubel, Herbert and Peter Lloyd, 1975, Intra—industry trade (Wiley, New York)

Helpman, Elhanan, 1982, Increasing returns, imperfect markets, and trade

  theory, Discussion Paper, Tel Aviv University

Krugman, Paul, 1979, Increasing returns, monopolistic competition and

  international trade, Journal of International Economics 9, 469—479

Lancaster, Kelvin, 1980, Intra—industry trade under perfect monopolistic

  competition, Journal of International Economics 10, 151—175

Seade, Jesus, 1980, On the effects of entry, Econometrica 48, 479—89

Smithies, Arthur, 1942, Aspects of the basing—point system, American

 Economic Review 32, 705—26
       1
CE/CE —I)
                         E/g(E—cr)


     c/g                 C/(E+O I)


                           0

            Figure   1
                           GAIN
 p0

 p1

c/g
 C
                       I

                       I

               x
                   0

      Figure   2
