NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ESTIMATING THE INTERTEMPORAL RISK-RETURN
TRADEOFF USING THE IMPLIED COST OF CAPITAL
Lubos Pastor
Meenakshi Sinha
Bhaskaran Swaminthan
Working Paper 11941
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11941
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2006

Pastor is Professor of Finance at the Graduate School of Business at the University of Chicago,
Faculty Research Fellow at the NBER, and Research Affiliate at the CEPR. Sinha is Research
Associate at Cornerstone Research. Swaminathan is Director of Research at LSV Asset Management
and Professor of Finance at the Johnson Graduate School of Management at Cornell University.
Email: lubos.pastor@ChicagoGSB.edu, ms233@cornell.edu, bswamina@johnson.cornell.edu.
Helpful comments were gratefully received from George Constantinides, Doug Diamond, Gene
Fama, Toby Moskowitz, Rob Stambaugh, Pietro Veronesi, Robert Whitelaw, Franco Wong, and the
audiences at the University of Chicago and at the 2005 meetings of the Western Finance Association.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Lubos Pastor, Meenakshi Sinha, and Bhaskaran Swaminathan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Estimating the Intertemporal Risk-Return Tradeoff Using the Implied Cost of Capital
Lubos Pastor, Meenakshi Sinha, and Bhaskaran Swaminathan
NBER Working Paper No. 11941
January 2006
JEL No. G1
ABSTRACT
We reexamine the time-series relation between the conditional mean and variance of stock market
returns. To proxy for the conditional mean return, we use the implied cost of capital, computed using
analyst forecasts. The usefulness of this proxy is shown in simulations. In empirical analysis, we
construct the time series of the implied cost of capital for the G-7 countries. We find strong support
for a positive intertemporal mean-variance relation at both the country level and the world market
level. Some of our evidence is consistent with international integration of the G-7 financial markets.
Lubos Pastor
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
lubos.pastor@chicagogsb.edu
Meenakshi Sinha
Cornerstone Research
msinha@cornerstone.com
Bhaskaran Swaminathan
Cornell University
bswamina@johnson.cornell.edu

1.

Introduction

The tradeoﬀ between risk and return is a central concept in ﬁnance. Finance theory generally
predicts a positive risk-return relation, both across assets and over time. For example,
the intertemporal capital asset pricing model of Merton (1973) predicts a positive timeseries relation between the conditional mean and variance of market returns. However, the
empirical evidence on the sign of the intertemporal risk-return relation is inconclusive.1
To explain the mixed nature of the evidence, some researchers have shown that the
intertemporal mean-variance relation need not be positive theoretically (e.g., Abel (1988),
Backus and Gregory (1993), and Whitelaw (2000)). Others have argued that a positive
mean-variance relation emerges when the empirical speciﬁcation includes hedging demands
(e.g., Scruggs (1998) and Guo and Whitelaw (2005)). Yet others argue that the relation
is highly sensitive to the way conditional variance is measured (e.g., Harvey (2001), Wang
(2004), and Ghysels, Santa-Clara, and Valkanov (2005)). For example, Ghysels et al. state
that “the main diﬃculty in testing the ICAPM relation is that the conditional variance of
the market is not observable,” and that “the conﬂicting ﬁndings of the above studies are
mostly due to diﬀerences in the approach to modeling the conditional variance.”
While estimating the conditional variance of market returns is clearly important, to us,
estimating the conditional mean return seems no less important. First moments of returns are
generally more diﬃcult to estimate than second moments (Merton (1980)). The conditional
mean return is sometimes estimated by projecting future returns onto a set of conditioning
variables.2 The results produced by this approach tend to be sensitive to the choice of the
conditioning variables (Harvey, 2001). Another popular estimate of the conditional mean
return in this literature is the realized future return.3 Although realized returns provide
unbiased estimates of expected returns, they are notoriously noisy. For example, Elton
(1999) argues that “realized returns are a very poor measure of expected returns.” Lundblad
(2005) shows that when realized returns proxy for expected returns, a very long sample is
needed to detect a positive risk-return relation in simulations.
1

Some studies ﬁnd a positive relation (e.g., Scruggs (1998), Ghysels, Santa-Clara, and Valkanov (2005),
Lundblad (2005)), but others ﬁnd a negative relation (e.g., Campbell (1987), Turner, Startz, and Nelson
(1989), Glosten, Jagannathan, and Runkle (1993), Harvey (2001), Lettau and Ludvigson (2003), Brandt and
Kang (2004)), and yet others ﬁnd either no signiﬁcant relation or mixed evidence (e.g., French, Schwert, and
Stambaugh (1987), Baillie and DeGennaro (1990), Nelson (1991), Campbell and Hentschel (1992), Chan,
Karolyi, and Stulz (1992), Whitelaw (1994, 2000)).
2
See, for example, Campbell (1987), Harvey (2001), Whitelaw (1994), and Lettau and Ludvigson (2003).
3
See, for example, French, Schwert, and Stambaugh (1987), Baillie and DeGennaro (1990), Nelson (1991),
Chan, Karolyi, and Stulz (1992), Glosten, Jagannathan, and Runkle (1993), De Santis and Imrohologlu
(1997), Scruggs (1998), Ghysels, Santa-Clara, and Valkanov (2005), and Lundblad (2005).

1

This paper reexamines the conditional mean-variance relation using a diﬀerent proxy for
the conditional expected return: the implied cost of capital. The implied cost of capital for
a given asset is the discount rate (or internal rate of return) that equates the asset’s market
value to the present value of all expected future cash ﬂows. One appealing feature of this
proxy is that it does not rely on realized asset returns. Estimating expected return using
the implied cost of capital is increasingly popular in the ﬁnance literature. For example,
Friend, Westerﬁeld, and Granito (1978), Kaplan and Ruback (1995), Gebhardt, Lee, and
Swaminathan (2001), Brav, Lehavy, and Michaely (2003), and Lee, Ng, and Swaminathan
(2003) compute the implied costs of capital for a cross section of ﬁrms. Claus and Thomas
(2001) and Fama and French (2002) use similar approaches to estimate the expected return
for the market portfolio. To our knowledge, the implied cost of capital has not yet been used
to analyze the relation between the conditional mean and variance of stock returns.
We begin by deriving some general analytical results about the implied cost of capital.
We show that if dividend growth follows an AR(1) process, the implied cost of capital is a
linear function of the dividend yield and dividend growth. If, in addition, the conditional
expected return also follows an AR(1) process, then the implied cost of capital is perfectly
correlated with the conditional expected return over time. Therefore, the implied cost of
capital should be useful in capturing time variation in expected returns.
We conduct simulations to analyze the usefulness of the implied cost of capital in estimating the intertemporal risk-return tradeoﬀ. First, we design a simple framework in which
the conditional mean and variance of stock returns are positively related. We simulate the
time series of the conditional moments and compare the ability of various proxies for the
conditional mean to detect the positive mean-variance relation. We show that the relation
is much easier to detect using the implied cost of capital than using realized returns.
Importantly, the implied cost of capital outperforms realized returns even in the absence
of information about dividend growth. In that case, the implied cost of capital is perfectly
correlated with the dividend-price ratio, so its changes are driven mostly by changes in the
stock price: increases in the stock price are accompanied by declines in the implied cost
of capital, and vice versa. Therefore, the ability of the implied cost of capital to detect a
positive mean-variance relation in that case stems from the fact that price changes tend to
be accompanied by variance changes in the opposite direction. As long as price changes are
to some extent driven by changes in expected returns, the implied cost of capital should be
positively related to the conditional variance. In line with this intuition, we ﬁnd that the
correlation between the implied cost of capital and the conditional variance is high especially

2

when market returns are driven mostly by changes in expected returns (as opposed to changes
in expected cash ﬂows). However, the implied cost of capital outperforms realized returns
also when only a small fraction of the market return variance is due to time-varying expected
returns. In short, the implied cost of capital seems well suited for capturing the risk-return
tradeoﬀ, even in the absence of information about future cash ﬂow.
In our empirical analysis, we estimate the intertemporal relation between the conditional
mean and variance of excess market returns in the G-7 countries. We construct monthly
estimates of the conditional mean and variance in 1981–2002 (for the United States) and
1990–2002 (for Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, and U.K.). To proxy for the conditional mean return, we compute the implied cost of capital, following the approach developed
by Gebhardt, Lee, and Swaminathan (2001) and Lee, Ng, and Swaminathan (2003). For each
ﬁrm in each month, we compute the implied cost of capital using analyst forecasts of earnings
and historical plowback rates. We then aggregate these cost of capital estimates across ﬁrms
to compute a market-wide implied cost of capital for each country. We compute both equaland value-weighted versions of the country-level implied cost of capital. Finally, we subtract
the long-term local government bond yield from the implied cost of capital to compute the
implied risk premium for each country. This implied risk premium is the measure of the
conditional mean return that we use in our regression tests.
To estimate the conditional variance of market returns for a given country in a given
month, we average squared daily market returns over the previous month. This approach
to variance estimation is simpler than some other approaches developed in the literature.4
Although we believe that it is important to estimate the conditional variance as precisely as
possible, we choose a simple variance estimator to highlight the paper’s focus on estimating
the conditional expected return.
Our empirical results provide strong support for a positive relation between the conditional mean and variance of market returns. Consider the equal-weighted average implied
risk premium as a proxy for expected excess market return at the country level. We ﬁnd
a positive relation between the levels of the implied risk premia and volatility in all G-7
countries, and this relation is statistically signiﬁcant for ﬁve of the seven countries. We
also ﬁnd a positive and statistically signiﬁcant relation between shocks to the risk premia
and shocks to volatility in Canada, France, Germany, U.K., and U.S. The evidence based
on the value-weighted average implied risk premium is somewhat weaker but still generally
4

Our estimator coresponds to the simplest variance estimator considered by French, Schwert, and Stambaugh (1987). Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold, and Labys (2003) discuss the advantages of realized volatility
relative to ARCH, stochastic volatility, and other parametric volatility models.

3

supportive of a positive mean-variance relation. We ﬁnd a positive and signiﬁcant relation
between the levels of the implied risk premia and volatility in four of the seven countries.
The relation between the shocks to the premia and to volatility is positive and signiﬁcant for
three countries (France, U.K., and U.S.). The results are similar whether we use conditional
variance or standard deviation to measure volatility.
We also ﬁnd a positive intertemporal risk-return tradeoﬀ at the global level. There is a
strong positive relation between the world market volatility and the world market implied
risk premium, approximated by averaging the implied risk premia across the G-7 countries.
There is also a positive relation between several individual country risk premia and the
world market volatility. Finally, some country risk premia are positively related to the
conditional covariances of the country returns with the world market portfolio. This evidence
is consistent with some international integration of the G-7 ﬁnancial markets.
It is noteworthy that we ﬁnd any statistically signiﬁcant relations at all, given the short
length of our samples (22 years for the U.S., and 13 years for the other six countries) and
the fact that we estimate the conditional variance in a simple manner. The implied cost of
capital seems quite powerful in capturing time variation in expected returns.
As one way of assessing the robustness of our results, we estimate return volatility using
the implied volatility from the options market, which is available to us for the U.S. stock
market. The results based on implied volatility are even stronger than those based on
realized volatility. The mean-variance relation is signiﬁcantly positive with the t-statistics
on the order of ten in a 17-year-long sample. Additional tests show that the mean-variance
relation remains positive after controlling for hedging demands, and that this relation is not
driven by analyst forecast errors. The mean-variance relation weakens but remains mostly
positive when we replace the implied cost of capital by the dividend yield.
While our results based on the implied cost of capital indicate positive risk-return tradeoﬀs at various levels, the tests that use realized returns to proxy for expected returns ﬁnd no
signiﬁcant tradeoﬀs. These results conﬁrm our simulation evidence, and reinforce the notion
that realized returns are a poor proxy for expected returns.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 characterizes the implied cost of capital
analytically. Section 3 provides simulation evidence on the usefulness of the implied cost
of capital in estimating the risk-return tradeoﬀ. Section 4 describes our data and empirical
methodology. Section 5 discusses the empirical results. Section 6 concludes.

4

2.

Implied Cost of Capital

The implied cost of equity capital is the discount rate that equates the present value of
expected future dividends to the current stock price. One common approach is to deﬁne the
implied cost of capital as the value of re that solves
Pt =

∞

Et (Dt+k )
k=1

(1 + re )k

,

(1)

where Pt is the stock price and Dt are the dividends paid at time t. To obtain some analytical
results about the implied cost of capital under time-varying expected returns, we propose
a slightly diﬀerent but analogous deﬁnition. Campbell and Shiller (1988) develop a useful
approximation to the present value formula, which expresses the log price pt = log(Pt ) as


k
ρj dt+1+j − Et
ρj rt+1+j ,
+ (1 − ρ)Et
1−ρ
j=0
j=0
∞

pt =

∞

(2)

where rt is the log stock return, dt ≡ log(Dt ), ρ = 1/(1 + exp(d − p)), k = −log(ρ) − (1 −
ρ)log(1/ρ − 1), and d − p is the average log dividend-price ratio. In this framework, it is
natural to deﬁne the implied cost of capital as the value of re,t that solves
∞
∞


k
j
+ (1 − ρ)
ρ Et (dt+1+j ) −
ρj re,t .
pt =
1−ρ
j=0
j=0

(3)

To provide some insight into the implied cost of capital, it is convenient to assume that
log dividend growth gt+1 ≡ dt+1 − dt follows a stationary AR(1) process:
gt+1 = γ + δgt + vt+1 ,

0 < δ < 1,

vt+1 ∼ N(0, σv2 ).

(4)

Given these dynamics of gt , the Appendix shows that
∞


ρj Et (dt+1+j ) =

j=0

γ
δgt
dt
γδ
+
+
(5).
−
2
1 − ρ (1 − δ)(1 − ρ)
(1 − δ)(1 − ρ)(1 − ρδ) (1 − ρ)(1 − ρδ)

Substituting this equation into equation (3), we obtain
pt =

γδ
re,t
k
γ
δ
+ dt +
−
+ gt
−
,
1−ρ
(1 − δ)(1 − ρ) (1 − δ)(1 − ρδ)
1 − ρδ 1 − ρ

(6)

which can be rearranged into
re,t



δ(1 − ρ)
γ
γ
= k+
+ (dt − pt ) (1 − ρ) + gt −
.
1−δ
1−δ
1 − ρδ
5

(7)

The implied cost of capital, re,t , is a simple linear function of the log dividend-price ratio,
dt − pt , and log dividend growth, gt . (Note some similarity with the well known constantparameter Gordon growth model, in which P = D/(r − g), and thus r = D/P + g.)
Further insight into the implied cost of capital can be obtained by assuming that the
conditional expected return, μt ≡ Et (rt+1 ), follows a stationary AR(1) process:
μt+1 = α + βμt + ut+1,

0 < β < 1,

ut+1 ∼ N(0, σu2 ).

(8)

Under this assumption, the Appendix shows that


α
α
1
ρ Et (rt+1+j ) =
+ μt −
.
(1 − β)(1 − ρ)
1 − β 1 − ρβ
j=0

∞


j

(9)

Plugging equations (5) and (9) into equation (2), we obtain
pt =

k
γ
α
+
−
1 − ρ (1 − δ)(1 − ρ) (1 − β)(1 − ρ)




δ
1
γ
α
− μt −
.
+dt + gt −
1 − δ (1 − ρδ)
1 − β 1 − ρβ

(10)

The log stock price pt is a simple function of dt , gt , and μt . The stock price increases with
dividends dt and dividend growth gt , and it decreases with expected return μt . Note that
pt depends on the deviations of μt and gt from their unconditional means of α/(1 − β) and
γ/(1 − δ), respectively. Comparing equations (10) and (7), we have


α
α
1−ρ
+ μt −
,
re,t =
1−β
1 − β 1 − ρβ

(11)

which implies that re,t and μt are perfectly correlated. Therefore, the implied cost of capital
is a perfect proxy for the conditional expected return in an AR(1) framework.
We also consider a modiﬁed version of the implied cost of capital, re2,t:
re2,t = k +

γ
+ (dt − pt ) (1 − ρ).
1−δ

(12)

This expression is obtained from equation (7) by setting gt equal to its unconditional mean
of γ/(1 − δ). This deﬁnition of re2,t captures the idea that our information about dividend
growth is often limited in practice. Note that re2,t is perfectly correlated with the dividendprice ratio, which is commonly used to proxy for expected return. Since dividends tend to
vary less than prices, the time variation in re2,t is driven mostly by the time variation in pt .

6

3.

Simulation

This section builds on the framework developed in Section 2. First, we make additional
assumptions about the conditional variance of stock returns. We impose a positive relation
between the conditional mean and variance, and then we analyze the ability of various
proxies for the conditional mean to detect this relation in simulated data. We show that
the proxy proposed in this paper, the implied cost of capital, is well suited for capturing the
intertemporal risk-return tradeoﬀ.

3.1.

The Variance of Stock Returns

Let σt2 ≡ Vart (rt+1 ) denote the conditional variance of stock returns. We assume that the
conditional variance is related to the conditional mean as follows:
μt = a + bσt2 + et ,

b > 0,

et ∼ N(0, σe2 )1{et ≤ēt } ,

(13)

so that et is drawn from a truncated normal distribution with an upper bound of ēt. The
truncation of et ensures nonnegativity of the variance draws, as explained below. We assume
the risk-free rate of zero, so that μt can also be thought of as expected excess return.
Equation (13) deﬁnes the process for σt2, conditional on μt : σt2 = (μt − a − et )/b. In the
absence of the truncation of et, σt2 would follow an AR(1) process with an autoregressive
parameter equal to β. In the presence of the truncation, σt2 follows a process that is approximately autoregressive. Note that the strength of the mean-variance association in equation
(13) can be measured as σu2 /(σu2 + σe2), which is approximately equal to the fraction of the
conditional variance of σt2 that can be explained by the conditional variance of μt .
We show in the Appendix that the return variance in the framework developed in Section
2. can be approximated by
Vart (rt+1 ) =

1
ρ2
2
σ
+
σ2.
v
(1 − ρδ)2
(1 − ρβ)2 u

(14)

This expression is detached from the process for σt2 deﬁned in equation (13). To ensure that
σt2 can be interpreted as the variance of stock returns, we make σv2 from equation (4) vary
over time in a way that equates σt2 from equation (13) to Vart (rt+1 ) from equation (14):


ρ2
2
2
2
2
(15)
σ .
σv,t+1 = (1 − ρδ) σt −
(1 − ρβ)2 u
2
Since σv,t+1
must be nonnegative, σt2 ≥ σ̄ 2 must hold in each period, where σ̄ 2 =

ρ2
σ2.
(1−ρβ)2 u

To ensure that this inequality holds for each draw of σt2, we truncate the distribution of et
in equation (13) at ēt = μt − a − bσ̄ 2.
7

The ﬁrst term in equation (14) captures the return variance that is due to news about
dividend growth. The second term captures the variance due to news about expected future
returns. The fraction of the return variance that is explained by the variation in expected
return is therefore given by φt = ρ2 σu2 /((1− ρβ)2σt2). Replacing σt2 by its unconditional mean
yields an unconditional value of φt, which we denote by φ.

3.2.

The Simulation Procedure

In this subsection, we describe how we simulate the time series of μt , σt2, rt , re,t , and re2,t,
and how we use these time series to analyze the intertemporal risk-return relation.
The parameters are speciﬁed as follows. In equation (8), we choose α = 0.25% per month
and β = 0.8, which implies an unconditional expected return of 15% per year. In equation
(13), we choose a = 0.5% per month and b = 2.7778, which implies an unconditional return
variance of (18%)2 per year. In equation (4), we choose γ = 0.16% per month and δ = 0.8,
which implies an unconditional mean of gt equal to 10% per year. We solve for ρ and k
numerically, and obtain ρ = 0.9955 and k = 0.0291. The variable σu in equation (8) takes
ﬁve diﬀerent values (0.34, 0.58, 0.75, 0.89, 1.01)% per month, selected so that the fraction
of the return variance that can be explained by the variation in expected return, earlier
denoted by φ, takes the values of (0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9). For each value of σu , the value of σe
in equation (13) is selected so that the strength of the mean-variance link (i.e., σu2 /(σu2 + σe2),
or the fraction of the variance of σt2 that can be explained by the variation in μt ) takes the
values of (0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9).
The variables g0 , μ0 , and σ0 are initialized at their unconditional values, d0 = 0, and
the initial price is computed from equation (10) as p0 = f1(g0 , μ0, d0 ). The following process is repeated in each period t, t = 1, . . . , T , conditional on the information up to time t−1:
1. Compute σv,t from equation (15).
2. Draw gt from equation (4).
3. Construct dt = dt−1 + gt .
4. Draw μt from equation (8).
5. Compute the price, pt = f1 (gt , μt , dt ), from equation (10).
6. Compute the implied cost of capital, re,t = f2 (gt , pt , dt ), from equation (7). Also
compute the modiﬁed implied cost of capital, re2,t = f3 (pt , dt ), from equation (12).
8

7. Draw σt from equation (13).
8. Compute the realized return as rt = log((Pt + Dt )/Pt−1 ).
This process generates the time series of all variables used in the following subsection.

3.3.

The Simulation Results

In this subsection, we use the time series simulated in Section 3.2. to estimate the intertemporal relation between the conditional mean and variance of returns. We consider the regression
μt = c + dσt2 + t,

(16)

with three proxies for μt : re,t , re2,t, and rt+1 . The realized return, rt+1 , is a common proxy
for μt in this literature (see the references in footnote 3). Our objective is to examine the
performance of the ﬁrst two proxies relative to rt+1 in detecting the positive risk-return
relation (d > 0), which is imposed in the simulation (b > 0 in equation (13)). We also run
the regression (16) in ﬁrst diﬀerences of μt and σt2.
We consider ﬁve sample sizes: T = 60, 120, 240, 360, and 600 months. For each sample
size, we simulate 5,000 time series of re,t , re2,t, rt+1 , μt , and σt2. For each time series, we run
ˆ We take the average of the
the regression (16), and record the estimated slope coeﬃcient d.
5,000 d̂’s to be the true value of d, given the large number of simulations. The “t-statistic”
ˆ In the
is computed by dividing the average d̂ by the standard deviation of the 5,000 d’s.
same manner, we compute the true correlations between σt2 and the three proxies for μt .
Table 1 reports the correlations and their t-statistics. As the strength of the meanvariance link increases (i.e., as we move from the left to the right in the table), all correlations
increase, along with their signiﬁcance. As T increases (i.e., as we move down the table),
the correlations remain about the same, but their signiﬁcance increases. Neither result is
surprising: It is easier to detect a stronger mean-variance link, especially in large samples.
Table 1 shows a clear ranking among the three proxies for μt in terms of their ability to
detect the positive risk-return relation. The highest and most signiﬁcant correlations with
σt2 are achieved by re,t and the lowest by rt+1. This ranking is the same for all ﬁve values
of T , all ﬁve degrees of the mean-variance link, and all ﬁve values of φ. For example, for
T = 120 and the 0.5 values of the mean-variance link and φ, the correlations achieved by
re,t , re2,t, and rt+1 are 0.72 (t = 11.05), 0.40 (t = 3.08), and 0.14 (t = 1.22), respectively.

9

The best performance of re,t is not surprising, given the perfect correlation between re,t
and μt (equation (11)). More interesting is that rt+1 is uniformly outperformed not only
by re,t but also by re2,t. Recall that re2,t is the implied cost of capital computed under the
assumption that log dividend growth, gt , is equal to its unconditional mean. In practice,
we (and the equity analysts whose forecasts we use in the empirical work) often have little
information about future cash ﬂow. Our results show that the implied cost of capital can help
us estimate the intertemporal risk-return relation even in the absence of such information.
Since the time variation in re2,t is driven mostly by pt , the ability of re2,t to detect the
positive risk-return tradeoﬀ stems from the fact that price changes tend to be accompanied by
variance changes in the opposite direction. As long as price changes are to some extent driven
by changes in μt (i.e., φ > 0), and μt is positively related to σt2 , then the regression of re2,t
on σt2 should detect the positive relation between μt and σt2 in a long enough sample. Table
1 shows that re2,t works better as φ increases, which is not surprising. More important, re2,t
works well even for relatively low values of φ and relatively small sample sizes. For example,
for φ = 0.3, T = 120, and the mean-variance link of 0.5, the estimated correlation between
re2,t and σt2 is 0.36 (t = 2.66). The empirical estimates of φ are generally in the neighborhood
of 0.7 (e.g., Campbell and Ammer, 1993). For φ = 0.7, re2,t has a signiﬁcant correlation with
σt2 even for T as low as 60 months and the mean-variance link as low as 0.3. Even when the
link is only 0.1, the correlation is signiﬁcant for T ≥ 240 months, or 20 years. These results
show that even re2,t can be quite useful in estimating the risk-return tradeoﬀ.
In contrast, rt+1 performs poorly. Its correlation with σt2 is never signiﬁcant for T ≤ 60
months, even when the mean-variance link is 0.9. When the link is 0.7, we need at least
a 20-year-long sample to ﬁnd a signiﬁcant relation between rt+1 and σt2, and when the link
is 0.5, we need a 30-year-long sample. This evidence is consistent with Lundblad (2005),
who shows in simulations that a very long sample is needed to precisely estimate the riskreturn relation using rt+1 . Realized returns are just too noisy to be very useful as proxies
for expected return, at least relative to re,t and re2,t . Proxying for expected return by the
implied cost of capital might allow us to detect a positive risk-return tradeoﬀ in substantially
shorter samples than would be required if we used realized returns. This fact seems useful
especially in international markets, in which long return histories are often unavailable.
We have also estimated the regression (16) in ﬁrst diﬀerences rather than levels, and
obtained results that lead to exactly the same conclusions. Exactly the same conclusions are
also reached based on the slope coeﬃcients dˆ rather than based on correlations. The results
are robust to reasonably large changes in the parameter speciﬁcation.

10

4.
4.1.

Empirical Methodology
The Methodology for Computing Implied Cost of Capital

We compute the implied cost of equity capital for each ﬁrm as the internal rate of return
that equates the present value of future dividends to the current stock price, following the
approach of Gebhardt, Lee, and Swaminathan (2001) and Lee, Ng, and Swaminathan (2003).
We use the term “dividends” quite generally to describe the free cash ﬂow to equity (FCFE),
which captures the total cash ﬂow available to shareholders, net of any stock repurchases and
new equity issues. The stock valuation formula in equation (1) expresses the stock price in
terms of an inﬁnite series, but we explicitly forecast free cash ﬂow only over a ﬁnite horizon,
and capture the free cash ﬂow beyond the last explicit forecast period in a “terminal value”
calculation. In other words, the value of a ﬁrm is computed in two parts, as the present
value of free cash ﬂow up to the terminal period t + T , plus the present value of free cash
ﬂow beyond the terminal period. We compute future free cash ﬂow up to year t + T + 1 as
the product of annual earnings forecasts and one minus the plowback rate:
Et (F CF Et+k ) = F Et+k × (1 − bt+k ),

(17)

where F Et+k and bt+k are the forecasts of earnings and the plowback rate for year t + k.
The plowback rate is the fraction of earnings that is reinvested in the ﬁrm, or one minus
the payout ratio. The earnings forecasts for years t + 1 through t + 3 are based on analyst
forecasts, and the forecasts from year t + 4 to year t + T + 1 are computed by mean-reverting
the year t + 3 earnings growth rate to its steady-state value by year t + T + 2. We assume
the steady-state growth rate starting in year t + T + 2 to be equal to the long-run nominal
GDP growth rate, g, computed as the sum of the long-run real GDP growth rate (a rolling
average of annual real GDP growth) and the long-run average rate of inﬂation based on the
implicit GDP deﬂator (more details are provided below). We further impose an exponential
rate of decline to mean-revert the year t + 3 growth rate to the steady-state growth rate.5
Speciﬁcally, we compute earnings growth rates and earnings forecasts for years t + 4 to
t + T + 1 (k = 4, . . . , T + 1) as follows:
gt+k = gt+k−1 × exp [log(g/gt+3 )/(T − 1)] ,
F Et+k = F Et+k−1 × (1 + gt+k ) .
5

(18)
(19)

We choose the exponential rate of decline to be consistent with the empirical evidence that growth
rates of earnings mean-revert rapidly (e.g., Chan, Karceski, and Lakonishok (2002)). Given this rapid mean
reversion, any potential biases in analysts’ short-term earnings forecasts should not have large eﬀects on the
long-run growth rates, and therefore also on our estimates of the implied cost of capital.

11

We forecast plowback rates in two stages: (a) we explicitly forecast plowback rates for
years t+1 and t+2 (see the next section), and (b) we mean-revert the plowback rates between
years t + 2 and t + T + 1 linearly to a steady-state value computed from the sustainable
growth rate formula.6 This formula assumes that, in the steady-state, the product of the
steady-state return on new investments, ROI, and the steady-state plowback rate is equal
to the steady-state growth rate in earnings (see Brealey and Myers (2002)); i.e, g = ROI × b.
We then set ROI = re for new investments in the steady state, assuming that competition
drives returns on these investments down to the cost of equity. Thus, our main assumptions
are that the earnings growth rate reverts to the long-run nominal GDP growth rate, and
that the return on new investment, ROI, reverts to the (implied) cost of equity, re .
Substituting ROI = re in the sustainable growth rate formula and solving for b provides
the steady-state value for the plowback rate, b = g/re . The intermediate plowback rates
from t + 3 to t + T (k = 3, . . . , T ) are computed as follows:
bt+k = bt+k−1 −

bt+2 − b
.
T −1

(20)

The terminal value at time t + T , T Vt+T , is computed as the present value of a perpetuity
equal to the ratio of the year t + T + 1 earnings forecast divided by the cost of equity:
F Et+T +1
,
(21)
re
where F Et+T +1 is the earnings forecast for year t + T + 1. Note that the use of the no-growth
perpetuity formula does not imply that earnings or cash ﬂows do not grow after period t + T .
T Vt+T =

Rather, it simply means that any new investments after year t+T earn zero economic proﬁts.
In other words, any growth in earnings or cash ﬂows after year T is value irrelevant.
Substituting equations (17) to (21) into the inﬁnite horizon free cash ﬂow valuation model
in equation (1) provides the following empirically tractable ﬁnite-horizon model:
Pt =

T

F Et+k (1 − bt+k )
k=1

(1 + re

)k

+

F Et+T +1
.
re (1 + re )T

(22)

We use a ﬁfteen-year horizon (T=15), following Lee, Ng, and Swaminathan (2003).
4.1.1.

Earnings Forecasts over the First Three Years

We obtain explicit earnings forecasts for years t + 1 and t + 2 from the I/B/E/S database.
I/B/E/S analysts supply one-year-ahead and two-year-ahead earnings per share (EPS) fore6
We assume that year t + k plowback aﬀects year t + k + 1 earnings growth. We assume a linear decline
in the plowback rate because plowback rates appear to mean-revert slower than earnings growth rates.

12

casts for each ﬁrm, as well as an estimate of the long-term growth rate (Ltg). We use
the consensus (mean) one- and two-year-ahead EPS forecasts (F Et+1 and F Et+2 ), and we
compute a three-year-ahead earnings forecast as F Et+3 = F Et+2 × (1 + Ltg). If Ltg is not
available, we estimate the growth rate for year t + 3 from the consensus forecasts in years
1 and 2: gt+3 = F Et+2 /F Et+1 − 1, and use this growth rate to compute a three-year ahead
earnings forecast: F Et+3 = F Et+2(1 + gt+3 ). Firms with growth rates above 100% (below
2%) are assigned values of 100% (2%).
4.1.2.

Plowback Rates

For each U.S. ﬁrm, we compute the plowback rate (bt ) for the ﬁrst three years as one minus
the ﬁrm’s most recent net payout ratio (pt ). To compute pt , we ﬁrst compute net payout
(NPt ) as gross payout (i.e., dividends plus share repurchases) minus any issuance of new
stock: NPt = Dt + REPt − NEt , where Dt is the amount of common dividends paid by
the ﬁrm in year t (COMPUSTAT item D21), REPt is the amount of common and preferred
stock purchased by the ﬁrm in year t (item D115), and NEt is the amount of common and
preferred stock sold by the ﬁrm in year t (item D108). We then compute the net payout
ratio, pt , as NPt /NIt , where NIt is the ﬁrm’s net income in year t (item D18). If the ﬁrm’s
NPt /NIt is not available, we compute pt as NPt /F Et+1, where F Et+1 is the one-year ahead
earnings forecast from I/B/E/S. If even that quantity is unavailable, pt is computed as the
median NPt /NIt across all ﬁrms in the corresponding industry-size portfolio. The industrysize portfolios are formed each year by ﬁrst sorting ﬁrms into 48 industries, based on the
Fama-French classiﬁcation, and then forming three equal-number-of-ﬁrms portfolios based
on market capitalization within each industry. If pt is above 1 or below -0.5, we set it equal
to the median NPt /NIt of the industry-size portfolio. Also, industry-size portfolios with a
median NPt /NIt below -0.5 are given a value of -0.5. As a result, the net payout ratio is
bounded above by 1.0 and below by -0.5. To ensure that our computations are based on
publicly available information, we require the ﬁscal year-end to be at least three months
prior to the date of computation of the cost of equity.
For the other G-7 countries, due to data availability, we use a simpler approach to estimate
the payout ratio. If dividends and positive earnings are available for the prior ﬁscal year,
we use the dividend payout ratio. For ﬁrms experiencing negative earnings, we divide the
dividends paid by 6% of total assets. Since the long-run return on assets is 6% in the U.S.,
we use 6% of total assets as an estimate of normal earnings when earnings are negative in
the other G-7 countries (see Gebhardt, Lee, and Swaminathan, 2001).

13

Given our forecasts of earnings and plowback rates, we compute the implied cost of equity
capital, re , from equation (22) for each ﬁrm at each month-end. To trim the outliers, we
delete the top 0.5% and the bottom 0.5% of the values of the implied cost of capital in each
month. We then compute the country-level cost of capital as an equal-weighted or valueweighted average of the individual ﬁrm costs of capital. The value weights are based on
market values at the most recent year-end. Finally, we compute the implied risk premium
for each G-7 country as the implied cost of equity capital minus the local risk-free rate, which
is described in the following section.

4.2.

Data

We obtain return data from CRSP (for U.S. ﬁrms) and Datastream (for non-U.S. ﬁrms),
accounting data from Compustat (U.S.) and Worldscope (non-U.S.), and analyst forecasts
from I/B/E/S (for both U.S. and non-U.S. ﬁrms). To ensure a reasonable number of ﬁrms
in each country, we limit our analysis to the period of January 1981 to December 2002 for
the U.S., and January 1990 to December 2002 for the other six countries.
We require ﬁrms to have monthly price and share outstanding numbers available in
I/B/E/S. For U.S. ﬁrms, monthly data on market capitalization are obtained from CRSP.
We require the availability of the following data items: common dividend, net income, book
value of common equity, ﬁscal year-end date, and currency denomination. These items come
from the most recent ﬁscal year ending at least six months (three months in the case of the
U.S.) prior to the month in which the cost of capital is computed. As discussed above, for
U.S. ﬁrms, we also require data on share repurchases and new stock issuance to compute
the net payout ratio. We exclude ADRs and ﬁrms with negative common equity. We use
I/B/E/S to obtain monthly data on one-year and two-year consensus EPS forecasts and
estimates of the long-term growth rate, all in local currency.
To measure market returns, we use monthly returns on the CRSP value-weighted index
for the U.S, and monthly local-currency returns on the MSCI index for the other six countries.
Data on nominal GDP growth rates are obtained from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (U.S.
Department of Commerce) and World Bank. Each year, we compute the “steady-state” GDP
growth rate as the historical average of the GDP growth rates, using annual data up to that
year. For the U.S., our GDP growth rate series begins in 1930. For France, Italy, Japan,
and U.K., GDP growth rates are available from 1961. For Canada and Germany, these data
begin in 1966 and 1972, respectively.

14

For non-U.S. ﬁrms, I/B/E/S reports analyst forecasts, price, and shares outstanding
within a few days after the 15th of each month. Therefore, we compute the implied cost of
capital for non-U.S. ﬁrms as of mid-month. For consistency, we compute monthly returns
from the ﬁrst trading day after the 15th of the previous month to the ﬁrst trading day after
the 15th of the current month. Each month, we also estimate the conditional variance and
standard deviation of market returns using mid-month to mid-month daily returns. For
U.S. ﬁrms, we obtain month-end price data from CRSP, and compute monthly returns and
volatilities from the beginning to the end of the month.
For each country, we compute the implied risk premium as the implied cost of equity
capital minus the yield to maturity on the local 10-year government bond (obtained from
Datastream).7 The only exception is Italy, for which we use the 7-year bond series because
the data series for the 10-year bond starts later. For the U.S., we use month-end bond yields
since we compute the month-end cost of capital. For the other countries, we use mid-month
yields to match the timing of the cost of capital estimates.
To compute realized excess returns, we subtract the local one-month risk-free rate from
realized returns. For the risk-free rate, we use monthly returns on a one-month Treasury bill
for the U.S., Canada, and U.K. Data on U.S. T-bill rates are obtained from Kenneth French’s
website, and data on the T-bill rates in Canada and U.K. are obtained from Datastream. For
the other four countries, the T-bill rates are not available for the entire sample period, so we
use the inter-bank one-month oﬀer rates provided by the British Bankers Association (BBA),
also obtained from Datastream.8 Datastream provides two series on inter-bank oﬀer rates
– one provided by BBA and another that originates within the country. We use the former
since there is a longer time series of data available for the BBA series in most countries. The
rates on the two series are very similar for most countries, except for Japan where the rate
provided by BBA is 0.03% below the local inter-bank rate. We use the BBA series for Japan
since the data go back to 1989, whereas the data on local rates start only in 1995.
How do the inter-bank rates compare to one-month T-bill rates? We compare these two
rates in the countries where they are both available. In Canada, the average spread of the
inter-bank rate over the T-bill rate is 0.23% (annualized) over the period 1990–2003. In
the U.K., the spread is very similar, about 0.24%. We also compare the inter-bank rates to
the euro-currency rates and ﬁnd only marginal diﬀerences. For example, in the U.K., the
7
Claus and Thomas (2001) also use the 10-year risk-free rate to construct the risk premium from the
implied cost of capital.
8
For Italy, both short-term and long-term risk-free rates are available starting July 1990. For this reason,
all regressions for Italy start in July 1990.

15

inter-bank rates are about 0.01% higher than the euro-pound rates.
Table 2 provides the summary statistics on the implied risk premia and return volatilities
(annualized monthly standard deviations computed from daily returns) for the G-7 countries.
The average equal-weighted risk premium varies from 4.2% in Italy to 8.1% in Canada. The
value-weighted averages are smaller, ranging from 0.6% in Italy to 4.7% in Canada. These
estimates are similar to those found in Lee, Ng, and Swaminathan (2003). The average
standard deviation of returns varies from 13.7% in the U.S. and Canada to 20.8% in Italy.
The table also provides the average number of ﬁrms per month in each country. The U.S.
has the highest average number ﬁrms (1,795), Italy has the lowest (115).
Figures 1 through 4 plot the monthly time series of the implied risk premiums in all
seven countries, along with the time series of the country return volatilities. The equalweighted U.S. implied risk premium in Figure 1 ﬂuctuates between 1% and 8% between
January 1981 and December 2002, with most of the values falling in the 4% to 6% range.
The value-weighted U.S. premium ﬂuctuates between 0 and 6%, but mostly between 2% and
4%, consistent with the ﬁndings of Claus and Thomas (2001). In most of the seven countries,
the implied risk premium rises in the 1990s. This rise is partly due to signiﬁcant increases
in the analysts’ cash ﬂow expectations in the 1990s, and partly due to the contemporaneous
declines in the risk-free rates in most countries. When the risk-free rates are added back to
plot the implied costs of capital, the upward trend remains apparent only for Germany and
Japan, and the implied cost of capital in the U.S. exhibits a clear decline.
Several studies ﬁnd that analyst forecasts tend to be systematically biased upward. Given
this bias, the true risk premia may well be lower than those reported in Figures 1 through
4. Note, however, that we are interested in the time variation in the risk premia, so if the
bias is constant over time, it has no eﬀect on our results. Even if the bias varies over time, it
has no eﬀect on our results as long as its time variation is uncorrelated with market return
volatility. In order to artiﬁcially create our results, the bias would have to be signiﬁcantly
positively correlated with market volatility. We are not aware of any empirical evidence
establishing such correlation. Moreover, we do not ﬁnd any signiﬁcant correlation between
analyst forecast errors and market volatility in our subsequent analysis in Section 5.5.

5.

Empirical Results

This section presents our main empirical ﬁndings. For each G-7 country, we regress estimates
of the conditional mean return on the conditional market volatility. We consider the same
16

regression speciﬁcations as in Section 3., as well as a few additional ones.
Since Merton’s ICAPM postulates a positive relation between the conditional mean and
variance of market returns, variance seems to be more relevant than standard deviation as
a measure of market volatility. Nonetheless, we consider not only variance (σt2) but also
standard deviation (σt), as one way of assessing the sensitivity of our results. The units of
volatility correspond to the units of the variable on the other side of the regression. When the
dependent variable is monthly returns, volatility is in monthly units. When the dependent
variable is the annualized implied risk premium, volatility is annualized as well.
In most of our analysis, we ignore any potential hedging demands (Merton, 1973), as
does Merton (1980) and others. However, in Section 5.4., we show that including popular
proxies for hedging demands has little eﬀect on our results for the U.S. market.

5.1.

Volatility and Realized Returns

We begin by using realized excess market return at time t + 1, rt+1, as a proxy for expected
excess market return at time t. We regress this proxy on market volatility V olt (σt2 or σt ):
rt+1 = a + b V olt + et+1.

(23)

This regression is an empirical analogue to the simulated regression in equation (16).
Table 3 presents the regression estimates. There is no evidence of a positive relation
between market volatility and the next month’s realized return. The estimates of b are not
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero in any of the seven countries. In fact, in three countries,
the estimates of b are (insigniﬁcantly) negative.9 All adjusted R-squareds in Table 3 are
low, conﬁrming the fact that this month’s volatility has very little predictive power for the
next month’s return. In short, these results conﬁrm our simulation evidence (as well as the
simulation evidence of Lundblad (2005)) that it is diﬃcult to detect a positive mean-variance
relation in tests that use realized returns to proxy for expected returns.

5.2.

Volatility and the Implied Risk Premia

Next, we consider several regression speciﬁcations with the implied risk premium μt :
μt = a + b V olt + et ,

(24)

9
The t-statistics are corrected for potential residual autocorrelation using one Newey-West lag. We have
also examined the regression speciﬁcation with ﬁrst diﬀerences in volatility in place of the levels, and found
similar results (i.e., no signiﬁcant slopes).

17

μt = a + b V olt + cμt−1 + et,

(25)

μt = a + bΔV olt + cμt−1 + et,

(26)

Δμt = a + bΔV olt + et,
μ,t

= a+b

V,t

(27)

+ et ,

(28)

where μt is the implied risk premium at the end of month t, measured as the diﬀerence
between the implied cost of capital (re,t ) and the risk-free rate, Δμt = μt − μt−1 ,
residual from an AR(1) model estimated for μt in the full sample, and
AR(1) residual for volatility (σt2 or σt ).

V,t

μ,t

is the

is the analogous

Regressions (26) to (28) examine the relations between shocks to volatility and shocks
to expected returns. A test involving shocks may be more powerful in testing the meanvariance relation than a test involving levels because any persistent biases in the estimates
of the conditional mean and volatility should not inﬂuence the monthly shocks. Regression
(27) uses changes in μt and V olt as proxies for shocks to the risk premium and volatility. To
assess the robustness of our results with respect to diﬀerent shock speciﬁcations, we regress
the level of μt on lagged μt and the levels or changes in volatility (equations (25) and (26)).
We also estimate AR(1) processes independently for expected returns and volatility, and
then regress the residuals from the expected return model on the residuals from the volatility
model (equation (28)). To correct the standard errors for potential autocorrelation, we use
12 Newey-West lags in regression (24) and one lag for all other speciﬁcations. We use more
lags for regression (24) because μt is highly persistent.
Table 4 presents the results in the case where the country-level implied risk premium
is the equal-weighted average of the individual ﬁrm risk premia. First, consider regression
(24). Using σt as a measure of volatility, the risk-return relation is positive (b > 0) for all
G-7 countries, and the relation is statistically signiﬁcant in all countries but Italy and Japan.
Using σt2 to measure volatility, the risk-return relation is again signiﬁcantly positive for ﬁve
of the seven countries. In regression (25), the risk-return relation is positive and signiﬁcant in
Canada, France, U.K., and U.S. In regressions (26) to (28), we ﬁnd a statistically signiﬁcant
positive relation between shocks to the risk premia and shocks to volatility in Canada, France,
Germany, U.K., and U.S. In Japan, the relation is also positive but marginally insigniﬁcant.
Only in Italy, the country with the lowest number of ﬁrms in the sample, does the slope
coeﬃcient have the wrong sign (statistically insigniﬁcant). These results are robust to using
variance or standard deviation as a measure of volatility. In sum, the results reveal a strong
positive relation between the risk premium and market volatility. We ﬁnd it striking that
our results are statistically signiﬁcant in so many cases, despite the relatively short samples
18

used in the estimation (22 years for the U.S., and 13 years for the other six countries).
Table 5 is an equivalent of Table 4, with the equal-weighted country risk premia replaced
by the value-weighted ones, where the weights are based on the market values of equity at the
most recent year-end. As in Table 4, the regression (24) uncovers a positive mean-variance
relation. This relation is statistically signiﬁcant in four countries (France, Germany, Italy,
and U.K.), and it is insigniﬁcantly positive in Canada and the U.S. The regressions based
on shocks ﬁnd a signiﬁcantly positive mean-variance relation in France, U.K., and the U.S.
The value-weighted evidence is somewhat weaker than the equal-weighted evidence.
Should we pay more attention to the results in Table 4, where the costs of capital are
equal-weighted across ﬁrms in computing the country-level cost of capital, or to the results in
Table 5, where the costs are value-weighted? Equal-weighting typically pays disproportionate
attention to small ﬁrms, but it would be misleading to argue that the results in Table 4 are
driven by small ﬁrms. The ﬁrms in our sample are a subset of ﬁrms in any given country (see
Table 2), and this is not a random subset because ﬁrms that satisfy our data requirements
(which include analyst forecasts) tend to be among the largest ﬁrms in their countries.
As a result, value-weighting focuses on the largest among these already large ﬁrms, which
overweights the largest ﬁrms relative to the country’s market portfolio. Equal-weighting
pays more attention to smaller ﬁrms in our large-ﬁrm subsets, which partly compensates for
the absence of truly small ﬁrms in our sample. It is not clear whether value-weighting or
equal-weighting produces an aggregate expected return that is closer to the expected return
on the country’s true market portfolio, so we consider both Tables 4 and 5 informative.
The regressions in Tables 4 and 5 are estimated separately for each individual country.
To test if the estimated positive mean-variance relation is jointly signiﬁcant across the G-7
countries, we estimate a multivariate seemingly unrelated regression (SUR) model involving
all 7 countries for each of the ﬁve regression speciﬁcations. A joint F-test of the hypothesis
that all seven slope coeﬃcients are equal to zero rejects the null for each speciﬁcation.
Table 6 reports the Spearman correlations between the levels and changes in the risk
premia and the levels and changes in volatility for each G-7 country, to provide a sense of
the economic signiﬁcance of the risk-return relation. The results generally show a strong
positive relation between the levels of the risk premium and volatility. The correlation
between the equal-weighted premium and volatility ranges from 13% for Italy to 60% for
U.K. The correlation between the value-weighted premium and volatility ranges from 10%
to 45%. The correlations between the changes in the risk premium and changes in volatility
are also positive but lower in magnitude and not as statistically signiﬁcant. The correlation
19

results are consistent with the regression results presented in Tables 4 and 5.
Overall, the results in Tables 4 through 6 show a positive relation between the conditional
mean and volatility of the country-level market returns. The diﬀerence between the results in
Table 3 and Tables 4 through 6 conﬁrms our simulation ﬁndings that a positive intertemporal
mean-variance relation, if present, is easier to detect by using the implied cost of capital than
by using the realized return as a proxy for expected return.

5.3.

Robustness: Implied Volatility

So far, we have estimated conditional return volatility using the volatility realized over the
previous month. This approach involves nontrivial estimation error, which biases our results
against ﬁnding a mean-variance relation. In this subsection, we consider an alternative
volatility estimator: the implied volatility from the options market.
Implied volatility data are available to us for the U.S. stock market over the period
January 1986 through December 2002. We use the month-end series of the VXO index,
which is based on the S&P 100 options. The data are obtained from the CBOE.10
Table 7 contains the results from the regressions (24) through (28). The estimated riskreturn relation is unambiguously positive. For example, consider regression (27), in which
ﬁrst diﬀerences in the implied premium are regressed on ﬁrst diﬀerences in implied volatility.
Across four speciﬁcations (σ 2 and σ, equal-weighted and value-weighted implied premium),
the t-statistics for the slope coeﬃcient range from 9.77 to 10.47. Based on the residuals in μt
(2)

and σt (regression (28)), the t-statistics range from 9.24 to 11.24. This level of statistical
signiﬁcance is striking, given the relatively short sample period (17 years of monthly data).
It appears that implied volatility contains less estimation error than realized volatility.

5.4.

Robustness: Hedging Demands

According to Merton (1973), the conditional expected excess market return depends not
only on the conditional variance of market returns but also on hedging demands, i.e., on the
market’s covariance with the state variables that capture investment opportunities. Scruggs
(1998) and Guo and Whitelaw (2005) argue that hedging demands are important in uncovering a positive mean-variance relation. Although we ﬁnd this relation even without including
10

The VXO index used to be known as the VIX index until CBOE modiﬁed the VIX methodology in
September 2003 (it switched to the S&P 500 index options and changed the index formula).

20

hedging demands in our estimation, it seems useful to test whether the relation survives the
inclusion of commonly used proxies for hedging demands.
We model hedging demands as a linear combination of ﬁve macroeconomic variables that
have been used in prior studies. The ﬁrst variable is the excess return on the 30-year U.S.
Treasury bond, obtained from CRSP. This variable is motivated by Scruggs (1998), who
uses long-term government bond excess returns as a catch-all proxy for hedging demands.
The other four variables follow Guo and Whitelaw (2005): the default spread (Baa-Aaa
yield spread, obtained from the St. Louis Fed), the term spread (30-year minus one-month
Treasury yield spread, obtained from CRSP), the detrended risk-free rate (the one-month
T-bill rate in excess of its 12-month moving average), and the dividend-price ratio (extracted
from the value-weighted CRSP market return series with and without dividends).
We add all ﬁve variables to the right-hand side of each regression summarized in Table 7
for the U.S. market, and report the results in Table 8. The inclusion of the hedging demand
proxies has a relatively small eﬀect on the estimated coeﬃcients and their t-statistics. In
both Tables 7 and 8, the mean-variance relation is highly statistically signiﬁcant in the same
set of 18 out of 20 speciﬁcations. We conclude that the positive risk-return tradeoﬀ in the
U.S. is robust to controlling for popular proxies for hedging demands.

5.5.

Robustness: Analyst Forecast Errors

We ﬁnd a positive relation between market volatility and the implied risk premium, but the
implied risk premium measures the true risk premium with error. If this measurement error
is somehow positively related to market volatility, it could create an appearance of a positive
mean-variance relation even if the true risk premium is unrelated to volatility.
To see if this is a problem, we need a proxy for the measurement error in the implied
risk premium. The main source of this measurement error is that analyst forecasts may not
perfectly capture the market’s cash ﬂow expectations. If analysts are more optimistic than
the market, the implied risk premium is higher than the true risk premium, and vice versa.
Therefore, we use analyst forecast errors as a proxy for the measurement error in the risk
premium. We test whether these forecast errors are related to market volatility.
We compute analyst forecast errors for each ﬁrm and each month as the absolute value
of the ratio of the diﬀerence between the consensus one-year-ahead analyst forecast of EPS
(earnings per share) and the corresponding actual EPS to the one-year-ahead forecast. We
then average the forecast errors across ﬁrms (equal-weighting or value-weighting) in each
21

month to compute a market-wide forecast error for each of the G-7 countries.11 Finally, we
run country-level regressions of forecast errors on the levels and changes in market variance,
using all available data (1981–2002 for the U.S. and 1990-2002 for the other countries).
We do not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant relation between analyst forecast errors and market volatility
in any of the G-7 countries, regardless of whether the forecast errors are equal-weighted or
value-weighted. Although most point estimates of the slope coeﬃcient are positive, none of
them is statistically signiﬁcant. (To save space, we do not report the results in a separate
table.) Therefore, our ﬁnding of a positive mean-variance relation does not appear to be
driven by analyst forecast errors.

5.6.

Integration of International Financial Markets

So far, we have tested the conditional mean-variance relation separately for each country,
which implicitly assumes that the G-7 ﬁnancial markets are segmented. This section analyzes
the risk-return tradeoﬀ from a global perspective.
We begin by computing the aggregate risk premium across the G-7 countries by averaging
the seven equal-weighted or value-weighted individual country risk premia. We refer to this
premium as the world market risk premium, even though the G-7 markets account for only
about 70% of the world market capitalization (as of 2002). We compute the world market
volatility in each month from the daily returns on the MSCI value-weighted world market
index. Because of the reporting diﬀerences on I/B/E/S across the G-7 countries (see Section
4.2.), we compute monthly volatility in two ways: from the beginning of the month to the
month-end, as well as mid-month to mid-month. We conduct three tests.
First, we assess the strength of the risk-return relation at the world market level by
regressing the world market risk premium on the world market volatility. We run the same
ﬁve regressions, equations (24) to (28), as we did at the country level. We do this for two
deﬁnitions of the risk premium (equal-weighted and value-weighted) and two deﬁnitions of
market volatility (σt2 and σt), which gives us four variations of each of the ﬁve regressions.
Table 9 shows a strong positive relation between the levels of the world market risk
premium and the world market volatility. This relation is positive and statistically signiﬁcant
in all four panels. The relation between the shocks to the risk premium and to volatility is
also positive in all four panels, but it is statistically signiﬁcant only for the equal-weighted
country risk premia. On balance, this evidence supports a positive intertemporal risk-return
11

To eliminate outliers, we delete the top 0.5% of forecast errors in each country/month.

22

tradeoﬀ at the world market level.
Merton (1973, 1980) shows that the coeﬃcient of proportionality between the conditional
mean and variance can be interpreted as the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion, under certain
assumptions. Therefore, our estimated slope coeﬃcients in the level regression are estimates
of relative risk aversion under Merton’s assumptions. These slopes range from 0.28 to 0.67
across the four basic speciﬁcations. There are at least two reasons why these coeﬃcients may
understate the true average level of risk aversion in the economy. One, return volatility is
measured with error, and the resulting attenuation bias makes the estimated slope coeﬃcient
smaller than the true coeﬃcient. Two, under assumptions more general than Merton’s, these
slope coeﬃcients do not necessarily represent relative risk aversion (e.g., Backus and Gregory
(1993), Campbell (1993), Veronesi (2000)).
Second, we examine the cross-market risk-return relation by regressing the seven countrylevel risk premia on the world market volatility. We use both the equal-weighted and the
value-weighted risk premia. To conserve space, we present only the results based on variance
as a measure of volatility (the results based on standard deviation are similar).
Table 10 shows that, in six of the seven countries, the level of the equal-weighted risk
premium is positively and signiﬁcantly related to the world market volatility. Interestingly,
this relation is stronger than the relation observed in Table 4, which uses the individual local
market volatility in place of the world market volatility. That is, the country risk premia
appear to be even more closely related to the world market volatility than to their own
country’s volatility. Table 10 also shows that the shocks to the equal-weighted risk premia
are positively related to the volatility shocks, but this relation is statistically signiﬁcant
only in France, U.K., and the U.S. The results based on the value-weighted risk premia
are similar. The level relation is positive and signiﬁcant in four countries, and the relation
involving shocks is statistically signiﬁcant in three countries (France, U.K., U.S.).
Third, we analyze the relation between the implied country risk premia and the conditional covariances with the world market portfolio. This analysis is motivated by Chan,
Karolyi, and Stulz (1992) who ﬁnd that the U.S. risk premium is positively related to the
conditional covariance of U.S. stocks with a foreign index but unrelated to its own conditional variance. For each G-7 country, we run ﬁve regressions of the risk premium on the
conditional covariance between the country returns and the world market returns, as well as
on the world market volatility. The conditional covariances with the world market portfolio
are estimated simply from daily returns over the previous month.

23

Table 11 reports the results. In the levels speciﬁcation, we ﬁnd a signiﬁcantly positive
relation between the risk premia and the conditional covariances in ﬁve of the seven countries,
consistent with the international CAPM. In the other four speciﬁcations, the relation is
estimated to be positive for all seven countries but it is almost never statistically signiﬁcant.
Compared to Table 10, including the conditional covariance in the regression causes the
market variance to lose its signiﬁcantly positive coeﬃcient for all seven countries, similar to
the result that Chan, Karolyi, and Stulz (1992) found for the United States.
The evidence in Tables 10 and 11 suggests that the country risk premia are aﬀected by
foreign asset returns, which is inconsistent with full segmentation of international markets.
Instead, our evidence suggests that ﬁnancial markets are at least partially integrated.

5.7.

Dividend Yield vs Implied Cost of Capital

In Section 3., we show that when dividend growth follows an AR(1) process, the implied cost
of capital is a simple function of the dividend yield (D/P) and dividend growth (see equation
7). The ﬁrst component, D/P, is commonly used to capture time variation in expected return.
The second component, dividend growth, reﬂects the market’s expectations of future cash
ﬂow. If analyst forecasts are at least somewhat useful in estimating future cash ﬂow, the
implied cost of capital should better capture time variation in expected return than D/P
does. In this section, we reestimate the intertemporal risk-return relation by using D/P
(instead of the implied cost of capital) as a proxy for expected return.
Tables 12 and 13 are the counterparts of Tables 4 and 5, with the implied cost of capital
replaced by D/P. For each country, we construct monthly D/P by equal-weighting (Table
12) or value-weighting (Table 13) the dividend yields of all ﬁrms in that country. Firm-level
dividend yield is computed as the ratio of all dividends paid out in the most recent ﬁscal
year to the market capitalization at the end of the current month. To proxy for the risk
premium, we use the diﬀerence between the country-wide D/P and the local risk-free rate.
The results show that D/P is positively related to market volatility in several countries,
as predicted by our simulation, but the relation is not as strong as that observed when using
the implied cost of capital. In Table 13, the relation between D/P and market variance is
signiﬁcantly positive for four countries based on levels, for two countries based on changes,
and for three countries based on innovations. In contrast, in Table 4, the relation is signiﬁcantly positive for ﬁve countries in all three speciﬁcations. Similarly, the value-weighted
results are generally stronger in Table 5 than in Table 14.

24

This evidence leads to two conclusions. First, since the results based on D/P are weaker
than those based on the implied cost of capital, analyst forecasts seem to contain useful information about expected return. Second, since even the results based on D/P are signiﬁcant
in many speciﬁcations, the intertemporal risk-return relation seems reliably positive.

6.

Conclusions

This paper reexamines the intertemporal risk-return tradeoﬀ using a novel proxy for expected
market return. This proxy, the implied cost of capital, is the internal rate of return computed
from a discounted cash ﬂow model. Our simulations show that the implied cost of capital
outperforms realized return, a common proxy for expected return, in detecting a positive
risk-return tradeoﬀ. Using the implied cost of capital, we ﬁnd strong empirical evidence of
a positive relation between the conditional mean and variance of market returns in the G-7
countries, both at the country level and at the world market level. We ﬁnd no such relation
using realized returns to proxy for expected returns.
Most studies on this subject ﬁnd either no relation or a negative relation between the
conditional mean and variance of the U.S. market returns. The few recent studies that report
a positive relation attribute their ﬁndings to a superior estimator of the conditional variance
(Ghysels, Santa-Clara, and Valkanov (2005)), to the inclusion of hedging demands in the
estimation (Scruggs (1998) and Guo and Whitelaw (2005)), or to a longer sample (Lundblad
(2005)). In contrast, our study provides evidence of a positive mean-variance relation in an
international framework without a long sample, without proxies for hedging demands, and
without a sophisticated estimator for conditional variance. We attribute our results solely
to our proxy for expected return, namely, the implied cost of capital.
This proxy is negatively related to market prices, by construction. Thus, the fact that
this proxy reveals a positive mean-variance relation is to some extent due to the well known
empirical fact that changes in market prices are negatively correlated with changes in market
volatility (e.g., Black (1976)). We believe that the observed negative relation between prices
and volatility is due to time-varying expected returns: increases in volatility lift expected
returns, driving down prices. However, we show that volatility is more closely related to the
implied cost of capital than to the dividend yield, which implies that there is more to the
implied cost of capital than just its negative correlation with stock prices.
The evidence of a positive intertemporal relation between the mean and variance of
market returns supports the basic prediction of several asset pricing models (e.g., Merton
25

(1973), Campbell (1993)). In addition, this relation has important practical implications
for ﬁnancial decision makers. For example, the joint dynamics of the conditional mean
and variance play a crucial role in dynamic portfolio selection (e.g., Campbell and Viceira
(2002)). Also, since second moments of returns are generally easier to measure than ﬁrst
moments, imposing a positive mean-variance relation a priori may improve the ﬁrst moment
estimates by incorporating the sample information about the second moments (e.g., Pástor
and Stambaugh (2001)). Further implications of the intertemporal mean-variance relation
for inference and decision making can be examined in future work.
Future work can also examine other applications of the implied cost of capital. While the
cross-section of the implied costs of capital has already been analyzed to some extent, both
domestically (e.g., Gebhardt, Lee, and Swaminathan (2001) and Brav, Lehavy, and Michaely
(2003)) and internationally (Lee, Ng, and Swaminathan (2003)), our results suggest that the
implied cost of capital can also be useful in capturing the time variation in expected returns.
Given the recent growth in the literature on time-varying expected returns, the implied cost
of capital is likely to ﬁnd new applications in the near future.

26

Panel A. USA: Implied Market Risk Premium
8

% per year

6

4

2

0
Value−weighted
Equal−weighted
−2
1981

1983

1985

1987

1989

1991
1993
Year

1995

1997

1999

2001

1997

1999

2001

Panel B. USA: Market Return Volatility

Std dev of returns, % per year

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1981

1983

1985

1987

1989

1991
1993
Year

1995

Figure 1. USA: Implied Market Risk Premium and Market Return Volatility.
Panel A plots the monthly time series of the implied market risk premium for the U.S.,
computed as the diﬀerence between the implied cost of capital and the yield to maturity on
the 10-year Treasury bond. The implied cost of capital is computed as an equal-weighted
(dashed line) or value-weighted (solid line) average of the implied costs of capital across all
U.S. ﬁrms. Panel B plots the monthly time series of the realized market return volatility,
computed from daily data within the month.

27

B. France: Implied Market Risk Premium

15

15

10

10

% per year

% per year

A. Canada: Implied Market Risk Premium

5

0

−5

5

0
Value−weighted
Equal−weighted

−5

1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002
Year

1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002
Year

C. Canada: Market Return Volatility

D. France: Market Return Volatility
60

Std dev of returns, % per year

60

Std dev of returns, % per year

Value−weighted
Equal−weighted

50
40
30
20
10
0
1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002
Year

50
40
30
20
10
0
1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002
Year

Figure 2. Canada and France: Implied Market Risk Premium and Market Return Volatility. Panels A and B plot the monthly time series of the implied market risk
premium for Canada and France, respectively, computed as the diﬀerence between the implied cost of capital and the yield to maturity on the 10-year local government bond. The
implied cost of capital is computed as an equal-weighted (dashed line) or value-weighted
(solid line) average of the implied costs of capital across all ﬁrms in the given country. Panels C and D plot the monthly time series of the realized market return volatility, computed
from daily data within the month.

28

B. Italy: Implied Market Risk Premium

15

15

10

10

% per year

% per year

A. Germany: Implied Market Risk Premium

5

0

−5

5

0
Value−weighted
Equal−weighted

−5

1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002
Year

1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002
Year

C. Germany: Market Return Volatility

D. Italy: Market Return Volatility
60

Std dev of returns, % per year

60

Std dev of returns, % per year

Value−weighted
Equal−weighted

50
40
30
20
10
0
1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002
Year

50
40
30
20
10
0
1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002
Year

Figure 3. Germany and Italy: Implied Market Risk Premium and Market Return
Volatility. Panels A and B plot the monthly time series of the implied market risk premium
for Germany and Italy, respectively, computed as the diﬀerence between the implied cost of
capital and the yield to maturity on the 10-year (Germany) or 7-year (Italy) local government
bond. The implied cost of capital is computed as an equal-weighted (dashed line) or valueweighted (solid line) average of the implied costs of capital across all ﬁrms in the given
country. Panels C and D plot the monthly time series of the realized market return volatility,
computed from daily data within the month.

29

B. UK: Implied Market Risk Premium

15

15

10

10

% per year

% per year

A. Japan: Implied Market Risk Premium

5

0

−5

5

0
Value−weighted
Equal−weighted

−5

1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002
Year

1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002
Year

C. Japan: Market Return Volatility

D. UK: Market Return Volatility
60

Std dev of returns, % per year

60

Std dev of returns, % per year

Value−weighted
Equal−weighted

50
40
30
20
10
0
1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002
Year

50
40
30
20
10
0
1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002
Year

Figure 4. Japan and the United Kingdom: Implied Market Risk Premium and
Market Return Volatility. Panels A and B plot the monthly time series of the implied market risk premium for Japan and the U.K., respectively, computed as the diﬀerence
between the implied cost of capital and the yield to maturity on the 10-year local government bond. The implied cost of capital is computed as an equal-weighted (dashed line) or
value-weighted (solid line) average of the implied costs of capital across all ﬁrms in the given
country. Panels C and D plot the monthly time series of the realized market return volatility,
computed from daily data within the month.

30

Table 1
Simulation Evidence:
Correlations Between Return Variance and Proxies for Expected Return
This table reports the time-series correlations between the return variance σt2 and three proxies for expected
return μt : the implied cost of capital (ret ), the implied cost of capital with unknown conditional expected
cash ﬂow (re2t ), and realized return rt+1 . Each correlation is computed by averaging the estimated correlations across 5,000 simulations. The t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are computed by dividing the
corresponding average correlation by the standard deviation of the 5,000 correlations. The degree of the
mean-variance link is the fraction of the conditional variance of σt2 that can be explained by the conditional
variance of μt , or σu2 /(σu2 + σe2 ). The variable φ denotes the average fraction of the return variance that can
be explained by the variation in expected return, or the unconditional mean of ρ2 σu2 /((1 − ρβ)2 σt2 ). The
length of the sample period over which the correlations are computed is denoted by T .

Degree of mean-variance link
0.1
φ

ret

re2t

0.3
rt+1

ret

re2t

0.5
rt+1

ret

re2t

0.7
rt+1

0.9

ret

re2t

rt+1

ret

re2t

rt+1

0.89
(22.74)
0.85
(15.77)
0.84
(13.49)
0.82
(12.42)
0.82
(11.80)

0.31
(1.47)
0.41
(2.21)
0.45
(2.61)
0.47
(2.87)
0.49
(3.05)

0.10
(0.70)
0.15
(0.98)
0.17
(1.15)
0.19
(1.24)
0.20
(1.33)

0.97
(78.49)
0.95
(53.56)
0.95
(46.40)
0.94
(43.04)
0.94
(39.97)

0.32
(1.47)
0.42
(2.17)
0.47
(2.58)
0.50
(2.89)
0.53
(3.18)

0.11
(0.82)
0.17
(1.20)
0.21
(1.42)
0.23
(1.58)
0.24
(1.69)

0.90
(34.63)
0.87
(24.25)
0.85
(20.78)
0.84
(19.19)
0.83
(18.14)

0.31
(1.93)
0.41
(2.81)
0.45
(3.33)
0.47
(3.67)
0.49
(3.95)

0.10
(0.96)
0.15
(1.33)
0.17
(1.55)
0.19
(1.70)
0.20
(1.80)

0.97
(119.31)
0.96
(81.74)
0.95
(70.57)
0.95
(63.77)
0.95
(60.47)

0.32
(1.93)
0.42
(2.82)
0.46
(3.32)
0.49
(3.74)
0.52
(4.06)

0.11
(1.09)
0.17
(1.62)
0.20
(1.90)
0.22
(2.09)
0.24
(2.27)

0.90
(51.25)
0.87
(34.74)
0.86
(30.01)
0.85
(27.51)
0.84
(25.71)

0.31
(2.70)
0.41
(3.90)
0.45
(4.57)
0.48
(5.07)
0.49
(5.48)

0.10
(1.32)
0.14
(1.82)
0.17
(2.11)
0.18
(2.30)
0.19
(2.46)

0.97
(175.12)
0.96
(118.25)
0.96
(101.50)
0.95
(93.42)
0.95
(86.47)

0.32
(2.69)
0.42
(3.83)
0.46
(4.55)
0.49
(5.07)
0.51
(5.54)

0.11
(1.49)
0.17
(2.19)
0.20
(2.56)
0.21
(2.82)
0.23
(3.05)

0.90
(63.04)
0.87
(43.89)
0.86
(38.10)
0.85
(34.73)
0.84
(32.31)

0.31
(3.23)
0.41
(4.68)
0.45
(5.51)
0.48
(6.17)
0.49
(6.67)

0.10
(1.64)
0.14
(2.27)
0.17
(2.61)
0.18
(2.86)
0.19
(3.03)

0.97
(217.55)
0.96
(147.96)
0.96
(127.15)
0.95
(115.53)
0.95
(108.20)

0.32
(3.21)
0.41
(4.61)
0.46
(5.44)
0.49
(6.08)
0.51
(6.60)

0.11
(1.86)
0.16
(2.70)
0.19
(3.18)
0.21
(3.51)
0.23
(3.76)

0.91
(83.44)
0.88
(57.38)
0.86
(49.99)
0.85
(45.42)
0.84
(42.53)

0.31
(4.04)
0.41
(5.86)
0.45
(6.84)
0.47
(7.53)
0.49
(8.18)

0.10
(2.10)
0.14
(2.89)
0.17
(3.33)
0.18
(3.63)
0.19
(3.89)

0.97
(286.92)
0.96
(195.66)
0.96
(169.42)
0.95
(152.87)
0.95
(142.43)

0.32
(4.01)
0.41
(5.78)
0.46
(6.78)
0.49
(7.58)
0.51
(8.23)

0.11
(2.37)
0.16
(3.44)
0.19
(4.02)
0.21
(4.43)
0.23
(4.81)

T = 60 months
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.9

0.34
(2.70)
0.32
(2.52)
0.31
(2.40)
0.30
(2.36)
0.29
(2.30)

0.11
(0.71)
0.13
(0.94)
0.15
(1.03)
0.15
(1.11)
0.16
(1.15)

0.03
(0.17)
0.04
(0.22)
0.04
(0.26)
0.04
(0.27)
0.04
(0.27)

0.62
(6.16)
0.57
(4.99)
0.54
(4.56)
0.53
(4.30)
0.52
(4.14)

0.22
(1.20)
0.28
(1.69)
0.30
(1.90)
0.31
(2.02)
0.32
(2.09)

0.06
(0.41)
0.08
(0.52)
0.09
(0.59)
0.10
(0.63)
0.11
(0.68)

0.78
(11.25)
0.73
(8.26)
0.70
(7.36)
0.69
(6.83)
0.68
(6.44)

0.36
(4.02)
0.33
(3.62)
0.32
(3.58)
0.31
(3.44)
0.31
(3.35)

0.11
(1.00)
0.14
(1.29)
0.15
(1.48)
0.16
(1.56)
0.17
(1.62)

0.03
(0.28)
0.04
(0.36)
0.04
(0.39)
0.05
(0.42)
0.05
(0.46)

0.64
(9.05)
0.59
(7.50)
0.56
(6.69)
0.55
(6.40)
0.54
(6.08)

0.22
(1.61)
0.28
(2.27)
0.31
(2.56)
0.32
(2.78)
0.33
(2.90)

0.06
(0.59)
0.09
(0.76)
0.10
(0.86)
0.10
(0.91)
0.11
(0.97)

0.80
(17.04)
0.75
(12.48)
0.72
(11.05)
0.71
(10.24)
0.70
(9.75)

0.37
(5.80)
0.34
(5.22)
0.33
(5.08)
0.32
(5.00)
0.32
(4.90)

0.11
(1.48)
0.14
(1.92)
0.16
(2.15)
0.17
(2.30)
0.17
(2.37)

0.03
(0.40)
0.04
(0.49)
0.04
(0.54)
0.05
(0.57)
0.05
(0.59)

0.65
(13.14)
0.60
(10.58)
0.58
(9.69)
0.56
(9.24)
0.55
(8.63)

0.23
(2.33)
0.29
(3.25)
0.32
(3.71)
0.33
(4.00)
0.34
(4.18)

0.06
(0.84)
0.09
(1.07)
0.10
(1.20)
0.10
(1.27)
0.11
(1.34)

0.81
(24.86)
0.76
(18.20)
0.74
(15.78)
0.72
(14.56)
0.71
(13.88)

0.37
(7.19)
0.34
(6.63)
0.33
(6.30)
0.32
(6.18)
0.32
(6.03)

0.11
(1.76)
0.14
(2.29)
0.16
(2.54)
0.17
(2.74)
0.17
(2.85)

0.03
(0.51)
0.04
(0.63)
0.05
(0.70)
0.05
(0.74)
0.05
(0.76)

0.65
(16.27)
0.60
(13.11)
0.58
(11.92)
0.56
(11.26)
0.55
(10.76)

0.23
(2.80)
0.29
(3.89)
0.32
(4.41)
0.33
(4.77)
0.34
(5.00)

0.07
(1.06)
0.09
(1.35)
0.10
(1.48)
0.10
(1.59)
0.11
(1.65)

0.81
(30.83)
0.76
(22.68)
0.74
(19.90)
0.72
(18.13)
0.71
(17.15)

0.37
(9.26)
0.34
(8.49)
0.33
(8.21)
0.33
(7.97)
0.32
(7.81)

0.11
(2.24)
0.14
(2.95)
0.16
(3.32)
0.17
(3.51)
0.18
(3.73)

0.03
(0.63)
0.04
(0.77)
0.04
(0.87)
0.05
(0.94)
0.05
(0.95)

0.66
(21.01)
0.61
(17.09)
0.58
(15.53)
0.57
(14.57)
0.56
(14.07)

0.23
(3.51)
0.29
(4.90)
0.32
(5.56)
0.33
(6.02)
0.34
(6.33)

0.07
(1.35)
0.09
(1.70)
0.10
(1.89)
0.10
(2.00)
0.11
(2.10)

0.81
(40.35)
0.76
(29.27)
0.74
(25.85)
0.73
(23.65)
0.72
(22.38)

0.28
(1.39)
0.36
(2.02)
0.39
(2.35)
0.41
(2.57)
0.42
(2.73)

0.08
(0.57)
0.12
(0.77)
0.14
(0.87)
0.15
(0.95)
0.15
(0.99)

T = 120 months
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.9

0.28
(1.85)
0.36
(2.66)
0.40
(3.08)
0.42
(3.36)
0.43
(3.56)

0.08
(0.79)
0.12
(1.07)
0.14
(1.22)
0.15
(1.31)
0.15
(1.39)

T = 240 months
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.9

0.29
(2.61)
0.37
(3.74)
0.40
(4.33)
0.42
(4.67)
0.43
(4.99)

0.08
(1.12)
0.12
(1.49)
0.14
(1.69)
0.15
(1.82)
0.15
(1.92)

T = 360 months
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.9

0.28
(3.13)
0.37
(4.48)
0.40
(5.17)
0.42
(5.71)
0.43
(6.01)

0.08
(1.40)
0.12
(1.85)
0.14
(2.08)
0.15
(2.25)
0.15
(2.39)

T = 600 months
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.9

31

0.28
(3.89)
0.37
(5.64)
0.40
(6.55)
0.42
(7.12)
0.44
(7.54)

0.08
(1.78)
0.12
(2.36)
0.13
(2.66)
0.15
(2.89)
0.15
(3.04)

Table 2
Time-series Summary Statistics
The table contains the summary statistics for the implied risk premia and the return volatility for each of the G-7 countries. The statistics are computed over the period 1981-2002 for the
United States and over 1990-2002 for the other countries (For Italy, the time series of implied risk premia starts in July 1990). The implied risk premia are computed as the difference
between the cost of equity computed from a discounted cash flow model that uses analyst forecasts of earnings and the yield on the country’s 10-year government bond (except for Italy,
where we use the yield on the 7-year bond). Standard deviation of returns is the annualized standard deviation of the daily market returns computed over the previous month, where the
‘market’ is the CRSP value-weighted index for the United States and the MSCI index for other countries. Data for the United States is obtained from COMPUSTAT, CRSP and I/B/E/S.
Data on other countries is obtained from Worldscope, Datastream and I/B/E/S. N is the average across months of the number of firms for which the implied cost of capital is available.

Country
N

Equal-Weighted Risk Premia
Min
Mean
Max
Std. Dev.

Value-Weighted Risk Premia
Min
Mean
Max
Std. Dev.

Standard Deviation of Returns
Min
Mean
Max
Std. Dev.

CANADA

275

0.019

0.081

0.128

0.025

0.002

0.047

0.092

0.016

0.057

0.137

0.421

0.076

FRANCE

308

0.005

0.057

0.106

0.023

0.002

0.029

0.055

0.010

0.064

0.188

0.544

0.083

GERMANY

279

-0.047

0.048

0.164

0.046

-0.047

0.016

0.072

0.019

0.057

0.194

0.623

0.105

ITALY

115

-0.056

0.042

0.126

0.043

-0.076

0.006

0.067

0.036

0.069

0.208

0.499

0.078

JAPAN

960

-0.039

0.054

0.152

0.056

-0.034

0.031

0.091

0.033

0.079

0.194

0.519

0.082

UK

787

0.020

0.070

0.127

0.024

-0.007

0.029

0.061

0.011

0.064

0.148

0.476

0.069

USA

1795

0.009

0.046

0.078

0.014

-0.002

0.026

0.062

0.010

0.045

0.137

0.783

0.076

Table 3
Predictive Regressions Involving Realized Excess Returns and Volatility
The table contains the results of time-series regressions using monthly data over the period
1981-2002 for the United States and over 1990-2002 for the other countries. Rt is the monthly
excess return (in excess of the risk-free rate) on the CRSP value-weighted index for the United
States, or the monthly excess return on the Morgan Stanley Country Index (MSCI) for the
other G-7 countries. Rf is the one-month risk-free rate. σt is the square root of 21 times the
standard deviation of the daily returns on the market, computed over the previous month,
where the ‘market’ is the CRSP value-weighted index for the United States and the MSCI
index for other countries. Data for the United States are obtained from COMPUSTAT, CRSP
and I/B/E/S. Data for other countries are obtained from Worldscope, Datastream and I/B/E/S.
The numbers in parentheses are t-statistics computed using the Newey-West correction with 1
lag of autocorrelation and also corrected for heteroskedasticity.

PANEL 1. CANADA
Rt+1-Rft+1

Intercept
0.003
(0.60)

σt

2

0.026
(0.01)

Adj. R2
-0.65%

Intercept
0.002
(0.22)

Adj. R
-0.62%

2

Intercept
0.005
(0.45)

Adj. R
-0.30%

2

Intercept
0.010
(1.02)

2

Intercept
-0.017
(-1.04)

σt
0.024
(0.10)

Adj. R2
-0.64%

PANEL 2. FRANCE
Rt+1-Rft+1

Intercept
0.004
(0.61)

σt

2

-0.278
(-0.25)

PANEL 3. GERMANY
Intercept
σt 2
Rt+1-Rft+1

0.005
(0.84)

-0.743
(-0.66)

σt
-0.039
(-0.21)

σt
-0.145
(-0.79)

2

Adj. R
-0.62%

2

Adj. R
-0.16%

PANEL 4. ITALY
Rt+1-Rft+1

Intercept
-0.006
(-0.71)

σt 2
1.768
(1.09)

Adj. R
0.00%

σt
0.290
(1.17)

2

Adj. R
0.11%

PANEL 5. JAPAN
Rt+1-Rft+1

Intercept
-0.012
(-1.76)

σt

2

1.501
(1.01)

2

Adj. R
0.08%

PANEL 6. UNITED KINGDOM
2
2
Adj. R
Intercept
σt
Rt+1-Rft+1

0.000
(0.07)

0.451
(0.33)

-0.58%

PANEL 7. UNITED STATES
2
Adj. R2
Intercept
σt
Rt+1-Rft+1

0.007
(2.46)

-0.906
(-1.35)

0.15%

Intercept
-0.018
(-1.65)
Intercept
-0.001
(-0.16)
Intercept
0.008
(1.48)

σt
0.207
(1.04)

σt
0.057
(0.37)

σt
-0.079
(-0.52)

2

Adj. R
-0.02%

2

Adj. R
-0.58%

Adj. R2
-0.24%

Table 4
Volatility and Equal-Weighted Risk Premia
The table contains the results of time-series regressions using monthly data over the period 1981-2002 for the United States and over 1990-2002 for the other countries. (For Italy,
the time series of the implied risk premia starts in July 1990). µt is the equal-weighted average annual implied risk premium. σt is the square root of 252 times the standard
deviation of the daily returns on the market, computed over the previous month, where the ‘market’ is the CRSP value-weighted index for the United States and the MSCI index
for other countries. εµt ( εσt) is the residual from an AR (1) model for expected premia (standard deviation). Data for the United States are obtained from COMPUSTAT, CRSP and
I/B/E/S. Data for other countries are obtained from Worldscope, Datastream and I/B/E/S. The numbers in parentheses are t-statistics computed using the Newey-West correction
with 12 lags of autocorrelation in the first specification and 1 lag of autocorrelation in other specifications and also corrected for heteroskedasticity.

PANEL 1. CANADA
Intercept

σ t2

∆σ t2

µt

0.07
(10.38)

0.36
(3.83)

µt

0.01
(3.00)

0.04
(2.35)

µt

0.00
(2.67)

0.05
(2.00)

∆µ t

0.00
(0.95)

0.05
(2.02)

ε µt

0.00
(0.00)

µt-1

ε σ2 t

Adj. R2

Intercept

σt

∆σ t

18.65%

µt

0.06
(6.09)

0.16
(3.98)

0.93
(39.60)

92.59%

µt

0.00
(2.55)

0.02
(2.10)

0.95
(47.45)

92.63%

µt

0.00
(2.70)

0.02
(1.95)

2.58%

∆µ t

0.00
(0.93)

0.02
(1.96)

0.06
(2.45)

3.15%

ε µt

0.00
(0.00)

ε σ2 t

Adj. R2

µt-1

ε σt

Adj. R2
24.80%

0.93
(37.54)

92.58%

0.95
(47.66)

92.61%

2.30%

0.03
(2.31)

2.84%

ε σt

Adj. R2

PANEL 2. FRANCE
Intercept

σ t2

∆σ t2

µt

0.05
(8.04)

0.24
(6.31)

µt

0.00
(2.33)

0.04
(4.26)

µt

0.00
(2.08)

0.05
(3.24)

∆µ t

0.00
(0.94)

0.06
(3.47)

ε µt

0.00
(0.00)

µt-1

Intercept

σt

∆σ t

21.95%

µt

0.03
(4.75)

0.14
(8.39)

0.92
(38.24)

92.23%

µt

0.00
(0.65)

0.02
(3.38)

0.96
(42.01)

92.33%

µt

0.00
(2.11)

0.02
(2.68)

8.46%

∆µ t

0.00
(0.92)

0.03
(2.88)

0.07
(4.15)

10.10%

ε µt

0.00
(0.00)

ε σ2 t

Adj. R2

µt-1

25.96%

0.91
(37.78)

92.13%

0.96
(41.01)

92.12%

5.79%

0.03
(3.10)

7.23%

ε σt

Adj. R2

PANEL 3. GERMANY
Intercept

σ t2

µt

0.03
(2.88)

0.38
(6.66)

µt

0.00
(0.75)

0.01
(0.78)

µt

0.00
(1.01)

∆µ t

ε µt

∆σ t2

0.03
(3.09)

0.00

0.03

(1.36)

(3.12)

µt-1

Intercept

σt

24.01%

µt

0.00
(0.20)

0.24
(5.04)

0.99
(47.10)

96.92%

µt

0.00
(0.19)

0.01
(0.68)

1.00
(52.99)

97.02%

µt

0.00
(1.02)

3.14%

∆µ t

0.00

0.03

(0.00)

(2.36)

2.16%

ε µt

∆σ t

µt-1

28.18%

0.02
(2.40)

0.00

0.02

(1.35)

(2.41)

0.99
(47.26)

96.92%

1.00
(52.71)

96.99%

1.96%

0.00

0.02

(0.00)

(2.01)

1.39%

PANEL 4. ITALY
Intercept

σ t2

µt

0.03
(2.42)

0.23
(2.20)

µt

0.00
(1.51)

-0.01
(-0.56)

µt

∆µ t

ε µt

∆σ t2

µt-1

ε σ2 t

2

Adj. R

Intercept

σt

4.03%

µt

0.02
(1.04)

0.11
(1.74)

0.97
(39.09)

93.13%

µt

0.00
(1.29)

-0.01
(-0.64)

93.11%

µt

0.00

0.00

0.97

(1.41)

(-0.15)

(38.99)

0.00
(1.07)

0.00
(-0.17)

0.00

-0.01

(0.01)

(-0.37)

-0.66%

∆µ t

-0.55%

ε µt

∆σ t

µt-1

ε σt

2

Adj. R

3.27%

0.97
(39.46)

93.13%

93.11%

0.00

0.00

0.97

(1.41)

(-0.11)

(39.03)

0.00
(1.07)

0.00
(-0.13)

-0.67%

0.00

-0.01

(0.01)

(-0.37)

-0.57%

Table 4 Continued

PANEL 5. JAPAN
Intercept

σ t2

∆σ t2

µt

0.05
(3.88)

-0.02
(-0.13)

µt

0.00
(1.38)

0.01
(0.49)

µt

0.00
(2.09)

0.02
(1.86)

∆µ t

0.00
(1.78)

0.02
(1.88)

ε µt

0.00
(0.00)

µt-1

ε σ2 t

Adj. R2

Intercept

σt

∆σ t

-0.63%

µt

0.04
(3.10)

0.05
(0.63)

0.99
(89.33)

98.17%

µt

0.00
(0.57)

0.00
(0.59)

0.99
(89.10)

98.19%

µt

0.00
(2.07)

0.01
(1.76)

0.38%

∆µ t

0.00
(1.77)

0.01
(1.78)

0.01
(0.97)

-0.30%

ε µt

0.00
(0.00)

ε σ2 t

Adj. R2

µt-1

ε σt

Adj. R2
-0.16%

0.99
(88.39)

98.17%

0.99
(89.18)

98.19%

0.56%

0.01
(1.16)

-0.06%

ε σt

Adj. R2

PANEL 6. UNITED KINGDOM
Intercept

σ t2

∆σ t2

µt

0.06
(10.15)

0.47
(7.23)

µt

0.00
(2.50)

0.08
(3.05)

µt

0.00
(1.49)

0.11
(4.82)

∆µ t

0.00
(1.06)

0.11
(5.11)

ε µt

0.00
(0.00)

µt-1

Intercept

σt

∆σ t

33.87%

µt

0.04
(7.13)

0.23
(14.06)

0.92
(34.99)

93.66%

µt

0.00
(0.89)

0.04
(3.38)

0.97
(51.04)

94.28%

µt

0.00
(1.48)

0.05
(5.17)

18.35%

∆µ t

0.00
(1.03)

0.05
(5.43)

0.12
(4.52)

17.58%

ε µt

0.00
(0.00)

ε σ2 t

Adj. R2

µt-1

40.14%

0.91
(31.77)

93.70%

0.97
(50.50)

94.31%

18.81%

0.06
(5.12)

18.55%

ε σt

Adj. R2

PANEL 7. UNITED STATES
Intercept

σ t2

∆σ t2

µt

0.04
(15.94)

0.09
(1.78)

µt

0.00
(3.18)

0.05
(11.15)

µt

0.00
(2.77)

0.03
(2.22)

∆µ t

0.00
(0.20)

0.03
(2.38)

ε µt

0.00
(0.00)

µt-1

Intercept

σt

∆σ t

8.83%

µt

0.04
(9.01)

0.07
(3.18)

0.89
(34.78)

85.91%

µt

0.00
(1.77)

0.03
(3.43)

0.93
(35.91)

84.52%

µt

0.00
(2.83)

0.02
(2.68)

8.11%

∆µ t

0.00
(0.20)

0.02
(2.83)

14.99%

ε µt

0.00
(0.00)

0.05
(10.53)

µt-1

16.33%

0.87
(28.14)

85.23%

0.93
(36.42)

84.54%

8.16%

0.03
(4.01)

11.79%

Table 5
Volatility and Value-Weighted Risk Premia
The table contains the results of time-series regressions using monthly data over the period 1981-2002 for the United States and over 1990-2002 for the other countries. (For Italy,
the time series of the implied risk premia starts in July 1990). µt is the value-weighted average annual implied risk premium. σt is the square root of 252 times the standard
deviation of the daily returns on the market, computed over the previous month, where the ‘market’ is the CRSP value-weighted index for the United States and the MSCI index
for other countries. εµt (εσt) is the residual from an AR (1) model for expected premia (standard deviation). Data for the United States are obtained from COMPUSTAT, CRSP
and I/B/E/S. Data for other countries are obtained from Worldscope, Datastream and I/B/E/S. The numbers in parentheses are t-statistics computed using the Newey-West
correction with 12 lags of autocorrelation in the first specification and 1 lag of autocorrelation in other specifications and also corrected for heteroskedasticity.

PANEL 1. CANADA
Intercept

µt

µt

µt

∆µ t

ε µt

σ t2

0.05

0.08

(8.64)

(1.01)

∆σ t2

µ t-1

ε σ2 t

Adj. R2
1.69%

0.01

0.01

0.87

(3.20)

(0.40)

(21.85)

0.01

0.03

0.88

(3.23)

(1.19)

(22.29)

0.00

0.03

(0.74)

(1.09)

80.28%

80.42%

0.06%

0.00

0.02

(0.00)

(1.03)

-0.05%

Intercept

µt

µt

µt

∆µ t

ε µt

σt

0.04

0.04

(5.28)

(1.06)

∆σ t

µ t-1

ε σt

Adj. R2
2.68%

0.01

0.00

0.87

(3.05)

(0.30)

(21.59)

0.01

0.01

0.87

(3.24)

(1.30)

(22.31)

0.00

0.01

(0.74)

(1.15)

80.28%

80.44%

0.10%

0.00

0.01

(0.00)

(1.14)

0.06%

PANEL 2. FRANCE
Intercept

µt

µt

µt

∆µ t

ε µt

σ t2

0.02

0.12

(11.62)

(9.17)

µt

µt

∆µ t

ε µt

µ t-1

ε σ2 t

0.00

0.03

0.81

(3.97)

(20.18)

0.00

0.03

0.90

(2.64)

(2.38)

(24.32)

0.00

0.03

(0.45)

(2.90)

78.16%

77.37%

4.41%

0.00

0.04

(0.00)

(3.34)

0.01

0.16

(1.99)

(5.26)

Adj. R2
30.38%

(3.49)

PANEL 3. GERMANY
σ t2
Intercept
µt

∆σ t2

∆σ t2

µ t-1

ε σ2 t

6.46%

0.00

0.03

0.87

(1.70)

(17.26)

0.00

0.01

0.92

(1.87)

(0.66)

(19.52)

0.00

0.01

(0.97)

(0.66)

83.08%

82.61%

-0.18%

0.00

0.02

(0.00)

(1.08)

µt

µt

µt

∆µ t

ε µt

Adj. R2
26.41%

(1.34)

Intercept

0.81%

0.02

0.07

(5.52)

(5.33)

µt

µt

∆µ t

ε µt

∆σ t

µ t-1

ε σt

0.00

0.02

0.82

(3.35)

(20.31)

0.00

0.01

0.90

(2.71)

(1.96)

(24.16)

0.00

0.01

(0.44)

(2.23)

77.85%

77.04%

2.80%

0.00

0.02

(0.00)

(2.51)

σt

0.00

0.09

(-0.48)

(3.59)

Adj. R2
29.93%

(1.77)

Intercept

µt

σt

∆σ t

µ t-1

ε σt

4.66%

Adj. R2
26.24%

0.00

0.02

0.87

(-0.40)

(1.74)

(17.52)

0.00

0.01

0.92

(1.88)

(0.69)

(19.57)

0.00

0.01

(0.97)

(0.65)

83.06%

82.60%

-0.22%

0.00

0.01

(0.00)

(1.06)

0.67%

PANEL 4. ITALY
Intercept

µt

µt

µt

∆µ t

ε µt

σt

2

0.00

0.20

(-0.35)

(2.40)

∆σ t

2

µ t-1

ε σ2 t

Adj. R2
4.25%

0.00

-0.01

0.96

(1.47)

(-0.57)

(38.82)

0.00

0.00

0.96

(1.39)

(0.19)

(39.49)

0.00

0.00

(1.17)

(0.17)

93.28%

93.26%

-0.66%

0.00

-0.01

(0.01)

(-0.21)

-0.64%

Intercept

µt

µt

µt

∆µ t

ε µt

σt

-0.01

0.09

(-0.87)

(1.75)

∆σ t

µ t-1

ε σt

Adj. R2
3.24%

0.00

-0.01

0.96

(1.26)

(-0.75)

(39.30)

0.00

0.00

0.96

(1.39)

(0.23)

(39.50)

0.00

0.00

(1.17)

(0.20)

93.29%

93.26%

-0.65%

0.00

0.00

(0.01)

(-0.25)

-0.63%

Table 5 Continued

PANEL 5. JAPAN
Intercept

µt

µt

µt

∆µ t

ε µt

σ t2

0.03

-0.04

(4.22)

(-0.47)

∆σ t2

µt

µt

∆µ t

ε µt

0.00

0.00

0.98

(1.80)

(0.02)

(61.40)

0.00

0.02

0.98

(2.33)

(1.77)

(61.58)

0.00

0.02

(1.49)

(1.81)

µt

µt

∆µ t

ε µt

95.76%

0.63%

0.00

0.01
(0.64)

0.02

0.20

(10.00)

(8.21)

µ t-1

ε σ2 t

0.01

0.08

0.68

(3.17)

(6.67)

0.01

0.06

0.79

(2.57)

(1.90)

(9.63)

0.00

0.07

(0.54)

(2.13)

61.58%

5.04%

0.00

0.09
(2.95)

0.04
(1.17)

∆σ t2

µ t-1

ε σ2 t

7.54%

0.00

0.03

0.84

(6.75)

(20.52)

0.00

0.02

0.86

(3.20)

(1.70)

(19.55)

0.00

0.02

(0.45)

(1.83)

72.39%

70.75%

3.49%

0.00

0.03

(0.00)

(6.99)

µt

µt

µt

∆µ t

ε µt

µt

µt

µt

∆µ t

ε µt

7.35%

0.03

0.01
(0.17)

µt

µt

∆µ t

ε µt

∆σ t

µ t-1

ε σt

0.00

0.00

0.98

(-0.08)

(61.49)

0.00

0.01

0.98

(2.34)

(1.60)

(61.79)

0.00

0.01

(1.48)

(1.62)

95.71%

95.77%

0.88%

0.00

0.00

(0.00)

(0.73)

σt

0.02

0.09

(4.84)

(5.97)

∆σ t

µ t-1

ε σt

0.00

0.04

0.68

(3.18)

(6.62)

0.01

0.04

0.80

(2.58)

(2.62)

(9.97)

0.00

0.04

(0.52)

(2.71)

62.78%

8.15%

0.00

0.05
(3.47)

0.02

0.03
(1.42)

Adj. R2

63.53%

(0.00)

(7.11)

-0.37%

27.69%

(2.15)

σt

Adj. R2
-0.61%

(1.27)

Intercept

µt

σt

(3.26)

Intercept

Adj. R2
2.41%

(2.90)

Intercept

Adj. R2

63.28%

(0.00)

0.03

-0.48%

27.43%

(2.90)

(14.61)

Adj. R2

95.71%

(0.00)

PANEL 7. UNITED STATES
σ t2
Intercept
µt

ε σ2 t

-0.36%

PANEL 6. UNITED KINGDOM
σ t2
∆σ t2
Intercept
µt

µ t-1

∆σ t

µ t-1

ε σt

10.39%

Adj. R2
4.24%

0.00

0.02

0.83

(1.76)

(2.67)

(19.43)

0.00

0.01

0.85

(3.27)

(1.66)

(19.65)

0.00

0.01

(0.45)

(1.77)

71.61%

70.60%

2.81%

0.00

0.02

(0.00)

(2.71)

4.71%

Table 6
Correlations Matrix
The table contains the Spearman correlation coefficients and the corresponding p-values for the test that correlations are zero across implied risk premia
and the measures of volatility of returns for each of the G-7 countries. The statistics are computed over the period 1981-2002 for the United States and over
1990-2002 for the other countries. (For Italy, the time series of implied risk premia starts in July 1990). µt is the average (equal- or value-weighted) annual
implied risk premium. σt is the square root of 252 times the standard deviation of the daily returns on the market, computed over the previous month,
where the ‘market’ is the CRSP value-weighted index for the United States and the MSCI index for other countries. Data for the United States are obtained
from COMPUSTAT, CRSP, and I/B/E/S. Data for other countries are obtained from Worldscope, Datastream and I/B/E/S. The equal-weighted average is
a simple arithmetic average of the individual firm risk premia while the value-weighted average is based on the market cap as of the most recent year-end.

PANEL 1. CANADA
Equal-Weighted Risk Premia
σt
σt2
∆µt
µt

∆σt

∆σt2

0.55

0.08

0.00

-0.01

<.0001

0.35

0.99

0.86

1.00
<.0001

0.01
0.89

0.27
0.00

0.23
0.00

σt

0.01
0.89

0.27
0.00

0.23
0.00

σt2

0.09
0.25

0.08
0.32

∆µt

0.99
<.0001

∆σt

σt2

∆µt

∆σt
PANEL 2. FRANCE
Equal-Weighted Risk Premia
σt
σt2
∆µt

σt

0.09

0.01

0.03

0.29

0.86

0.72

1.00

1.00
<.0001

0.02
0.79

0.38
<.0001

0.39
<.0001

σt

1.00

0.02
0.79

0.38
<.0001

0.39
<.0001

σt2

1.00

0.20
0.01

0.22
0.01

∆µt

1.00

0.99
<.0001

∆σt

∆σt

∆σt2

∆σt
PANEL 3. GERMANY
Equal-Weighted Risk Premia
σt2
∆µt
σt

σt2

∆µt

∆σt

µt

0.52
<.0001

µt

0.50

0.50

0.14

0.02

0.02

<.0001

0.07

0.78

0.77

1.00

1.00
<.0001

0.04
0.60

0.31
<.0001

0.29
0.00

σt

1.00

0.04
0.60

0.31
<.0001

0.29
0.00

σt2

1.00

0.15
0.05

0.16
0.05

∆µt

1.00

0.99
<.0001

∆σt

∆σt2

0.20

0.20

0.05

0.04

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.56

0.62

1.00

1.00
<.0001

-0.04
0.60

0.27
0.00

0.23
0.00

1.00

-0.04
0.60

0.27
0.00

0.23
0.00

1.00

0.03
0.75

0.01
0.94

1.00

0.99
<.0001

∆σt

∆σt2

0.38

0.38

0.25

0.04

0.05

<.0001

<.0001

0.00

0.60

0.54

1.00

1.00
<.0001

-0.01
0.88

0.38
<.0001

0.39
<.0001

1.00

-0.01
0.88

0.38
<.0001

0.39
<.0001

1.00

0.11
0.16

0.12
0.12

1.00

0.99
<.0001

∆σt

∆σt2

Value-Weighted Risk Premia
σt
σt2
∆µt

<.0001

∆σt

0.20

Value-Weighted Risk Premia
σt
σt2
∆µt

∆σt2

0.52

∆µt

σt

∆σt

<.0001

σt2

µt

µt

0.55
<.0001

σt

µt

Value-Weighted Risk Premia
σt
σt2
∆µt

0.45

0.45

0.09

0.01

0.01

<.0001

<.0001

0.25

0.88

0.87

1.00

1.00
<.0001

0.08
0.34

0.31
<.0001

0.29
0.00

1.00

0.08
0.34

0.31
<.0001

0.29
0.00

1.00

0.18
0.02

0.18
0.02

1.00

0.99
<.0001

Table 6 continued

PANEL 4. ITALY
Equal-Weighted Risk Premia
σt
σt2
∆µt
µt

σt

0.11

-0.02

-0.01

0.12

0.17

0.80

0.95

1.00

1.00
<.0001

-0.09
0.2599

0.37
<.0001

0.35
<.0001

σt

1.00

-0.09
0.26

0.37
<.0001

0.35
<.0001

σt2

1.00

-0.02

-0.03

∆µt

0.81

0.74

1.00

0.99
<.0001

∆σt

∆σt2

PANEL 5. JAPAN
Equal-Weighted Risk Premia
σt
σt2
∆µt
0.13

-0.03

-0.03

0.01

0.11

0.72

0.69

1.00

1.00
<.0001

0.05
0.58

0.49
<.0001

0.48
<.0001

σt

1.00

0.05
0.58

0.49
<.0001

0.48
<.0001

σt2

1.00

0.08
0.32

0.08
0.30

∆µt

1.00

0.99
<.0001

∆σt

∆σt

∆σt2

∆µt

∆σt
PANEL 6. UNITED KINGDOM
Equal-Weighted Risk Premia
σt
σt2
∆µt
0.60

0.10

0.02

0.02

<.0001

0.21

0.80

0.84

1.00

1.00
<.0001

0.06
0.46

0.36
<.0001

0.36
<.0001

σt

1.00

0.06
0.46

0.36
<.0001

0.36
<.0001

σt2

1.00

0.32
<.0001

0.33
<.0001

∆µt

1.00

0.99
<.0001

∆σt

∆σt

∆σt2

∆σt
PANEL 7. UNITED STATES
Equal-Weighted Risk Premia
σt
σt2
∆µt

σt

σt2

∆µt

∆σt

µt

0.60

∆µt

0.15

0.07

-0.02

0.00

0.06

0.37

0.81

1.00

1.00

1.00
<.0001

-0.09
0.27

0.37
<.0001

0.35
<.0001

1.00

-0.09
0.27

0.37
<.0001

0.35
<.0001

1.00

0.01

0.01

0.88

0.88

1.00

0.99
<.0001

∆σt

∆σt2

0.20

0.20

0.18

-0.03

-0.03

0.01

0.01

0.02

0.74

0.67

1.00

1.00
<.0001

-0.05
0.51

0.49
<.0001

0.48
<.0001

1.00

-0.05
0.51

0.49
<.0001

0.48
<.0001

1.00

0.08
0.32

0.08
0.33

1.00

0.99
<.0001

∆σt

∆σt2

Value-Weighted Risk Premia
σt
σt2
∆µt

<.0001

σt2

µt

µt

0.20

0.44

0.44

0.28

0.07

0.07

<.0001

<.0001

0.00

0.37

0.42

1.00

1.00
<.0001

0.08
0.31

0.36
<.0001

0.36
<.0001

1.00

0.08
0.31

0.36
<.0001

0.36
<.0001

1.00

0.21
0.01

0.23
0.00

1.00

0.99
<.0001

∆σt

∆σt2

Value-Weighted Risk Premia
σt
σt2
∆µt
µt

0.37

0.37

0.18

0.00

0.00

<.0001

<.0001

0.00

0.95

0.96

1.00

1.00
<.0001

0.06
0.35

0.31
<.0001

0.29
<.0001

σt

1.00

0.06
0.35

0.31
<.0001

0.29
<.0001

σt2

1.00

0.11
0.08

0.11
0.07

∆µt

1.00

0.99
<.0001

∆σt

∆σt2

0.06

Value-Weighted Risk Premia
σt
σt2
∆µt

0.01

∆σt

0.15

∆σt

0.20

σt2

σt

µt

0.13

∆σt

µt

Value-Weighted Risk Premia
σt
σt2
∆µt

0.12

∆µt

σt

∆σt2

0.13

σt2

µt

∆σt

0.10

0.10

0.29

-0.03

-0.03

0.12

0.12

<.0001

0.60

0.63

1.00

1.00
<.0001

0.04
0.50

0.31
<.0001

0.29
<.0001

1.00

0.04
0.50

0.31
<.0001

0.29
<.0001

1.00

0.03
0.68

0.02
0.70

1.00

0.99
<.0001

Table 7
U.S. Implied Premium Regressed on U.S. Implied Volatility (1986-2002)
This table reports the slope coeﬃcients from the time series regressions in equations (24) through (28) for
the U.S. stock market between January 1986 through December 2002. Return volatility σt is the implied
volatility from month t, measured as the VXO index. The t-statistics are adjusted for residual autocorrelation
using the Newey-West correction.

σ2
EW

σ
VW

EW

VW

(2)

Equation (24): μt = a + b σt + et
b̂
t
R2

0.11
4.37
0.25

0.04
1.89
0.06

0.06
3.95
0.27

0.02
1.21
0.03

(2)

Equation (25): μt = a + b σt + cμt−1 + et
b̂
t
R2

0.06
8.32
0.80

0.04
6.19
0.75

0.03
6.60
0.78

0.02
4.45
0.72

(2)

Equation (26): μt = a + b Δσt + cμt−1 + et
b̂
t
R2

0.08
9.63
0.81

0.07
9.00
0.78

0.06
9.42
0.81

0.05
9.15
0.78
(2)

Equation (27): Δμt = a + b Δσt + et
b̂
t
R2

0.09
10.47
0.35

0.07
9.77
0.32

0.06
10.17
0.34

Equation (28):
b̂
t
R2

0.09
11.24
0.38

0.08
9.64
0.31

μ,t

=a+b

V,t

0.06
10.37
0.35

38

0.05
9.84
0.32
+ et
0.05
9.24
0.29

Table 8
U.S. Implied Premium Regressed on U.S. Implied Volatility (1986-2002),
Controlling for Hedging Demands
This table reports the slope coeﬃcients from the time series regressions in the counterparts of equations (24)
through (28) for the U.S. stock market between January 1986 through December 2002. Return volatility σt is
the implied volatility from month t, measured as the VXO index. Hedging demands (Ht ) are proxied by ﬁve
variables: the excess return on the 30-year Treasury bond, the default spread, the term spread, the detrended
risk-free rate, and the dividend-price ratio. The t-statistics are adjusted for residual autocorrelation using
the Newey-West correction.

σ2
EW

σ
VW

EW

VW
(2)

Eq. (24) with hedging demands: μt = a + b σt + hHt + et
b̂
t
R2

0.09
4.58
0.46

0.04
1.77
0.17

0.05
3.89
0.44

0.01
1.14
0.16
(2)

Eq. (25) with hedging demands: μt = a + b σt + cμt−1 + hHt + et
b̂
t
R2

0.06
8.40
0.86

0.04
6.50
0.82

0.03
7.06
0.85

0.02
5.40
0.81
(2)

Eq. (26) with hedging demands: μt = a + b Δσt + cμt−1 + hHt + et
b̂
t
R2

0.07
9.03
0.86

0.06
8.71
0.84

0.05
9.42
0.87

0.04
9.51
0.85
(2)

Eq. (27) with hedging demands: Δμt = a + b Δσt + hΔHt + et
b̂
t
R2

0.03
4.21
0.68

0.02
3.42
0.65

0.02
4.22
0.69

Eq. (28) with hedging demands:
b̂
t
R2

0.08
7.47
0.41

0.06
5.97
0.35

μ,t

=a+b

0.05
6.56
0.38

39

0.02
3.80
0.65
V,t

+h

H,t

+ et

0.04
5.53
0.34

Table 9
Aggregate G-7 Risk Premia and World Market Volatility
The table contains the results of time-series regressions using monthly data over the period July 1990 to December 2002. µt is the ‘G-7 risk premium’, computed as a simple
cross-sectional average of the annual implied risk premiums in the G-7 countries. σt is the ‘world volatility’, computed as the square root of 252 times the standard deviation of
the daily returns on the market, computed over the previous month, where the ‘market’ is the MSCI World index. εµt (εσt) is the residual from an AR (1) model for the implied

premium (standard deviation). Data for the United States are obtained from COMPUSTAT, CRSP, and I/B/E/S. Data for other countries are obtained from Worldscope,
Datastream, and I/B/E/S. The numbers in parentheses are t-statistics computed using the Newey-West correction with 12 lags of autocorrelation in the first specification and 1 lag
of autocorrelation in other specifications and also corrected for heteroskedasticity.

PANEL 1A. World Regressions with Month-End World Volatility and Average EW Risk Premia
Intercept

µt
µt
µt
∆µt
εµt

σt 2

0.05

0.67

(8.40)

(3.67)

∆σt2

µt-1

εσ2 t

2

Adj. R

16.71%

0.00

0.10

0.97

(1.06)

(3.65)

(59.54)

0.00

0.09

0.99

(1.39)

(2.70)

(73.82)

0.00

0.09

(1.88)

(2.72)

97.90%
97.83%
10.89%

0.00
(0.00)

0.12
(3.49)

15.31%

Intercept

µt
µt
µt
∆µt
εµt

σt

0.03

0.23

(5.11)

(3.27)

∆σt

µt-1

εσt

2

Adj. R

19.38%

0.00

0.03

0.97

(-0.71)

(3.19)

(58.41)

0.00

0.03

0.99

(1.42)

(2.43)

(71.96)

0.00

0.03

(1.85)

(2.45)

97.82%
97.77%
8.25%

0.00
(0.00)

0.03
(3.04)

11.61%

εσt

Adj. R2

PANEL 1B. World Regressions with Month-End World Volatility and Average VW Risk Premia
Intercept

σt 2

∆σt2

µt

0.02
(7.87)

0.30
(2.39)

µt

0.00
(1.41)

0.05
(2.52)

µt

0.00
(2.18)

0.03
(1.18)

∆µt

0.00
(1.66)

0.03
(1.24)

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

µt-1

εσ2 t

Adj. R2

Intercept

σt

∆σt

11.70%

µt

0.02
(3.75)

0.09
(2.01)

0.95
(49.27)

95.29%

µt

0.00
(-0.12)

0.01
(2.17)

0.97
(51.23)

95.05%

µt

0.00
(2.22)

0.01
(0.94)

2.28%

∆µt

0.00
(1.64)

0.01
(0.98)

5.37%

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

0.05
(1.92)

µt-1

11.52%
0.96
(49.48)

95.19%

0.97
(50.91)

95.00%
1.12%
0.02
(1.49)

3.28%

εσt

Adj. R2

PANEL 2A. World Regressions with Mid-Month World Volatility and Average EW Risk Premia
Intercept

σt 2

∆σt2

µt

0.05
(8.21)

0.60
(3.98)

µt

0.00
(1.37)

0.04
(1.93)

µt

0.00
(1.54)

0.05
(2.06)

∆µt

0.00
(1.86)

0.05
(2.06)

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

µt-1

εσ2 t

Adj. R2

Intercept

σt

∆σt

15.25%

µt

0.03
(5.68)

0.22
(3.26)

0.98
(71.19)

97.63%

µt

0.00
(0.30)

0.01
(1.91)

0.99
(69.67)

97.65%

µt

0.00
(1.54)

0.02
(2.02)

3.34%

∆µt

0.00
(1.85)

0.02
(2.02)

3.63%

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

0.06
(2.03)

µt-1

18.47%
0.98
(70.66)

97.62%

0.99
(69.40)

97.64%
3.03%
0.02
(2.00)

3.45%

εσt

Adj. R2

PANEL 2B. World Regressions with Mid-Month World Volatility and Average VW Risk Premia
Intercept

σt 2

∆σt2

µt

0.02
(7.69)

0.28
(2.80)

µt

0.00
(2.00)

0.02
(1.06)

µt

0.00
(2.38)

0.01
(0.76)

∆µt

0.00
(1.64)

0.02
(0.76)

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

µt-1

εσ2 t

Adj. R2

Intercept

σt

∆σt

11.51%

µt

0.02
(4.14)

0.09
(2.09)

0.96
(53.45)

94.97%

µt

0.00
(0.77)

0.01
(1.15)

0.97
(52.28)

94.95%

µt

0.00
(2.38)

0.01
(0.95)

0.05%

∆µt

0.00
(1.64)

0.01
(0.95)

0.51%

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

0.02
(0.96)

µt-1

11.23%
0.96
(53.54)

94.98%

0.97
(52.31)

94.96%
0.25%
0.01
(1.11)

0.72%

Table 10
Country Risk Premia and World Market Volatility

The table contains the results of time-series regressions using monthly data over the period July 1990 to December 2002. µt is the individual country implied risk
premium. σt is the ‘world volatility’, computed as the square root of 252 times the standard deviation of the daily returns on the market, computed over the previous

month, where the ‘market’ is the MSCI World index. εµt (εσt) is the residual from an AR (1) model for the implied premium (standard deviation). Data for the United
States are obtained from COMPUSTAT, CRSP, and I/B/E/S. Data for other countries are obtained from Worldscope, Datastream, and I/B/E/S. The numbers in
parentheses are t-statistics computed using the Newey-West correction with 12 lags of autocorrelation in the first specification and 1 lag of autocorrelation in other
specifications and also corrected for heteroskedasticity.

PANEL 1. CANADA
Equal-Weighted Risk Premia
σt2
∆σt2
µt-1
Intercept
µt

µt

µt

∆µt

εµt

0.08

0.29

(12.72)

(2.09)

ε σ2 t

Adj. R

2

3.86%

0.00

0.06

0.94

(2.45)

(2.22)

(44.13)

0.00

0.02

0.95

(2.68)

(0.59)

(46.81)

0.00

0.02

(0.94)

(0.63)

PANEL 2. FRANCE
Equal-Weighted Risk Premia
σt2
∆σt2
µt-1
Intercept
0.05
(10.54)

0.41
(3.62)

µt

0.00
(1.86)

0.08
(2.96)

µt

0.00
(2.12)

0.08
(2.80)

∆µt

0.00
(0.92)

0.09
(2.84)

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

0.03
(3.23)

1.04
(3.84)

µt

0.00
(0.51)

0.04
(0.83)

µt

0.00
(0.97)

0.05
(1.37)

∆µt

0.00
(1.35)

0.05
(1.37)

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

0.05
(1.47)

0.79%

ε σ2 t

Adj. R

2

Adj. R

0.05

0.01

-0.62%

(12.37)

(0.12)

0.01

0.00

0.88

(3.25)

(0.13)

(22.14)

0.01

0.00

0.88

(3.21)

(0.04)

(22.17)

0.00

0.00

(0.74)

(0.06)

Intercept

80.27%

Value-Weighted Risk Premia
σt2
∆σt2
µt-1
ε σ2 t
0.21
(3.36)

0.93
(38.71)

92.03%

0.00
(2.85)

0.05
(2.66)

0.96
(40.40)

92.09%

0.00
(2.75)

0.03
(1.42)

5.35%

0.00
(0.45)

0.03
(1.57)

0.11
(3.13)

6.27%

0.00
(0.00)

ε σ2 t

Adj. R2

Intercept

16.33%

0.01
(2.38)

0.41
(2.78)

0.99
(51.65)

96.93%

0.00
(1.27)

0.05
(0.91)

1.00
(51.17)

96.95%

0.00
(1.87)

0.00
(0.01)

0.65%

0.00
(0.96)

0.00
(-0.00)

0.50%

0.00
(0.00)

0.05
(1.01)

80.27%

0.00
(0.09)

0.03
(15.12)

2

-0.65%

0.00
(0.00)

10.11%

PANEL 3. GERMANY
Equal-Weighted Risk Premia
σt2
∆σt2
µt-1
Intercept
µt

92.43%

-0.22%

0.00
(0.00)

µt

92.56%

Value-Weighted Risk Premia
σt2
∆σt2
µt-1
ε σ2 t

Intercept

-0.65%

Adj. R

2

14.37%

0.86
(22.25)

77.11%

0.89
(23.81)

76.52%

0.53%

0.05
(2.20)

Value-Weighted Risk Premia
σt2
∆σt2
µt-1
ε σ2 t

1.99%

Adj. R2
15.36%

0.90
(18.99)

82.70%

0.92
(19.38)

82.52%

-0.65%

0.03
(0.49)

-0.36%

Table 8 continued

PANEL 4. ITALY
Intercept

µt

µt

µt

∆µt

εµt

Equal-Weighted Risk Premia
σt2
∆σt2
µt-1

0.03

0.72

(2.95)

(2.64)

ε σ2 t

Adj. R

2

9.26%

0.00

0.02

0.97

(1.17)

(0.49)

(37.38)

0.00

-0.01

0.97

(1.41)

(-0.31)

(38.97)

0.00

-0.01

(1.07)

(-0.32)

93.12%

93.11%

-0.62%

0.00

0.01

(-0.00)

(0.10)

-0.67%

Value-Weighted Risk Premia
σt2
∆σt2
µt-1
ε σ2 t

Adj. R

0.00

0.55

7.67%

(-0.40)

(2.73)

Intercept

0.00

0.02

0.95

(0.79)

(0.46)

(36.65)

0.00

-0.01

0.96

(1.38)

(-0.31)

(39.27)

0.00

-0.01

(1.17)

(-0.31)

2

93.27%

93.26%

-0.62%

0.00

0.01

(-0.00)

(0.12)

-0.67%

PANEL 5. JAPAN
Intercept

Equal-Weighted Risk Premia
σt2
∆σt2
µt-1

µt

0.04
(2.96)

0.88
(3.32)

µt

0.00
(1.23)

0.03
(0.93)

µt

0.00
(2.11)

0.02
(0.53)

∆µt

0.00
(1.77)

0.02
(0.54)

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

Intercept

7.84%

0.02
(3.01)

0.37
(1.87)

0.99
(84.99)

98.18%

0.00
(1.46)

0.03
(0.95)

0.99
(89.28)

98.17%

0.00
(2.34)

0.01
(0.49)

-0.50%

0.00
(1.48)

0.01
(0.51)

0.03
(0.81)

-0.21%

0.00
(0.00)

ε σ2 t

Adj. R2

Intercept

21.50%

0.02
(13.57)

0.26
(5.33)

0.94
(37.90)

93.46%

0.01
(2.71)

0.11
(3.01)

0.97
(46.49)

93.61%

0.01
(2.62)

0.06
(1.73)

8.76%

0.00
(0.52)

0.07
(1.86)

0.12
(4.00)

9.13%

0.00
(0.00)

ε σ2 t

Adj. R2

Intercept

7.31%

0.03
(13.92)

0.07
(1.20)

0.90
(35.11)

85.93%

0.00
(2.87)

0.06
(7.57)

0.93
(36.43)

84.69%

0.00
(3.21)

0.03
(1.83)

9.17%

0.00
(0.45)

0.04
(1.96)

15.58%

0.00
(0.00)

PANEL 6. UNITED KINGDOM
Equal-Weighted Risk Premia
σt2
∆σt2
µt-1
Intercept
µt

0.06
(13.07)

0.62
(4.77)

µt

0.00
(1.90)

0.10
(3.38)

µt

0.00
(1.52)

0.10
(4.05)

∆µt

0.00
(0.98)

0.11
(4.25)

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

PANEL 7. UNITED STATES
Equal-Weighted Risk Premia
σt2
∆σt2
µt-1
Intercept
µt

0.04
(15.33)

0.15
(1.83)

µt

0.00
(2.84)

0.09
(11.53)

µt

0.00
(2.75)

0.05
(2.43)

∆µt

0.00
(0.20)

0.06
(2.61)

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

Value-Weighted Risk Premia
σt2
∆σt2
µt-1
ε σ2 t

Adj. R2

ε σ2 t

0.09
(11.76)

Adj. R2
3.75%

0.97
(59.91)

95.73%

0.98
(61.29)

95.71%

-0.56%

0.02
(0.88)

Value-Weighted Risk Premia
σt2
∆σt2
µt-1
ε σ2 t

-0.32%

Adj. R2
17.49%

0.72
(7.58)

62.28%

0.79
(9.60)

60.53%

2.28%

Value-Weighted Risk Premia
σt2
∆σt2
µt-1

0.10
(2.86)

4.77%

ε σ2 t

Adj. R2
3.39%

0.84
(20.45)

72.45%

0.86
(19.63)

70.84%

3.76%

0.06
(7.70)

7.64%

Table 11
Country Risk Premia, World Market Volatility, and Conditional Covariance with the World Market
The table contains the results of time-series regressions using monthly data over the period July 1990 to December 2002. µt is the individual country implied risk premium. σt is the ‘world

volatility’, computed as the square root of 252 times the standard deviation of the daily returns on the market, computed over the previous month, where the ‘market’ is the MSCI World
index and covt is the conditional covariance between the daily world market returns and the daily country returns computed over the previous month. For consistency, the conditional
covariance is multiplied by 252 for annualization. εµt (εσt, εcovt) is the residual from an AR (1) model for the implied premium (standard deviation, covariance). Data for the United States
are obtained from COMPUSTAT, CRSP, and I/B/E/S. Data for other countries are obtained from Worldscope, Datastream, and I/B/E/S. The numbers in parentheses are t-statistics
computed using the Newey-West correction with 12 lags of autocorrelation in the first specification and 1 lag of autocorrelation in other specifications and also corrected for
heteroskedasticity.

PANEL 1. CANADA
Equal-Weighted Risk Premia
∆σt2
covt ∆covt µt-1

Intercept

σ t2

µt

0.08
(12.79)

-0.60
(-2.01)

1.20
(2.96)

µt

0.00
(2.69)

0.01
(0.14)

0.07
(1.08)

µt

0.00
(2.73)

∆µt

0.00
(0.94)

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

2
εcovt Adj. R

Value-Weighted Risk Premia
∆σt2
covt ∆covt µt-1

Intercept

σ t2

20.32%

0.05
(11.61)

-0.38
(-1.29)

0.54
(1.50)

0.93
(38.85)

92.56%

0.01
(3.02)

-0.04
(-0.81)

0.06
(1.11)

-0.07
(-1.03)

0.14
0.95
(1.69) (47.56)

92.56%

0.01
(2.91)

-0.07
(-1.00)

0.14
(1.67)

1.58%

0.00
(0.24)

-0.03 0.12 1.75%
(-0.55) (1.58)

0.00
(0.00)

εσ2t

εσ2t

2
εcovt Adj. R

7.29%

0.87
(21.84)

77.57%

-0.08
(-1.64)

0.12
0.88
(2.03) (22.90)

77.84%

-0.08
(-1.64)

0.12
(1.95)

0.31%

-0.08 0.12 0.04%
(-1.62) (1.95)

PANEL 2. FRANCE
Equal-Weighted Risk Premia
∆σt2
covt ∆covt µt-1

Intercept

σ t2

µt

0.05
(13.84)

-0.95
(-2.12)

1.16
(3.39)

µt

0.00
(2.10)

-0.04
(-0.45)

0.11
(1.51)

µt

0.00
(2.12)

∆µt

0.00
(0.91)

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

2
εcovt Adj. R

Value-Weighted Risk Premia
∆σt2
covt ∆covt µt-1

Intercept

σ t2

23.34%

0.03
(20.31)

-0.41
(-2.59)

0.53
(4.14)

0.92
(32.82)

92.08%

0.01
(2.68)

-0.12
(-1.54)

0.16
(2.37)

-0.02
(-0.28)

0.10
0.96
(1.67) (40.73)

92.17%

0.01
(2.22)

-0.04
(-0.76)

0.07
(1.26)

-0.02
(-0.26)

0.10
(1.69)

6.31%

0.00
(1.03)

-0.04
(-0.70)

0.07
(1.45)

-0.03 0.13 7.60%
(-0.41) (1.98)

0.00
(0.00)

εσ2t

εσ2t

2
εcovt Adj. R

29.34%

0.71
(7.00)

71.14%

0.80
(8.78)

69.19%

0.60%

-0.05 0.10 3.03%
(-0.73) (1.61)

PANEL 3. GERMANY
Equal-Weighted Risk Premia
∆σt2
covt ∆covt µt-1

Intercept

σ t2

µt

0.04
(4.83)

-1.70
(-2.79)

1.98
(5.64)

µt

0.00
(0.58)

0.00
(-0.04)

0.03
(0.42)

µt

0.00
(0.99)

∆µt

0.00
(1.34)

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

2
εcovt Adj. R

Value-Weighted Risk Premia
∆σt2
covt ∆covt µt-1

Intercept

σ t2

29.69%

0.01
(4.72)

-1.02
(-3.40)

1.04
(5.57)

0.99
(43.46)

96.91%

0.00
(2.24)

-0.25
(-1.78)

0.23
(2.49)

-0.03
(-0.32)

0.06
1.00
(1.15) (51.37)

96.94%

0.00
(1.73)

-0.03
(-0.32)

0.06
(1.15)

0.49%

0.00
(0.78)

-0.04 0.08 0.38%
(-0.38) (1.25)

0.00
(0.00)

εσ2t

εσ2t

2
εcovt Adj. R

37.55%

0.85
(16.71)

83.40%

-0.17
(-1.28)

0.14
0.92
(1.51) (20.43)

82.79%

-0.17
(-1.28)

0.14
(1.50)

1.05%

-0.18 0.17 1.65%
(-1.24) (1.74)

PANEL 4. ITALY
Equal-Weighted Risk Premia
∆σt2
covt ∆covt µt-1

Intercept

σ t2

µt

0.03
(3.82)

-0.69
(-1.04)

1.42
(2.59)

µt

0.00
(1.14)

0.00
(0.01)

0.02
(0.19)

µt

0.00
(1.41)

∆µt

0.00
(1.07)

εµt

0.00
(-0.00)

2
εcovt Adj. R

Value-Weighted Risk Premia
∆σt2
covt ∆covt µt-1

Intercept

σ t2

16.77%

0.00
(0.03)

-0.72
(-1.26)

1.27
(2.78)

0.96
(34.75)

93.07%

0.00
(0.83)

-0.02
(-0.16)

0.04
(0.38)

-0.02
(-0.17)

0.00
0.97
(0.02) (38.83)

93.06%

0.00
(1.39)

-0.02
(-0.16)

0.00
(0.01)

-1.31%

0.00
(1.17)

0.00 0.01 -1.36%
(-0.01) (0.05)

0.00
(-0.01)

εσ2t

εσ2t

2
εcovt Adj. R

16.44%

0.95
(34.23)

93.23%

-0.05
(-0.57)

0.04
0.96
(0.50) (39.50)

93.23%

-0.05
(-0.56)

0.04
(0.47)

-1.13%

-0.04 0.05 -1.19%
(-0.31) (0.41)

PANEL 5. JAPAN
Equal-Weighted Risk Premia
∆σt2
covt ∆covt µt-1

Intercept

σ t2

µt

0.05
(3.66)

1.75
(4.30)

-1.83
(-5.07)

µt

0.00
(1.31)

0.04
(0.97)

-0.02
(-0.48)

µt

0.00
(2.08)

∆µt

0.00
(1.77)

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

2
εcovt Adj. R

Value-Weighted Risk Premia
∆σt2
covt ∆covt µt-1

Intercept

σ t2

27.99%

0.03
(3.98)

0.87
(5.29)

-1.05
(-5.28)

0.99
(77.08)

98.17%

0.00
(1.35)

0.04
(1.18)

-0.02
(-0.69)

-0.01
(-0.25)

0.04
0.99
(1.52) (88.43)

98.17%

0.00
(1.99)

-0.01
(-0.25)

0.04
(1.54)

-0.48%

0.00
(1.36)

0.02 0.02 -0.79%
(0.50) (0.47)

0.00
(0.00)

PANEL 6. UNITED KINGDOM
Equal-Weighted Risk Premia
σ t2
∆σt2
covt ∆covt µt-1
Intercept

εσ2t

2
εcovt Adj. R

22.69%

95.73%

-0.03
(-1.27)

0.07
0.98
(2.46) (61.19)

95.79%

-0.03
(-1.30)

0.07
(2.48)

0.92%

0.01 0.02 -0.79%
(0.38) (0.69)

Value-Weighted Risk Premia
∆σt2
covt ∆covt µt-1

σ t2

33.45%

0.03
(15.77)

-0.33
(-1.44)

0.68
(2.66)

0.93
(34.88)

93.42%

0.01
(2.58)

-0.01
(-0.11)

0.14
(1.14)

µt

0.06
(13.89)

-0.74
(-1.28)

1.58
(2.66)

µt

0.00
(1.77)

0.10
(1.01)

0.01
(0.07)

µt

0.00
(1.57)

0.00
(0.02)

0.13
0.97
(1.28) (47.67)

93.68%

0.01
(2.62)

-0.02
(-0.27)

0.10
(1.03)

∆µt

0.00
(0.99)

0.00
(0.06)

0.13
(1.27)

9.66%

0.00
(0.51)

0.00
(0.02)

0.09
(0.92)

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

0.04 0.11 9.30%
(0.42) (0.98)

0.00
(0.00)

PANEL 7. UNITED STATES
Equal-Weighted Risk Premia
σ t2
∆σt2
covt ∆covt µt-1
Intercept

2
εcovt Adj. R

8.95%

0.03
(3.53)

-0.01
(-0.08)

0.08
(0.61)

0.89
(34.59)

85.92%

0.00
(2.93)

0.02
(0.41)

0.04
(0.83)

0.04
(4.46)

-0.19
(-0.62)

0.31
(1.17)

µt

0.00
(2.93)

0.04
(0.75)

0.04
(0.87)

µt

0.00
(2.72)

0.01
(0.18)

0.04
0.93
(0.78) (36.29)

84.66%

0.00
(3.18)

∆µt

0.00
(0.20)

0.01
(0.19)

0.04
(0.82)

9.04%

0.00
(0.45)

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

0.04 0.05 15.47%
(0.69) (0.78)

0.00
(0.00)

2
εcovt Adj. R

27.73%

0.69
(6.39)

62.82%

0.79
(9.68)

60.95%

2.14%

Value-Weighted Risk Premia
∆σt2
covt ∆covt µt-1

σ t2

µt

εσ2t

0.02 0.11 4.74%
(0.19) (1.00)

Intercept

εσ2t

2
εcovt Adj. R

0.97
(54.38)

Intercept

εσ2t

εσ2t

εσ2t

2
εcovt Adj. R

3.28%

0.84
(20.39)

72.40%

0.00
(0.06)

0.03
0.86
(0.52) (19.54)

70.76%

0.00
(0.03)

0.03
(0.60)

3.52%

0.03 0.03 7.41%
(0.45) (0.63)

Table 12
Volatility and Equal-Weighted Dividend Yields
The table contains the results of time-series (monthly) regressions. The regressions are run over the period 1981-2002 for the United States and over 1990-2002 for the other
countries (For Italy, the time series of risk premia starts in July 1990). µ t is the equal-weighted average of the dividend yield premia, defined as the difference between the
dividend yield and the yield on the local long-term government bond. Firm-level dividend yield is computed as the ratio of total dividends from the most recent fiscal year ending
at least six months (three months in case of US) prior, to the market capitalization at the end of the month. σt is square root of 252 times the standard deviation of the daily
returns on the market, computed over the last one month, where the ‘market’ is defined as the CRSP value-weighted index for the United States and the MSCI index for other
countries. εµt (εσt) is the residual from an AR (1) model for expected returns (standard deviation). Data for the United States is obtained from COMPUSTAT, CRSP and IBES.
Data on other countries is obtained from Worldscope, Datastream and IBES. The numbers in parentheses are t-statistics computed using Newey-West correction with 12 lags of
autocorrelation in the first specification and 1 lag of autocorrelation in the other specifications and also corrected for heteroskedasticity.

PANEL 1. CANADA
Intercept

σt

µt

-0.05
(-16.58)

0.20
(4.28)

µt

0.00
(-2.07)

0.02
(1.83)

µt

0.00
(-1.61)

0.01
(0.95)

∆µt

0.00
(0.76)

0.01
(0.98)

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

2

∆σt

2

µt-1

εσ 2 t

Adj. R2

Intercept

σt

∆σt

22.65%

µt

-0.06
(-14.64)

0.09
(4.94)

0.92
(25.95)

88.66%

µt

-0.01
(-2.11)

0.01
(1.86)

0.95
(31.32)

88.52%

µt

0.00
(-1.61)

0.01
(1.05)

-0.26%

∆µt

0.00
(0.75)

0.01
(1.09)

0.02
(1.60)

0.20%

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

εσ 2 t

Adj. R2

µt-1

εσt

Adj. R2
30.90%

0.91
(23.51)

88.71%

0.95
(31.31)

88.52%

-0.23%

0.01
(1.65)

0.23%

εσt

Adj. R2

PANEL 2. FRANCE
Intercept

σt

µt

-0.05
(-11.60)

0.15
(6.62)

µt

-0.01
(-1.84)

0.04
(2.65)

µt

0.00
(-1.29)

0.02
(2.19)

∆µt

0.00
(0.70)

0.03
(2.35)

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

2

PANEL 3. GERMANY
2
σt
Intercept

∆σt

2

∆σt

2

µt

-0.04
(-7.75)

0.12
(4.90)

µt

0.00
(-2.13)

0.02
(2.50)

µt

0.00
(-0.48)

0.02
(1.43)

∆µt

0.00
(1.02)

0.02
(1.46)

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

µt-1

Intercept

σt

∆σt

15.09%

µt

-0.06
(-12.13)

0.09
(5.83)

0.85
(9.80)

79.11%

µt

-0.01
(-1.96)

0.03
(2.34)

0.89
(11.59)

78.16%

µt

0.00
(-1.30)

0.02
(1.91)

0.75%

∆µt

0.00
(0.68)

0.02
(1.82)

0.04
(3.54)

2.25%

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

εσ 2 t

Adj. R2

µt-1

Intercept

σt

µt-1

16.99%

∆σt

12.72%

µt

-0.04
(-9.84)

0.07
(3.88)

0.96
(43.79)

94.54%

µt

0.00
(-2.21)

0.01
(2.04)

0.98
(47.36)

94.37%

µt

0.00
(-0.51)

0.01
(1.17)

2.23%

∆µt

0.00
(1.02)

0.01
(1.19)

0.02
(1.96)

4.33%

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

εσ 2 t

Adj. R

0.84
(9.38)

79.34%

0.89
(11.98)

78.32%

1.63%

µt-1

0.03
(2.58)

3.47%

εσt

Adj. R2
14.61%

0.96
(43.00)

94.42%

0.98
(46.75)

94.30%

0.98%

0.01
(1.53)

2.24%

εσt

Adj. R

PANEL 4. ITALY
Intercept

σt

µt

-0.08
(-4.09)

0.77
(1.32)

µt

0.00
(-0.80)

0.04
(0.92)

µt

0.00
(-0.51)

0.01
(0.24)

∆µt

0.00
(0.70)

0.00
(0.05)

εµt

0.00
(-0.01)

2

∆σt

2

µt-1

2

Intercept

σt

∆σt

7.34%

µt

-0.13
(-2.49)

0.42
(1.34)

0.86
(13.48)

69.04%

µt

-0.01
(-1.24)

0.03
(1.16)

0.86
(13.57)

69.03%

µt

0.00
(-0.51)

0.02
(0.37)

-0.68%

∆µt

0.00
(0.70)

0.01
(0.23)

-0.64%

εµt

0.00
(-0.01)

0.03
(0.51)

µt-1

2

7.78%

0.86
(13.25)

69.06%

0.86
(13.46)

69.04%

-0.66%

0.03
(0.66)

-0.59%

PANEL 5. JAPAN
Intercept

σt2

∆σt2

µt

-0.02
(-3.89)

0.00
(-0.04)

µt

0.00
(-0.63)

0.01
(1.68)

µt

0.00
(0.19)

0.00
(0.68)

∆µt

0.00
(1.19)

0.00
(0.72)

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

PANEL 6. UNITED KINGDOM
2
2
σt
∆σt
Intercept
µt

-0.08
(-13.82)

0.27
(5.03)

µt

0.00
(-1.37)

0.02
(2.70)

µt

0.00
(-0.51)

0.01
(0.87)

∆µt

0.00
(1.56)

0.01
(0.92)

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

PANEL 7. UNITED STATES
2
σt
Intercept

∆σt

2

µt

-0.06
(-14.09)

0.08
(1.09)

µt

0.00
(-1.77)

0.02
(6.80)

µt

0.00
(-0.80)

0.01
(2.41)

∆µt

0.00
(0.99)

0.01
(2.40)

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

µt-1

εσ 2 t

Adj. R2

Intercept

σt

∆σt

-0.65%

µt

-0.03
(-4.26)

0.02
(0.58)

0.99
(55.14)

97.67%

µt

0.00
(-1.38)

0.01
(1.90)

0.99
(54.18)

97.63%

µt

0.00
(0.19)

0.00
(0.55)

-0.45%

∆µt

0.00
(1.19)

0.00
(0.60)

0.01
(1.47)

0.73%

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

εσ 2 t

Adj. R2

µt-1

Intercept

σt

∆σt

µt

-0.09
(-15.68)

0.13
(6.74)

0.98
(67.21)

97.96%

µt

0.00
(-1.57)

0.01
(2.08)

0.99
(71.40)

97.93%

µt

0.00
(-0.51)

0.00
(0.66)

-0.36%

∆µt

0.00
(1.56)

0.00
(0.67)

0.01
(1.72)

0.36%

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

εσ 2 t

Adj. R2

Intercept

σt

Adj. R2

0.99
(54.85)

97.68%

0.99
(54.13)

97.62%

-0.49%

µt-1

0.01
(1.56)

0.92%

εσt

Adj. R2
17.08%

∆σt

2.22%

µt

-0.07
(-10.79)

0.07
(1.85)

0.98
(61.38)

96.53%

µt

0.00
(-2.10)

0.01
(2.35)

0.98
(60.38)

96.43%

µt

0.00
(-0.82)

0.01
(1.62)

1.86%

∆µt

0.00
(0.99)

0.01
(1.62)

4.30%

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

0.02
(7.04)

εσt

-0.02%

13.78%

µt-1

µt-1

0.98
(65.20)

97.96%

0.99
(71.44)

97.93%

-0.42%

µt-1

0.01
(1.26)

0.14%

εσt

Adj. R2
5.64%

0.98
(59.29)

96.45%

0.98
(60.15)

96.40%

1.02%

0.01
(2.36)

2.23%

Table 13
Volatility and Value-Weighted Dividend Yields
The table contains the results of time-series (monthly) regressions. The regressions are run over the period 1981-2002 for the United States and over 1990-2002 for the other
countries (For Italy, the time series of risk premia starts in July 1990). µ t is the value-weighted average of the dividend yield premia, defined as the difference between the
dividend yield and the yield on the local long-term government bond. Firm-level dividend yield is computed as the ratio of total dividends from the most recent fiscal year ending
at least six months (three months in case of US) prior, to the market capitalization at the end of the month. σt is square root of 252 times the standard deviation of the daily returns
on the market, computed over the last one month, where the ‘market’ is defined as the CRSP value-weighted index for the United States and the MSCI index for other countries.
εµt (εσt) is the residual from an AR (1) model for expected returns (standard deviation). Data for the United States is obtained from COMPUSTAT, CRSP and IBES. Data on
other countries is obtained from Worldscope, Datastream and IBES. The numbers in parentheses are t-statistics computed using Newey-West correction with 12 lags of
autocorrelation in the first specification and 1 lag of autocorrelation in the other specifications and also corrected for heteroskedasticity.

PANEL 1. CANADA
Intercept

σt

µt

-0.05
(-13.77)

0.16
(2.77)

µt

0.00
(-1.93)

0.01
(1.08)

µt

0.00
(-1.75)

0.01
(0.92)

∆µt

0.00
(0.96)

0.01
(0.91)

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

2

∆σt

2

µt-1

εσ 2 t

Adj. R2

Intercept

σt

∆σt

14.16%

µt

-0.06
(-11.15)

0.08
(3.14)

0.94
(34.36)

90.61%

µt

0.00
(-1.72)

0.00
(0.90)

0.95
(38.25)

90.59%

µt

0.00
(-1.77)

0.01
(1.13)

-0.26%

∆µt

0.00
(0.96)

0.01
(1.07)

0.01
(1.07)

-0.04%

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

εσ 2 t

Adj. R2

µt-1

εσt

Adj. R2
20.59%

0.94
(32.46)

90.59%

0.95
(38.43)

90.60%

-0.15%

0.01
(1.19)

0.01%

εσt

Adj. R2

PANEL 2. FRANCE
Intercept

σt

µt

-0.05
(-13.70)

0.16
(8.00)

µt

0.00
(-2.30)

0.02
(3.43)

µt

0.00
(-0.23)

0.01
(1.31)

∆µt

0.00
(2.05)

0.01
(1.40)

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

2

PANEL 3. GERMANY
2
σt
Intercept

∆σt

2

∆σt

2

µt

-0.05
(-15.62)

0.12
(6.59)

µt

0.00
(-1.52)

0.01
(2.35)

µt

0.00
(0.15)

0.00
(0.71)

∆µt

0.00
(1.62)

0.00
(0.73)

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

µt-1

Intercept

σt

∆σt

20.34%

µt

-0.06
(-13.22)

0.09
(5.50)

0.97
(66.81)

97.20%

µt

0.00
(-2.46)

0.01
(2.66)

0.99
(66.98)

97.09%

µt

0.00
(-0.25)

0.00
(1.01)

1.45%

∆µt

0.00
(2.03)

0.00
(1.07)

0.02
(2.03)

3.38%

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

εσ 2 t

Adj. R2

µt-1

Intercept

σt

µt-1

21.60%

∆σt

22.43%

µt

-0.06
(-17.37)

0.07
(4.33)

0.97
(46.78)

95.73%

µt

0.00
(-1.52)

0.01
(1.84)

0.99
(49.74)

95.53%

µt

0.00
(0.13)

0.00
(0.61)

-0.13%

∆µt

0.00
(1.62)

0.00
(0.62)

0.01
(1.41)

1.39%

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

εσ 2 t

Adj. R

0.97
(65.10)

97.17%

0.99
(66.32)

97.06%

0.49%

µt-1

0.01
(1.55)

1.97%

εσt

Adj. R2
23.89%

0.97
(45.40)

95.66%

0.99
(50.02)

95.53%

-0.31%

0.00
(1.08)

0.59%

εσt

Adj. R

PANEL 4. ITALY
Intercept

σt

µt

-0.07
(-7.25)

0.21
(2.41)

µt

0.00
(0.09)

0.00
(-0.26)

µt

0.00
(-0.10)

0.00
(-0.04)

∆µt

0.00
(1.82)

0.00
(-0.04)

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

2

∆σt

2

µt-1

2

Intercept

σt

∆σt

5.57%

µt

-0.09
(-6.06)

0.10
(1.93)

0.99
(65.18)

96.66%

µt

0.00
(0.29)

0.00
(-0.40)

0.99
(67.73)

96.66%

µt

0.00
(-0.10)

0.00
(0.17)

-0.68%

∆µt

0.00
(1.83)

0.00
(0.17)

-0.67%

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

0.00
(-0.15)

µt-1

2

4.53%

0.99
(65.63)

96.66%

0.99
(67.95)

96.66%

-0.66%

0.00
(-0.06)

-0.68%

PANEL 5. JAPAN
Intercept

σt2

∆σt2

µt

-0.02
(-5.43)

-0.02
(-0.31)

µt

0.00
(0.08)

0.00
(0.93)

µt

0.00
(0.53)

0.00
(0.51)

∆µt

0.00
(1.95)

0.00
(0.52)

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

PANEL 6. UNITED KINGDOM
2
2
σt
∆σt
Intercept
µt

-0.08
(-13.84)

0.27
(5.05)

µt

0.00
(-1.43)

0.02
(2.69)

µt

0.00
(-0.57)

0.01
(0.83)

∆µt

0.00
(1.61)

0.01
(0.87)

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

PANEL 7. UNITED STATES
2
σt
Intercept

∆σt

2

µt

-0.05
(-13.82)

0.05
(1.11)

µt

0.00
(-2.07)

0.02
(5.88)

µt

0.00
(-1.18)

0.01
(1.75)

∆µt

0.00
(1.10)

0.01
(1.77)

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

µt-1

εσ 2 t

Adj. R2

Intercept

σt

∆σt

-0.47%

µt

-0.03
(-5.20)

0.01
(0.28)

0.99
(83.89)

98.70%

µt

0.00
(-0.44)

0.00
(0.98)

0.99
(83.06)

98.69%

µt

0.00
(0.53)

0.00
(0.39)

-0.51%

∆µt

0.00
(1.95)

0.00
(0.41)

0.00
(0.84)

-0.31%

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

εσ 2 t

Adj. R2

µt-1

Intercept

σt

∆σt

µt

-0.09
(-15.68)

0.13
(6.74)

0.98
(66.56)

97.93%

µt

0.00
(-1.61)

0.01
(2.08)

0.99
(70.67)

97.90%

µt

0.00
(-0.58)

0.00
(0.62)

-0.39%

∆µt

0.00
(1.61)

0.00
(0.64)

0.01
(1.68)

0.32%

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

εσ 2 t

Adj. R2

Intercept

σt

Adj. R2

0.99
(83.54)

98.70%

0.99
(83.29)

98.69%

-0.54%

µt-1

0.00
(0.80)

-0.25%

εσt

Adj. R2
17.02%

∆σt

1.19%

µt

-0.06
(-10.46)

0.04
(1.46)

0.97
(52.39)

95.41%

µt

0.00
(-2.25)

0.01
(1.99)

0.97
(51.46)

95.24%

µt

0.00
(-1.20)

0.01
(1.08)

1.62%

∆µt

0.00
(1.10)

0.01
(1.11)

4.56%

εµt

0.00
(0.00)

0.02
(5.92)

εσt

-0.51%

13.74%

µt-1

µt-1

0.98
(64.62)

97.93%

0.99
(70.70)

97.89%

-0.45%

µt-1

0.01
(1.23)

0.11%

εσt

Adj. R2
2.37%

0.97
(51.41)

95.28%

0.97
(51.20)

95.19%

0.60%

0.01
(1.77)

1.88%

7.

Appendix

Proofs of equations (9) and (5):
j

j
By iterating equation (8) forward, we obtain Et(rt+1+j ) = α 1−β
1−β + β μt . Equation (9) follows:
∞


ρj Et (rt+1+j ) =

j=0

∞


ρj (α

j=0

=

1 − βj
+ β j μt )
1−β

∞
∞

α  j
ρ (1 − β j ) + μt
ρj β j
1−β
j=0

=
=

j=0

∞

α
j j
ρ −
ρ β + μt
ρj β j
1−β
j=0
j=0
j=0


1
α
α
+ μt −
.
(1 − β)(1 − ρ)
1 − β 1 − ρβ

α
1−β

∞


j

∞



 γ

+δ k gt, Et(dt+k ) = dt + ki=1 Et(gt+i ),
To prove equation (5), we ﬁrst note that Et(gt+k ) = 1 − δ k 1−δ

ρ
j
and ∞
j=0 jρ = (1−ρ)2 . Equation (5) then follows easily in a manner similar to equation (9). 
Proof of equation (14):
Using a ﬁrst-order Taylor approximation to rt+1 = log(Pt+1 + Dt+1 ) − log(Pt), Campbell and
Shiller (1988) show that
(29)
rt+1 ≈ k + ρpt+1 + (1 − ρ)dt+1 − pt.
Substitute for pt+1 from equation (10) and pool together all terms known at time t:
rt+1 ≈ kt + dt+1 + gt+1

δρ
ρ
− μt+1
.
(1 − ρδ)
1 − ρβ

(30)

The return variance can be approximated by taking the variance of the right hand side:
δ 2 ρ2
ρ2
2
σ
+
σ2
v,t+1
(1 − ρδ)2
(1 − ρβ)2 u
ρδ
ρ
ρ2 δ
2
σv,t+1
σuv − 2
σuv
+2
−2
(1 − ρδ)
1 − ρβ
(1 − ρδ)(1 − ρβ)
1
ρ2
2ρ
2
σuv ,
=
σ
+
σu2 −
v,t+1
2
2
(1 − ρδ)
(1 − ρβ)
(1 − ρδ)(1 − ρβ)

2
+
Vart (rt+1 ) = σv,t+1

(31)

where σuv is the covariance between ut and vt . We assume that σuv = 0, for simplicity, so that
Vart (rt+1 ) =

1
ρ2
2
σ
+
σ2,
(1 − ρδ)2 v,t+1 (1 − ρβ)2 u

which proves equation (14). 

45

(32)

REFERENCES
Abel, Andrew B., 1988, “Stock prices under time-varying dividend risk: An exact solution
in an inﬁnite-horizon general equilibrium model,” Journal of Monetary Economics 22,
375–393.
Andersen, Torben G., Tim Bollerslev, Francis X. Diebold, and Paul Labys, 2003, “Modeling
and forecasting realized volatility,” Econometrica 71, 529–626.
Backus, David, and Allan W. Gregory, 1993, “Theoretical relations between risk premiums
and conditional variances,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 11, 177–185.
Baillie, Richard T., and Ramon P. DeGennaro, 1990, “Stock returns and volatility,” Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 25, 203–214.
Black, Fischer, 1976, “Studies of stock market volatility changes,” 1976 Proceedings of the
American Statistical Association, Business and Economic Statistics Section, 177–181.
Brandt, Michael W., and Qiang Kang, 2004, “On the Relationship Between the Conditional
Mean and Volatility of Stock Returns: A Latent VAR Approach,” Journal of Financial
Economics 72, 217–257.
Brav, Alon, Reuven Lehavy, and Roni Michaely, 2003, “Using expectations to test asset
pricing models,” Financial Management, forthcoming.
Brealey, Richard A., and Stewart Myers, 2002, Principles of Corporate Finance, Seventh
Edition, Irwin McGraw-Hill.
Campbell, John Y., 1987, “Stock returns and the term structure,” Journal of Financial
Economics 18, 373–399.
Campbell, John Y., 1993, Intertemporal asset pricing without consumption data, American
Economic Review 83, 487-512.
Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller, 1988, “The dividend-price ratio and expectations
of future dividends and discount factors,” Review of Financial Studies 1, 195-228.
Campbell, John Y., and Ludger Hentschel, 1992, “No news is good news: An asymmetric
model of changing volatility in stock returns,” Journal of Financial Economics 31, 281–
331.
Campbell, John Y., and John Ammer, 1993, “What moves the stock and bond markets? A
variance decomposition for long-term asset returns,” Journal of Finance 48, 3–37.
Campbell, John Y., and Luis M. Viceira, 2002, Strategic Asset Allocation: Portfolio Choice
for Long-Term Investors, Oxford University Press.
Chan, Louis K. C., Andrew Karolyi, and René M. Stulz, 1992, “Global ﬁnancial markets
and the risk premium,” Journal of Financial Economics 32, 137–167.
46

Chan, Louis K. C., Jason Karceski, and Josef Lakonishok, 2003, “The level and persistence
of growth rates,” Journal of Finance 58, 643–684.
Claus, James, and Jacob Thomas, 2001, “Equity premia as low as three percent? Evidence
from analysts’ earnings forecasts for domestic and international stock markets,” Journal
of Finance 56, 1629–1666.
De Santis, Giorgio, and Selahattin Imrohoroglu, 1997, “Stock returns and volatility in emerging ﬁnancial markets,” Journal of International Money and Finance 16, 561–579.
Elton, Edwin J., 1999, “Expected return, realized return, and asset pricing tests”, Journal
of Finance 54, 1199–1220.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2002, “The equity premium”, Journal of Finance
57, 637–659.
French, Kenneth R., G. William Schwert, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1987, “Expected stock
returns and variance,” Journal of Financial Economics 19, 3–29.
Friend, Irwin, Randolph Westerﬁeld, and Michael Granito, 1978, “New evidence on the
capital asset pricing model,” Journal of Finance 33, 903–917.
Gebhardt, William R., Charles M. C. Lee, and Bhaskaran Swaminathan, 2001, “Toward an
implied cost of capital,” Journal of Accounting Research 39, 135–176.
Ghysels, Eric, Pedro Santa-Clara, and Rossen Valkanov, 2005, “There is a risk-return tradeoﬀ
after all,” Journal of Financial Economics 76, 509–548.
Glosten, Lawrence R., Ravi Jagannathan, and David E. Runkle, 1993, “On the relation
between the expected value and the variance of the nominal excess return on stocks,”
Journal of Finance 48, 1779–1801.
Guo, Hui, and Robert F. Whitelaw, 2005, “Uncovering the risk-return relation in the stock
market,” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Harvey, Campbell R., 2001, “The speciﬁcation of conditional expectations,” Journal of Empirical Finance 8, 573–637.
Kaplan, Steven N., and Richard S. Ruback, 1995, “The valuation of cash ﬂow forecasts: An
empirical analysis,” Journal of Finance 50, 1059–1093.
Lee, Charles M. C., David Ng, and Bhaskaran Swaminathan, 2003, “The cross-section of
international cost of capital,” Working paper, Cornell University.
Lettau, Martin, and Sydney C. Ludvigson, 2003, “Measuring and modeling variation in
the risk-return tradeoﬀ,” in Yacine Ait-Sahalia and Lars P. Hansen, eds.: Handbook of
Financial Econometrics.

47

Lundblad, Christian, 2005, “The risk return tradeoﬀ in the long-run: 1836–2003,” Working
paper, Indiana University.
Merton, Robert C., 1973, “An intertemporal asset pricing model,” Econometrica 41, 867–888.
Merton, Robert C., 1980, “On estimating the expected return on the market: An exploratory
investigation,” Journal of Financial Economics 8, 323–361.
Nelson, Daniel B., 1991, “Conditional heteroskedasticity in asset returns: A new approach,”
Econometrica 59, 347–370.
Pástor, Ľuboš, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2001, “The equity premium and structural
breaks”, Journal of Finance 56, 1207–1239.
Scruggs, John T., 1998, “Resolving the puzzling intertemporal relation between the market risk premium and conditional market variance: A two-factor approach,” Journal of
Finance 53, 575–603.
Turner, Christopher M., Richard Startz, and Charles R. Nelson, 1989, “A Markov model
of heteroskedasticity, risk, and learning in the stock market,” Journal of Financial Economics 25, 3–22.
Veronesi, Pietro, 2000, “How does information quality aﬀect stock returns?,” Journal of
Finance 55, 807–837.
Wang, Leping, 2004, “On the intertemporal risk-return relation: A Bayesian model comparison perspective,” Working paper, Wharton.
Whitelaw, Robert F., 1994, “Time variations and covariations in the expectation and volatility of stock market returns,” Journal of Finance 49, 515–541.
Whitelaw, Robert F., 2000, “Stock market risk and return: An equilibrium approach”,
Review of Financial Studies 13, 521–547.

48

