                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                INNOVATION AND INCENTIVES:
                               EVIDENCE FROM CORPORATE R&D

                                               Josh Lerner
                                                Julie Wulf

                                          Working Paper 11944
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11944


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2006




John Core, Wayne Guay, Charlie Himmelberg, Mark Myers, Felix Oberholzer-Gee, Antoinette Schoar, Cathy
Schrand, Scott Stern, Joel Waldfogel and seminar participants a the National Bureau of Economic Research
Summer Institute and the Wharton Applied Economics Workshop provided helpful comments. We thank
Chris Allen and especially Rui Tang for research assistance. David Scharfstein generously shared the
entrepreneurial spawning data. Harvard Business School’s Division of Research and the Wharton School’s
Reginald H. Jones Center for Management Policy, Strategy and Organization provided generous financial
support. All errors and omissions are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Josh Lerner and Julie Wulf. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Innovation and Incentives: Evidence from Corporate R&D
Josh Lerner and Julie Wulf
NBER Working Paper No. 11944
January 2006
JEL No. O3, J3

                                           ABSTRACT

Beginning in the late 1980s, American corporations began increasingly linking the compensation of

central research personnel to the economic objectives of the corporation. This paper examines the

impact of the shifting compensation of the heads of corporate research and development. Among

firms with centralized R&D organizations, a clear relationship emerges: more long-term incentives

(e.g. stock options and restricted stock) are associated with more heavily cited patents. These

incentives also appear to be somewhat associated with more patent filings and patents of greater

generality. We address endogeniety concerns in a variety of ways, including examining the impact

of compensation for other key managers and utilizing an instrument based on spawning activity in

the region. While we cannot determine whether the effect is due to better project selection or better

people selection, the results continue to be consistent with our interpretation that performance pay

of corporate R&D heads is associated with more innovative firms.

Josh Lerner
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall, Room 395
Cambridge, MA 02163
and NBER
josh@hbs.edu

Julie Wulf
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
2023 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6370
wulf@wharton.upenn.edu
1. Introduction

        Research and development expenditures have long been understood to be a key

driver of economic growth. Yet profound changes in the U.S. corporate R&D sector over

the past two decades have attracted remarkably little attention by economists. This paper

seeks to address this gap, by seeking to understand whether the increasingly high-

powered incentives of central corporate research leaders are related to the innovation

process.

        The central corporate R&D laboratory was a dominant feature of the innovation

landscape in the U.S. for most of the 20th century. While the concept of the centralized

laboratory originated in the German chemical industry, U.S. corporations adopted it with

enthusiasm by mid century. These campus-like facilities employed many thousands of

researchers, many of whom were free to pursue fundamental science with little direct

commercial applicability, most notably Bell Laboratories (with 11 Nobel Laureates) and

IBM Central Research (with 5).

        Beginning in the late 1980s, however, American corporations began

fundamentally rethinking the role of these centralized research facilities (see, for

example, the discussions in Rosenbloom and Spencer [1996]). Reflecting both a

perception of disappointing commercial returns and intensified competitive pressures,

firms undertook a variety of changes to these facilities. These included both paring the

size of central research facilities in favor of divisional laboratories and more tightly

linking the compensation of central research personnel to the economic objectives of the

corporation.1


1
 These changes were frequently dramatic in magnitude. For instance, the head count of Bell Laboratories
(now operated by Lucent Technologies) dropped from 35,000 in 1997 to 9,500 in 2005. Microsoft’s $8


                                                                                                          2
        Numerous observers within the scientific establishment have expressed concern

about the long-run implications of these changes. For instance, the National Science

Board in 1992 attributed the decline of centralized research facilities to “risk

minimization” on the part of corporations and an inappropriate emphasis on “the needs of

today’s customers” instead of longer-run objectives. Concerns about these patterns have

frequently been expressed as well by organizations such as the National Academies of

Science and the Council on Competitiveness.

        To economists, however, the issue is not so clear-cut. On the one hand, observers

such as Jensen [1993] have contrasted the incentives within corporate research facilities

unfavorably with those offered by venture capitalists. He suggests that had higher-

powered incentives been offered, some of the poor performance of research-intensive

firms would have been avoided. In a similar vein, Kortum and Lerner [2000] find that

venture-backed firms are approximately three times as efficient in generating innovations

as corporate research.

        On the other hand, the addition of high-powered incentives could plausibly have

deleterious consequences as well. A critical problem, highlighted by the line of work

beginning with Holmstrom and Milgrom [1991], is “multi-tasking.” In particular, when

an agent has multiple tasks to perform, only some of which can be measured with

precision, it may make sense to offer compensation schemes with flat or very limited

sensitivity to performance. Otherwise, the agent may neglect the activities that cannot be

precisely measured.



billion in R&D expenditures in 2003 included $1.3 billion in equity
(http://www.spectrum.ieee.org/WEBONLY/publicfeature/nov04/1104rd.html, accessed March 12, 2005).



                                                                                                   3
       Scientists and engineers in research facilities are likely to have a portfolio of

projects that they can work on, with varying degree of observability. As the incentives

offered by the corporation increase, researchers may be led to spurn riskier but important

long-run projects in favor of straightforward efforts (Holmstrom [1989]). As a result, it

may make sense to offer weaker incentives in these settings (see also Lazear [1989]).

       Moreover, the effect of different types of performance pay may not be uniform.

In particular, a series of papers have suggested that compensation in the form of option

holdings will lead managers to riskier behavior, because the increased volatility of the

firm will translate into option value. Meanwhile, risk-averse managers who receive

extensive stock-based compensation and whose human and financial capital is poorly

diversified will prefer that their firms make less risky choices. Examples of literature

where this idea has been developed are Smith and Stulz [1985], Hirshleifer and Suh

[1992], and many others.

       This question is also related to research on the relationship between authority and

incentives in uncertain environments. Recent work suggests that for complex jobs it may

be optimal to delegate decision-making to better informed agents and keep them in check

with high-powered incentives (Prendergast [2002]). Also, firms may link pay to global

or firm performance measures for specific positions in order to encourage better decisions

over project selection that have firm-wide implications (Athey and Roberts [2001]).

While the position of corporate R&D head varies across firms, the responsibilities can be

generally characterized as making decisions about research project selection in highly

uncertain environments.




                                                                                            4
        This paper examines the relationship between innovation and the shifting

compensation of the managers responsible for corporate research and development. We

find that the compensation of corporate R&D heads changed dramatically over the course

of the 1990s, with much greater use of long-term incentives (e.g., restricted stock and

stock options). The ratio of the value of long-term incentives to cash compensation for

corporate R&D heads has more than doubled over the period from 1988 to 1998 from

0.39 to 0.87. The value of long-term incentives (in 1996 $) has more than tripled over the

period from $136,867 to $416,720. These shifts are not unique to these managers,

mirroring those in other senior managers’ compensation.2

        We then turn to understanding the relationship between these changes and shifts

in innovation. We are unable to find consistent patterns among firms with a

decentralized R&D organization. But, among firms with a centralized R&D organization

in which the corporate R&D head has greater firm-wide authority over R&D decisions, a

clear relationship emerges: more long-term incentives are associated with more heavily

cited patents. These incentives also appear to be associated with patents of greater

generality and more frequent awards. There is little evidence that high-powered

incentives lead to the neglect of more tangential research or to a substitution of patents

for publications in scientific journals: greater incentives generally are not associated with

any drop-off in the volume of scientific publication.

        Finally, we examine the question of whether there is a causal relationship between

the innovation measures and the long-term incentives of corporate R&D heads:

specifically, whether we find support for the hypothesis that long-term incentives lead to


2
 Hall and Liebman [1998], Murphy [1999], and others document the significant increase in CEO long-term
incentives over a similar time-frame.


                                                                                                     5
either better R&D decisions or more skilled R&D managers and, in turn, more-heavily

cited patents. While the very presence of an association may be of interest, understanding

causation is also important.

       While we must be careful in the interpretation, we present three analyses that

support the incentives interpretation of the result. First, we examine the relationship using

two other corporate managers who are unlikely to be directly involved in the innovation

process: the chief financial officer (CFO) and the human resources head (HRH). If we

find a relationship between patent quality and compensation of these officials, it is

unlikely that the incentives story holds. We find no relationship between patent quality

and generality and the incentives offered to the CFO or the HRH.

       Second, we undertake an instrumental variables analysis. We employ an

instrument that we believe will be correlated with the likelihood of high-powered

incentives but uncorrelated with the technological prospects of the firm: the extent to

which there is spawning, or the creation of entrepreneurial venture-backed entities by

managers of publicly traded companies, in the county of the firm’s headquarters and the

year of the observation. In places and periods where there are many departures to venture

backed firms, firms should be under more pressure to offer high-powered compensation.

High-powered compensation continues to be associated with more heavily cited patents.

       Finally, using the methodology of Aggarwal and Samwick [1999], we show that

the sensitivity of compensation to performance is positively related to performance, but

declines with the volatility of performance. The negative risk-incentive relationship holds

in firms with a centralized R&D organization and R&D-intensive firms, which are




                                                                                           6
precisely the firms where we anticipate that corporate R&D decisions will have the

greatest effect on firm value, but not elsewhere.

         Several caveats are in order. First, while we document that stronger incentives

are associated with more innovations, we cannot distinguish between whether the effect

of performance pay is due to better project selection or better people selection. While it

would be interesting to disentangle these, both explanations are consistent with

performance pay: firms should hire better people to produce higher-quality patents and

pay them more in return. Incentive pay plans are supposed to have selection effects, in

addition to direct incentive effects [Lazear, 2000].3

         Second, in equilibrium, firms should offer the optimal level of incentives. During

the period under study, competitive pressures have led to a greater importance of

innovation giving skilled R&D managers more bargaining power. Also, the effectiveness

of property rights over inventions has changed significantly during the late 1980s and

1990s. As Merges [1999] notes in the context of R&D: “The history of intra-firm R&D

management is a history of experimentation to find the right set of incentives.”4

         This paper is related to two sets of work. First, a number of articles, particularly

in the accounting literature, have sought to relate R&D choices to the incentives of top

management. Three pieces deserve special mention. Dechow and Sloan [1991]

examines R&D expenditures of firms with chief executive officers (CEOs) in their final

years of office, to determine whether they cut spending to improve short-term earnings



3
  We thank Kathryn Shaw for highlighting this distinction.
4
 Demsetz and Lehn [1985] argue that if all firms in the sample are optimizing with respect to long-term
incentives, we should not find any relation between performance and the observed endogenous choice,
once the exogenous determinants of choice are controlled for. However, as discussed in Ittner, Lambert,
and Larcker [2003], Milgrom and Roberts [1992] argue that firms adapt by experimentation and imitation,
and, at any given time, not all firms in the cross-section will have adopted optimal organizational practices.


                                                                                                             7
performance. They find that these firms spend less on R&D during the CEOs’ final years,

unless the CEO has significant equity holdings in the firm. Holthausen, Larcker, and

Sloan [1995] examine whether the compensation for the divisional CEO is related to

subsequent innovative activity within the division. They find at least weak evidence that

when divisional CEOs have a higher proportion of total compensation tied to long-term

components, the ratio of patent awards to sales in the division is higher. Finally, Eng and

Shackell [2001] find no evidence that the adoption of long-term performance plans for

senior management has implications for R&D spending, once the presence of holdings by

institutional investors are controlled for. Because the compensation of officials directly

responsible for managing R&D are typically not included in filings with the U.S.

Securities and Exchange Commission, these works focus on the compensation of senior

managers (Holthausen, et al., being an exception).

       The second, smaller body of work more explicitly seeks to relate the

organizational structure of R&D to innovation. Cockburn, Henderson, and Stern [1999]

examine the intensity of research workers'incentives for the distinct tasks of basic and

applied research. Motivated by the multi-tasking framework, they suggest that when

incentives are strong along one dimension, firms will set high-powered incentives for

effort along other dimensions that compete for the worker'
                                                         s effort and attention. They

find that firms who promote individuals based on scientific publications (which are likely

to reflect basic research) also provide more intense incentives for success in applied

research, by increasing program budgets in response to patent filings. Argyres and

Silverman [2004] examine how the centralization of a firm’s R&D organizational

structure and R&D funding authority affects its innovations. They find that in particular,




                                                                                             8
firms with centralized R&D organizations generate innovations that are more cited, and

are cited across a broader range of technological areas, than do firms with decentralized

R&D organizations.5

         The contribution of this paper is to document a new set of facts that performance

pay is positively associated with firm innovation. To our knowledge, this relationship has

not been documented elsewhere. The facts documented in the paper constitute suggestive

evidence that stronger incentives lead to more innovation.

         The plan of this paper is as follows. Section 2 describes the data employed in the

study. In Section 3, we present the key regression analyses and robustness tests. The

final section concludes the paper.


2.       Data Description

2.1      Compensation Data

         The primary dataset from which we draw our sample is an unbalanced panel of

more than 300 publicly traded U.S. firms over the years 1987 to 1998, spanning a number

of industries. This has a rich array of compensation data for senior and middle corporate

management.

         The data are collected from a confidential compensation survey conducted by

Hewitt Associates, a leading human resources consulting firm specializing in executive

compensation and benefits. The survey is the largest private compensation survey (as

measured by the number of participating firms). The survey participants are typically the

5
 This paper is also related to Guedj and Scharfstein [2004], who compare 235 cancer drugs developed by
early-stage biotechnology companies and established pharmaceutical corporations. They find that early-
stage firms are much more likely to advance drugs from Phase I to Phase II of clinical trials, but that these
drugs are much less likely to reach later stages of trials or to be approved. This pattern is particularly
pronounced in biotechnology companies with large cash reserves. They attribute this pattern to agency
problems between managers of single-product firms and their investors.


                                                                                                                9
leaders in their sectors. More than 75% of the firms in the dataset are listed as Fortune

500 firms in at least one year and more than 85% are listed as Fortune 1000 firms. In

general, Hewitt survey participants also participate in other compensation consulting firm

surveys (e.g., Hay Associates, Mercer, Towers Perrin, to name a few) and do so primarily

to receive information about pay practices to use as a competitive benchmark in

evaluating their own compensation programs. It is important to note that the sample

includes many more firms than Hewitt’s consulting client base, with at least 50% of the

survey participants having no other relationship to Hewitt. Based on several analyses

described in Appendix A, we conclude that the survey sample is probably most

representative of Fortune 500 firms.

        The survey is comprehensive in that it collects detailed compensation data on

many senior and middle management positions, including both operational positions

(e.g., chief operations officer and divisional CEO) and staff positions (e.g., chief financial

officer and human resources head). The survey typically covers all the positions at the

top of the hierarchy and a sample of positions lower down.6

        The data for each position include all components of compensation including

salary, bonus, restricted stock, stock options, and other forms of long-term incentives

(e.g., performance units). An observation in the dataset is a managerial position within a

firm in a year. To ensure consistency in matching these positions across firms, the survey

provides benchmark position descriptions and collects additional data for each position,

leading to a rich dataset. Hence, in addition to data on all aspects of compensation, the

dataset includes position-specific characteristics such as job title, the title of the position

6
 The Hewitt database is thus far more comprehensive than the SEC filings which form the basis for the
ExecuComp database. Because firms are required to only file information on the top five executive officers,
information on R&D executives is rarely included in these sources.


                                                                                                        10
that the job reports to (i.e., the position’s boss), number of positions between the position

and the CEO in the organizational hierarchy, and both the incumbent’s status as a

corporate officer and tenure in position.

       In this paper, we focus on the subset of firms (a) that report compensation data for

the most senior executive responsible for corporate level R&D in the Hewitt survey

(corporate R&D head) and (b) that report R&D expenditures in Compustat. This leads to

a sample of approximately 800 firm-years and 140 firms. In some cases, the firms also

have divisional R&D managers. As a basis of comparison, we also document

compensation for the CEO, CFO, and HRH positions. The definitions for each of these

positions, and additional R&D positions included in the survey, are described in

Appendix B.

       We believe the survey data are accurate for several reasons. First, Hewitt

personnel are knowledgeable about survey participants because they are assigned to

specific participants for several years. Furthermore, while the participating firms initially

match their positions to the benchmark positions in the survey, Hewitt personnel follow

up to verify accuracy and spend additional eight to ten hours on each questionnaire,

evaluating the consistency of responses with public data (e.g., proxy statements) and

across years. Finally, participants have an incentive to match positions correctly and

provide accurate data because they use the survey results to set pay levels and design

management compensation programs.

       The above data are supplemented with information from Compustat for financial

data and CRSP for shareholder returns. While the Hewitt survey is conducted in April of

each year and the compensation data describe the firm in the year of survey completion,




                                                                                           11
some statistics (e.g., number of employees in the firm) represent the end of the most

recent fiscal year. To maintain consistency, we match Compustat and CRSP data using

the year prior to the year of the survey.

       In Panel A of Table 1, we present descriptive statistics for the firms in the sample.

While the dataset includes 141 firms, the exact number varies over the period, as firms

enter and exit as survey participants. The firms in the sample are large firms with

average sales of approximately $11.0 billion, assets of $12.1 billion, and a ratio of R&D

expense to sales of 5%. In 63% of the firm-years, the firm has a centralized R&D

organization (i.e., reports a corporate R&D head and does not report divisional R&D

managers). In 48% of the firm-years, the corporate R&D head reports directly to the

CEO in the organizational hierarchy. Finally, the sample firms span many industrial

sectors of the economy, with some concentration in the chemical, machinery,

transportation equipment, paper, electrical, and instrumentation industries (Table 1, Panel

B).

       A natural question is whether the individuals recorded as corporate R&D heads

are indeed the key decision-makers, or rather outward-looking officials primarily

responsible for being the R&D organizations’ “public face.” While it is difficult to

answer this question definitively, we can examine these individuals’ titles. The ten most

frequently represented titles are reported in Panel C of Table 1. These titles seem

consistent with individuals who are involved with the day-to-day management of the

firms’ research efforts.



2.2. Innovation Data




                                                                                          12
        The survey data for firms reporting a corporate R&D head are linked to patent

data from the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) and publication data from

Thomson/ISI’s Web of Science.

        For patent data, we employ the NBER Patent Citations Database, which includes

all patent awards and patent citations between 1975 and 1999. For each patent awarded to

a publicly traded firm and its affiliates, the database includes the firm’s CUSIP. We

match the CUSIPs of the firms in Hewitt sample to those employed in the Citations

Database. One complication is posed by firms that went public after 1989 that are

included in the Hewitt database, as the CUSIPs for these firms are not included in the

NBER database. In these instances, we add the CUSIP to the patents awarded to the firm

and any subsidiaries in the NBER database.

        From the NBER database, we collect the following information:

    •   The number of awards to the firm in a given year.

    •   The mean and median number of citations to the firm’s patents awarded in a given

        year.

    •   The mean and median number of adjusted citations to the firm’s patents awarded

        in a given year: that is, the number of citations adjusted by the expected number

        of citations that we would anticipate that the firms’ patents would receive. We

        undertake this adjustment by estimating a regression using all patents awarded

        over this period, with controls for the year of the award, the technology subclass

        (see Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg [2001] for a description), and a dummy

        indicating the patentee is a domestic entity.7


7
We employ the subclasses in the NBER scheme rather than U.S. Patent and Trademark Office’s Patent
Classification scheme due to the limitations of the latter scheme, which does not correspond well to


                                                                                                       13
    •    The “generality” of the firm’s awards in a given year. This frequently employed

         measure (see Jaffe and Trajtenberg [2002]) is one minus the Herfindahl Index

         across technology classes of the patent citations received by a patent. Thus, a

         patent with a generality score approaching zero suggests that the patent has very

         narrow use, while a measure of one suggests that a diverse array of subsequent

         patents draw upon the award. We compute the mean of the generality measure for

         all patents awarded each firm in every year.

    •    The “originality” of the firm’s awards in a given year. This measure is computed

         similarly, but captures the concentration of the citations made by the patent to

         earlier awards. Once again, we average the patents awarded in each firm-year.

    •    The extent of concentration of the firm’s awards in a given year. We compute the

         Herfindahl Index of the firm’s awards, again employing the technology subclasses

         in the NBER Patent Citations Database.

         While our primary focus is on patented technologies, we also wish to understand

the changes in publications. We determine the number of publications by authors

associated with each firm through the use of the Web of Science database. We use as

keywords the names of the firms in the Hewitt database and their major subsidiaries.8

         One challenging issue has to do with the timing of awards and R&D expenditures.

The economics literature has argued that patent applications are generated nearly

contemporaneously with R&D expenditures (Hall, Griliches, and Hausman [1986]).

Thus, it would be clearly problematic to relate the number of patent awards in 1995 to


technological classifications (see Lerner [1994] for a discussion). Foreign patentees may be cited less, as
often their original patent filing in another nation is cited instead of the award in the United States.
8
  Our search procedure did not allow us to identify citations to these articles akin to those of patents. While
Thomson offered to sell us the citation data, the cost would have been in the six figures.


                                                                                                             14
compensation levels in 1995, as the patents would have been filed on average two years

before (the typical patent took approximately two years to issue over this period9).

Instead, we employ in our base specifications a two-year lag for patents, relating patents

awarded in 1995 to compensation levels in 1993. Similarly, reflecting the relatively short

pendencies at most applied science and engineering journals (Adams, Clemmons, and

Stephan [2004]), we relate publications appearing in 1995 to compensation levels in

1994.

        It might be wondered why we do not instead employ applications: for instance,

relating applications filed in 1995 to compensation levels in that year. Our reluctance to

do so reflects the facts that (a) the extent of patent pendency is not random and (b) the

substantial truncation bias affecting the sample. Johnson and Popp [2003] show that more

important patents appear to take longer to issue, with a significant tail of patents taking

10 years or more.10 Since our compensation data begins in 1988, this would mean that

the count of applications in a significant number of years (certainly, at least half the

sample) would be truncated. Moreover, some of the most important patents would not be

included in the tabulations of mean citations and other measures. If we could be assured

that this pattern would introduce no systematic bias, we could perhaps ignore it, but it is

hard to be confident. While the use of awards will introduce noise into the analysis (some

awards will actually have been applied for less than two years before, while others will

have been done so three or more years earlier), the approach should not raise concerns

about systematic biases.


9
 For instance, Popp, Juhl, and Johnson [2004] find that the median patent awarded between 1976 and 1996
took 23 months to issue.
10
   Until the end of the period under study, the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office only published issued
patents. The fact that a firm had made a patent application that had not issued was not disclosed.


                                                                                                     15
          Below, we will examine the robustness of the analysis to different approaches.

For instance, rather than employing a two-year lag between patent awards and

compensation data, we employ a one- and three-year lag. Similarly, we employ the

application data despite our reservations with it. The critical results continue to hold as

before.

          As noted above, the NBER Patent database includes all awards and citations

through the end of 1999. Thus, in our regressions, we will be only employing data on

compensation levels between 1988 and 1997.11



2.3.      Summary Statistics

          This study primarily focuses on compensation for the most senior executive with

corporate R&D responsibility (i.e., corporate R&D heads). We document each

component of pay: salary, bonus, and long-term compensation. The pay tied to long-term

components includes restricted stock, stock options, and other components of long-term

compensation as calculated by Hewitt Associates.12 We also report the ratio of bonus to

cash compensation (or salary plus bonus) and the ratio of long-term compensation to cash

compensation. We focus on long-term compensation because decisions made by

corporate R&D heads have a longer-time horizon relative to decisions made by other

11
   An additional complication is introduced by the fact that few patents garner a significant number of
citations in their first year of issue. When employing citation analyses, we explore the robustness to only
employing patents that have had at least two years to be cited: for instance, we repeat Table 4, only
employing compensation data between 1988 and 1995 in the citation regressions. The results are little
changed.
12
   These measures represent ex ante assessments of the value of long-term compensation and are computed
by Hewitt Associates. Stock options are valued using a modified version of Black-Scholes that takes into
account firm-specific vesting and termination provisions in addition to the standard variables of interest
rates, stock price volatility, and dividends. As is standard practice among compensation consulting firms,
the other components of long-term incentives (i.e., restricted stock, performance units, and performance
shares) are valued using an economic valuation similar to Black-Scholes that takes into account firm-
specific vesting, term provisions, and the probability of achieving performance goals.


                                                                                                         16
executives, e.g., those responsible for manufacturing, marketing and sales. And, payoffs

associated with investing in innovation are not likely to be realized immediately.

        We analyze both cash compensation (salary and bonus) and total compensation.

We also analyze several measures of performance-based pay as proxies for the incentives

of corporate R&D heads. The first measure is the ratio of the value of long-term

compensation to cash compensation. This measure is similar to that used in Holthausen,

Larcker, and Sloan [1995].13 We also analyze two distinct measures of long-term

compensation: the ratio of the value of stock options to cash compensation and the ratio

of restricted stock to cash compensation. Finally, as a measure of short-term incentives,

we analyze the fraction of cash compensation from annual bonuses.

        In Panel A of Table 2, we report summary statistics of several pay measures for

the corporate R&D head, the CEO, the CFO, and the HRH position. Compensation

variables are denominated in 1996 dollars. Sample averages for the corporate R&D head

for salary and bonus (or cash compensation), ratio of bonus to cash compensation (ST

incentive ratio), ratio of long-term compensation to cash compensation (LT incentive

ratio), and total compensation are $380,039, 27.7%, 59.2%, and $641,559, respectively.

Comparable sample averages for the CEO are $1,390,899, 35.7%, 98.9%, and $2,994,476

respectively. Finally, sample averages for the CFO are $538,340, 30.5%, 78.9%, and

$1,011,812, and for the HRH are $339,366, 27.2%, 58.5% and $567,935, respectively.

Consistent with the findings of the CEO literature, long-term compensation comprises a

much greater proportion of CEO pay relative to corporate R&D, CFO, and HRH


13
  Since we only observe flow compensation and not stock of incentives, we may worry about measurement
error in our pay variables as proxies for performance-based incentives (Baker and Hall [2004]; Core and
Guay [2002]). To partially address this issue, we also estimate between regressions by averaging executive
observations over the period and analyzing variation between corporate R&D heads.


                                                                                                       17
positions. The long-term incentive ratio for the CEO, on average, is more than 50%

greater than that for the corporate R&D head and HRH positions and 25% greater than

that for the CFO position.14

         In Panel B of Table 2, we document changes in cash compensation and both the

fraction of bonus and the fraction of long-term compensation of salary plus bonus for the

corporate R&D heads, the CEO, the CFO and the HRH position over the period of study.

The table includes firms that appear in the dataset for two consecutive years. By focusing

on this set of observations, we minimize biases from the exit and entry of firms. As we

see, there is an upward trend in both annual and long-term compensation as a fraction of

cash compensation for all four positions over time for this sample. Also, the increase in

the ratio of long-term compensation is much greater than that of the ratio of annual bonus

and the increase in the former is much greater for the CEO relative to the other positions,

especially the corporate R&D head and HRH positions. (The patterns for the whole

sample are qualitatively similar.)

         The ratio of long-term compensation to cash compensation is one measure of

performance-based pay that might be particularly important in the effect it has on the

corporate R&D head’s decisions to invest in innovation. It is also an ex ante measure in

that its value is based on expectations of future performance. And, as mentioned earlier,


14
 This “flow” measure of long-term compensation understates incentive pay for the CEO relative to other
executives because CEOs hold a much higher percentage of a firm’s stock in comparison to other
managers. Recent research on CEO compensation accounts for the incentives from the holding of stock
and stock options (in addition to annual grants of restricted stock and options). In contrast to ExecuComp
data, we only observe annual grants of options and restricted stock and not stock holdings. In order for us to
construct an explicit measure of incentives for an executive based on stock ownership from annual grants
of options and restricted stock, we would have to make many assumptions about initial holdings, exercising
of options, and vesting restrictions on both options and restricted stock. However, this data limitation is less
problematic in our context because of the panel structure of our data and our econometric specification.
Since we are exploiting both within firm and between firm variations in our random effects regressions,
annual grants of options and restricted stock are an appropriate measure.


                                                                                                            18
the ratio of the value of long-term incentives to cash compensation for corporate R&D

heads has more than doubled over the period from 1988 to 1998.

       One important consideration is that while all firms in the sample have a head of

corporate research, not all of them have a centralized R&D organization. Approximately

37% of the firm-year observations in our sample also have divisional R&D managers

who typically report to division heads and are responsible for applied R&D and design

and development engineering for the division. In firms with a centralized R&D

organization, corporate R&D heads have greater firm-wide authority over R&D since

these firms do not have divisional R&D managers. Argyres and Silverman [2004] argue

that there are fundamental differences between the manner in which firms with

centralized versus decentralized research structures evaluate new projects. In addition,

centralized R&D organizations generate innovations that have a higher level of impact

and affect a broader range of technological areas than do firms with decentralized R&D

organizations.

       It might be anticipated that offering high-powered incentives to the corporate

R&D head would have a much more dramatic impact among firms that have a centralized

R&D organization than in ones which also have divisional R&D managers. The ability of

the corporate R&D head to have an effect on firm value is likely to be much lower in the

case where R&D responsibilities reside in large part within the divisions.

       In Table 3, we report summary statistics of firm characteristics, pay measures for

corporate R&D head and CEO positions, and innovation measures for both the samples

with centralized R&D organizations and those with decentralized organizations. The

centralized R&D firms are smaller firms operating in more volatile environments. These




                                                                                           19
firms tend to have lower levels of compensation and lower ratios of performance-based

pay for the CEO and the corporate R&D head positions.



3.       Econometric Specification and Results

3.1      Specification

         In each table of regressions, we use firm-years as units of observation. We

estimate regressions with the same nine measures of innovation as dependent variables

introduced above.15 We typically employ a random effects specification. In these

analyses, as well as the subsequent ones, we employ controls for each corporate R&D

head separately.16 While unobserved executive heterogeneity is a concern, we are limited

to random effects specifications. The fixed effects coefficients are imprecisely estimated,

because there is not enough variation within R&D head compensation variables during

the relatively short average tenure of each head.

         In each case, we employ as independent variables the logarithm of firm sales

(denominated in 1996 dollars), the research intensity (the ratio of the firms’ R&D to

sales), and dummy variables for the year of the observation. (Again, we explore the

robustness of the results to additional control variables below.)

         As mentioned earlier, we might worry about measurement error in our use of flow

compensation as a proxy for incentives since we are limited to annual grants of stock

options and restricted stock. To address this, we examine the robustness of the results in a


15
   Due to the skewed distributions of the number of patents and publications (as documented in Jaffe and
Trajtenberg [2002], we employ the logarithm of (one plus) these measures as dependent variables. The
results are also robust to the use of a negative binomial specification based on the count of patents and
publications.
16
   We determine turnover of the corporate R&D head from the Hewitt data. In an alternative specification,
we employ effects for each firm. We find that while the explanatory power is not quite as high, the results
are qualitatively unchanged.


                                                                                                         20
between regression that takes averages of observations over time periods for each

corporate R&D head and analyzes variation between these positions.

        In most tables, we report four sets of analyses. In these analyses, we vary the

dependent variable measuring compensation. In particular, we employ:

        •    The overall compensation level of the corporate R&D head, where we use the

             logarithm of compensation in 1996 dollars as the dependent variable.17

        •    The ratio of long-term compensation of the corporate R&D head to the sum of

             the base compensation and bonus in that year.

        •    The ratio of long-term compensation of the corporate R&D head to the sum of

             base compensation and bonus in that year, as well as the ratio of short-run

             incentives (the ratio of bonus to the sum of base salary and bonus).

        •    The ratio of the two key components of long-term compensation of the

             corporate R&D head (stock options and restricted stock) to the sum of base

             compensation and bonus in that year.



3.2     Baseline Results

        Table 4 presents the base-line analyses for the firms with centralized R&D

organizations. Here, we see several distinct patterns:

        •    Higher compensation levels for the corporate R&D head are associated with

             more patent awards, more heavily cited patents, and more concentrated

             patents (Table 4a). A one-standard deviation increase in the log of total

             compensation is associated with an increase of 0.65 in mean citations for the
17
  Salary increases are another measure that partially captures promotion incentives. However, they are
small relative to the importance of other types of incentives for corporate R&D heads. The results are
robust to the inclusion of the log of changes in salary for each manager in our regressions.


                                                                                                         21
    firm, which is 14.3 % of the sample mean. Or, an increase in total

    compensation from the 25th percentile ($344,400) to the 75th percentile

    ($764,309) is associated with an increase of 0.8 in mean citations for the firm,

    which is 18.6 % of the sample mean.

•   Long-term incentives for the corporate R&D head are associated with more

    patent awards, more heavily cited patents, and patents with greater generality

    (Table 4b). A one-standard deviation increase in the ratio of long-term

    incentives to salary plus bonus is associated with an increase of 9.0% in patent

    awards to the firm. A one-standard deviation increase in the ratio of long-

    term incentives to salary plus bonus is associated with an increase of 0.48 in

    mean citations for the firm, which is 10.4 % of the sample mean. An increase

    in the ratio of long-term incentives to salary plus bonus from the 25th

    percentile (28.6%) to the 75th percentile (74.3%) is associated with an increase

    of 0.41 in mean citations for the firm, which is 9.1% of the sample mean.

•   Short-term incentives appear to have little impact, with the exception of the

    median number of adjusted citations (Table 4c).

•   The long-term incentive effect appears to work through both stock options and

    restricted stock. Restricted stock grants have the strongest relationship with

    citations, while options are associated with more patent awards (Table 4d). A

    one-standard deviation increase in the ratio of the value of restricted stock to

    salary plus bonus is associated with an increase of 0.47 in mean citations for

    the firm, which is 10.4 % of the sample mean. For stock options, the

    associated increase is 8.0 % of the sample mean. An increase in the ratio of




                                                                                     22
            the value of stock options to salary plus bonus from the 25th percentile

            (15.6%) to the 75th percentile (52.1%) is associated with an increase of 0.27 in

            mean citations for the firm, which is 5.9% of the sample mean.

        •   Turning to the control variables, larger firms appear to patent more frequently

            and widely (i.e., the Herfindahl Index of patent classes is lower), and to have

            fewer citations, as well as to publish more. More research-intensive firms

            publish more.18

        These results appear to be more consistent with the Jensen hypothesis: high-

powered incentives are associated with more research output and higher research quality.

There seem to be few of the anticipated costs associated with higher-powered incentives:

these firms do not increase the concentration of their patent portfolio or reduce the

number of publications.

        When we look at the firms with a decentralized R&D organization in Table 5, the

results are much weaker. In Table 5a, the only significant patterns are that firms with

higher compensation levels for the corporate R&D head patent more. In Table 5b, there is

no significant relationship between long-term incentives and innovation. When we repeat

the analyses in Tables 4c and 4d in unreported analyses, few significant patterns emerge.

        Moreover, these results are not robust to slight changes in the specification. For

instance, when we repeat the analyses in Tables 4 and 5 with some slight changes, such

as using random effects for each firm (rather than for each R&D manager) and

winsorizing the compensation measures at the 99% level, the basic patterns in Table 4

remain, while the few significant results in Table 5 disappear.


18
  When we exclude R&D intensity from the baseline regressions in Table 4b, the magnitude of the
coefficients are somewhat larger with no change in significance levels.


                                                                                                  23
        To sum up, we find positive relations between innovation measures and long-term

incentives for corporate R&D heads in the centralized R&D sample, but not in the sample

of firms with a decentralized R&D organization.



3.3. Robustness Checks

        We undertake a variety of robustness checks of the results. Table 6 is an example

of the additional analyses we perform.

        In this table, we employ applications rather than awards, though as discussed

above, the use of this measure may pose some concerns about truncation biases. The

basic patterns go through as before. Higher compensation is associated more patenting,

more citations, and now more focused awards. More long-term incentives are associated

with more patenting, more citations, and more general awards. The results continue to

hold when we control for short-term compensation. Interestingly, more short-term

incentives are associated with more focused awards. When we divide the long-term

compensation into stock options and restricted stock, both stock options and restricted

stock have a statistically significant effect on the number of citations.

        In Table 7a, we undertake an analysis addressing the possibility that the above

results may be driven by differences in the position of the corporate R&D head in the

organizational hierarchy. It might be that more incentive-based compensation is offered

to positions closer to the CEO, which in turn drives the nature of the innovation. Thus,

we might be falsely imputing significance to the compensation variables, when it is really

the hierarchical position that is critical.




                                                                                           24
       We are already partially addressing this issue by employing random effects in the

regressions. A wealth of sociological literature (e.g., Baron, Hannon, and Burton [1999])

has suggested that organizational features are very persistent, and typically survive even

as the management team turns over. Thus, these effects should absorb much of the

differences.

       Another way to address this concern is to explicitly control for position within the

hierarchy. In particular, it might be argued that during this period, the decision-making

authority of the corporate R&D head’s position was considerably augmented. Put in the

language of economic theory, R&D chiefs may have moved from having “formal” to

“real” authority over the allocation of R&D budgets (Aghion and Tirole [1997], Dessein

[2002]).

       To control for this possibility, we examine whether the head of corporate R&D

reports directly to the CEO. We add a dummy variable for such observations, as well as

an interaction between the compensation measures and the dummy. Table 7a shows that

these controls make little difference to the results.

       We also undertake a variety of unreported robustness checks. As noted above, we

winsorize the compensation measures, to delineate the effects of outliers. We estimate

ordinary least squares regressions merely employing dummy variables for each industry,

but without fixed or random effects. In addition, we include the mean compensation of a

number of other staff positions as a control. We also vary the period that we lag the

patent awards: that is, we look at the results if we assume the awards are issued one and

three years after the application date. Also, we estimate the patent and publication




                                                                                            25
regressions using a negative binomial specification that recognizes the dependent variable

as a count measure. In each case, the same basic patterns appear.

        Since there appears to be limited variation across time periods within firms, we

repeat the specification in Table 4, but estimate between regressions. In this analysis, we

take averages of the observations over time for each executive, which allows us to limit

the errors-in-variables problems brought about by annual fluctuations of the independent

variables. We find similar qualitative patterns as in the random effects specifications, but

with larger coefficients and greater statistical significance.19



3.4. Examining the Incentives Hypothesis

        We have been circumspect in the interpretation of these results. The positive

association between innovation measures and long-term incentives of corporate R&D

heads is consistent with the hypothesis that equity-based incentives lead to better

decisions about project selection at the corporate level. However, alternative explanations

certainly exist, such as the possibility that these incentives are offered to attract or retain

high-quality managers or that these awards are a reward for past successful

performance.20 Definitively establishing one hypothesis is very challenging and beyond

the scope of this paper. However, we do explore evidence in light of the incentives

hypothesis.

19
   When we undertake instrumental variable analyses using the between specification, we also do not see to
the same extent the dramatic increase in the coefficients as we do in the random effects specifications
discussed in Section 3.4.
20
   Based on interviews with Hewitt Associates and human resource personnel, awarding stock options and
restricted stock for past performance is relatively uncommon. This is consistent with the finding of Cohen,
Nelson, and Walsh [2000] that patents are infrequently used to measure internal performance. Moreover, if
stock options and restricted stock are granted as rewards for past performance, we might expect a positive
contemporaneous relation between grants and pay. To evaluate this, we estimate our baseline regression in
Table 4b, but use contemporaneous measures of grants instead of lagged grants. We find that the
coefficient on long-term incentive pay is no longer significant in the citation regressions.


                                                                                                        26
       We address this concern in three ways. First, we repeat the analysis of Table 4,

but replace compensation of the corporate R&D head with compensation of two senior

staff positions: Chief Financial Officer and Human Resources Head. In effect, we are

using these other positions as a control group. If our results are just spurious correlations

driven by unobserved firm heterogeneity, then we might expect to find similar results for

other senior staff positions. In Tables 7b and 7c, we report the regressions analogous to

Table 4b for the CFO and HRH positions based on the centralized R&D sample: that is,

we regress the innovation measure on the ratio of long-term incentives to salary plus

bonus, firm size, ratio of R&D to sales, firm and year indicators. While (the logarithm of)

patents are weakly positively correlated with long-term incentives for the CFO position,

there is no association for the HRH position, plus no association between the citation

measures and long-term incentives for either of these positions. When we estimate the

patent count regressions based on a negative binomial specification, the weakly

significant result between patents and long-term incentives for the CFO disappears.

       Importantly, the uniqueness of the positive associations between long-term

incentives and citations for the corporate R&D head are consistent with the explanation

that incentives affect decisions of managers responsible for corporate R&D. Both the

CFO and the HRH position receive roughly comparable levels of long-term incentives as

the corporate R&D head (see Table 2, Panel A), but it is only the R&D head incentives

that are related to either patents or citations. These results are also consistent with the

explanation that greater performance pay attracts more skilled R&D managers.

       Second, since compensation is a choice variable and endogenously chosen, we

undertake an instrumental variables analysis. An ideal instrument is one that is correlated




                                                                                              27
with the independent variable of interest but not with the unobserved error in the

dependent variable. For an instrument, we use the extent of spawning: the number of

instances where an employee left a publicly traded firm headquartered in that county in

that year to begin a venture-backed firm.

       The extent of spawning is likely to be correlated with incentive compensation. In

many cases, these individuals obtained substantial equity stakes and/or stock option

grants in the new ventures. It can be anticipated that these defections will create pressures

for local firms to offer higher-powered compensation. Meanwhile, this variable should be

uncorrelated with circumstances affecting the extent of innovation in the firm itself: in

calculating this measure, we exclude spawning by both the Hewitt firm and by firms in

the same two-digit industry within the same county as the Hewitt firm. Because by

construction the spawned enterprises are in other industries than the Hewitt firm, it is

unlikely that the rate of spawning is closely linked to the overall technological

opportunity set facing the firm. We obtain this information from Gompers, et al. [2005],

who compile this information from the DowJones Venture Source data-set.

       Table 8 presents the second-stage results of our instrumental variables regression.

The number of citations continues to be explained by the instrumented long-term

compensation ratio. Two results, however, are less easily explained. First, the mean

originality of the patents actually declines with higher-powered incentives. Second, the

magnitude of the coefficients increases quite dramatically in the instrumented

regressions.

       Third, since agency theory predicts a negative relation between risk and

incentives, if performance-based pay is offered to provide incentives, we should expect to




                                                                                            28
see the sensitivity of pay to performance declining as the volatility of the performance

measure rises. To test this for the corporate R&D heads in our sample of firms, we

replicate the analysis of Aggarwal and Samwick [1999] using total compensation,

shareholder returns as the performance measure, and the empirical cumulative

distribution function (CDF) of the standard deviation of monthly returns over the prior 60

months as the measure of risk. We use standard deviations based on historical stock

returns in order to somewhat mitigate the manager’s ability to influence stock return

volatility. Based on the “implicit” method, we estimate a regression of total compensation

for the corporate R&D head on stock returns, the CDF of return standard deviation, an

interaction term between stock returns and the CDF, and firm and year indicators. Total

compensation is defined as salary, bonus, and the value of long-term incentives. In Table

9, we use two measures of shareholder returns and report the estimated coefficients on

the performance measure, the interaction term between performance and risk, and the risk

measure. We first estimate the coefficients for the whole sample and then split the

sample using two criteria: (i) firms with centralized versus decentralized R&D

organizations; and (ii) firms above the sample median in the ratio of R&D to sales and

firms below the median.

         Based on the whole sample and for both shareholder return measures, we find a

negative risk-incentive relation, i.e., the coefficient on the performance measure is

positive and significant, while that on the interaction between performance and risk is

negative and significant.21 The sensitivity of pay is positively related to performance and

declines in the volatility of the performance measure. These findings are consistent with

offering stock-based pay to provide incentives. Furthermore, we find that this relation
21
  These results are robust to inclusion of firm size measured as log of firm sales.


                                                                                           29
holds in the partition of firms with centralized R&D organizations and R&D-intensive

firms, but not in firms with decentralized R&D organizations or low R&D firms. These

results are consistent with the explanation that stock-based pay is more effective when

the decisions of the corporate R&D head have the greatest effect on stock returns: that is,

in R&D-intensive firms with centralized R&D organizations. It is also consistent with

Prendergast [2002], who argues that the mixed empirical results on the negative tradeoff

between risk and incentives are due to the omission of measures of authority. When we

partition the sample by characteristics that proxy for the importance of the corporate

R&D head’s decision-making authority (centralized R&D and R&D-intensive firms), we

find stronger support of the negative tradeoff between risk and incentives.

       Taken together, our findings suggest that incentives play some role in corporate

R&D heads making better decisions over project selection. Once again, we cannot

determine whether the effect is due to better project selection or better people selection.

However, both explanations are consistent with performance pay: firms should hire more

skilled managers to produce more patents and pay them more in return.



4. Conclusions

       Beginning in the late 1980s, American corporations began linking the

compensation of central research personnel to the economic objectives of the corporation.

This trend has attracted considerable concern in technology policy circles, while

economic theory suggests widely different consequences.

       This paper examines the relationship between innovation and the shifting

compensation of corporate R&D heads over the 1990s. Among firms with centralized




                                                                                          30
R&D organizations, a clear relationship emerges: more long-term incentives are

associated with more heavily cited patents. These incentives also appear to be more

weakly associated with more frequent awards and patents of greater generality. We

undertake a variety of analyses to address concerns that the results reflect dynamics other

than performance pay improving project selection by, or skill selection of, corporate

R&D heads. Furthermore, the results appear to be robust to many of the controls we

employ.

       Two important limitations of this analysis—and opportunities for future work—

should be noted. We confine our analysis here to the relationship between innovation and

the shifting compensation on the head of corporate R&D. It would certainly be

interesting to examine the compensation schemes of divisional research managers as

well. We intend to examine this question in future work.

       At the same time, the Hewitt data does not enable us to examine what are

arguably the most interesting compensation choices: the incentives offered rank-and-file

scientists and engineers. Field-based evidence suggests that the compensation has

traditionally been extremely flat (Orth, Bailey, and Wolek [1964], Neumayer [1973]).

Understanding the extent to which this pattern still holds, and its implications for

innovation, is an important challenge.

       Second, it is by no means clear that our measures can capture shifts in truly

groundbreaking research. It may be that profound changes in corporate research have

occurred, but that the consequences of these shifts can only be measured after several

decades. Nonetheless, the absence of deleterious patterns using the measures that we can

employ is striking.




                                                                                         31
References

Adams, James D., J. Roger Clemmons, and Paula E. Stephan, 2004, “How Rapidly Does
Science Leak Out?,” Unpublished working paper, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute,
University of Florida, and Georgia State University.

Aggarwal, Rajesh K., and Andrew A. Samwick, 1999, “The Other Side of the Trade-Off:
The Impact of Risk on Executive Compensation,” Journal of Political Economy, 107, 65-
105.

Aghion, Philippe, and Jean Tirole, 1997, “Formal and Real Authority in Organizations,”
Journal of Political Economy, 105, 1-27.

Argyres, Nicholas S., and Brian S. Silverman, 2004, "R&D, Organization Structure, and
the Development of Corporate Technological Knowledge," Strategic Management
Journal, 25, 929-958.

Athey, Susan, and John Roberts, 2001, “Organizational Design: Decision Rights and
Incentive Contracts,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 91, 200-205.

Baker, George P., and Brian J. Hall, 2004, "CEO Incentives and Firm Size," Journal of
Labor Economics, forthcoming.

Baron, James N., Michael T. Hannan, and M. Diane Burton, 1999, “Building the Iron
Cage: Determinants of Managerial Intensity in the Early Years of Organizations,”
American Sociological Review, 64, 527–47.

Cockburn, Iain, Rebecca Henderson, and Scott Stern, 1999, “The Diffusion of Science-
Driven Drug Discovery: Organizational Change in Pharmaceutical Research,” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 7359.

Cohen, Wesley M., Richard R. Nelson, John P. Walsh, 2000, “Protecting Their
Intellectual Assets: Appropriability Conditions and Why U.S. Manufacturing Firms
Patent (or Not),” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 7552.

Core, John E., and Wayne R. Guay, 2002, “The Other Side of the Tradeoff: The Impact
of Risk on Executive Compensation, A Revised Comment,” Unpublished working paper,
University of Pennsylvania, Wharton School.

Dechow, Patricia M., and Richard G. Sloan, 1991, “Executive Incentives and the Horizon
Problem,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 14, 51-89.

Demsetz, Harold and Kenneth Lehn, 1985, “The Structure of Corporate Ownership:
Causes and Consequences,” Journal of Political Economy, 93, 1155-1171.




                                                                                        32
Dessein, Wouter, 2002, “Authority and Communication in Organizations,” Review of
Economic Studies, 69, 811-838.

Eng, Li L., and Margaret Shackell, 2001, “The Implications of Long-Term Performance
Plans and Institutional Ownership for Firms'Research and Development (R&D)
Investments,” Journal of Accounting, Auditing and Finance, 16, 117-139.

Gompers, Paul, Josh Lerner, and David Scharfstein, 2005, “Entrepreneurial Spawning:
Public Corporations and the Formation of New Ventures, 1986-1999,” Journal of
Finance, 60, 577-614

Guedj, Ilan, and David Scharfstein, 2004, “Organizational Scope and Investment:
Evidence from the Drug Development Strategies and Performance of Biopharmaceutical
Firms,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 10933.

Hall, Brian J., and Jeffrey B. Liebman, 1998, “Are CEOs Really Paid Like Bureaucrats?,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113, 653-691.

Hall, Bronwyn H., Zvi Griliches, and Jerry A. Hausman, 1986, "Patents and R&D: Is
There A Lag?,” International Economic Review, 27, 265-284.

Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam B. Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg, 2001, “The NBER Patent
Citation Data File: Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools,” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper 8498.

Hirshleifer, David, and Yoon Suh, 1992, “Risk, Managerial Effort, and Project Choice,”
Journal of Financial Intermediation, 2, 308-345.

Holmstrom, Bengt, 1989, “Agency Costs and Innovation,” Journal of Economic Behavior
and Organization, 12, 305-27.

Holmstrom, Bengt, and Paul Milgrom, 1991, “Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses:
Incentive Contracts, Asset Ownership, and Job Design,” Journal of Law, Economics and
Organization, 7 (Special Issue), 24-52.

Holthausen, Robert W., David F. Larcker, and Richard G. Sloan, 1995, “Business Unit
Innovation and the Structure of Executive Compensation,” Journal of Accounting and
Economics, 19, 279-313.

Ittner, Christopher D., Richard A. Lambert, David F. Larcker, 2003, “The Structure and
Performance Consequences of Equity Grants to Employees of New Economy Firms,”
Journal of Accounting and Economics, 34, 89-127.

Jaffe, Adam B., and Manuel Trajtenberg, 2002, Patents, Citations, and Innovations: A
Window on the Knowledge Economy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.




                                                                                       33
Jensen, Michael C., 1993, “The Modern Industrial Revolution, Exit, and the Failure of
Internal Control Systems,” Journal of Finance, 48, 831-880.

Johnson, Daniel K. N., and David Popp, 2003, “Forced Out of the Closet: The Impact of
the American Inventors Protection Act on the Timing of Patent Disclosure,” Rand
Journal of Economics, 34, 96-112.

Kortum, Samuel, and Josh Lerner, 2000, “Assessing the Contribution of Venture Capital
to Innovation,” Rand Journal of Economics, 31, 674-692.

Lazear, Edward P., 1989, “Pay Equality and Industrial Politics,” Journal of Political
Economy, 97, 561-580.

_______________. 2000, “Performance Pay and Productivity,” American Economic
Review, vol. 90., no.5, 1346-61.

Lerner, Josh, 1994, “The Importance of Patent Scope: An Empirical Analysis,” Rand
Journal of Economics, 25, 319-333.

Merges, Robert P., 1999, “The Law and Economics of Employee Inventions,” Harvard
Journal of Law and Technology 13, 1-61.

Milgrom, Paul R., and John Roberts,1992, Economics, Organization, and Management,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Murphy, Kevin J., 1999, “Executive Compensation,” In Orley Ashenfelter and David
Card, editors, Handbook of Labor Economics, New York: North Holland, Volume 3,
Chapter 38, pp. 2485-2563.

National Science Board, Committee on Industrial Support of R&D, 1992, The
Competitive Strength of U.S. Industrial Science and Technology: Strategic Issues,
Washington, DC: National Science Foundation.

Neumeyer, Fredrik, 1971, The Employed Inventor in the United States: R & D Policies,
Law and Practice, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Orth, Charles D., 3rd, Joseph C. Bailey, and Francis W. Wolek, editors, 1964,
Administering Research and Development; The Behavior of Scientists and Engineers in
Organizations, Homewood, IL: R.D. Irwin.

Popp, David, Ted Juhl, and Daniel K.N. Johnson, 2004, “Time in Purgatory: Examining
the Grant Lag for U.S. Patent Applications,” Topics in Economic Analysis and Policy, 4,
No. 1, Article 29, http://www.bepress.com/bejeap/topics/vol4/iss1/art29.

Prendergast, Canice, 2002, “The Tenuous Tradeoff between Risk and Incentives.”
Journal of Political Economy, 110, 1071-1102.



                                                                                        34
Rosenbloom, Richard S., and William J. Spencer, 1996, Engines of Innovation: U.S.
Industrial Research at the End of an Era, Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School
Press.

Smith, Clifford W, and Rene M. Stulz, 1985, “The Determinants of Firms'Hedging
Policies,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 20, 391-405.




                                                                                    35
                                      Table 1 (Panel A): Summary Statistics

                                                                                Std.
                             Variable                               Mean        Dev.        Min        Max          Obs

   Firm Sales ($ millions)                                           11038 21307               86 165370               818
   Assets ($ millions)                                               12142 29465              103 279097               818
   R&D/Sales ratio                                                     0.05   0.05           0.00    0.49              818
   Volatility of Shareholder Returns                                   8.71   3.53           3.62   50.55              762
   Patent Count                                                       82.15 168.09           0.00 1936.00              735
   Citations (mean)                                                    4.58   4.48           0.00   29.00              735
   Citations (median)                                                  3.11   3.44           0.00   29.00              735
   Adjusted Citations (mean)                                           0.56   2.99          -4.85   21.39              735
   Adjusted Citations (median)                                        -0.74   2.33          -5.49   21.39              735
   Generality (mean)                                                   0.28   0.16           0.00    0.86              702
   Originality (mean)                                                  0.42   0.13           0.00    0.74              735
   Firm Herfindahl of Patents (HHI)                                    0.28   0.20           0.00    1.00              735
   Publications                                                     112.67 323.41            0.00 2651.00              779
   Centralized R&D organization                                        0.63   0.48           0.00    1.00              818
   Direct Report to CEO (corporate R&D head)                           0.48   0.50           0.00    1.00              813


Note: Sample includes firms that report both a corporate R&D head in the compensation survey and R&D expenditures in Compustat.
Volatility of Shareholder Returns is defined as the standard deviation of monthly returns (percentage) based on the previous 60
months. Patent count is defined as the sum of the number of patents awarded in that firm-year. Citations are defined as the mean and
median of the number of citations in patents awarded in that firm-year. Adjusted citations is defined as the mean and median of the
number of adjusted citations per firm-year, where the adjustment entails subtracting the mean number of patents received by awards in
that technology class in the same award year. Generality is a measure of the breadth of patents that cite the firm’s patents in a given
year; originality the breadth of cited patents. Patent Herfindahl (HHI) is an index of the number of patent classes into which the firm’s
patents fall. Publications are defined as the number of publications by affiliates of that company included in the ISI Web of Science.
Centralized R&D organization is a dummy variable equal to one if the firm reports a corporate R&D head, but no divisional R&D
managers in a firm-year, and zero otherwise. Direct Report to CEO is a dummy variable equal to one if the corporate R&D head
reports directly to the CEO in the organizational hierarchy.




                                                                                                                                            36
            Table 1 (Panel B): Industries of Firms in Sample
                    Distribution by 2-digit SIC Code

              Industry                            N               % of Sample
            (2-digit SIC)                     (firm-yrs)

 Chemical (28)                                    167                   20.4
 Machinery (35)                                   120                   14.7
 Transportation Equipment (37)                    109                   13.3
 Paper (26)                                        66                   8.1
 Electrical (36)                                   57                   7.0
 Instrumentation (38)                              56                   6.8
 Food (20)                                         52                   6.4
 Communications (48)                               25                   3.1
 Other                                            166                   20.3

 Total                                            818                   100

Note: Sample includes firms that report both a corporate R&D head in the compensation survey
and R&D expenditures in Compustat.




                                                                                               37
         Table 1 (Panel C): Ten Most Frequent Titles for
                 Corporate R&D Head in Sample
Rank                  Title


1      Vice President- Research and Development
2      Vice President- Technology
3      Vice President- Engineering
4      Senior Vice President- Technology
5      Senior Vice President- Research and Development
6      Director- Research and Development
7      Vice President- Science and Technology
8      Executive Vice President- Research and Development
9      Vice President- Research
10     Vice President – Corporate Technology




                                                            38
                                           Table 2 (Panel A): Summary Statistics
                    Compensation of Corporate R&D Head, CEO, CFO, and Human Resources Head Positions

                                      Variable                                         Mean        Std. Dev        Min           Max           Obs

     Corporate R&D Head
      Salary+Bonus (constant 1996 $)                                                    380039        204768        99952       1969598            817
      ST incentive ratio (Bonus/(Salary+Bonus))                                           0.277         0.142       0.000          0.750           817
      LT incentive ratio (Long-Term Incentive/(Salary+Bonus))                             0.592         0.521       0.000          5.034           817
      Total Compensation (constant 1996 $)                                              641559        502934        99952       5267421            817

     Chief Executive Officer (CEO)
      Salary+Bonus (constant 1996 $)                                                  1390899        904192        361536      11100000            786
      ST incentive ratio (Bonus/(Salary+Bonus))                                          0.357         0.182        0.000          0.870           786
      LT incentive ratio (Long-Term Incentive/(Salary+Bonus))                            0.989         0.911        0.000         11.027           786
      Total Compensation (constant 1996 $)                                            2994476       3113832        364478      35600000            786

     Chief Financial Officer (CFO)
      Salary+Bonus (constant 1996 $)                                                   538340         290377       156142       3778934            674
      ST incentive ratio (Bonus/(Salary+Bonus))                                          0.305          0.158       0.000          0.795           674
      LT incentive ratio (Long-Term Incentive/(Salary+Bonus))                            0.789          0.622       0.000          5.547           674
      Total Compensation (constant 1996 $)                                            1011812         778089       173897       8378033            674

     Human Resources Head (HRH)
      Salary+Bonus (constant 1996 $)                                                    339366        162991        99698       1535105            722
      ST incentive ratio (Bonus/(Salary+Bonus))                                           0.272         0.141       0.000          0.703           722
      LT incentive ratio (Long-Term Incentive/(Salary+Bonus))                             0.585         0.474       0.000          4.257           722
      Total Compensation (constant 1996 $)                                              567935        405922       103922       3932550            722


Note: Sample includes firms that report a corporate R&D head in the compensation survey and R&D expenditures in Compustat. Compensation variables are
denominated in 1996 dollars. The value of long-term compensation is computed by Hewitt Associates. Stock options are valued using a modified version of
Black-Scholes that takes into account vesting and termination provisions in addition to the standard variables of interest rates, stock price volatility, and
dividends. As is standard practice among compensation consulting firms, the other components of long-term incentives (i.e., restricted stock, performance units
and performance shares) are valued using an economic valuation similar to Black-Scholes that takes into account vesting, term provisions, and the probability of
achieving performance goals.



                                                                                                                                                              39
                                                Table 2 (Panel B): Trends in Compensation
                                    Corporate R&D Head, CEO, CFO and Human Resources Head Positions

            Corporate R&D Head                               CEO                                    CFO                       Human Resources Head
                                                                                                                                     (HRH)
                      LT            ST                       LT            ST                      LT            ST                   LT        ST               Firm-
        Salary+    Incentive     Incentive    Salary+     Incentive     Incentive    Salary+    Incentive     Incentive    Salary+ Incentive Incentive           years
Year    Bonus        Ratio         Ratio       Bonus        Ratio         Ratio      Bonus        Ratio         Ratio      Bonus     Ratio     Ratio              (N)

1988    353661       0.387         0.278      1158623       0.637         0.341      510314          0.490        0.297    294477          0.355        0.270         50
1989    355525       0.380         0.253      1215221       0.605         0.314      516050          0.518        0.286    289417          0.349        0.245         51
1990    341902       0.455         0.222      1187175       0.738         0.296      483097          0.615        0.254    293616          0.423        0.226         56
1991    344507       0.568         0.218      1128942       0.810         0.271      441818          0.700        0.224    294977          0.509        0.210         62
1992    384016       0.524         0.262      1256524       0.848         0.319      485261          0.679        0.271    326281          0.501        0.246         66
1993    353783       0.600         0.231      1267873       0.851         0.318      503907          0.710        0.258    317149          0.549        0.229         72
1994    409573       0.610         0.321      1576426       0.911         0.416      581149          0.771        0.355    378858          0.550        0.316         62
1995    438664       0.696         0.339      1741238       1.215         0.446      602749          0.860        0.367    423784          0.700        0.340         54
1996    412076       0.822         0.307      1910300       1.517         0.422      638727          1.320        0.347    443626          1.040        0.334         52
1997    430593       0.872         0.328      1908689       1.747         0.442      619821          1.260        0.356    429787          0.976        0.326         48
1998    480092       0.868         0.345      2037057       1.677         0.444      726682          1.290        0.366    386705          0.800        0.305         39


Note: Sample includes firms that report both a corporate R&D head in the compensation survey for two consecutive years and R&D expenditures in Compustat.
Compensation variables are denominated in 1996 dollars. The value of long-term compensation is computed by Hewitt Associates. Stock options are valued
using a modified version of Black-Scholes that takes into account vesting and termination provisions in addition to the standard variables of interest rates, stock
price volatility, and dividends. As is standard practice among compensation consulting firms, the other components of long-term incentives (i.e., restricted stock,
performance units and performance shares) are valued using an economic valuation similar to Black-Scholes that takes into account vesting, term provisions, and
the probability of achieving performance goals. LT incentive ratio is the ratio of long-term incentives, such as restricted stock and option grants, to salary and
bonus. ST incentive ratio is the ratio of bonus to salary and bonus.




                                                                                                                                                                40
                    Table 3: Summary Statistics--Sample Split by Organizational Structure of R&D—Centralized R&D vs. Decentralized R&D

                                                                I. Firm Variables--Sample Means and Medians
                         Sales          R&D/Sales      Volatility        Direct Report to CEO             Sales        R&D/Sales            Volatility       Direct Report
                                                                                                                                                             to CEO
                                                            Mean                                                                            Median
Centralized R&D            7556.07         0.044            9.02                       0.42                3227.3          0.027              8.19                 0
Decentralized R&D         16945.44         0.049            8.20                       0.58                6125.95         0.039              7.60                 1

                                                                 II. Pay Measures—Sample Means and Median
                             Total         Bonus/        LT Comp./         Options/       Rest. Stock/       Total         Bonus/           LT Comp./          Options/       Rest. Stock/
                            Comp.           Cash           Cash             Cash             Cash           Comp.           Cash              Cash              Cash             Cash
                            1996 $                                                                          1996 $
                                                                               a. Corporate R&D Head
                                                             Mean                                                                             Median
Centralized R&D           608329.1         0.266            0.590           0.433          0.052       493691.1            0.286              0.469              0.305                0
Decentralized R&D         697634.9         0.296            0.596           0.437          0.044       558679.5            0.305              0.479              0.324                0
                                                                              b. Chief Executive Officer
                                                             Mean                                                                             Median
Centralized R&D            2647631         0.343            0.974           0.714             0.097        1933995         0.392              0.758              0.455                0
Decentralized R&D          3117808         0.379            1.015           0.727             0.107        2161250         0.404              0.840              0.515                0

                                                                    III. Innovation Measures—Sample Means
                            Patent        Mean of         Median of        Mean of        Median of        Mean of        Mean of          HHI for Firm      Publications         Firm-Years
                            Count         Citations       Citations          Adj.        Adj. Citations   Generality     Originality                                                  (N)
                                                                           Citations
Centralized R&D             82.88           4.66             3.25           -0.69             0.60           0.28           0.42               0.30              94.43               513
Decentralized R&D           81.14           4.44             2.86           -0.36             0.98           0.28           0.42               0.25             139.31               304

Note: Sample includes firms that report a corporate R&D head in the compensation survey, R&D expenditures in Compustat and 60 months of historical stock returns to calculate
standard deviations. Volatility of Shareholder Returns is defined as the standard deviation of monthly returns (percentage) based on the previous 60 months. The sample is split
into firms with a centralized R&D function vs. firms with decentralized R&D (i.e. firms with both a corporate R&D function and divisional R&D managers). Options/ Cash and
Restricted Stock/ Cash are the ratios of the value of stock option grants and restricted stock to salary plus bonus, respectively. Patent Count is the number of patent awards. Mean
and median of citations are based on citations through 1999 and are computed on a yearly basis. Adjusted citations control for the technology subclass, year of the award, and the
location of the patentee. Original and generality are based on citation patterns (see text). HHI for firm is the Herfindahl Index of the firms’ patent filings in each year across
technology subclasses. Publications are the number of publications in Web of Science. See earlier tables for other variable definitions.




                                                                                                                                                                             41
                      Table 4a: Firm Innovation Measures and Corporate R&D Head (log) Total Compensation--Centralized R&D Sample
                                                Random Effects Specification (Corp RD Head Random Effects)

                                                 (1)             (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)          (6)           (7)           (8)               (9)
                                             Log (Patent      Mean of      Median of      Mean of      Median of      Mean of      Mean of        HHI for            Log
                                               Count)         Citations    Citations      Adjusted      Adjusted     Generality   Originality      Firm          (Publications)
                                                                                          Citations     Citations
Log (total comp.) for Corp RD Head          0.249***         1.066**       0.999***     1.124***      1.060***      0.010         -0.015         0.045*       0.130
                                            (0.089)          (0.437)       (0.374)      (0.386)       (0.309)       (0.016)       (0.015)        (0.024)      (0.094)
Log (firm sales)                            0.638***         -0.492*       -0.653***    -0.552***     -0.660***     -0.006        -0.000         -0.075***    0.843***
                                            (0.065)          (0.253)       (0.203)      (0.211)       (0.158)       (0.008)       (0.008)        (0.012)      (0.080)
R&D/firm sales                              8.047***         16.313***     5.275        6.825         -3.478        0.457***      0.125          -0.505**     12.235***
                                            (1.349)          (5.226)       (4.183)      (4.330)       (3.218)       (0.167)       (0.171)        (0.251)      (1.633)
Constant                                    -5.714***        -1.963        -1.585       -8.882**      -9.027***     0.295         0.596***       0.320        -6.963***
                                            (1.069)          (5.006)       (4.235)      (4.380)       (3.464)       (0.181)       (0.175)        (0.269)      (1.163)
Observations                                457              457           457          457           457           433           457            457          486
Number of Corp RD Heads                     177              177           177          177           177           170           177            177          175

                          Table 4b: Firm Innovation Measures and Corporate R&D Head LT Incentive Ratio--Centralized R&D Sample
                                                Random Effects Specification (Corp RD Head Random Effects)

                                                   (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)             (7)            (8)               (9)
                                               Log (Patent     Mean of      Median of     Mean of      Median of     Mean of        Mean of       HHI for Firm         Log
                                                 Count)        Citations    Citations    Adjusted      Adjusted     Generality     Originality                     (Publications)
                                                                                         Citations     Citations
LT comp./ (salary+bonus) for Corp RD Head     0.171**         0.908**      0.820**      0.773**       0.578**       0.030**       0.019           0.010            0.069
                                              (0.076)         (0.390)      (0.340)      (0.353)       (0.293)       (0.015)       (0.014)         (0.023)          (0.079)
Log (firm sales)                              0.685***        -0.329       -0.499***    -0.361*       -0.455***     -0.008        -0.008          -0.064***        0.871***
                                              (0.061)         (0.227)      (0.181)      (0.191)       (0.143)       (0.007)       (0.007)         (0.011)          (0.076)
R&D/firm sales                                8.628***        18.593***    7.541*       9.608**       -0.482        0.428***      0.023           -0.341           12.499***
                                              (1.320)         (4.957)      (3.932)      (4.143)       (3.085)       (0.155)       (0.162)         (0.240)          (1.618)
Constant                                      -2.988***       9.944***     9.590***     3.636**       2.673**       0.424***      0.454***        0.807***         -5.565***
                                              (0.515)         (1.942)      (1.551)      (1.632)       (1.230)       (0.062)       (0.064)         (0.096)          (0.644)
Observations                                  457             457          457          457           457           433           457             457              486
Number of Corp RD Heads                       177             177          177          177           177           170           177             177              175




                                                                                                                                                                        42
                    Table 4c: Firm Innovation Measures and Corporate R&D Head LT Incentive and ST Incentive Ratio--Centralized R&D Sample
                                                  Random Effects Specification (Corp RD Head Random Effects)

                                                            (1)             (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)               (7)           (8)             (9)
                                                        Log (Patent      Mean of       Median of       Mean of       Median of      Mean of          Mean of        HHI for          Log
                                                          Count)         Citations     Citations      Adjusted       Adjusted      Generality       Originality      Firm        (Publications)
                                                                                                      Citations      Citations
 LT comp./ (salary+bonus) for Corp RD Head             0.172**          0.927**       0.853**        0.823**        0.661**       0.026*          0.016            0.012         0.077
                                                       (0.076)          (0.392)       (0.342)        (0.354)        (0.292)       (0.015)         (0.014)          (0.023)       (0.079)
 Bonus/(salary+bonus) for Corp RD Head                 0.042            0.682         1.106          1.530          2.318***      -0.075*         -0.092**         0.061         0.246
                                                       (0.211)          (1.132)       (1.008)        (1.040)        (0.883)       (0.045)         (0.042)          (0.069)       (0.220)
 Log (firm sales)                                      0.683***         -0.356        -0.541***      -0.420**       -0.544***     -0.005          -0.004           -0.067***     0.862***
                                                       (0.061)          (0.232)       (0.185)        (0.194)        (0.145)       (0.007)         (0.008)          (0.011)       (0.076)
 R&D/firm sales                                        8.625***         18.493***     7.351*         9.351**        -0.907        0.445***        0.039            -0.353        12.556***
                                                       (1.322)          (4.971)       (3.940)        (4.143)        (3.052)       (0.156)         (0.161)          (0.239)       (1.615)
 Constant                                              -2.984***        9.975***      9.628***       3.688**        2.743**       0.420***        0.451***         0.809***      -5.556***
                                                       (0.516)          (1.946)       (1.553)        (1.631)        (1.216)       (0.062)         (0.064)          (0.095)       (0.642)
 Observations                                          457              457           457            457            457           433             457              457           486
 Number of Corp RD Heads                               177              177           177            177            177           170             177              177           175

               Table 4d: Firm Innovation Measures and Corporate R&D Head LT Compensation Components (Stock Options & Restricted Stock)—
                                                                 Centralized R&D Sample
                                               Random Effects Specification (Corp RD Head Random Effects)

                                                         (1)              (2)           (3)             (4)            (5)            (6)               (7)            (8)             (9)
                                                     Log (Patent       Mean of       Median of       Mean of       Median of        Mean of          Mean of         HHI for          Log
                                                       Count)          Citations     Citations       Adjusted      Adjusted        Generality       Originality       Firm        (Publications)
                                                                                                     Citations      Citations
Options/ (salary+bonus) for Corp RD Head            0.182**           0.741*         0.722*        0.580          0.388          0.025            0.004             0.007         0.119
                                                    (0.085)           (0.437)        (0.382)       (0.395)        (0.328)        (0.017)          (0.016)           (0.025)       (0.088)
Rest. Stock/ (salary+bonus) for Corp RD Head        -0.297            2.931***       2.386***      2.502***       1.793***       0.050            0.052             0.071         -0.371
                                                    (0.211)           (0.933)        (0.782)       (0.817)        (0.657)        (0.033)          (0.033)           (0.051)       (0.239)
Log (firm sales)                                    0.687***          -0.245         -0.429**      -0.283         -0.391***      -0.006           -0.004            -0.063***     0.869***
                                                    (0.061)           (0.223)        (0.177)       (0.187)        (0.139)        (0.007)          (0.007)           (0.011)       (0.075)
R&D/firm sales                                      8.740***          18.041***      7.149*        9.298**        -0.473         0.430***         0.041             -0.354        12.595***
                                                    (1.329)           (4.916)        (3.896)       (4.115)        (3.072)        (0.157)          (0.163)           (0.241)       (1.616)
Constant                                            -2.982***         9.444***       9.159***      3.163**        2.273*         0.411***         0.436***          0.797***      -5.556***
                                                    (0.517)           (1.917)        (1.529)       (1.612)        (1.216)        (0.062)          (0.064)           (0.095)       (0.641)
Observations                                        456               456            456           456            456            432              456               456           485
Number of Corp RD Heads                             177               177            177           177            177            170              177               177           175

Note: Sample includes firms that report a corporate R&D head in the compensation survey, R&D expenditures in Compustat, and 60 months of historical stock returns to calculate standard
deviations. The sample is only those firms with a centralized R&D organization (i.e. firms with a corporate R&D head, but no division R&D managers). Log (Patent Count) and Log
(Publications) are defined as the logarithm of (one plus) the number of patents and publications. All regressions include unreported year fixed effects. ***/**/* represent significance at the
1%/5%/10% level. See earlier tables/text for variable definitions.



                                                                                                                                                                                       43
                             Table 5a: Firm Innovation Measures and Corporate R&D Head (log) Total Compensation--Decentralized R&D Sample
                                                       Random Effects Specification (Corp RD Head Random Effects)

                                                  (1)               (2)          (3)                (4)              (5)           (6)              (7)           (8)              (9)
                                              Log (Patent        Mean of      Median of          Mean of         Median of       Mean of         Mean of        HHI for           Log
                                                Count)           Citations    Citations          Adjusted        Adjusted       Generality      Originality      Firm         (Publications)
                                                                                                 Citations       Citations
   Log (total comp.) for Corp RD Head           0.276**           -0.202          -0.067          -0.109            0.147         -0.011          -0.000           0.029         -0.037
                                                 (0.118)          (0.469)         (0.324)         (0.417)         (0.251)        (0.019)          (0.018)        (0.029)        (0.145)
             Log (firm sales)                   0.508***          -0.092          -0.000          -0.157           -0.116         -0.004          -0.005        -0.052***      0.905***
                                                 (0.077)          (0.232)         (0.146)         (0.194)         (0.102)        (0.009)          (0.010)        (0.013)        (0.098)
             R&D/firm sales                     4.888**          13.770**          4.465           3.401          -5.634*          0.432         -0.587**         -0.004       9.159***
                                                 (2.084)          (6.663)         (4.231)         (5.603)         (3.043)        (0.263)          (0.274)        (0.372)        (2.606)
                 Constant                      -4.698***         10.686**          5.749           3.605           -2.476        0.551**         0.465**           0.299       -4.893***
                                                 (1.379)          (5.214)         (3.564)         (4.600)         (2.756)        (0.215)          (0.206)        (0.315)        (1.664)
             Observations                          277              277             277             277              277            268             277             277           292
        Number of Corp RD Heads                    101              101             101             101              101             96             101             101           102

                                 Table 5b: Firm Innovation Measures and Corporate R&D Head LT Incentive Ratio--Decentralized R&D Sample
                                                        Random Effects Specification (Corp RD Head Random Effects)

                                                       (1)               (2)            (3)              (4)            (5)           (6)             (7)            (8)              (9)
                                                   Log (Patent        Mean of        Median of       Mean of        Median of       Mean of        Mean of         HHI for           Log
                                                     Count)           Citations      Citations       Adjusted       Adjusted       Generality     Originality       Firm         (Publications)
                                                                                                     Citations      Citations
LT comp./ (salary+bonus) for Corp RD Head            0.070              0.005           0.116          -0.187         -0.136         0.004           -0.008         0.017           -0.010
                                                    (0.089)            (0.363)         (0.260)        (0.329)        (0.218)        (0.015)         (0.014)        (0.023)         (0.098)
              Log (firm sales)                     0.580***            -0.146          -0.026          -0.172         -0.070        -0.007           -0.004       -0.046***       0.895***
                                                    (0.070)            (0.197)         (0.119)        (0.160)        (0.080)        (0.008)         (0.008)        (0.010)         (0.088)
               R&D/firm sales                      5.895***           12.768**          3.867          3.202         -4.559*         0.377         -0.577**         0.113         9.013***
                                                    (2.054)            (6.281)         (3.904)        (5.191)        (2.722)        (0.248)         (0.261)        (0.343)         (2.553)
                  Constant                         -1.827***          8.587***        5.078***         2.411          -0.974       0.436***        0.459***       0.607***        -5.266***
                                                    (0.644)            (1.833)         (1.127)        (1.502)        (0.782)        (0.072)         (0.077)        (0.099)         (0.804)
              Observations                            277                277             277            277            277            268             277            277             292
         Number of Corp RD Heads                      101                101             101            101            101             96             101            101             102

Note: Sample includes firms that report a corporate R&D head in the compensation survey, R&D expenditures in Compustat, and 60 months of historical stock returns to calculate
standard deviations. The sample is only those firms with a decentralized R&D organization (i.e. firms with both a corporate R&D head and division R&D managers. Log (Patent
Count) and Log (Publications) are defined as the logarithm of (one plus) the number of patents and publications. All regressions include unreported year fixed effects. ***/**/*
represent significance at the 1%/5%/10% level. See earlier tables/text for variable definitions.




                                                                                                                                                                                   44
                      Table 6a: Firm Innovation Measures and Corporate R&D Head (log) Total Compensation--Centralized R&D Sample
                                         Random Effects Specification (Corp RD Head Random Effects)--Applications

                                           (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)             (5)           (6)            (7)           (8)            (9)
                                       Log (Patent     Mean of       Median of        Mean of       Median of       Mean of       Mean of        HHI for         Log
                                         Count)        Citations     Citations       Adjusted        Adjusted      Generality    Originality      Firm       (Publications)
                                                                                     Citations       Citations
Log (total comp.) for Corp RD Head   0.372***         2.398***       1.969***      2.017***       1.719***         0.024        0.008          0.069***     0.110
                                     (0.101)          (0.595)        (0.491)       (0.510)        (0.396)          (0.021)      (0.016)        (0.027)      (0.119)
Log (firm sales)                     0.660***         -0.672**       -0.863***     -0.614**       -0.780***        -0.017       -0.007         -0.089***    0.845***
                                     (0.067)          (0.297)        (0.241)       (0.249)        (0.190)          (0.010)      (0.008)        (0.014)      (0.090)
R&D/firm sales                       7.177***         14.907**       3.991         9.568*         -1.050           0.421**      -0.136         -0.787***    13.812***
                                     (1.446)          (5.979)        (4.869)       (5.046)        (3.883)          (0.207)      (0.173)        (0.279)      (1.966)
Constant                             -7.551***        -18.337***     -13.277**     -20.914***     -17.675***       0.191        0.386**        0.154        -6.869***
                                     (1.187)          (6.692)        (5.513)       (5.721)        (4.431)          (0.231)      (0.179)        (0.298)      (1.429)
Observations                         384              304            304           304            304              304          384            384          378
Number of Corp RD Heads              160              139            139           139            139              139          160            160          154

                          Table 6b: Firm Innovation Measures and Corporate R&D Head LT Incentive Ratio—Centralized R&D Sample
                                          Random Effects Specification (Corp RD Head Random Effects)--Applications

                                            (1)             (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)           (6)             (7)           (8)           (9)
                                        Log (Patent      Mean of       Median of       Mean of     Median of      Mean of        Mean of        HHI for        Log
                                          Count)         Citations     Citations      Adjusted     Adjusted      Generality     Originality      Firm      (Publications)
                                                                                      Citations    Citations
 LT comp./ (salary+bonus) for         0.181**          2.216***        1.714***      1.781***     1.142***       0.041**        0.010          -0.002      0.020
   Corp RD Head                       (0.090)          (0.576)         (0.484)       (0.505)      (0.409)        (0.020)        (0.015)        (0.026)     (0.100)
 Log (firm sales)                     0.740***         -0.320          -0.558***     -0.303       -0.455***      -0.016*        -0.006         -0.069***   0.875***
                                      (0.062)          (0.262)         (0.212)       (0.222)      (0.171)        (0.009)        (0.007)        (0.012)     (0.084)
 R&D/firm sales                       8.390***         19.826***       8.348*        13.841***    3.644          0.427**        -0.124         -0.490*     14.200***
                                      (1.395)          (5.608)         (4.562)       (4.773)      (3.729)        (0.192)        (0.163)        (0.268)     (1.922)
 Constant                             -3.537***        8.632***        8.816***      1.711        1.297          0.475***       0.481***       0.874***    -5.720***
                                      (0.529)          (2.235)         (1.810)       (1.894)      (1.468)        (0.076)        (0.064)        (0.105)     (0.716)
 Observations                         384              304             304           304          304            304            384            384         378
 Number of Corp RD Heads              160              139             139           139          139            139            160            160         154




                                                                                                                                                                    45
                 Table 6c: Firm Innovation Measures and Corporate R&D Head LT Incentive and ST Incentive Ratio--Centralized R&D Sample
                                         Random Effects Specification (Corp RD Head Random Effects)--Applications
                                                  (1)              (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)             (7)           (8)             (9)
                                              Log (Patent       Mean of       Median of      Mean of       Median of       Mean of        Mean of        HHI for          Log
                                                Count)          Citations     Citations     Adjusted       Adjusted       Generality     Originality      Firm        (Publications)
                                                                                            Citations      Citations
LT comp./ (salary+bonus) for                0.204**            2.300***      1.810***      1.851***       1.252***       0.040**        0.011          0.010         0.041
  Corp RD Head                              (0.091)            (0.582)       (0.487)       (0.510)        (0.408)        (0.020)        (0.015)        (0.026)       (0.101)
Bonus/(salary+bonus) for                    0.389*             1.822         2.255         1.583          2.811**        -0.020         0.016          0.268***      0.318
  Corp RD Head                              (0.226)            (1.627)       (1.397)       (1.461)        (1.202)        (0.055)        (0.042)        (0.072)       (0.246)
Log (firm sales)                            0.721***           -0.387        -0.640***     -0.361         -0.560***      -0.015         -0.006         -0.080***     0.860***
                                            (0.063)            (0.270)       (0.218)       (0.229)        (0.174)        (0.009)        (0.008)        (0.013)       (0.085)
R&D/firm sales                              8.341***           19.336***     7.798*        13.446***      3.025          0.432**        -0.127         -0.543**      14.231***
                                            (1.396)            (5.640)       (4.572)       (4.792)        (3.700)        (0.192)        (0.164)        (0.265)       (1.917)
Constant                                    -3.501***          8.655***      8.839***      1.733          1.360          0.475***       0.481***       0.887***      -5.694***
                                            (0.529)            (2.243)       (1.810)       (1.897)        (1.452)        (0.076)        (0.064)        (0.104)       (0.715)
Observations                                384                304           304           304            304            304            384            384           378
Number of Corp RD Heads                     160                139           139           139            139            139            160            160           154

            Table 6d: Firm Innovation Measures and Corporate R&D Head LT Compensation Components (Stock Options and Restricted Stock) --
                                                                Centralized R&D Sample
                                       Random Effects Specification (Corp RD Head Random Effects)--Applications
                                           (1)              (2)           (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)             (7)            (8)              (9)
                                       Log (Patent       Mean of       Median of       Mean of         Median of         Mean of        Mean of         HHI for           Log
                                         Count)          Citations     Citations       Adjusted        Adjusted         Generality     Originality       Firm         (Publications)
                                                                                       Citations       Citations
Options/ (salary+bonus) for          0.192*             1.909***      1.533***       1.570***       1.092**            0.032           -0.013          0.010        0.046
  Corp RD Head                       (0.101)            (0.677)       (0.565)        (0.593)        (0.476)            (0.023)         (0.017)         (0.030)      (0.111)
Rest. Stock/ (salary+bonus) for      -0.274             3.158***      2.592***       2.371**        1.392*             0.051           0.048           -0.026       -0.352
  Corp RD Head                       (0.212)            (1.079)       (0.904)        (0.948)        (0.775)            (0.037)         (0.031)         (0.053)      (0.249)
Log (firm sales)                     0.743***           -0.196        -0.469**       -0.209         -0.407**           -0.013          -0.002          -0.071***    0.874***
                                     (0.062)            (0.260)       (0.209)        (0.221)        (0.170)            (0.009)         (0.007)         (0.012)      (0.084)
R&D/firm sales                       8.473***           19.844***     8.226*         13.810***      3.446              0.435**         -0.085          -0.512*      14.277***
                                     (1.405)            (5.647)       (4.579)        (4.822)        (3.770)            (0.194)         (0.166)         (0.270)      (1.918)
Constant                             -3.536***          7.977***      8.355***       1.218          1.064              0.462***        0.461***        0.885***     -5.719***
                                     (0.531)            (2.231)       (1.800)        (1.897)        (1.471)            (0.077)         (0.064)         (0.105)      (0.713)
Observations                         383                303           303            303            303                303             383             383          377
No. of Corp RD Heads                 160                139           139            139            139                139             160             160          154

  Note: Sample includes firms that report a corporate R&D head in the compensation survey, R&D expenditures in Compustat, and 60 months of historical stock returns to calculate
  standard deviations. The sample is only those firms with a centralized R&D organization (i.e. firms with a corporate R&D head, but no division R&D managers). Log (Patent Count)
  and Log (Publications) are defined as the logarithm of (one plus) the number of patents and publications. All regressions include unreported year fixed effects. ***/**/* represent
  significance at the 1%/5%/10% level. See earlier tables/text for variable definitions.




                                                                                                                                                                                46
                   Table 7a: Firm Innovation Measures and Corporate R&D Head LT Incentive Ratio and Reporting Relationship to CEO
                                                               Centralized R&D Sample
                                              Random Effects Specification (Corp RD Head Random Effects)

                                            (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)           (7)          (8)           (9)
                                        Log (Patent    Mean of     Median of   Mean of     Median of    Mean of      Mean of       HHI for        Log
                                          Count)       Citations   Citations   Adjusted    Adjusted    Generality   Originality     Firm      (Publications)
                                                                               Citations   Citations
Direct Report to CEO                   0.069          0.417        0.693       0.300       0.624       0.022        0.024         -0.006      -0.120
                                       (0.096)        (0.502)      (0.447)     (0.459)     (0.393)     (0.020)      (0.019)       (0.031)     (0.097)
LT comp./ (salary+bonus) for Corp RD   0.064          1.181**      1.050**     0.994*      0.805*      0.038        0.027         0.015       0.007
Head
                                       (0.110)        (0.587)      (0.527)     (0.540)     (0.469)     (0.024)      (0.022)       (0.036)     (0.105)

LT comp./ (salary+bonus) for Corp RD   0.170          -0.533       -0.523      -0.447      -0.497      -0.019       -0.017        -0.007      0.131
Head*Direct Report to CEO
                                       (0.137)        (0.707)      (0.627)     (0.644)     (0.550)     (0.028)      (0.026)       (0.043)     (0.122)
Log (firm sales)                       0.696***       -0.251       -0.445**    -0.299      -0.418***   -0.006       -0.007        -0.064***   0.870***
                                       (0.061)        (0.220)      (0.178)     (0.185)     (0.141)     (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.011)     (0.076)
R&D/firm sales                         8.540***       18.793***    7.411*      9.813**     -0.632      0.427***     0.011         -0.328      12.685***
                                       (1.315)        (4.801)      (3.880)     (4.019)     (3.068)     (0.155)      (0.162)       (0.243)     (1.611)
Constant                               -3.057***      9.041***     8.875***    2.923*      2.120*      0.402***     0.441***      0.808***    -5.502***
                                       (0.519)        (1.907)      (1.553)     (1.608)     (1.244)     (0.063)      (0.065)       (0.098)     (0.647)
Observations                           455            455          455         455         455         431          455           455         483
Number of Corp RD Heads                176            176          176         176         176         169          176           176         174




                                                                                                                                                         47
                        Table 7b: Firm Innovation Measures and Chief Financial Officer (CFO) LT Incentive Ratio--Centralized R&D Sample
                                                      Random Effects Specification (Firm Random Effects)

                                                (1)              (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)              (7)               (8)                (9)
                                            Log (Patent       Mean of       Median of      Mean of       Median of      Mean of         Mean of          HHI for Firm          Log
                                              Count)          Citations     Citations      Adjusted      Adjusted      Generality      Originality                         (Publications)
                                                                                           Citations     Citations
  LT comp./ (salary+bonus) for CFO        0.123*             -0.303        -0.262         -0.380        -0.344        -0.002          0.003            -0.005             -0.007
                                          (0.065)            (0.312)       (0.274)        (0.294)       (0.255)       (0.013)         (0.012)          (0.019)            (0.064)
  Log (firm sales)                        0.534***           -0.211        -0.309         -0.197        -0.255        -0.000          -0.011           -0.066***          0.892***
                                          (0.079)            (0.281)       (0.226)        (0.238)       (0.179)       (0.010)         (0.010)          (0.015)            (0.094)
  R&D/firm sales                          8.639***           16.351***     7.514*         10.024**      1.321         0.423**         0.006            -0.287             12.010***
                                          (1.546)            (5.480)       (4.409)        (4.633)       (3.487)       (0.184)         (0.191)          (0.299)            (1.832)
  Constant                                -1.782***          9.525***      8.251***       2.815         1.315         0.380***        0.488***         0.814***           -5.618***
                                          (0.661)            (2.379)       (1.922)        (2.022)       (1.530)       (0.082)         (0.083)          (0.131)            (0.790)
  Observations                            371                371           371            371           371           348             371              371                395
  Number of firms                         105                105           105            105           105           101             105              105                101



                       Table 7c: Firm Innovation Measures and Human Resources Head (HRH) LT Incentive Ratio--Centralized R&D Sample
                                                      Random Effects Specification (Firm Random Effects)

                                                (1)              (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)             (7)               (8)                (9)
                                            Log (Patent       Mean of       Median of      Mean of        Median of      Mean of        Mean of          HHI for Firm          Log
                                              Count)          Citations     Citations      Adjusted       Adjusted      Generality     Originality                         (Publications)
                                                                                           Citations      Citations
  LT comp./ (salary+bonus) for HRH        0.029             -0.063         -0.059         -0.010        -0.063          -0.006        0.023            -0.007             0.065
                                          (0.082)           (0.394)        (0.344)        (0.368)       (0.314)         (0.015)       (0.014)          (0.023)            (0.079)
  Log (firm sales)                        0.602***          -0.629**       -0.621***      -0.541**      -0.524***       -0.008        -0.011           -0.059***          0.985***
                                          (0.074)           (0.267)        (0.216)        (0.224)       (0.172)         (0.009)       (0.009)          (0.014)            (0.087)
  R&D/firm sales                          8.436***          15.082***      7.197          8.643*        0.529           0.442**       0.020            -0.138             11.420***
                                          (1.598)           (5.634)        (4.543)        (4.715)       (3.602)         (0.182)       (0.194)          (0.292)            (1.889)
  Constant                                -2.209***         12.554***      10.739***      5.138***      3.325**         0.428***      0.469***         0.748***           -6.362***
                                          (0.620)           (2.247)        (1.822)        (1.895)       (1.457)         (0.074)       (0.077)          (0.118)            (0.730)
  Observations                            408               408            408            408           408             387           408              408                437
  Number of firms                         110               110            110            110           110             107           110              110                108


Note: Sample includes firms that report a corporate R&D head in the compensation survey, R&D expenditures in Compustat, and 60 months of historical stock returns to calculate
standard deviations. The sample is only those firms with a centralized R&D organization (i.e. firms with a corporate R&D head, but no division R&D managers). Direct Report to CEO is
a dummy variable that equals one if the Corporate R&D Head reports directly to the CEO in the organizational hierarchy and zero otherwise. Log (Patent Count) and Log (Publications)
are defined as the logarithm of (one plus) the number of patents and publications. All regressions include unreported year fixed effects. ***/**/* represent significance at the 1%/5%/10%
level. See earlier tables/text for other variable definitions.


                                                                                                                                                                                  48
                     Table 8: Firm Innovation Measures and Corporate R&D Head LT Incentive Ratio--Centralized R&D Sample
                                         2SLS Random Effects Specification (Corp RD Head Random Effects)
             Instrument is number of spawned firms in county of headquarters per year excluding own firm and firms in own 2-digit industry

                                      (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)               (7)             (8)             (9)
                                  Log (Patent       Mean of       Median of       Mean of         Median of       Mean of           Mean of          HHI for          Log
                                    Count)          Citations     Citations       Adjusted        Adjusted       Generality        Originality        Firm        (Publications)
                                                                                  Citations       Citations
LT comp./ (salary+bonus) for     -0.198           6.825**        5.754**        3.500*           1.605          0.044            -0.295**          -0.157        0.076
  Corp RD Head                   (0.779)          (2.695)        (2.719)        (2.086)          (1.672)        (0.137)          (0.127)           (0.266)       (2.766)
Log (firm sales)                 0.763***         -1.135**       -1.250***      -0.713**         -0.628**       -0.011           0.031             -0.038        0.772*
                                 (0.132)          (0.458)        (0.476)        (0.354)          (0.284)        (0.023)          (0.022)           (0.044)       (0.408)
R&D/firm sales                   15.843***        16.169**       2.083          8.605            -1.989         0.666**          0.784**           -0.219        10.325***
                                 (2.237)          (7.745)        (7.580)        (5.994)          (4.806)        (0.330)          (0.365)           (0.598)       (2.188)
Constant                         -3.685***        13.572***      13.189***      5.003**          3.306*         0.422***         0.240*            0.677***      -4.544**
                                 (0.862)          (2.985)        (3.028)        (2.310)          (1.852)        (0.138)          (0.141)           (0.260)       (1.990)
Observations                     431              431            431            431              431            407              431               431           459
Number of Corp RD Heads          164              164            164            164              164            157              164               164           161

Note: Sample includes firms that report a corporate R&D head in the compensation survey, R&D expenditures in Compustat, and 60 months of historical stock returns to calculate
standard deviations. The sample is only those firms with a centralized R&D organization (i.e. firms with a corporate R&D head, but no division R&D managers). Log (Patent Count)
and Log (Publications) are defined as the logarithm of (one plus) the number of patents and publications. All regressions include unreported year fixed effects. ***/**/* represent
significance at the 1%/5%/10% level. See earlier tables/text for other variable definitions.




                                                                                                                                                                             49
                   Table 9: Pay-Performance Sensitivities Based on Measures of Total Compensation for Corporate R&D Head Positions
                                                             Firm Fixed Effects Regressions

                                                                                                     Sample Partition by R&D                     Sample Partition by R&D
                                                                                                           Organization                                 Intensity
                                                                     Whole Sample               Centralized R&D Decentralized                   High R&D       Low R&D
                                                                                                                    R&D

Shareholder Returns excluding dividends

Stock Return                                                         2.488***                   3.110***                 1.352                  2.778**             -2.099
                                                                     (0.964)                    (1.092)                  (1.776)                (1.414)             (1.412)
Stock Return*CDF of Std. Deviation                                   -2.489***                  -3.148***                -0.499                 -2.817**            6.374***
                                                                     (0.972)                    (1.098)                  (2.687)                (1.421)             (1.853)
CDF of Std. Deviation                                                373.09***                  523.47***                248.77                 423.99***           -41.10***
                                                                     (108.33)                   (140.60)                 (157.89)               (162.00)            (152.56)

Shareholder Returns including dividends

Stock Return                                                         2.825***                   3.416***                 3.214*                 3.756***            -0.054
                                                                     (1.122)                    (1.299)                  (1.925)                (1.620)             (1.666)
Stock Return*CDF of Std. Deviation                                   -2.312*                    -3.386**                 -2.781                 -3.807**            2.361
                                                                     (1.385)                    (1.542)                  (2.910)                (1.898)             (2.348)
CDF of Std.Deviation                                                 392.58***                  521.67***                160.88                 548.42***           98.72
                                                                     (112.54)                   (139.46)                 (173.71)               (169.62)            (149.95)

Note: Sample includes firms that report a corporate R&D head in the compensation survey, R&D expenditures in Compustat, and 60 months of historical stock returns to calculate
standard deviations. Centralized R&D sub-sample includes firms that report corporate R&D heads, while decentralized R&D sub-sample includes firms that report both corporate
R&D heads and division R&D managers. High R&D sub-sample includes firms with ratio of R&D to sales above the sample median, while low R&D includes those below the
sample median. The dependent variable is total flow compensation for the corporate R&D head: salary, bonus and the value of long-term incentives (including stock options,
restricted stock, performance unit plans and performance share plans). Stock returns are measured as annual shareholder returns (excluding dividends) and annual total shareholder
returns (average of monthly returns), both stated in percentage points. CDF of Std. Deviation represents the empirical cumulative distribution function of the standard deviation of
monthly % returns over prior 60 months. Each regression includes firm and year indicators. ***/**/* represent significance at the 1%/5%/10% level. See earlier tables/text for
other variable definitions.




                                                                                                                                                                                 50
Appendix A: Survey Representativeness

         We evaluate the representativeness of Hewitt survey participants by comparing

key financial measures of the survey participants to a matched sample from Compustat.

We begin by matching each firm in the Hewitt dataset to the Compustat firm that is

closest in sales within its two-digit SIC industry in the year the firm joins the sample. We

then perform Wilcoxon signed rank tests to compare the Hewitt firms with the matched

firms. While the firms in the Hewitt dataset are, on average, slightly larger in sales than

the matched sample, we found no statistically significant difference in employment and

profitability (return on sales).22 We also found no statistically significant difference in

sales growth, employment growth, or annual changes in profitability for all sample years.

In sum, while the Hewitt firms are larger (measured by sales) on average than the

matched sample, there is little additional evidence that these firms are not representative

of the population of industrial firms that are leaders in their sectors.

         We also calculate financial measures for the sample of Compustat firms with

10,000 employees or greater over the period from 1987 to 1998 (excluding firms

operating in financial services). We find that, on average, survey participants are more

profitable, but growing at a slower rate relative to the sample of large Compustat firms.

Specifically, the sample average return on sales for survey participants is 17.8% versus

15.7% for the sample of large Compustat firms and the average sales growth is 5.7% vs.

7.4%. This is consistent with the observation that the firms in the sample are likely to be

industry leaders (hence slightly more profitable) and also large (hence the slightly slower




22
  The Hewitt firms are larger in sales than the matched sample of firms because in a number of the cases,
the Hewitt firm is the largest firm in the industry thus forcing me to select a matched firm smaller in size.


                                                                                                            51
growth). To sum up, the survey sample is probably most representative of Fortune 500

firms.




                                                                                       52
Appendix B: Position Descriptions from Hewitt Survey


1. Chief Executive Officer (CEO). The highest executive authority in the corporation.
   Reports to the Board of Directors. May also be Chairman or President.

Research and Development Positions:

2. Corporate Level Research and Development (Corporate R&D Head). Responsible
   for applied research and development and design and development engineering for
   the entire corporation. Oversees and directs R&D activities of the corporation
   leading to new or improved products or processes. Provides technical assistance and,
   when necessary, correlates research activities with other functions and operating
   units.

3. Division Level Research and Development. The head of all applied R&D and design
   and development engineering for the division. Responsibilities include investigation
   and experimentation aimed at practical applications of scientific theories, as well as
   the application of existing engineering and scientific theories and techniques to the
   design and development of new products.

4. Principal Scientist. Top R&D technical position, responsible for research leadership
   in creating or improving products or processes. Originates and coordinates research
   projects, evaluates results, and makes recommendations to senior management. This
   is the top position on the technical (non-managerial) career ladder within R&D and
   may be equivalent to the R&D Director in terms of level.

Senior Staff Positions:

5. Human Resources Head (HRH). Head of all human resources with responsibility for
   establishing and implementing corporate-wide policies.

6. Chief Financial Officer (CFO). Functional head responsible for all financial
   operations of the corporation. Has responsibility for both the treasury and accounting
   functions. Indicate whether responsibilities also include data processing, investor
   relations, internal audit, and tax.




                                                                                        53
