NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTANGIBLE CAPITAL AND ECONOMIC GROWTH
Carol A. Corrado
Charles R. Hulten
Daniel E. Sichel
Working Paper 11948
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11948
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2006

Federal Reserve Board, University of Maryland and NBER, and Federal Reserve Board, respectively. Earlier
versions of this paper were presented at the CRIW/NBER Summer Institute (July 2004), the OECD (March
2005), and the BEA (October 2005). We thank Dale Jorgenson and the participants at the Summer Institute,
OECD, and BEA workshops for helpful comments. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors
and should not be attributed to the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or other members of
its staff. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Carol A. Corrado, Charles R. Hulten, and Daniel E. Sichel. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Intangible Capital and Economic Growth
Carol A. Corrado, Charles R. Hulten, and Daniel E. Sichel
NBER Working Paper No. 11948
January 2006
JEL No. O47, E22, E01
ABSTRACT
Published macroeconomic data traditionally exclude most intangible investment from measured
GDP. This situation is beginning to change, but our estimates suggest that as much as $800 billion
is still excluded from U.S. published data (as of 2003), and that this leads to the exclusion of more
than $3 trillion of business intangible capital stock. To assess the importance of this omission, we
add capital to the standard sources-of-growth framework used by the BLS, and find that the inclusion
of our list of intangible assets makes a significant difference in the observed patterns of U.S.
economic growth. The rate of change of output per worker increases more rapidly when intangibles
are counted as capital, and capital deepening becomes the unambiguously dominant source of growth
in labor productivity. The role of multifactor productivity is correspondingly diminished, and labor's
income share is found to have decreased significantly over the last 50 years.
Carol A. Corrado
Division of Research and Statistics
Federal Reserve Board
Washington, DC 20551
carol.a.corrado@frb.gov
Charles R. Hulten
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
hulten@econ.bsos.umd.edu
Daniel E. Sichel
Division of Research and Statistics
Federal Reserve Board
Washington, DC 20551
dan.sichel@frb.gov

I. Introduction and Background
The revolution in information technology is apparent in the profusion of new products
available in the market place (goods with the acronyms PCs, PDAs, ATMs, wi-fi), as well as
items like the internet, cell phones, and e-mail. These innovations are part of a broader
technological revolution based on the discovery of the semiconductor, often called the “IT
revolution.” However, while its effects are apparent in the market place, its manifestation in the
macroeconomic statistics on growth has been slow to materialize. Writing in 1987, Robert
Solow, famously remarked that “you see the computer revolution everywhere except in the
productivity data.” Some ten years later, Alan Greenspan observed that the negative trends in
measured productivity observed in many services industries seemed inconsistent with the fact
that they ranked among the top computer-using industries.1 Greenspan also questioned the
accuracy of the consumer price index, in part because of its failure to adequately account for the
new or superior goods made possible by the IT revolution.2
The IT revolution began to appear in the productivity data mentioned by Solow in the
mid 1990s. This pick-up has been linked to investment in IT capital in a series of papers (Oliner
and Sichel (2000, 2002), Jorgenson and Stiroh (2000), Stiroh (2002), and Jorgenson, Ho, and
Stiroh (2002)), all of which estimate the contribution of IT capital to output growth within the

1

Chairman Greenspan’s concerns about the measured productivity trends in services industries were first
expressed in remarks at an FOMC meeting in late 1996 in regard to a staff analysis of disaggregated
productivity trends (Corrado and Slifman 1999). Gullickson and Harper (1999) also investigated this
issue. The observation that many of the services industries that had negative productivity trends were
among the top computer-using industries owes, at least in part, to Stiroh (1998) and Triplett (1999).
2
Similar views were expressed by Nordhaus (1997), who concluded from his analysis of the history of
lighting that official price and output data “miss the most important technological revolutions in history.”
Also, Hausman (1999) noted that cell phones were absent from the CPI market basket for many years
after they appeared in the market place.
1

Solow-Jorgenson-Griliches sources-of-growth (SOG) framework. However, the productivity
pick-up did not remove all suspicion about the ability of official data to accurately capture the
factors that affect U.S. economic growth. Both firm-level and national income accounting
practice has historically treated expenditure on intangible inputs as an intermediate expense and
not as an investment that is part of GDP, although this has begun to change with the
capitalization of software in the U.S. National Income and Product Accounts (NIPAs).3 The
capitalization of software alone has had an appreciable affect on the growth of output per worker
in the non-farm business sector, and the growing literature on intangibles suggests that this is just
the tip of the iceberg.4
Our own earlier estimates suggest that, in 1999, software spending was less than
15 percent of a more complete list of intangible business investments that includes spending on
innovative property (eg., R&D) and economic competencies as well as software and other
computerized information (Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel 2005, hereafter CHS). We found that
total business investment in intangibles was approximately one trillion dollars in 1999, an
amount that is roughly the same as investment in tangible capital at that time. The magnitude of
these estimates suggests that uncounted intangibles have an appreciable effect on the level of
GDP, as well as on the rate of investment and level of labor productivity. This paper builds on
3

In addition to the capitalization of software expenditures by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA),
the capitalization of scientific R&D is under serious consideration for both the U.S. NIPA and the United
Nations System of National Accounts. See Grimm, Moulton, and Wasshausen (2005) for a description of
BEA’s procedures for estimating software.
4
The recent literature includes work sponsored by the OECD (OECD Secretariat 1998, Kahn 2001),
Nakamura 1999, 2001, 2003; Brynjolffson and Yang 1999; Brynjolffson, Hitt, and Yang 2000; Hall
2000, 2001a, 2001b; McGratten and Prescott 2000, Lev 2001. This literature approaches the intangibles
problem from a variety of perspectives, building upon previous work that both linked aggregate
productivity and stock market performance (e.g., Baily 1981, B. Hall and R. Hall 1993) and constructed
firm-level intangible stocks using financial data (e.g., Griliches 1981, Cockburn and Griliches 1988, and
B. Hall 1993).
2

our previous work by examining whether the relative magnitude of the discrepancy in the level
of investment carries over to the rates of growth of capital stock and real output. Our ultimate
objective is to examine how the capitalization of intangible expenditures affects the SOG
analyses that have played such a prominent role in recent analyses of the productivity pick-up.
We use our new SOG estimates to address the following issues: how much growth in
output went uncounted because of the omission of intangibles; what is the contribution of
intangible capital to output growth; how does the inclusion of intangibles affect the allocation of
output growth between capital formation and multifactor productivity growth; and, does the post1995 productivity pickup look different when intangibles are taken into account? To our
knowledge, this is the first paper to examine these issues in the SOG framework with a more-orless complete list of intangible assets. We find that the inclusion of intangibles makes a
significant difference in the measured pattern of economic growth: the growth rates of output
and of output-per worker are found to increase at a noticeably more rapid rate when intangibles
are included than under the baseline case in which intangible capital is completely ignored, and
capital deepening (when expanded to include both tangibles and intangibles) becomes the
unambiguously dominant source of growth in labor productivity. More broadly, the factors
typically associated with the growth of the “knowledge economy” assume a greater importance
once intangibles are included.
We also find that the inclusion of intangibles has an important effect on the labor share of
income. Specifically, in our framework, labor’s share of income is lower than implied by
conventional NIPA data, and it trends down notably over time. The addition of intangible capital
and the associated flow of income from that capital raise the capital share of income and lower
3

the labor share. Moreover, our numbers indicate that intangible investment has grown
considerably more rapidly in recent decades than has tangible business investment, and the stock
of intangible capital has grown considerably more rapidly than has the stock of tangible business
capital. Thus, once intangible assets are incorporated into the calculations, the share of capital
income shows a noticeable uptrend in recent decades, and the share of labor income shows a
marked downtrend, particularly since 1980.
The paper is organized as follows: We first examine the theoretical basis for the claim
that intangibles should be treated as capital rather than as intermediate inputs. We then describe
how intangible capital, which is often viewed as qualitatively different from tangible capital, can
be incorporated in the neoclassical framework on which the sources-of-growth model is based.
Our procedures for estimating the flow of intangible investment and the corresponding stock of
intangible capital are then discussed, after which our growth accounting results are presented and
discussed.
II. Are Intangibles Really Capital?
A. The Treatment of Intangible Expenditures
The first question to be settled is theoretical: should intangible expenditures be classified
as capital or as an intermediate good? The choice between the two alternatives becomes more
apparent when the production functions and accounting identities associated with the two
approaches are made explicit. This can be accomplished by considering a world of three goods,
consumption C, tangible investment goods I, and an intangible N. When intangibles are
regarded as being an intermediate good, labor L and tangible capital K are allocated to the

4

production of all three goods, and N is an input to C and I. The production function and flow
account for each of the three sectors is then

(1a)

N(t) = FN(LN(t),KN(t), t);

(1b)

I(t)

(1c)

C(t) = FC(LC(t),KC(t),NC(t), t);

= FI(LI(t),KI(t),NI(t), t);

PN(t)N(t) = PL(t)LN(t) + PK(t)KN(t);
PI(t)I(t)

= PL(t)LI(t) + PK(t)KI(t) + PN(t)NI(t);

PC(t)C(t) = PL(t)LC(t) + PK(t)KC(t) + PN(t)NC(t);

with the adding up conditions L = LN + LI + LC, K = KN + KI + KC, and N = NI + NC , as well as
the accumulation equation K(t) = I(t) + (1-

K)K(t-1).

5

The production functions in each

equation are linked to the accounting identities by the assumption that each input is paid the
value of its marginal product. In this formulation, N(t) is both an output and an immediate input
to the production of the other products, and therefore nets out in the aggregate. Thus, N(t) does
not appear in the GDP identity, which has the form

(1d)

PQ’(t)Q’(t) = PC(t)C(t) + PI(t)I(t) = PL(t)L(t) + PK(t)K(t).

This is the approach taken by financial accounts for individual firms, the United Nation’s System
of National Accounts (1993), and, until the recent move to capitalize software, the U.S. NIPAs.
In equation (1d), the apostrophes on the left-hand side of the equation are used to distinguish the

5

We adopt the convention that intermediates used by the industry that produced them are netted out of
final output. We have therefore omitted NN from the production function and accounts of the
intermediate good industry. We also ignore the complication of chain weighting to keep the exposition
simple.
5

case in which intangibles are excluded from the case described below in which intangibles are
counted as investment.
A different model of production accounting applies when the intangible is classified as
capital. The output of the intangible, N(t), now appears in the production functions of the
consumption and tangible investment sectors as a cumulative stock, not as a contemporaneous
input as above. An accumulation equation for intangible capital, R(t) = N(t) + (1- R)R(t-1),
parallels the corresponding equation for tangibles. The sectoral equations become

(2a)

N(t) = FN(LN(t),KN(t),RN(t),t);

(2b)

I(t)

(2c)

C(t) = FC(LC(t),KC(t),RC(t),t);

= FI(LI(t),KI(t),RI(t),t);

PN(t)N(t) = PL(t)LN(t) + PK(t)KN(t) + PR(t)RN(t);
PI(t)I(t)

= PL(t)LI(t) + PK(t)KI(t) + PR(t)RI(t);

PC(t)C(t) = PL(t)LC(t) + PK(t)KC(t) + PR(t)RC(t);

The balance equations set out above are modified to replace the equation N = NN + NI + NC with
R = RI + RC +RN.6 Again, the production functions in each equation are linked to the accounting
identities by the assumption of marginal productivity pricing. The GDP identity, in this case,

6

In this second formulation we expand the technology of the intangible producing sector to use the
output that it produced in previous years (that is, to use its own stock of accumulated intangibles). In
other words, the knowledge investments of past years are allowed to be productive in producing current
and future knowledge. This allows investment to be aimed not just at direct product or process
innovation, but also at furthering the capability of the innovation process itself. Indeed, this is a key
aspect of the R&D process, because research often is done to further the research capability of R&D
researchers. Moreover, some firms continue to do research even when a competitor has beat them to the
punch, in order to keep up with best practice and perhaps get out in front in the next round. This line of
reasoning does not fit well with the preceding formulation (1a)-(1d) in which the accumulated stock of
past knowledge is treated as an intermediate input and omitted from the technology for producing
knowledge.
6

must be expanded to included the flow of new intangibles on the product side and the flow of
services from the intangible stock on the income side:

PQ(t)Q(t) = PC(t)C(t) + PI(t)I(t) + PN(t)N(t) = PL(t)L(t) + PK(t)K(t) + PR(t)R(t).

(2d)

The price PR(t) is the user cost associated with the services of the intangible stock and is a source
of income that is absent from the conventional intermediate goods case (1d). The concept of
GDP in this expanded identity is more comprehensive and larger in magnitude than in the
conventional case.
B. Growth Accounting with Intangible Capital
The conventional SOG framework allocates the growth rate of output to the shareweighted growth rates of the inputs plus a residual. Following Solow (1957), the SOG equation
is derived from the conventional framework of equations (1a)-(1d) by logarithmic differentiation
of (1d):
(1e)

gQ’(t) = s’C(t)gC(t) + s’I(t)gI(t)
= s’L(t)gL(t) + s’K(t)gK(t) + gA’(t).

The notation gX(t) is used to denote the rate of growth of the respective variables; for example,
gQ’(t) thus denotes the growth rate of aggregate output (the Divisia index of the growth rates of
consumption, gC(t), and investment, gI(t)), and gA’(t) denotes the growth rate of multifactor
productivity. The output shares s’C(t) = [PC(t)C(t)]/[PC(t)C(t) + PI(t)I(t)], etc., and input shares
s’L(t) = [PL(t)L(t)]/[PL(t)L(t) + PK(t)K(t)], etc., are assumed to be equal to the corresponding
7

output elasticities. Intangible input and output play no role in the formulation of this SOG
equation.
When intangible capital is treated symmetrically with tangibles, the structure (2a)-(2d)
governs the equations of growth, and the SOG model becomes

(2e)

gQ(t) = sC(t)gC(t) + sI(t)gI(t) + sN(t)gN(t)
= sL(t)gL(t) + sK(t)gK(t) + sR(t)gR(t) + gA(t),

where the output shares are now sC(t) = [PC(t)C(t)]/[PC(t)C(t) + PI(t)I(t) + PN(t)N(t)], etc., and the
true input shares are sL(t) = [PL(t)L(t)]/[PL(t)L(t) + PK(t)K(t) + PR(t)R(t)], etc.
A comparison of (1e) and (2e) reveals that the alternative view of intangibles involves
more than the growth terms gN(t) and gR(t), and the associated shares, but also requires a
restatement of all shares. The shares are linked by the factor of proportionality

(3)

= (pCC+pII)/(pCC+pII+pNN ).

The basic result is that labor’s share when intangibles are capitalized is smaller by this factor: sL
=

s’L, and the income share of capital is thus larger. A similar analysis applies to the rates of

saving and consumption. Consumption shares with and without intangibles are related by the
same proportionality factor as above, sC =

s’C. The consumption share is smaller and the rate

of saving/investment is correspondingly higher. This result is relevant in view of the perception
of a low rate of saving in the U.S. economy, particularly because existing measures exclude
8

much of the investment in knowledge capital that is a defining feature of the modern U.S.
economy. Finally, the residual estimates of multifactor productivity from (1e) and (2e), gA’(t)
and gA(t), respectively, differ by the factor

when the economic system is in Golden Rule steady

state growth, a result derived from Jorgenson (1966), but the bias due to ignoring intangible
capital, gA(t) - gA’(t), has a more complicated form in other cases.
C. The Criteria for Capitalizing Intangibles
The two approaches set out above give different structural representations of the same
economy, and both cannot be simultaneously correct. Fortunately, standard capital theory
provides criteria for choosing one over the other. As discussed in CHS, capital theory implicitly
defines capital in the context of an optimal consumption plan based on the maximization of an
intertemporal utility function subject to the usual constraints (Weitzmann 1976). The solution to
this optimization problem determines the optimal path of consumption over time and thus
consumer saving behavior, which in turn determines the paths of investment and capital. As
discussed in Hulten (1979), the solution to this optimization problem has an important
implication for the treatment of intangible capital: any use of resources that reduces current
consumption in order to increase it in the future qualifies as an investment. This result argues for
symmetric treatment of all types of capital, so that, for example, spending on R&D and employee
training should be placed on the same footing as spending on plant and equipment. Moreover,
this symmetry principle requires that most business expenditures aimed at enhancing the value of
a firm and improving its products, including human capital development as well as R&D, be
accorded the same treatment as tangible capital in national accounting systems.

9

D. Symmetry in Production
The symmetry principle of the preceding section establishes the theoretical equivalence
of tangible and intangible capital from the standpoint of consumption. This symmetry between
tangible and intangible capital is less apparent from the production side of the economy, which is
perhaps one reason that intangibles have traditionally not been counted as capital. Indeed, some
have argued – particularly in the accounting world – that several characteristics of intangibles
disqualify them from being counted as capital; namely, the lack of verifiability for intangible
assets that are not acquired through market transactions; the lack of visibility of intangible assets
after their acquisition that complicates efforts to track past vintages; the non-rivalness of some
intangible assets; and the lack of appropriability of the returns from some intangibles. We
discuss each of these issues in turn and argue that such differences between tangibles and
intangibles, while generally noteworthy, are no more relevant for the capitalization issue than are
differences in the characteristics of equipment, structures, and land.
One source of production asymmetry between tangibles and intangibles arises from the
fact that most tangible assets are purchased from other producers. Intangible assets, on the other
hand, often are produced within the firm that uses them, and there is thus no arms-length market
transaction to generate observable and verifiable data with which to estimate the quantity
produced, designated as the flow PN(t)N(t) in the notation of this paper. A related problem arises
because it is also difficult to separate PN(t)N(t) into separate price and quantity components;
indeed, sometimes it is even difficult to define the units in which PN(t) and N(t) ought to be
measured (for example, in what units should knowledge be denominated?).

10

The absence of externally verifiable data is a major reason that accountants are reluctant
to capitalize intangibles, preferring instead to treat them as an intermediate expense that arises
and disappears internally within the same year. However, the lack of verifiability per se does not
automatically make intangibles an intermediate input. Some tangible assets are also produced
internally (some construction projects, for example) and therefore do not pass through external
markets that generate verifiable transactions data. On the other hand, many intangible assets are
acquired through external markets (technology licenses, patents and copyrights, and the
economic competencies acquired through purchases of management and consulting services). In
any case, the real issue of whether intangibles should be classified as intermediates or as capital
depends on the economic character of the good, as per the preceding section, and not on the ease
with which PN(t)N(t) can be measured.
Intangibility itself is another source of asymmetry in production. Tangible goods have a
physical embodiment that is capable of being observed, and it is therefore possible to observe the
ones that have been held over from previous years in the larger stock (they often have serial
numbers that identify their vintage). The self-evident durability of a tangible good would
immediately qualify it as capital rather than an intermediate good under most reasonable criteria.
Intangibles, on the other hand, have no palpable embodiment and, in some sense, lack visibility.
Thus, it is not feasible to look for a collection of vintages of intangible investments or even a
single older vintage as proof that the item in question really is capital. In the case of knowledge
capital, for example, it is hard to know which “bit” of knowledge belongs to which vintage of
investment. From the perspective of national income accounting methodology, this issue could
be characterized as the difficulty of measuring depreciation rates and obtaining stocks, R(t), for
11

intangible assets. However, this concern is not a valid conceptual reason for treating intangibles
as an intermediate input rather than as a capital asset. Again, it is how the item is used over time
that determines whether or not it should be capitalized, not the ease with which R(t) can be
measured.
Yet another asymmetry between tangibles and intangibles arises because of the public
good aspects of the latter. Many types of intangible capital, such as R&D knowledge, are nonrival. The non-rivalness of pure knowledge implies that it can be employed by many users
simultaneously without diminishing the quantity available to any single user. In this situation,
the balance equations would be N = NN = NI = NC and R = RI = RC =RN. Moreover, each
additional unit of output produced would not need an additional “unit” of knowledge, suggesting
that the marginal product of R is zero. However, while the marginal product of R used in the
direct production of output may indeed be zero, this is the wrong margin to examine, because an
increase in R increases the efficiency of production and thus increases output indirectly, or it
improves the quality of the product (which is conventionally expressed as an equivalent increase
in quantity). Why else would a firm pay to increase its R if it did not yield some benefit? In
addition, many types of intangible capital – such as brand equity and organizational and human
competencies – are not purely non-rival, but instead have a highly firm-specific character.
Indeed, many intangibles are specific to a firm and valuable, at least in part, because the firm is
able to exclude competitors from gaining access to key information and technology (the secrecy
of the formula for Coca Cola is an example).
The non-appropriability of some intellectual property is another aspect of intangibles.
The full benefits of R&D and worker training may not be captured by the firm making the
12

investment, and the measured prices PN(t) and PR(t) may reflect only private benefits and costs.7
However, as before, the capitalization issue pivots on whether the provision of R increases future
output and consumption, not whether R is partly non-appropriable or non-rival, and these two
features do not invalidate the need to capitalize many intangible expenditures.
In sum, the various characteristics that cause tangible and intangible capital to be
different – verifiablity, visibility, non-rivalness, and appropriability – are all important features
that distinguish one type of capital from the other. However, none of these differences is
relevant to the issue of whether to treat intangible expenditures as capital. That is determined by
whether or not the expenditure is intended to yield output in some future time period. This is the
conceptual analogue on the production side to the symmetry criterion of whether the expenditure
was made in order to increase future consumption. Many intangibles satisfy these criteria and
must therefore be treated as capital.
Symmetry in production does impose one important restriction on intangible assets. To
proceed as we have in the formulation of the equations (2a)-(2d), we assume that the same
neoclassical investment rules that apply to tangible capital also apply to intangibles: investment
in tangibles is assumed to proceed up to the point that the present value of the stream of future
user costs, PK(t + ) just equals the cost of acquiring a marginal unit of the investment good, PI(t).
Applied to intangibles, this assumption implies that investment is made using marginalist
principles. An alternative Schumpetarian view of the firm might reject this assumption, but we

7

Any externalities due to unappropriated benefits from R&D or other investments appear as a shift in the
production function and are picked up in measured MFP (Hulten 2001). This is essentially the
mechanism of endogenous growth theory when externalities arise from R&D (Romer 1986) and
education (Lucas 1988).
13

adopt the marginalist approach because our objective is to integrate intangible capital into the
neoclassical sources-of growth framework of equation (2e), which is based on marginalist
principles.
E. Prices and Deflators
The SOG equations of the preceding section are computationally derived from the
accounting structure in equations (2a)-(2d) using price deflators to convert nominal values into
their real counterparts. As discussed above, a difficult aspect of this computation is measuring
the price deflator PN(t) needed to convert estimates of expenditure PN(t)N(t) into real estimates.
This has proved to be one of the most difficult empirical issues in the study of R&D investment,
in large part because of the verifiability and visibility issues described above. The strategy in the
R&D literature has been to use input costs to proxy for PN(t); the most common approach has
been to average a wage deflator and a price deflator for a broad measure of output on the grounds
that R&D expenditures are roughly 50 percent labor costs and 50 percent supplies.8
In contrast to this approach, we opt for a pure output deflator as a proxy for the price of
intangibles. Although we consider this proxy only a placeholder until further research develops
deflators for specific intangibles, we believe that a price measure is preferred to a wage measure
for the following reason. Under constant returns to scale in the technology in (2a), the growth
rate of the price of the intangible capital good is:

(4)

gPN(t) = sLN(t)gPL(t) + sKN(t)gPK(t) + sRN(t)gPR(t) - gAN(t),

8

This approach to constructing a deflator for R&D was developed and used by Jaffe (1972) and then by
Griliches (1984).
14

where sLN(t) = [PL(t)LN(t)]/[PL(t)LN(t) + PK(t)KN(t) + PR(t)RN(t) ] is labor’s income share in the
production of intangible investment. Using the wage PL(t) as a proxy for PN(t) is equivalent to
assuming that the growth rate of output price is gPN(t) is equal to the growth rate of wages, gPL(t).
As can be seen in equation (4), this will occur only if labor is the sole input to the production of
the intangible and if the rate of multifactor productivity growth in the production of intangibles,
gAN(t), and the shares of tangible and intangible capital, sKN(t) and sRN(t), are all zero. These
assumptions are extremely implausible, because, for example, R&D programs require plant and
equipment, and knowledge builds on knowledge. Because using a wage deflator tends to give
biased results, we adopt the nonfarm business output price deflator as a proxy for PN(t). This
proxy can be rationalized by the fact that much R&D and coinvestments in marketing and human
competencies are tied to specific product lines. Integrating the cost of productivity-enhancing
investments back into the “using” industries is accomplished generally by adopting the nonfarm
business output price as the deflator for intangibles.9
The search for an appropriate deflator for the user cost of intangibles, PR(t), also poses
challenges. The corresponding user cost of tangible capital, PK(t ), is not usually observed but
can be imputed following Jorgenson (1963) and Hall and Jorgenson (1967). When intangibles
are ignored, the conventionally measured rental flow, PK(t)K(t), is estimated by the residual
income not attributable to labor, PC(t)C(t) + PI(t)I(t) - PL(t)L(t). This leads to an error because,
when income accrues to intangible capital, the conventionally measured residual term for capital
income actually equals

9

Martin Baily offered this rationale for the deflation of the output of management consultancies (see
Triplett and Bosworth 2004, p 260).
15

(5)

PC(t)C(t) + PI(t)I(t) - PL(t)L(t) = PK(t)K(t) + PR(t)R(t) - PN(t)N(t).

The conventional practice of ignoring intangible capital thus leads, in general, to a biased
estimate of the income accruing to tangible capital. There is, moreover, another subtle issue that
arises because the total capital income on the right-hand side of (5) is measured by the sum of all
property-type income (interest, dividends, retained earnings, taxes, and depreciation). This list
accounts for all the non-labor payments accruing to both tangible and intangible capital, i.e., to
PK(t)K(t) + PR(t) R(t), leaving no apparent role for the intangible investment, PN(t)N(t). As the
right-hand side of equation (5) illustrates, the answer to this apparent contradiction is that the
income accruing to intangible investments is reflected on the input side as uncounted profits.
Specifically, when intangibles are treated as an intermediate input, the spending on intangibles is
subtracted from revenue as an expense, reducing measured profits. On the other hand, when
intangibles are treated as an investment, they are not subtracted from revenue in the period of
purchase, and profits are higher. Thus, the symmetric treatment of tangible and intangible
capital is not just about PN(t)N(t) as uncounted output, but also about PN(t)N(t) as uncounted
income accruing to capital.

III. Estimates of Intangible Investment and Capital
A. Measuring Investment in Intangibles
In our earlier work, we developed estimates of a broad range of business investments in
intangibles in the 1990s. Our results are summarized in Table 1 for the three broad categories of
intangibles included in our analysis, with separate detail for two of the categories. We first
16

estimated expenditures on each type of intangible (the first column in the table), and then, based
on available economic research and evidence, we determined how much of each expenditure
might be considered business investment according to the criterion of whether the expenditure
could be deemed to yield future consumption (the last column). Estimates are the annual average
for the period shown (the late 1990s), and the numbers in parentheses indicate how much of each
type of investment currently is included in the NIPAs.
The rationale for our choice of categories is discussed in some detail in our the previous
paper. We only note here that our choice was driven, in large part, by our desire to go beyond
existing categories to develop a more comprehensive list. Our first broad category, business
investment in computerized information, is largely composed of the NIPA series for business
investment in computer software.10 Our second category, innovative property, includes the
National Science Foundation (NSF) Industrial R&D series. However, the NSF’s survey is
designed to capture only innovative activity built on a scientific base of knowledge and therefore
does not fully capture resources devoted by businesses to innovation and new product/process
R&D more broadly.11 This “other” R&D – we called it nonscientific R&D – includes the
revenues of the nonscientific commercial R&D industry, as measured in the Census Bureau’s

10

The NIPA software series is conceptually consistent with our intertemporal criterion for defining capital
because the software measure includes both purchased and own-account components. National
accountants estimated the own-account component indirectly to overcome the verifiability issue discussed
earlier (Parker and Grimm 1999).
11
The survey asks companies to include “activities carried on by persons trained, either formally or by
experience, in: biological sciences, computer science, engineering, mathematical and statistical sciences,
and physical sciences (e.g., chemistry and physics)” but to exclude “quality control, routine product
testing, market research, sales promotion, ... and other nontechnological activities; ... and research in the
social sciences or psychology.” In a further clarification, the survey instructs companies to include
expenditures for conducting clinical trials for drugs and software development if the application has
commercial value, but to exclude “software development intended for within company use only.”
17

Services Annual Survey (SAS), as well as the costs of developing new motion picture films and
other forms of entertainment, and a crude estimate of the spending for new product development
by financial services and insurance firms.12 It is apparent from Table 1 that, by the late 1990s,
investment in non-scientific R&D was as large as investment in scientific R&D.
Our third general category includes investment in what we have called “economic
competencies.” This includes spending on strategic planning, spending on redesigning or
reconfiguring existing products in existing markets, investments to retain or gain market share,
and investments in brand names. Expenditures for advertising are a large part of the investments
in brand equity, but as stressed in our earlier work, not all spending on intangibles should be
counted as capital spending. Based on results from the empirical literature on advertising, we
estimated that only about 60 percent of total advertising expenditures were for ads that had longlasting effects (that is, effects that last more than one year).
Investment in firm-specific human and structural resources is the second type of economic
competency included in our estimates. It includes the costs of employer-provided worker training
and an estimate of management time devoted to enhancing the productivity of the firm. Our
estimates of the former are based on BLS surveys; the latter are based on SAS revenues for the
management consultant industry and trends in the cost and number of persons employed in
executive occupations. Without doubt, these spending flows are imprecisely estimated, but
business investments in firm-specific human and structural resources through strategic planning,
adaptation, reorganization, and employee-skill building are important drivers of innovation and
12

Many new products in the financial services industry involve computerized information; to avoid
double-counting (particularly with the own-account portion of computer software), we deliberately were
very conservative in our estimates for this component.
18

profitability in industry and require treatment as investment to be consistent with capital theory.13
Moreover, this last category is, by our reckoning, the largest type of business intangible
investment. And, total investment in economic competencies is nearly as large as the investment
in the other two major categories combined.
Two other facts emerged from our earlier work. First, total investment in intangibles grew
more rapidly than investment in tangibles over the decade of the 1990s, although the levels of the
two were nearly equal in magnitude for the decade as a whole. Second, investment in the
categories of intangibles already included in the NIPAs was only a fraction of our estimated total,
even if all scientific R&D were included. Together, these findings suggest that a longer time
series on the growth of intangible business investment would indicate a strong dynamic role for
intangibles in explaining economic growth and might significantly affect our understanding of the
sources of growth of the U.S. nonfarm business sector.
Table 2 reports our new estimates of business investment in the intangibles shown in
table 1 by decade starting in 1950. In general, the estimates shown in table 2 were derived using
the same methods and sources as used in our earlier paper. Most of the needed source data begin
at least by the late 1940s, and the series for spending on scientific R&D and on brand equity begin
much earlier. However, for a few components we could not use the same sources for earlier
periods, and the components were extrapolated backward in time using related series. This
occurred most prominently for the series based on SAS data, which are not available prior to the

13

Moreover, the micro data evidence of Abowd et. al (2005) suggests that firm-level differences in
organizational practices (proxied by firm-level distributions of human capital) are strongly related to
outcomes such as revenue per worker and market valuation.
19

mid-1980s. All SAS series were extrapolated back using a related aggregate in the BEA’s gross
product by industry system that is available beginning in the late-1940s.14
For employer-provided training we made some changes to the estimates for recent years
and made some special adjustments to estimates for earlier years. In our earlier work, we used
trends in wage costs and the industrial structure of the workforce to extrapolate the results of
surveys conducted by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) in the mid-1990s. For this paper, we
improved our extrapolations for more recent years by linking them to estimates from surveys that
have been conducted by the American Society for Training and Development (ASTD) since
1997.15 These new results suggest a slight pullback in firms’ per-employee expenditure on
training in 2002, perhaps reflecting the cyclical episode in 2001. We know of no similar, surveybased data for business outlays on employer-provided training in earlier periods.
The studies that established the link between training and productivity at the firm level
(Bartel 1991, 1994) used data for earlier years (the mid-1980s), but the training measures were
qualitative indicators, not actual figures on the amount firms invested in their employees (see also
Black and Lynch 1996, whose data were for the early 1990s). The BLS surveys and the more
recent ASTD data suggest that per-employee rates of spending on (formal) training increases with
the size of the firm.16 The BLS surveys also show that employees in professional and managerial

14

Specifically, the rate of change in value added in miscellaneous professional services was used to extend
the series for R&D in the social sciences and humanities, market research services, and management
consulting services from 1985 back to 1947.
15
See www.astd.org or Bassi, et. al. 2001 for further information.
16
See table 1 in the employer survey at www.bls.gov/ept. Only 69 percent of small establishments (fewer
than 50 employees) provided formal training in 1995 compared with nearly all medium-sized (50-249
employees) and large (250 or more employees) establishments.
20

occupations receive the most training (in terms of hours).17 With the growth of the modern
corporation and a rough doubling of the ratio of employees in professional and managerial
occupations in the total workforce since the late 1960s, the incidence of employer-provided
training likely has also increased by a notable, albeit unknown, amount.18 Because an extension
of the methods used in our earlier work would not build in an increase in incidence (except
indirectly through its impact on the distribution of wage costs by industry), we boosted the trend
in training implied by an extension of our earlier work by a small amount (less than 2 percent per
year) between 1948 and 1988.
All told, business investment in intangibles is a vital aspect of business activity, and the
investments shown in table 2 represent a large and growing portion of the overall economy. The
extent to which existing nominal output measures are understated owing to the treatment of most
intangibles as intermediates in the national accounts is illustrated by Figures 1 and 2. The former
shows our measure of total investment as a share of (adjusted) nonfarm business output and
indicates that intangibles have accounted for virtually all of the increase over the last five
decades. (Note that software is included in “existing” investment, owing to its current treatment
the NIPAs). Figure 2 breaks the growth in intangible investment into its major components and
reveals that, in recent years, the most dynamic categories of intangibles are firm-specific
resources, non-scientific R&D, and computer software. The major period of relative growth in
17

Employees in professional and paraprofessional occupations received essentially twice the number of
hours of formal and informal training as those in other occupational groups, with training most prevalent
for computer, professional and technical, and management skills. See tables 1 and 6 in the employee
survey at www.bls.gov/ept.
18
The reported increase in the ratio of professional and managerial occupations in the workforce is based
on data from BLS’s Current Population Survey (CPS). Nakamura (2001) presents and discusses the
increase in this ratio from 1982 to 2000. We developed similar estimates using more limited CPS
occupational categories that extend back to 1967.
21

scientific R&D was the 1950s.19 Figure 2 also reveals the relative importance of investment in
economic competencies as a share of the total investment.
The last four rows of table 2 present data on related series as a basis for further
comparisons. The most interesting is perhaps the last row, which presents our estimates of the
parameter

from our equation (3). This parameter is the ratio of output with and without

unrecognized intangibles. When nonfarm business output is adjusted to include our estimates of
the unrecognized intangibles, the adjusted output is 12 percent (1/ ) percent higher than the
existing measure in the 2000-2003 period. Fifty years ago, the adjusted measure was only about 5
percent higher.
B. Real Intangible Investment and Capital Stocks
The ultimate objective is to estimate the SOG equation (2e). In order to do this, estimates
of the real investment in intangibles are necessary, as are the corresponding stocks of capital.
Real investment for each new category of intangibles was obtained by deflating the nominal
investment estimates of the preceding section by the nonfarm business output deflator.20 As noted
in Section II, we believe this deflator is a plausible placeholder until further research permits
better measures. The NIPA price for software is retained and used for that category of
intangibles.

19

Scientific R&D also bulged in the 1979-1982 period, but this bulge is accounted for by a jump in
mineral exploration, which we include in scientific R&D along with the NSF’s Industrial R&D series.
Expenditures on oil and gas well drilling and mining, the dominant component of mineral exploration, are
already capitalized in the NIPAs.
20
The nonfarm business output deflator begins in 1948. To deflate nominal investment data that begin
earlier (scientific R&D and brand equity, for example), the nonfarm business output deflator is linked to
the GDP deflator.
22

To obtain intangible capital stocks, we start with our estimates of real investment series
N(t) and apply the capital accumulation identity of Section II, R(t) = N(t) + (1- R)R(t-1).21 Two
further elements beyond N(t) are needed to implement the identity: a depreciation rate, , and a
capital benchmark, R(0), for each intangible asset.
Relatively little is known about depreciation rates for intangibles. Based on the limited
information available, we made the following assumptions about depreciation rates:

Category
Computerized information
other than software)
R&D, scientific
R&D, nonscientific
Brand equity
Firm-specific resources

Depreciation Rate (percent)
33
20
20
60
40

For computerized information, our estimate is based on the BEA’s assumptions for ownaccount software (depreciation rate of 33 percent, five-year service life). Our estimate of the
depreciation rate of R&D capital (20 percent) is in the middle of the range of the rates reported in
the existing literature on R&D. For R&D, Bernstein and Mamuneas (2004) find that the
depreciation rate in the United States is 18 percent. Nadiri and Prucha (1996) obtain a figure of
12 percent. Pakes and Schankerman (1978), using data for several European countries, obtain an

21

Note that we are assuming that R&D investment becomes productive as soon as it is put in place; that is,
we are assuming a gestation lag of zero. In contrast, Fraumeni and Okubo (2005) assumed a one-year
gestation lag. We maintained a gestation lag of zero to avoid the complication of different gestation lags
for different assets as is done in much of the growth accounting literature. Hopefully, future research will
shed further light on this issue.
23

average rate of 25 percent; in a later paper (1986), they estimate a range from 11 to 26 percent.22
For advertising, the empirical literature finds the effects of ads to be relatively short-lived (as
noted earlier) but reports a wide range of findings on the longevity of advertising capital; our own
interpretation of this literature is that advertising capital depreciates by 60 percent per year.23
For firm-specific resources, we averaged the rates for brand equity and R&D. As just
described, the firm-specific resources category has two components. On the one hand, the
discernible and direct link between employer-provided training and firm-level productivity
suggests that investments in this component are long-lasting. On the other hand, investments
through strategic planning and reorganization reflect business’ need to constantly adapt to
changing economic conditions. While such investments undoubtedly have a long-lasting
“learning-by-doing” dimension (similar to that in R&D), we believe they also have a short-lived
“organizational forgetting” dimension (similar to that in advertising).
For each asset, the initial capital stock was set to zero in the year shown below.
Category
Computerized information
R&D, scientific
R&D, nonscientific
Brand equity
Firm-specific resources

Year Initial Stock Set to Zero
1958
1928
1945
1928
1946

22

The 33 percent figure is the double-declining balance rate for BEA’s assumed service life of five years
for own-account software, calculated as 1.65/5. This ratio was originally developed by Hulten and Wykoff
(1981).
23
We concluded that advertising had a service life of less than 3 years based on work by Landes and
Rosenfield (1994) who estimated implied annual geometric rates of decay of advertising for 20 two-digit
SIC industries covering manufacturing and many services. The Landes-Rosenfield findings also generated
our conclusions on the amount of advertising that should be expensed (about 40 percent; see footnote 21 in
CHS).
The literature is not settled on these issues. Some find that all (Comanor and Wilson 1974) or a
higher fraction (Hall 1981) of advertising expenditures should be expensed, while others suggest that little
or no expensing is appropriate (Lev 2001). Yet another econometric study found the durability of
advertising capital to be as high as 7 years (Ayanian 1983).
24

The assumption that initial capital stocks are zero (rather than an unknown positive value) has
little effect on our growth accounting analysis because all of the depreciation rates are relatively
high and the true value of the benchmark will have depreciated away by the date that we start our
growth accounting analysis (1973).
Table 3 shows our estimate of the nominal intangible capital stock in 2003 (in billions of
dollars) and the annual average growth rate of real intangible capital in the 1973-1995 and 19952003 periods.24 In terms of the components of intangible capital, over the period from 1973-95,
nonscientific R&D capital is the fastest growing new category of intangibles; over the period
from 1995-2003, computerized information is the fastest growing category. In both periods,
scientific R&D is the slowest growing category.
C. The User Cost of Intangible Capital
The SOG model (2e) requires both the growth rate of intangible capital and its income
share. In order to estimate the income share, it is first necessary to estimate the user cost PR(t)
associated with each type of intangible capital. The standard expression for the user cost of any
asset was derived by Jorgenson (1963) and extended by Hall and Jorgenson (1967) to include
taxes. The Jorgensonian user cost for intangibles is given by the expression
(6)

PRi(t) = [r(t) +

i

-

i(t)]

PNi(t),

where r(t) a measure of the net rate of return common to all capital in year t,
rate for asset i,

i(t)

i

is the depreciation

is the expected capital gain (loss) on asset i, and PNi(t) is the intangible

24

As indicated in Table 2, two components of innovative property (mineral exploration and a portion of
architectural design services) are already included in the NIPAs and are not included as intangibles in
Table 3; thus, we are implicitly counting them as tangible assets in the growth accounting results that
follow. We left them as categorized by the BEA to simplify the presentation; in any case, these categories
are small enough that reclassifying them would make little difference in the sources of growth analysis.
25

investment price deflator. Except for the real net rate of return r(t), each term on the right-hand
side of this expression can be calculated for each new intangible asset from the data described
above, with the capital gain term proxied by the three-year moving average of the nonfarm
business price deflator. We include the usual Hall-Jorgenson tax terms in our actual calculations
although they are not shown in (6) for simplicity of exposition. We estimate the net rate of return
r(t) using the procedure developed in Jorgenson and Griliches (1967) that solves for the common
value of r(t) in each year that causes the accounting identity in equation (5) to hold for all types of
capital, intangible and tangible.25
D. Output Measures and Income Shares
The next link in completing the data needed for the SOG equation (2e) is the estimation of output
and the associated income shares. Following equation (2d), nominal output in the nonfarm
business sector is the sum of our estimates of current dollar intangible investment, PN(t)N(t), and
deliveries of consumption and tangible investment to final demand, PC(t)C(t) + PI(t)I(t). The
income shares follow immediately by dividing each element on the right-hand side of (2d),
PL(t)L(t), PK(t)K(t),and PR(t)R(t) by the value of output. These shares are shown in the last
column of table 3 for the periods 1973-95 and 1995-2003.

25

It is worth emphasizing that the Jorgenson-Griliches procedure for estimating the rate of return results
in a common rate of return to both tangibles and intangibles. This assumes that businesses arbitrage their
investments across all types of capital, investing in each type until the rate of return for all assets is equal.
While this assumption about investment may be disputed by Schumpeterians, we believe that it is the
logical starting point for incorporating intangibles into the sources-of-growth analysis because it treats
intangibles symmetrically with the way tangibles are treated in the existing SOG literature. In particular, it
is symmetric with the way the official SOG estimates are constructed by the BLS. We also note that, as of
this writing, the required BLS data extend through 2002. Following Oliner and Sichel, we use a regression
equation to project r(t) for 2003; explanatory variables include two lags of r(t), inflation in the nonfarm
business sector, the acceleration of real output in the nonfarm business sector, the unemployment rate, and
the profit share.
26

To highlight how the accounting differs when intangibles are counted as investment,
table 4 shows the elements of the income identity PQ(t)Q(t) = PL(t)L(t) + PK(t)K(t) + PR(t)R(t),
along with the associated shares. As can be seen in the memo items, including all intangibles
lowers the labor share of income from about 70 percent to 60 percent and raises the capital share
(the sum of lines 12 and 13) from about 30 percent to 40 percent. Note that intangibles account
for 37.5 percent of all capital income (line 13 as a share of line 12 plus line 13).
The full time series of the new labor share is provided in figure 3. The lowering of the
labor share is one of the more startling results of the “new view” of intangibles. Not only is
labor'
s share significantly lower when all intangibles are capitalized, the “new” share is no longer
constant (as it appeared to be before software was capitalized). Rather, the new share trends
downward over the past five decades, particularly since 1980. The growing wedge between the
old and new views of labor'
s share reflects the fact that an increasing fraction of capital income
has been associated with intangibles.26
To obtain an index of real output growth including the new intangibles, we aggregate the
existing real nonfarm business output and the real investment series for each of the new categories
of intangible assets, PNi(t)Ni(t), using a Divisia index procedure.27 The result is the growth rate
of output gQ(t) = sC(t)gC(t) + sI(t)gI(t) +

i sNi(t)gNi(t).

This is the final data series needed to

complete the SOG analysis.

26

This income appears in the first column of table 4 (and on the income statements of companies in the
economy) as retained earnings. Additions to retained earnings translate into a long-run increase in national
wealth as corporate share values increase. To the individual investor, it appears as an increase in personal
wealth from stocks, pensions, insurance, etc.
27
Because nominal business investment for each of the new intangible assets is deflated with the nonfarm
business deflator, Divisia aggregation and fixed-weight (or simple sum) aggregation yield the same series
for real nonfarm business output including business investment in intangible assets.
27

IV. Growth Accounting Results
The estimates of Section III provide the elements needed to construct growth accounts
with intangibles. We can then compare the SOG models with and without intangibles (equations
1e and 2e of Section II). The SOG results are shown in Table 5 for two periods, 1973-1995 and
1995-2003, which were selected in order to analyze the role played by intangible investments in
the productivity pick-up that is usually dated from 1995 in the recent SOG literature.28
The top panel in Table 5 presents the growth accounts based on equation (1e), the SOG
without any intangibles.29 These results are based on BLS estimates of the growth of labor
productivity in the nonfarm business sector, from which we have excluded software.30 The
estimates provide the baseline for comparison with SOG estimates based on equation (2e) with
intangibles, shown in the bottom panel of Table 5. A number of conclusions can be drawn from a
comparison of the two panels. First, it is apparent that the capitalization of intangibles increases
the rate of growth of output per hour in both the 1973-1995 and 1995-2003 periods. Interestingly,
the increase in growth rates relative to the baseline is largest in the earlier period (20 percent)
compared with the second (11 percent). However, it is worth noting that the second period covers
both the technology boom and the subsequent technology bust. Estimates that refer only to the
28

The figures here follow the methodology described above, which also coincides with that used by the
BLS to produce their estimates of multifactor productivity growth. For a description of their methodology,
see BLS (1983).
29
The figures in table 5 and throughout the paper do not incorporate the 2005 annual revision of the
NIPAs.
30
The items listed under the heading ‘Contribution of Components’ are the growth rate of each input
weighted by the corresponding income share. In moving from one formulation to the other, we make
appropriate adjustments to the income shares. As of this writing, BLS’s published estimates extend
through 2002, and we only had to estimate one year. This was done using the procedure developed in
Oliner and Sichel (2000, 2002).
28

1995-2000 period would show a greater influence of intangible investments on labor productivity
growth. The dependence of growth accounting estimates on the period of analysis, and
particularly on the endpoints, is a well-known characteristic of this type of analysis.
Second, the relative importance of the factors “explaining” growth changes significantly
when intangibles are introduced. In the first period, the portion of top-line growth explained by
intangibles goes from 0 percent in the top panel (by definition) to 26 percent with them, and the
corresponding numbers for the 1995-2003 period are 0 percent and 27 percent, respectively.
Moreover, intangibles moved up to parity with tangible capital in its importance as a source of
growth during the second period. Put another way, capital plays a larger role in accounting for
labor productivity growth once intangibles are included. In the earlier period, capital accounted
for 59 percent of labor productivity growth when intangibles are included, but only 44 percent
when they are excluded. In the latter period, the difference is even greater, with capital
accounting for 54 percent of growth when intangibles are included but only 35 percent when they
are excluded.
Third, a comparison of MFP growth rates reveals that this source of growth declines both
in absolute and relative importance when intangibles are included as investment. This is most
pronounced for the second period, during which the average annual growth rate of MFP drops
from 1.42 percentage points under the “old” view to 1.08 percentage points when intangible
investments are included in the analysis. Expressed as a fraction of the rate of growth in output
per hour, MFP declines in importance from 51 percent to 35 percent. This result is not
particularly surprising in light of Jorgenson and Griliches (1967) and in view of the fact that MFP
is measured as a residual.

29

Fourth, one thing that cannot be claimed for the “new” view is that intangibles affected the
size of the mid-1990s pick-up in labor productivity itself. The third column in both panels shows
the percentage-point acceleration in each SOG factor between the two periods. It is apparent that
the size of the acceleration in labor productivity in percentage points was virtually the same in
both panels.
Fifth, the source of the mid-1990s acceleration in labor productivity does change when
intangibles are included. In the top panel, the acceleration in MFP accounts for two-third of the
total pickup when intangibles are excluded, but accounts for less that half in bottom panel when
intangibles are included. Correspondingly, the role of capital in the acceleration of labor
productivity is considerably larger when intangibles are included.
In sum, the results shown in Table 5 strongly suggest that intangibles matter not just for
national income and wealth accounting, but for growth accounting as well. Indeed, our estimates,
rough as they may be, imply that the traditional practice of expensing intangibles results in a
seriously distorted picture of the sources of growth.
Table 6 continues the SOG of Table 5 by disaggregating line 6 of that table’s lower panel
into the separate components shown in Table 1. It is probably not surprising that computerized
information (software) is an important factor driving the growth of the total intangible variable in
Table 5, but it is perhaps more surprising that firm-specific resources are found to be of equal
importance. The rather small role of scientific R&D also is surprising in light of the attention that
R&D has been given in the literature on innovation. Scientific R&D accounts for only a modest
portion of total intangible capital deepening and is markedly less important than investment in

30

software.31 It also worth noting that the non-traditional types of intangibles highlighted in this
paper – nonscientific R&D, brand equity, and firm-specific resources – together account for
nearly 60 percent of total intangible capital deepening since 1995. Because software is already
capitalized in the NIPAs, and scientific R&D will probably be sometime over the next decade, our
results suggest that growth accountants should not lose sight of these other forms of intangible
capital.
This paper highlights the importance of intangibles as a source of economic growth.
However, because software is already included in published growth accounts, another question is
relevant: how much impact would the capitalization of the other intangibles have on published
growth rates? Table 7 addresses this question by showing estimates for the nonfarm business
sector, including software but not the other intangibles, for periods shown in Tables 5 and 6. A
comparison of the top-line result in Table 7 with the corresponding estimate on line 1 in the
lower panel of Table 5 indicates that the growth rate of output per hour is not greatly increased by
the inclusion of the other intangibles from 1995-2003 (2.95 percent versus 3.09 percent).
However, the composition of the sources of growth is affected, with a significantly greater role
for capital deepening with full accounting for intangibles and a proportionately smaller role for
MFP. Again, the capitalization of intangibles matters for the understanding of economic growth.

31

This result hinges, at least in part, on our assumption that the nonfarm business output price is an
appropriate deflator for scientific R&D. If we followed the R&D literature and used a deflator with a
wage component, the result that scientific R&D played a relatively small role in accounting for recent U.S.
economic growth would be, if anything, stronger. On the other hand, if the deflator for ICT investment
were used instead (as suggested by Mairesse and Kosoglu 2005), we would find that scientific R&D
played a more important role.
31

V. Conclusion: It’s the Knowledge Economy
The rapid expansion and application of technological knowledge in its many forms
(research and development, capital-embodied technical change, human competency, and the
associated firm-specific co-investments) is a key feature of recent U.S. economic growth.
Accounting practice traditionally excludes the intangibles component of this knowledge capital
and, according to our estimates, excludes approximately $1 trillion from conventionally measured
nonfarm business sector output by the late 1990s and understates the business capital stock by
$3.6 trillion. The current practice also overstates labor’s share of income by a significant amount
and masks a downward trend in that share. Our results also suggest that the inclusion of
intangibles both as an input and as an output can have a large impact on our understanding of
economic growth. We have found that the inclusion of intangible investment in the real output of
the nonfarm business sector increases the estimated growth rate of output per hour by 10 to 20
percent relative to the base-line case which completely ignores intangibles. Thus, the inclusion of
intangibles matters for labor productivity growth rates, although it has little effect on the
acceleration of productivity in the 1990s. On the input side, intangibles reached parity with
tangible capital as a source growth after 1995, and when the two are combined, capital deepening
supplants MFP as the principal source of growth. Moreover, the majority of the contribution of
intangibles comes from the non-traditional categories of intangibles identified in this paper.
It is also worth noting that the fraction of output growth per hour attributable to the old
“bricks and mortar” forms of capital investment (labeled “other tangible” capital in the lower
panel of table 5) is very small, accounting for less that 8 percent of the total growth in the period
1995-2003. While it is inappropriate to automatically attribute the other 92 percent to

32

“knowledge capital” or “the knowledge economy,” it is equally inappropriate to ignore the
association between innovation, human capital, and knowledge acquisition, on the one hand, and
investments in intangibles, IT capital, labor quality change, and multifactor productivity, on the
other.
That intangibles, and more generally, knowledge capital should be such an important
driver of modern economic growth is hardly surprising, given the evidence from every day life
and the results of basic intertemporal economic theory. What is surprising is that intangibles have
been ignored for so long, and that they continue to be ignored in financial accounting practice at
the firm level. The results presented this paper are intended to illustrate the potential magnitude
of the bias arising when they are excluded from economic growth accounting. In the process, we
have been forced to make a host of assumptions about many empirical issues, in order to measure
such items as output deflators and non-market inputs like firm-specific organization and human
competencies. Further research will undoubtedly find better ways to deal with these issues, and
future data collection efforts will evolve to fill the gaps that this paper only traverses lightly.
However, while our results are clearly provisional, we are also mindful of the famous dictum of
John Maynard Keynes that it is better to be imprecisely right than precisely wrong.

33

References
Abowd, John M., John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, Julia Lane, Paul Lengermann, Kristin McCue,
Kevin McKinney, and Kristen Sandusky (2005). “The Relation among Human Capital,
Productivity, and Market Value: Building Up from Micro Evidence.” In Measuring
Capital in the New Economy, C. Corrado, J. Haltiwanger, and D. Sichel, eds., Studies in
Income and Wealth, Vol. 65. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Ayanian, Robert (1983). “The Advertising Capital Controversy.” Journal of Business 56 (3):
349-364.
Baily Martin Neil (1981). “Productivity and the Services of Capital and Labor.” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity 1: 1-65.
Bernstein, Jeffrey, I. and Theofanis P. Mamuneas (2004), “R&D Depreciation, Stocks, User Costs
and Productivity Growth for U.S. Knowledge Intensive Industries,” mimeo, Carleton
University.
Bartel, Ann (1991). “Employee Training Programs in U.S. Businesses.” in David Stern and Josef
Ritzen, eds., Market Failure in Training: New Economic Analysis and Evidence on
Training of Adult Employees. Springer-Verlag.
Bartel, Ann (1994). “Productivity Gains from the Implementation of Employee Training
Programs.” Industrial Relations 33 (4): 411-25.
Bassie, Laurie J., Paul Harrison, Jens Ludwig, and Daniel P. McMurrer (2001). “Human Capital
Investments and Firm Performance.” Mimeo. Washington, DC: Human Capital
Dynamics, Inc.
Black, Sandra and Lisa M. Lynch. (1996). “Human Capital Investments and Productivity.”
American Economic Review 86 (2, May): 263-267.
Brynjolfsson, Erik. and Shinkyu Yang. (1999). “The Intangible Costs and Benefits of Computer
Investments: Evidence from the Financial Markets.” Atlanta, Georgia: Proceedings of the
International Conference on Information Systems.
Brynjolfsson, Erik., Lorin M. Hitt, and Shinkyu Yang (2000). “Intangible Assets: How the
Interaction of Information Technology and Organizational Structure Affects Stock Market
Valuations.” Cambridge, Mass: MIT Working paper.
Bureau of Labor Statistics (1983), Trends in Multifactor Productivity, Bulletin 2178, September.
Comanor, William and Thomas Wilson (1974). Advertising and Market Power. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
34

Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel (2005). “Measuring Capital and Technology:
An Expanded Framework.” In Measuring Capital in the New Economy, C. Corrado, J.
Haltiwanger, and D. Sichel, eds., Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 65. Chicago: The
University of Chicago Press.
Corrado, Carol and Larry Slifman (1999). “A Decomposition of Productivity and Costs.”
American Economic Review 89 (2, May): 328-332.
Cockburn, Iain and Zvi Griliches (1988). “Industry Effects and Appropriability Measures in the
Stock Market'
s Valuation of R&D and Patents.” American Economic Review 78 (2, May):
419-123.
Fraumeni, Barbara M. And Sumiye Okubo (2005), “R&D in the National Income and Product
Accounts: A First Look at its Effect on GDP.” In Measuring Capital in the New
Economy, C. Corrado, J. Haltiwanger, and D. Sichel, eds., Studies in Income and Wealth,
Vol. 65. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Griliches, Zvi (1981). “Market Value, R&D and Patents.” Economic Letters 7: 183-87.
Griliches, Zvi (1984), editor. R&D, Patents, and Productivity, University of Chicago Press.
Grimm, Bruce, Brent Moulton, and David Wasshausen (2005). “Information Processing
Equipment and Software in the National Accounts.” In Measuring Capital in the New
Economy, C. Corrado, J. Haltiwanger, and D. Sichel, eds., Studies in Income and Wealth,
Vol. 65. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Gullickson, William and Michael J. Harper (1999). “Possible Measurement Bias in Aggregate
Productivity Growth.” Monthly Labor Review 122 (February): 47-67.
Hall, Robert E. and Dale W. Jorgenson (1967). “Tax Policy and Investment Behavior.” American
Economic Review 57 (June): 391-414.
Hall, Bronwyn H. (1993). “The Stock Market Value of R&D Investment During the 1980s.”
American Economic Review 83 (May): 259-64.
Hall, Bronwyn H. and Robert E. Hall (1993). “The Value and Performance of U.S. Corporations.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1993:1): 1-34.
Hall, Robert E. (2000). “e-Capital: The Link between the Stock market and the Labor Market in
the 1990s.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (2000:2): 73-118.
Hall, Robert E. (2001a). “Struggling to Understand the Stock Market.” American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings 91 (May): 1-11.
35

Hall, Robert E. (2001b). “The Stock Market and Capital Accumulation.” American Economic
Review 91 (December): 1185-1202.
Hausman, Jerry (1999). “Cellular Telephone, New Products, and the CPI.” Journal of Business &
Economics Statistics 17 (April): 188-194.
Hulten, Charles R. (1979). “On the ‘Importance’ of Productivity Change.” American Economic
Review 69: 126-136.
Hulten, Charles R. (2001). “Total Factor Productivity: A Short Biography.” In Studies in Income
and Wealth Volume 65, New Developments in Productivity Analysis, Chicago: The
University of Chicago Press.
Hulten, Charles R. and Frank C. Wykoff (1981). “The Estimation of Economic Depreciation
Using Vintage Asset Prices.” Journal of Econometrics 15: 367-396.
Jaffe, Sidney A. (1972), “A Price Index for Deflation of Academic R&D Expenditures.” NSF
Working Paper no. 72-310. Washington, D.C.: National Science Foundation.
Jorgenson, Dale W. (1963). “Capital Theory and Investment Behavior.” American Economic
Review 53 (2, May): 247-259.
Jorgenson, Dale W. and Zvi Griliches (1967). “The Explanation of Productivity Change.”
Review of Economic Studies 34 (July): 349-83.
Jorgenson, Dale W. and Kevin J. Stiroh (2000). “U.S. Economic Growth in the New
Millenium.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, pp. 125-211.
Jorgenson, Dale W., Mun S. Ho, and Kevin J. Stiroh (2002), “Projecting Productivity Growth:
Lessons from the U.S. Growth Resurgence,” Atlanta Fed Economic Review, Third
Quarter, p. 1-14.
Khan, Mosahid (2001). “Investment in Knowledge.” OECD STI Review 42:19-48.
Landes, Elisabeth M. and Andrew M. Rosenfield (1994). “The Durability of Advertising
Revisited,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 42 (September): 263-276.
Lev, Baruch (2001). Intangibles: Management, Measurement, and Reporting. Washington, D.C.:
Brookings Institution.
Lucas, Robert E. Jr. (1988). “On the Mechanics of Economic Development.” Journal of
Monetary Economics 22: 3-42.

36

Mairesse, Jacques and Yusuf Kosoglu (2005). “Issues in Measuring Knowledge: The
Contribution of R&D and ICT to Growth.” Presented at Advancing Knowledge and
Knowledge Economies, Conference at the National Academies, Washington, D.C.,
January 10-11, 2005.
McGratten, Ellen and Edward C. Prescott (2000). “Is the Stock Market Overvalued?” Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review (24:4 Fall): 20-40.
Nadiri, M. Ishaq and Ingmar R. Prucha (1996), “Estimation of the Depreciation Rate of Physical
and R&D Capital in the U.S. Total Manufacturing Sector,” Economic Inquiry, Vol.
XXXIV, January, p. 43-56.
Nakamura, Leonard (1999). “Intangibles: What Put the New in the New Economy?” Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Business Review (July/August): 3-16.
Nakamura, Leonard (2001). “What is the US Gross Investment in Intangibles? (At Least) One
Trillion Dollars a Year!” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper No. 0115.
Nakamura, Leonard (2003). “The Rise in Gross Private Investment in Intangible Assets Since
1978.” Mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
Nordhaus, William D. (1997). “Do Real Output and Real Wage Measures Capture Reality? The
History of Light Suggests Not.” In The Economics of New Goods, ed. Timothy F.
Bresnahan and Robert J. Gordon, 29-66. Studies in Income and Wealth, vol. 58. Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press.
OECD Secretariat (1998). “Measuring Intangible Investment: Selected Bibliography.” Available
at http://www1.oecd.org/dsti/sti/industry/indcomp/prod/paper16.pdf.
Oliner, Stephen D. and Daniel E. Sichel (2000). “The Resurgence of Growth in the Late 1990s:
Is Information Technology the Story?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 14, Fall: 3-22.
Oliner, Stephen D. and Daniel E. Sichel (2002). “Information Technology and Productivity:
Where are We Now and Where are We Going?” forthcoming, Atlanta Fed Economic
Review, Third Quarter, p. 15-44.
Pakes, A. and M. Schankerman (1978), “The Rate of Obsolescence of Knowledge, Research
Gestation Lags, and the Private Rate of Return to Research Resources,” working paper no.
78-13, C.V. Starr Center for Applied Economics, New York University.
Pakes A. and M. Schankerman (1986), “Estimates of the Value of Patent Rights in European
Countries during the Post-1950 Period,” Economic Journal, December, p.1052-76.

37

Parker, Robert and Bruce Grimm (1999). “Recognition of Business and Government
Expenditures for Software as Investment: Methodology and Quantitative Impacts, 195998.” Website, Bureau of Economic Analysis.
Romer, Paul M. (1986). “Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth.” Journal of Political
Economy 94 (5): 1002-1037.
Solow, Robert M. (1957). “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function.” Review
of Economics and Statistics 39 (August): 312-320.
Solow, Robert M. (1987). “Book Review.” New York Times (July 12, 1987, 36).
Stiroh, Kevin J. (1998). “Computers, Productivity, and Input Substitution.” Economic Inquiry 36
(April): 175-191.
Stiroh, Kevin J. (2002), “Information Technology and the U.S. Productivity Revival: What Do
the Industry Data Say?” American Economic Review 92(5), December, 1559-1576.
System of National Accounts 1993. Commission of the European Communities, International
Monetary Fund, Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, United
Nations, and World Bank.
Triplett, Jack E. (1999). “Economic Statistics, the New Economy, and the Productivity
Slowdown.” Business Economics 34 (April): 13-17.
Triplett, Jack E. And Barry P. Bosworth (2004). Productivity in the U.S. Services Sector.
Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.
Weitzman, Martin L. (1976). “On the Welfare Significance of National Product in a Dynamic
Economy.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 90: 156-162.

38

Table 1
Business Intangibles: Total Spending and Capital Spending, 1998-2000
(billions of dollars, annual average)

Type
1. Computerized
information
(mainly computer
software)
2. Innovative property
(a) Scientific R&D
(b) Nonscientific
R&D

3. Economic
competencies
(a) Brand equity
(b) Firm-specific
resources

Total

Total
spending
154

201
223

235
407

Comments on evidence as
capital spending
Firms capitalize only a fraction of
purchased software in financial accounts.
Relatively little is known about the
service life of software assets.
Research suggests that scientific R&D
yields relatively long-lasting returns and
is capital spending.
Little is known about nonscientific R&D,
but a portion of new product development
expenditures in the entertainment industry
apparently have relatively short-lived
effects.
Research shows that the effects of some
advertising dissipate within one year, but
that more than half has effects that last
more than one year.
Research suggests that firm-specific
training is investment. Spending for
organizational change also likely has
long-lived effects, but a portion of
management fees probably is not capital
spending.

1,220

Capital spending

(incl. in the NIPAs)

154
(151)

201
(16)
223
(40)

140
365

1,085
(205)

Percent of Existing GDP
Ratio to Tangible Capital Spending

11.7
1.2

NOTE—Components may not sum to totals because of rounding.
SOURCE—Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2005), table 4. Estimates are based on a one-year service life cutoff for
determining capital spending.

39

Table 2
Business Investment in Intangibles

(billions of dollars, annual average for period shown)

1. Total CHS intangibles

1950-59

1960-69

1970-79

1980-89

1990-99

2000-03

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

19.4

41.9

103.4

349.3

749.8

1,226.2

2. Computerized information
(mainly computer software)
3. Innovative property
(a) Scientific R&D
(b) Nonscientific R&D
4. Economic competencies
(a) Brand equity
(b) Firm-specific resources

--

.8

4.5

23.2

85.3

172.5

7.7
.5

16.9
1.7

34.0
10.9

104.6
58.4

157.7
145.2

230.5
237.2

5.3
5.9

9.5
13.0

18.2
35.7

54.4
108.7

105.7
255.9

160.8
425.1

Related series1
Computer software, NIPAs
Industrial R&D, NSF2
Advertising, Coen report
Business fixed
investment, NIPAs

-5.2
8.6

.7
14.1
15.0

4.5
25.3
30.6

22.7
75.8
89.6

83.6
136.9
165.0

169.6
196.0
240.3

38.2

71.5

188.4

485.7

807.1

1,141.9

Tangibles
Intangibles3

35.6
2.5

67.3
4.2

171.4
17.0

421.1
64.6

676.5
130.7

893.4
248.5

Memo:
9. CHS intangibles, ratio to
NIPA tangibles
10. New CHS intangibles4

.47
16.9

.62
37.7

.60
86.3

.82
284.7

1.10
619.2

1.36
977.7

.95

.94

.94

.92

.90

.89

5.
6.
7.
8.
8a.
8b.

11. Nonfarm business output, ratio
of existing to adjusted for
new CHS intangibles ( )

NOTE–All figures for investments in intangibles are derived using the sources and methods described in
Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2005), or CHS, based on a one-year service life cutoff.
1. Sources indicated are as follows: NIPAs, the U.S. National Income and Product Accounts; NSF, the
National Science Foundation; and Coen report, advertising data developed by Bob Coen for Universal-McCann
(see http://www.universalmccann.com/ourview.html).
2. Prior to 1953, the industrial R&D estimates are from N. Terleckyj (1963).
3. Includes computer software, mineral exploration, and architectural and design services embedded in
structures and equipment purchases.
4. Intangibles not recognized as capital in the NIPAs.

40

Table 3
Value, Growth Rate, and Income Share of
Business Intangible Capital
Value, billions
of dollars
2003
1. Total
2.

Computerized information
(includes software)

3.

Innovative property

Growth rate of real
capital1 (percent
change)
197319951995
2003

Share of total
income
(percent)
197319951995
2003

3636.1

6.2

6.9

9.4

13.9

511.9

16.0

13.0

.8

2.3

3a.

Scientific

922.3

3.6

3.9

2.4

2.5

3b.

Nonscientific

864.4

12.4

7.2

1.0

2.2

4.

Economic competencies

4a.

Brand equity

271.8

4.2

4.6

1.7

2.0

4b.

Firm-specific resources

1065.6

5.3

6.2

3.5

5.0

3132.9

4.7

4.6

8.6

11.7

Memo:
5. New CHS intangibles

1. The rates of change for the total and major categories are built from the individual real stocks
using asset-specific user costs as price weights.
SOURCE—Authors’ calculations.

41

Table 4
Value of Output and Inputs, Nonfarm business sector, 2000-2003
(annual average, billions of dollars)
Conventional,
without Intangibles
Equation (1d)

This paper,
with Intangibles
Equation (2d)

7670

7670

0

1206

Nominal output

7670

8876

4. - Indirect business taxes1

736

736

5. - Statistical discrepancy

-52

-52

6. = Total income

6986

8192

7.

6986

8192

4915

4915

2071

2046

0

1231

70.4

60.0

29.6

25.0

1. Conventional nominal output (PC C + PI I)
2. + Intangible Investment ( PN N)
3. =

Total income

8.

=

9.

+

Labor compensation (PLL)
Income Accruing to
Tangible Capital (PK K)2

10. + Income Accruing to
Intangible Capital (PR R)
Memo: Shares out of total income (percent)
11.

Labor compensation (8)/(7)

12. Tangible capital (9)/(7)
13.

Intangible capital (9)/(7)

15.0

NOTE. The figures in this table are consistent with those used by the BLS in putting together its multifactor
productivity estimates for the nonfarm business sector. The figures in the first column, however, exclude
software, and thus nominal output (line 3) and total income (line 7) are lower by NIPA estimates for software
spending by nonfarm businesses.
1. Estimates of indirect business taxes for the nonfarm business sector (now known as taxes on production and
imports) were inferred, given figures for lines 3, 5, and 6.
2. The figure for income accruing to tangible capital in the second column differs from that in the first column
because the net rate of return—the term r(t) in equation (6)—changes slightly when intangibles are included.

42

Table 5
Annual Change in Labor Productivity,
Nonfarm Business Sector
Published data, excluding software
19731995

19952003

1.36

2.78

1.42

2. Capital deepening

.60

.98

.38

3.

IT equipment

.33

.70

.37

4.

Other tangible capital

.27

.28

.01

5. Labor composition

.28

.38

.10

6. Multifactor productivity

.48

1.42

.94

1. Labor productivity (percent)1

Memo:
Accel.2

Contribution of Components:2

Published data, including business investment in intangibles
1. Labor productivity (percent)1

1.63

3.09

1.45

2. Capital deepening

.97

1.68

.71

3.

.55

.85

.30

Contribution of Components:

2

Tangibles

4.

IT equipment

.30

.60

.30

5.

Other3

.25

.24

-.01

6.

Intangibles

.43

.84

.41

7.

Software

.12

.27

.15

8.

Other (new CHS)

.31

.57

.26

10. Labor composition

.25

.33

.08

11. Multifactor productivity

.41

1.08

.67

1. Output per hour of all persons.
2. Percentage points. Components may not sum to totals because of
independent rounding.
3. Includes mineral exploration and the architectural and design services
embedded in equipment purchases that are part of “CHS intangibles included in
the NIPAs” in tables 1 and 2.
43

Table 6
Contribution of Intangible Capital Deepening to the
Annual Change in Labor Productivity,
Nonfarm Business Sector
(percentage points)
19731995

19952003

Memo:
Accel.

(1)

(2)

(3)

1. Intangible capital deepening

.43

.84

.41

2.

Computerized information

.12

.27

.15

3.

Innovative property

.13

.22

.09

3a.

Scientific

.05

.08

.03

3b.

Nonscientific

.08

.14

.06

.17

.35

.18

4.

Economic competencies

4a.

Brand equity

.04

.08

.04

4b.

Firm-specific resources

.13

.27

.14

NOTE—Components may not sum to totals because of independent
rounding.

44

Table 7
Annual Change in Labor Productivity,
Nonfarm Business Sector

19731995
1. Labor productivity (percent)1

19952003

Memo:
Accel.2

1.47

2.95

1.48

2. Capital deepening

.73

1.26

.53

3.

IT equipment and software

.46

.99

.53

4.

Other equip. and structures

.27

.27

.00

5. Labor composition

.27

.37

.10

6. Multifactor productivity

.47

1.32

.85

Contribution of components:2

1. Output per hour of all persons.
2. Percentage points. Components may not sum to totals because of
independent rounding
SOURCE—Unpublished update to Oliner and Sichel (2000, 2002) based
on data from Bureau of Labor Statistics, Multifactor Productivity
Trends, 2002 (2004).

45

Figure 1

Investment Shares
(percent of business output)

28

28

26

26

24

24

22

22
Including intangibles

20

20

18

18

16

16

14

14
Existing NIPAs

12

12

10

10

8

1950

1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

8

Figure 2

Intangible Investments
(percent of business output)

15

15
C.I.

12

12

Nonscientific R&D

9

9

Scientific R&D
6

6

3

Firm-specific resources

3

Brand Equity
0

1950

1955

1960

1965

1970

Note: C.I. = Computerized information

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

0

Figure 3

Labor Shares
80

(percent of nonfarm business output)

75

80

75
NIPAs excluding software

70

70

65

65

60

55

Including intangibles

60

55

50
50
1950
1955
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
Note: BLS basis (output excludes government enterprises, labor income includes nonemployees).

