                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      WHAT’S SO SPECIAL ABOUT CHINA’S EXPORTS?

                                                Dani Rodrik

                                          Working Paper 11947
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11947


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2006




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Dani Rodrik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What’s So Special about China’s Exports?
Dani Rodrik
NBER Working Paper No. 11947
January 2006
JEL No. F1, O4

                                          ABSTRACT

Much more than comparative advantage and free markets have been at play in shaping China's export
success. Government policies have helped nurture domestic capabilities in consumer electronics and
other advanced areas that would most likely not have developed in their absence. As a result, China
has ended up with an export basket that is significantly more sophisticated than what would be
normally expected for a country at its income level. This has been an important determinant of
China's rapid growth. What matters for China's future growth is not the volume of exports, but
whether China will continue to latch on to higher-income products over time.

Dani Rodrik
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dani_rodrik@harvard.edu
                            WHAT’S SO SPECIAL ABOUT CHINA’S EXPORTS?*

                                              Dani Rodrik
                                           Harvard University
                                          Revised, January 2006

I. Introduction

        The phenomenal performance of China constitutes the great economic miracle of the last

quarter century. China’s economy has expanded by leaps and bounds, at historically

unprecedented rates that few economists would have found plausible or feasible ex ante. More

importantly, this growth has lifted hundreds of millions of people from deep poverty and has

helped improve health, education, and other social standards. China has accomplished all this

using its own brand of experimental gradualism--increasingly relying on markets and on price

signals, yet until very recently doing so within the boundaries of a highly unorthodox set of

institutions.

        That trade has played a significant role in this transformation is beyond dispute. China

would likely have grown even if the global economy had been closed. And the very early stages

of Chinese growth, based on rural reform, did not in any significant way rely on global markets.

But from the mid-1980s on, one must suppose that China’s growth was fueled and sustained by

the opportunities that the world market offered. We can see the increasing footprint of foreign

trade and investment in all the major aggregates. The share of exports in GDP rose from

virtually nothing in the 1960s to close to 30 percent in 2003, a rate of increase that is much larger

than what has been experienced elsewhere in the world (see Figure 1). Inward direct foreign

investment has risen from close to zero in the early 1980s to around 5 percent of GDP. The flip


*
  This is a paper prepared for the project on “China and the Global Economy 2010” of the China Economic Research
and Advisory Programme. I am indebted to Edwin Lim for his guidance and comments, and to the Programme for
financial support. Comments from Yu Yongding and Adrian Wood have also been very helpful. Oeindrila Dube
performed superb research assistance.
                                                                                            2

side of these figures is that China has become one of the world’s biggest trading powers,

accounting for 6% of global trade flows (Figure 2).

Figure 1
                                                                          Exports as a share of GDP


  35
                 China
                 World
  30




  25




  20




  15




  10




   5




   0
       1970    1972      1974       1976     1978      1980       1982     1984      1986       1988     1990      1992       1994     1996      1998       2000    2002



Source: World Development Indicators Database


Figure 2
                                                    China's share of world merchandise exports

   7%



   6%



   5%



   4%



   3%



   2%



   1%



   0%
        1960   1962   1964   1966    1968   1970    1972   1974    1976   1978    1980   1982    1984   1986    1988   1990    1992   1994    1996   1998   2000   2002




Source: World Development Indicators Database
                                                   3



         The success with which China has integrated itself into the world economy raises many

questions. Drawing the real lessons from this experience is important, not only because China is

the stellar example which other developing countries are trying to emulate, but also because the

shape of China’s own future policies depend (or should depend) on these lessons.

         The task is not made easier by the highly unconventional manner in which China has

achieved its global integration. The standard list of recommendations for countries pursuing this

goal includes: dismantling quantitative restrictions on imports, reducing import tariffs and their

dispersion, making the currency convertible for current account transactions, eliminating

bureacratic red tape and other impediments to direct foreign investment, improving customs

procedures, and establishing the rule of law. Measured by these guidelines, China’s policies

resemble more those of a country that messed up big time than those of a country that became a

formidable competitive threat in world markets to rich and poor countries alike. In brief, China

opened up very gradually, and significant reforms lagged behind growth (in exports and overall

incomes) by at least a decade or more. While monopoly state trading was liberalized relatively

early (starting in the late 1970s), what took its place was a complex and highly restrictive set of

tariffs, non-tariff barriers, and licenses. These were not substantially relaxed until the early

1990s.

         Table 1 shows the trend for import tariffs: In the early 1990s, tariffs still averaged above

40 percent (among the highest in the world at the time), with significant dispersion and a

maximum rate above 200%. While the home market was highly protected, the penalizing effect

of these tariffs on export production was neutralized through duty drawbacks and other

incentives for export oriented investment projects. Currency markets were not unified until

1994. Foreign investors were straddled with requirements to form joint ventures, transfer
                                                  4

technology to local partners, and source their inputs locally. And corruption and weak rule of law

remain significant problems. So China is not a straightforward story of export growth achieved

through trade openness and free market forces.



Table 1: China’s import tariffs

                     Unweighted              Weighted             Dispersion           Maximum
                        average              average               (st. dev)
1982                      55.6                  ..                      ..                 ..
1985                      43.3                  ..                      ..                 ..
1988                      43.7                  ..                      ..                 ..
1991                      44.1                  ..                      ..                 ..
1992                      42.9                40.6                                       220.0
1993                      39.9                38.4                   29.9                220.0
1994                      36.2                35.5                   27.9                  ..
1995                      35.2                26.8                     ..                220.0
1996                      23.6                22.6                   17.4                121.6
1997                      17.6                16.0                   13.0                121.6
1998                      17.5                15.7                   13.0                121.6
2000                      16.4                  ..                     ..                  ..
2001                      15.3                 9.1                   12.1                121.6
2002                      12.3                 6.4                    9.1                 70.0
 Source: Prasad (2004), p. 10.



       Neither is China a simple story of specialization according to comparative advantage.

While labor intensive exports (toys, garments, simple electronics assembly) have always played

an important role in China’s export basket, China also exports a wide range of highly

sophisticated products. Indeed, a major argument of this paper is that China is an outlier in terms

of the overall sophistication of its exports: its export bundle is that of a country with an income-

per-capita level three times higher than China’s. China has somehow managed to latch on to

advanced, high-productivity products that one would not normally expect a poor, labor abundant

country like China to produce, let alone export. I will provide some evidence below that
                                                  5

suggests this has been an important contributor to China’s recent growth. China’s experience

indicates that it not how much you export, but what you export that matters.

       The extent to which China’s sophisticated export basket has been a direct consequence of

its unorthodox policy regime is not clear. But it is not too much of a stretch to imagine that

China’s industrial structure has indeed been shaped by policies of promotion and protection, just

as in the cases of earlier East Asian tigers. I will return to this theme at the end of the paper, and

offer some general remarks that may help frame future policy decisions in the general areas of

trade and industrialization.

       The outline of this paper is as follows. In section II, I will provide a quantitative

evaluation of China’s export structure in comparative context and argue that China’s trade

pattern cannot be explained solely by factor endowments and other “economic fundamentals.”

In section III, I will provide some evidence that links the types of goods that countries export

with their growth performance, and show that China has benefited from having developed export

industries that one would not normally associate with a country at that level of income. Section

IV briefly reviews the development of the consumer electronics industry in China to put some

flesh on the statistical picture developed in previous sections and to highlight the role of

government policies. Section V provides concluding remarks and derives some implications for

Chinese policymakers.



II. The indeterminacy of comparative advantage

       Consider how a country’s pattern of specialization and trade is determined. The principle

of comparative advantage dictates that trade patterns are determined by how relative costs of

production within a country differ from those in the rest of the world. These differences are in
                                                  6

turn linked to differences in productivity levels across industries (as in the Ricardian model of

trade) or to differences in relative factor endowments across countries (as in the Heckscher-Ohlin

model). In these models, entrepreneurs observe costs directly and make their investment

decisions accordingly.

       But in a poor developing country, investors contemplating entry into new, non-traditional

activities face considerable uncertainty about the costs of operation. These costs will likely

depend not just on factor endowments, but also on the investor’s success with technology

adoption and adaptation, on the policy environment, and (perhaps also) on the number of other

investors making similar investment choices. The risks that arise from such uncertainty are

borne disproportionately by early entrants into new industries, who therefore provide valuable

informational spillovers to the rest of the economy. If they are successful, later entrants can

observe the profitability of the incumbents and emulate them. If they fail, they pay the full cost

of their failure. This externality implies that market forces on their own generate too little

investments in new activities; to use the terminology of Hausmann and Rodrik (2003), they

induce too little “self-discovery.” The result is that low-income countries produce too few high-

productivity goods that they could be producing (and selling in world markets) and incomes are

lower than they would otherwise be. Conversely, rapidly growing countries are those that are

able to somehow generate the investments in these non-traditional, higher-productivity tradables.

       To put some empirical flesh on these conceptual ideas, Ricardo Hausmann and I have

recently developed an indicator that measures the productivity level associated with a country’s

export basket. This indicator, which we call EXPY is calculated in two steps. First, for each 6-

digit commodity that is traded we compute the weighted average of the incomes of the countries

exporting that commodity, where the weights are the revealed comparative advantage of each
                                                 7

country in that commodity (normalized so that the weights sum up to 1). This gives us the

income level of that commodity, which we call PRODY. The 6-digit level of classification yields

more than 5,000 products for which PRODY can be calculated. Next we calculate EXPY as the

weighted average of the PRODY for each country, where the weights are the share of each

commodity in that country’s total exports. More details on the construction of these indices are

provided in the appendix.

       As would be expected, EXPY is strongly correlated with per-capita income: rich countries

export goods that other rich countries export. Figure 3 shows the scatter plot of EXPY against

per-capita GDP for 1992. The correlation coefficient is 0.83. But countries do not neatly lie

alongside the regression line. Some countries are way below the regression line, while others are

way above it. In the latter group, India and China stand out. It is striking that these two high-

performing economies have export profiles that are especially skewed towards high productivity

goods. In 1992, China’s exports were associated with an income level that is more than six times

higher than China’s per-capita GDP at the time. As we shall see, this gap has diminished

somewhat over time, but it still remains high.
                                                                     8

Figure 3: Relationship between EXPY and per-capita incomes in 1992

                                                                                                                       CHE
               9.94064
                                                                                                    IRL     FIN ISL
                                                                                                            SWEDEUDNK   USA
                                                                                                                 CAN
                                                                                                                 NLD
                                                                                                    SGP
                                                                                        KOR          ESP
                                                                                                     NZL
                                                                                MEX
                                                                                      HUN                    AUS
                                                                                               PRT
                                                                            BRAHRV            CYP          MAC
                                           CHN                              MYS                GRC
                                                                      ROM
                                                                     THA
lpppexpy1992




                                                                      TUR
                                         IND
                                                                              TTO
                                                                      DZA
                                                                     BLZ     CHL            OMN
                                                                                              SAU
                                                      IDN
                                               HTI LKA                  COL
                                                              PER     LCA
                                KEN            BOL
                                   BGD                      ECU
                                                              JAM


                                                                    PRY



                          MDG
               8.58371
                         6.75501                                                                                 10.2674
                                                              lPPPgdp1992


                 Neither is EXPY well explained by other economic fundamentals that one can think of.

Figures 4 and 5 show the partial correlations between EXPY and human capital and institutional

quality, respectively, controlling for per-capita GDP. These scatter plots use more recent trade

data from 2002 to maximize the sample of countries. We find a very weak positive partial

correlation with the stock of human capital (Figure 4) and virtually no partial correlation with

our index of institutional quality, the “rule of law” (Figure 5). Hence the evidence on the

fundamentals is mixed. While the productivity of a country’s exports is determined in part by its

overall productive capacity and its human capital endowment, idiosyncratic characteristics also

matter. To take one telling example, a country like Bangladesh with a much similar set of

relative factor endowments—abundant in labor, and scarce in human and physical capital—has

an EXPY that is roughly 50% lower than China’s. It is clear that whatever these idiosyncratic
                                                                                9

features may be (about which I speculate below), they seem to have China with an inordinately

high level of EXPY.1 In turn, this has apparently been an important driver of its recent economic

growth as I will show in the next section.



Figure 4: Partial scatter plot between EXPY and human capital
                       1




                                               MOZ
    e(lpppexpy2002 | X, loghl) + b*loghl




                                                                      SWZ
                                .5




                                                   NGA
                                                                                      CHN
                                                               IND
                                                                                        PHL
                                                              CIV LSO IDN MEX EGY MYS
                                                                KEN
                                                                 TUR                                            HUN
                                                   SLE TZASEN                  ZAF               KORPOL CHE
                                                                                                      LUX
                                                           MWI      BRA            ROM
                                                                                  LKA   URY      ISL
                                                                                                  IRLJPN
                                                                                                     DEU  FIN
                                                                                                          SWE
                                                                     SLV     SGP CRI
                                            BEN
                                             GMB     UGA
                                                                           ZMB
                                                                           BOL
                                                                         MDG
                                                                       NIC JOR MAR ESP FRAAUT RUS     GBRISR
                    0




                                                                    HNDPRT
                                                                         SYRCOL VEN ITA        HKG NLD  BEL DNK     NZL
                                                                                                              CAN USA
                                                           GTM                                 BRB
                                                       TGODZA                      ECU    ARG
                                                                                           GRC
                                             SDN                 IRN
                                                                   NAM                 PAN FJI
                                                CAFPNG GAB                    PRY       CHL                   AUS
                                                                             MUS
                                                                               OMN  PER
                                           NER                            JAM SAU
                                                                                GUY                           NOR
                                                      BDI              BFA
         -.5




                                             RWA          GIN
                       -1




                                                 .2             .45             .7               .95            1.2
                                                                       ln human capital

                                                                      Fitted values       Residuals




1
 Lo and Chan (1998) also emphasize that China’s trade structure cannot be explained only by comparative
advantage, and they emphasize (like I do below) the role of production- and technology-oriented policies of the
government.
                                                                             10

Figure 5: Partial scatter plot between EXPY and institutional quality

                       1

                                                              MOZ
    e(lpppexpy2002 | X, rule) + b*loghl




                                                                          SWZ
                                .5




                                             NGA
                                                                   CHN
                                                                             IND
                                                           PHL  ARM
                                                  IDN UKR CIVMDA
                                                             MEX
                                                                   LSO      EGYMYS
                                           KEN                                           BLZ
                                                                                         HUN
                                                   BLR       GEO
                                                               SLE  TUR
                                                                      ZAF TZA
                                                                     SEN          WSMCZE
                                                                                    POL
                                                                                    KOR                           CHE
                                                                                                                LUX
                                                     AZE       MWIBRA   BGR
                                                                       ROM      SVK                       JPN   FIN
                                                                                                              ISL
                                                       SLV
                                                  RUS MDGBENBOL
                                                              ZMBLKA   LBN           URY
                                                                                LVA CRI EST
                                                                              HRV           SVN          IRL
                                                                                                          DEUSWESGP
                                                                                             ISR           GBR
                                                    NIC                 GMB       MAR JOR        ESP BEL     DNKAUT
                   0




                                                    VENUGA
                                                      KGZ SYR MKD                       ITA PRT FRA          NZL
                                              HND
                                                GTM COL                                           BRB HKG USACAN
                                                                                                            NLD
                                                DZATGO
                                                     ECU
                                                      ALB                   ARG  MNG GRC
                                               SDN        FJI IRN    PAN                            NAM
                                                   PRY      GABPNG                                 CHL       AUS
                                                          PER                                  MUS
                                                                                                OMN
                                            NER                JAM          SAU
                                                                           GUY                               NOR
                                              BDI   BFA
         -.5




                                                                  ETH
                                                                                BHR
                                            RWA         GIN
                       -1




                                          -1.15     -.65        -.15        .35       .85         1.35      1.85
                                                                       rule of law

                                                                    Fitted values     Residuals



                                   It is also interesting to compare the progress over time of China’s EXPY with that of

some of its important competitors. This is done in Figure 6, which shows the trends for EXPY in

China, India, Hong Kong, and South Korea. China has experienced the most rapid rate of

growth in the sophistication of its exports since 1992. While China still lags behind South Korea

and Hong Kong, the difference in EXPY has steadily closed over time. Moreover, the gap

between China and India has actually increased over the past decade.2




2
 Note that EXPY is calculated using commodity exports, so India’s software exports are not included in this
comparison. Presumably, India’s EXPY would be significantly higher with software included.
                                                                               11

Figure 6


                                                             Income Content of Exports
                                       9.8

                                       9.7
           EXPY (log of PPP dollars)




                                       9.6

                                       9.5

                                       9.4

                                       9.3

                                       9.2

                                       9.1

                                        9
                                             1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
                                                                                                           China
                                                                        Year
                                                                                                           India
                                                                                                           South Korea
                                                                                                           Hong Kong


       The findings here contrast with those of Wood (2001), who has argued that China’s

export performance in skill-intensive products is below the level that would be expected on the

basis of the country’s factor endowments. Wood’s analysis is based on a cross-national

benchmark derived from regressing the ratio of skill-intensive to labor-intensive exports on a

measure of skill per worker in that country. Wood reports that China’s actual share of skill-

intensive exports within manufactures in 1990 stood at 33 percent, compared to a predicted ratio

of 40 percent (Wood 1991, Table 5). One plausible reason for the difference in the results is that

Wood’s method relies on a binary classification of goods (skill-intensive or not). Furhermore, the

classification is carried out at a much more aggregate level than here. (Remember that we

calculate EXPY using the information from more than 5,000 distinct products.) In practice, it is

common for skill-intensive components of some “goods” to be done in one country and the less
                                                 12

skill-intensive components in others, as Wood himself notes (1991, 10). An analysis at the 6-

digit level of disaggregation is more likely to capture these distinctions.

       It is worth noting however that there are often significant quality differences even within

6-digit product categories. Even at this level of aggregation, Chinese exports often concentrate

on the more labor-intensive, less sophisticated end of the product spectrum, at least when we

compare them to the exports of significantly richer countries. Table 2 shows unit value

comparisons for some of China’s leading electronics exports. In most cases, China’s unit values

are lower than those of South Korea, Malaysia, or Singapore. There is therefore some truth to

the argument that Chinese exports of electronics products tend to be low-cost, high volume

products with not much technological sophistication, and that they therefore pose little threat to

U.S. pre-eminence (see Lardy 2004). But here too there are interesting exceptions. For example,

Chinese exports of video recorders and TV and video monitors have higher unit values than

South Korean exports in these product lines. And in any case, what is surprising is that a country

at China’s income level is able to export such electronics products in the first place. That is

hardly the norm for other countries with similar factor endowments, as the cross-country

comparisons above show.
                                                         13

Table 2: Unit value comparisons: electrical goods and equipment exports (US$ per unit, 2003)

product name                                                  China       S. Korea       Malaysia       Singapore
Electric transformers,static converters and rectifier             0.855          5.713          0.884        0.229
Electric accumulators                                             1.317          2.519         17.295        1.248
Electric apparatus for line telephony, telegraphy               14.488          66.581         46.995       36.496
Electronic sound reproducing equipment, non-recording           13.520          50.003         52.966       68.260
Video recording and reproducing apparatus                       48.733          39.356         90.926      112.492
Parts, accessories of audio, video recording equipment            9.875         26.222         14.299          n.a.
Radio and TV transmitters, television cameras                   62.040         259.014        117.773       92.389
Radio, radio-telephony receivers                                  7.370         38.552         83.770       68.803
Television receivers, video monitors, projectors                72.903          17.987        144.185      195.939
Parts for radio, tv transmission, receive equipment             31.982          47.988         15.007          n.a.
Electronic printed circuits                                       1.774         65.973          2.281       49.581
Electronic integrated circuits and microassemblies                1.101        960.988          1.478        2.337


Source: UN Comtrade Database.


III. It is not how much but what you export that matters

        How do we know that the productivity level of a country’s exports (measured by EXPY)

matters to economic performance? It turns out that there is a robust relationship between the

initial level of a country’s EXPY and the subsequent rate of economic growth experienced by that

country. Figure 7 is the relevant scatter plot: it shows the relationship between EXPY in 1992

and growth over the 1992-2003 period, holding initial levels of income constant. This is a

positive and statistically significant relationship (at the 95% confidence level). The estimated

coefficient implies that a doubling of the productivity level of a country’s exports results in an

increase in its overall per-capita GDP growth of around 6 percent. Therefore, had China

exported only those goods that countries at China’s level of income tend to export, its growth

rate would have been significantly lower. As the chart shows, a high level of EXPY does not

fully account for China’s growth performance over this period—the other significant outlier is

Ireland--but it does help explain it.
                                                                                            14

Figure 7: Relationship between initial level of EXPY and growth, controlling for initial income
   e(growthPPPgdp | X, lpppexpy1992) + b*lpppexpy1992
                                                .1




                                                                                                        CHN
                                  .05




                                                                                                                        IRL


                                                                                                IND
                                                                                                              KOR
                                                                             BGD     LKA CHL
                                                                                           TTO       HRVHUN      SGP
                                                                                                    MYS
                                                                                                  THA
                                                                                   PER   BLZ       ROM
                                                                                                    GRC AUS
                                                                                                             NZL        FIN
                                                                                                               ESP CAN ISL
                     0




                                                                               BOL    IDN     TUR      PRT
                                                                                                     BRA          NLD SWE
                                                                                                                     USA
                                                                                                                     DNK
                                                                                          DZA              MEX
                                                                           JAM     COL
                                                                             ECU LCA      OMN                          DEU
                                                              MDG              KEN                                          CHE
                                                                    PRY                   SAU

                                                                                    HTI
       -.05




                                                        8.5                 9                          9.5                    10
                                                                                   lpppexpy1992

                                                                                Fitted values         Residuals



                                                   Is this a truly causal relationship? Even though the regressor is the level of EXPY at the

beginning of the period, it is still possible that causality goes from growth to EXPY rather than

the other way around (if growth and EXPY are both persistent over time). To rule this

possibility out, we can use an instrumental variable approach, which requires locating an

exogenous variable that plausibly influences growth only through the impact it has on EXPY.

Population (or population density) is in fact one such instrument. The basic economic theory

underlying this is simple. Go back to the original story of how comparative advantage is

determined in part by a process of cost discovery by initial entrants in a new industry. High

productivity “discoveries” naturally attract more emulation, and the productivity of an

economy’s tradable sector tends to converge towards the productivity level of the most profitable

(most productive) activities discovered to date. Larger economies have more entrepreneurs
                                                        15

engaged in discovery, and therefore, everything else being the same, will have maximum levels

of productivity in tradables that are higher.3 And indeed, just as this theory predicts, country size

does turn out to have a positive and statistically significant impact on EXPY, even when we

control for income, human capital, and other plausible regressors. Hence, we can use this

theoretical argument as a motivation for using measures of country size as an instrumental

variable for EXPY. When we do this, we find the same result that we did with simple OLS

regressions. Initial levels of EXPY are predictive of subsequent growth.

           What is precisely the mechanism that makes EXPY a potent force for growth? The theory

is that once investors in a country “discover” a number of high productivity exportables, this sets

off a powerful demonstration effect. Other investors are drawn in, and as the sector and its

suppliers expand, the economy’s resources get pulled from lower productivity activities into

higher productivity activities. This kind of growth driven by differential productivity across

sectors and structural change lies at the root of China’s economic performance. A visual

indication of this is provided in Figure 8, which shows the progress of per-capita GDP in China

alongside EXPY since 1992. As we saw previously, the “quality” of China’s exports has

increased somewhat, especially when compared to competitors. But when we plot EXPY

alongside per-capita GDP, what really stands out is the stability of EXPY relative to per-capita

GDP. Per-capita GDP has been rapidly converging to the productivity level of the country’s

export basket: it rose from 15% of EXPY to 35% in 2003. This picture is strongly indicative of a

process of productivity diffusion within the economy: the productivity gains associated with

producing a set of sophisticated exportables is spread around the economy as labor moves across

industries and across space to the higher productivity exportable activities.



3
    For a formal model of this process, see Hausmann, Hwang, and Rodrik (2006).
                                                                        16

Figure 8: Productivity Level of Exports and GDP per capita (log of PPP dollars)


                        10



                        9.5



                         9
   log of ppp dollars




                        8.5



                         8

                                                                                           China per-capita GDP
                        7.5
                                                                                           China productivity level
                                                                                           of exports
                         7
                              1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997      1998   1999   2000    2001    2002     2003
                                                                    Year




                         But the pattern shown in Figure 8 also raises a future challenge for China. If much of

China’s growth today is due to this particular pattern of convergence, will the economy not run

out of steam once the process nears completion and the rest of the economy catches up to the

productivity level of exportables? As we have seen, the “quality” of China’s exportables has

been increasing, but not nearly as rapidly as overall income. As a result, China is much less of an

outlier today than it was in 1992 in terms of the cross-national relationship between income and

EXPY (see Figure 9). Using the estimated coefficients from the growth regression presented

earlier, this necessarily implies a significant growth slowdown in China. Furthermore,

disaggregated analysis shows that the increase in China’s EXPY level over time is accounted for

exclusively by a compositional shift from goods associated with low productivity to goods

associated with high productivity. New goods, that is goods that were not already exported in
                                                               17

1992, have made a negligible contribution to the rise in overall EXPY.4 Sooner or later,

therefore, China will have to “discover” new products to sell on world markets if growth is to

continue at rates resembling recent ones. On the other hand, full GDP convergence to the current

level of EXPY still implies a per-capita GDP for China that is much higher than today’s level.



Figure 9: Relationship between EXPY and per-capita incomes in 2003
(restricted to same sample as in Figure 3)
            10




                                                                                       CHEIRL
                                                                                       ISL
                                                                                     FIN
                                                                                     DEU
                                                                                    SWE
                                                                                  SGP DNKUSA
                                                                          HUNKOR       CAN
                                                                                      NLD
                                                                                 ESP
                                                                                 NZL
                                                                 MEX
                                                                  MYS
                9.5




                                                      CHN                    PRT
                                                              THA
    lpppexpy2003




                                                                                      AUS
                                                                              GRC
                                                            TUR     HRV
                                                              BRA
                                         IND                 ROM
                                              IDN
                                                        LCA
                                                          COL       CHL  OMN
                                  BGD          LKA                   TTO
                                                         DZA
            9




                                        BOL
                                               ECU
                                                     PRY
                                                       PER BLZ
                            KEN


                      MDG
            8.5




                            7            8                  9                  10               11
                                                     lPPPgdp2003




IV. The roots of success: consumer electronics

                  Among areas where China has been successful, consumer electronics stands out as one of

those that would not have been expected a priori for a country at China’s level of income. While

low labor costs have helped, this cannot account for the entire story. Indeed, estimates by the

4
 Remember that the analysis here is carried out at the 6-digit level, so the absence of many new goods is
meaningful.
                                                          18

McKinsey Global Institute show that labor productivity in China’s consumer electronics industry

equals that in Mexico, a country where PPP-adjusted per-capita GDP is almost two times larger

McKinsey 2003, 86).5 Furthermore, China has steadily moved away from being simply an

assembler of components. Increasingly, production is integrated backwards and the supply chain

is moving to where the assembly is undertaken. So China’s success in consumer electronics is

based on its ability to make a productivity jump. I will briefly discuss this case as it is

emblematic of the broader statistical picture painted above.

           Foreign investors have played a key role in the industry’s evolution. They are the most

productive of the producers, they are the source of technology, and they dominate exports.

China’s openness to foreign investment and its willingness to create special economic zones

where foreign producers could operate with good infrastructure and with minimum hassles must

therefore receive considerable credit. But if China has welcomed foreign companies, it has

always done so with the objective of fostering domestic capabilities. To that end, China has used

a number of policies to ensure that technology transfer would take place and strong domestic

players would emerge. Early on, reliance was placed predominantly on state-owned national

champions. Later, the government used a variety of carrots and sticks. Foreign investors were

required to enter into joint ventures with domestic firms (in mobile phones and in computers).

Domestic markets were protected to attract market-seeking investors, in addition to those that

looked for cost savings. Weak enforcement of intellectual protection laws enabled domestic

producers to reverse engineer and imitate foreign technologies with little fear of prosecution.

And localities were given substantial freedoms to fashion their own policies of stimulation and

support, which led to the creation of industrial clusters in particular areas of the country. Huchet

characterizes China’s policies as of the mid-1990s thus: “China’s technological acquisition
5
    It is also telling that China’s EXPY exceeded Mexico’s by 2003.
                                                19

strategy is clear: It allows foreign firms access to the domestic market in exchange for

technology transfer through joint production or joint ventures” (1997, 270).

       The end result of all this can be seen in an industry structure that is very different from

the one, say, in Mexico. As Table 3 shows, domestic firms play a significant role in China. In

fact, 100% foreign owned firms are a rarity among the leading players in the industry. Most of

the significant firms tend to be joint ventures between foreign firms and domestic (mostly state-

owned) entitities. A strong domestic producer base has been important in diffusing imported

technologies and in creating domestic supply chains. In the words of the McKinsey Global

Institute, “the international companies’ interaction with domestic companies has created a

genuine global success story” (McKinsey 2003, 79, emphasis added).
                                                20

Table 3: Major consumer electronics firms in China by ownership type


Market segment           Foreign owned            Joint venture             Non-FDI
Mobile phone             •   Motorola             •   Motorola/Eastcom      •   TCL
                                                  •   Nokia/Capitel,
                                                      Southern
                                                  •   Siemens/MII
                                                      subsidiaries
                                                  •   Samsung/Kejian
                                                  •   SAGEM/Bird
PCs                      •   HP                   •   IBM/Great Wall        •   Lenovo (previously
                         •   Dell                 •   Toshiba/Toshiba           Legend)
                                                      Computer (Shanghai)   •   Founder
                                                  •   Epson/Start           •   Tongfang
                                                  •   Taiwan GVC/TCL

“Brown” goods                                     •   Sony/SVA              •   Changhong
                                                  •   Philips/Suzhou CTV    •   Konka
                                                  •   Toshiba/Dalian        •   Hisense
                                                      Daxian                •   Skyworth
                                                  •   Great Wall            •   Haier
                                                      Electronics/TCL       •   Panda
                                                                            •   Xoceco
“White” goods            •   Siemens              •   Samsung/Suzhou        •   Changling
                                                      Xiangxuehai           •   Gree
                                                  •   Electrolux/Changsha
                                                      Zhongyi
                                                  •   LG/Chunlan
                                                  •   Mitsubishi/Haier
                                                  •   Sanyo/Kelon,
                                                      Rongshida
                                                  •   Sigma/Meiling
                                                  •   Hong Leong
                                                      (SG)/Xinfei
                                                  •   Toshiba
                                                      Carrier/Midea
Source: McKinsey (2003), p. 83.



       It is true that many of the Chinese companies created through government efforts ended

up as failures. Accounts of industrial policy in China point to the low productivity and low

technology absorption of many SOEs, and to the lack of coordination (across national ministries

as well as across different levels of government) that characterizes Chinese policies (see Huchet
                                                       21

1997, Kraemer and Dedrick 2001). But as in other areas of policy, government attitudes have

been pragmatic and open to trying new approaches when old ones fail. A well-known case of

failure was the early development of the color TV industry, which consisted in the 1980s of more

than 100 companies operating at short production runs and high cost. By the early 1990s, the

industry had been consolidated thanks to the efforts of local governments and national

leadership, which forced mergers and joint ventures with foreign firms. This reversal of policies

led to the emergence in quick order of a profitable, export-oriented industry (see Lo and Chan

1998).

           Moreover, it is possible that the importance of the weaknesses of the Chinese

bureaucratic model is exaggerated. The essence of the self-discovery model of economic

development is that you need only a few successes: once a small number of high-productivity

activities are identified, they act as the lever for economic convergence by pulling resources in

from lower productivity activities. Without state support and publicly funded R&D, a company

like Lenovo (previously known as Legend) which became large and profitable enough to

purchase IBM’s PC business recently would never have come into being.6 Better to experiment

and identify these higher-end activities than not try at all. Lack of coordination can be an

advantage in these circumstances, as it allows different things to be tried and for successes in one

region to be copied elsewhere. Somewhat paradoxically, the hesitant, gradual, often conflicting

manner in which policies have been formulated and implemented in China may have presented a

more suitable environment for entrepreneurial experimentation and cost discovery than one that

is centralized, top-down, and overly coordinated.

           In sum, China has benefited both from good fundamentals—low labor and materials

costs, “outward orientation” in the form of SEZs, large market size—and from a determined
6
    Lenovo’s majority owner is a state-owned entity.
                                                          22

government effort to acquire domestic capabilities and build a modern industry. The large size

of the economy has allowed policy experimentation. It also has allowed the government to use

the carrot of the internal market to force foreign investors into joint ventures with domestic

producers. If China is producing an increasingly sophisticated set of consumer electronics

product, it would appear that this is due as much to the policy environment as it is to the free

play of market forces.

         While I have focused on the consumer electronics sector here, the same could be said of

other export successes as well. For example, the auto parts industry has been heavily promoted

through local content requirements. The Chinese government required foreign car companies

investing in the market to achieve a relatively high level of domestic content within a short

period of time (typically 70% within three years) (Sutton 2005, 9). This forced these companies

to cooperate closely with local suppliers to ensure that their technology and quality were up to

par. In his study of the auto supply chain in China, John Sutton found that the domestic first-tier

suppliers had achieved quality levels close to international best practice (Sutton 2005). One

indicator of success is that China exported $1.7 billion worth of auto components by 2001.

Another is that none of the foreign car manufacturers intended to switch to imports, once

domestic content requirements were phased out to comply with WTO rules. Sutton reports that

“the view expressed in all cases was that the car-maker had developed local sources of supply

that were superior, in terms of combination of cost and quality, to imported alternatives” (Sutton

2005, 25). Domestic-content requirements are widely derided as an inefficient tool of industrial

policy. The Chinese case stands in stark contrast to this.7



7
  Sutton’s portrayal of domestic content requirements in India is not much different; there too, it appears that these
requirements helped promote a successful auto parts industry during the 1990s, prior to the coming into effect of
WTO rules.
                                                 23

V. Implications

       I close with three set of implications for Chinese policymakers. The first has to do with

the need to understand better the fundamental underpinnings of China’s export performance and

its economic success. As I have argued above, much more than comparative advantage and “free

markets” have been at play here. China’s pattern of production and exports would have looked

very different if the traditional forces of comparative advantage, pushing China to specialize in

labor-intensive products “appropriate” to low income economies, were the sole determinant.

Instead, China has ended up with an export basket that is significantly more sophisticated than

what would be normally expected. Government policies have helped nurture domestic

capabilities in consumer electronics and other advanced areas that would most likely not have

developed in their absence. Whatever static inefficiency costs may have been engendered in the

process, this has had favorable implications for China’s growth. This is an important point to

remember as the inevitable debate between “market fundamentalists” and “planners” plays itself

out in the Chinese context.

       The second implication has to do with the sustainability of China’s export-oriented

growth. The question here is whether, with exports-to-GDP so high and rising, the Chinese

growth model is inevitably running out of steam. The ideas developed in this paper teach us that

what matters for China’s future growth is not the volume of exports or its relation to GDP, but

the “quality” of these exports. Indeed, what is so special about China’s exports is not that they

are voluminous or that its large pool of labor gives it a huge labor cost advantage. What stands

out is that China sells products that are associated with a productivity level that is much higher

than a country at China’s level of income. This helps account both for why China’s trade is

viewed as problematic in advanced countries, and for China’s rapid economic growth. The
                                                 24

economically relevant question for sustainability is not whether trade-GDP can keep on rising,

but whether China will manage to latch on to higher- and higher-income products over time, and

continue to fuel its growth thereby. As we have seen, there has been a dramatic reduction over

the last decade in the gap between EXPY and per-capita GDP. Everything else being the same,

this is something that is likely to slow down growth.

       This brings us to the third point, having to do with the nature of future industrial policies.

A clear implication of this paper is that China’s industrial policies—however incoherent they

may have been—have had a hand in China’s past success. Future economic performance may

also need to be supported by such policies. This is of course also a lesson from the experience of

other East Asian success stories: Japan, Taiwan, South Korea, and Singapore.

       The usual criticism of industrial policy is that governments cannot pick winners, and

therefore should not try. But this is not the right way to think about industrial policy. In

environments that are rife with uncertainty and with technological and informational spillovers,

markets under-provide investment in non-traditional products. The appropriate role for industrial

policy is to fill in this market incompleteness by subsidizing investments in new products. It is a

given that not all of these additional investments will prove to be socially profitable. Good

industrial policy consists of withdrawing support from those projects that are revealed to be

failures, so that resources do not get bottled up in unproductive activities. Hence the appropriate

criterion of success for industrial policy is not that “only winners should be picked” (an

impossible task) but that “losers should be let go” (a much less demanding and more doable

task). The latter is the relevant yardstick against which industrial policies ought to be measured.

       Therefore, a key question for China going forward is whether Chinese policies will

maintain their experimental and flexible nature—whether governments will remain willing to
                                                       25

support new industries but also willing to turn against ventures that under-perform. Designing

the appropriate institutional structure to foster such an experimental, carrot-and-stick approach to

industrial policy is an important challenge facing Chinese policy makers.8 This is an area where

institutional transplantation does not work very well. We can identify the higher-order principles

involved at a sufficient level of generality, but need to fashion blueprints that are suited to the

local context. The challenge for China therefore is to develop institutional models that are based

on Chinese realities.




8
  In Rodrik (2004) I discuss some of the issues involved and present some broad guidelines drawing from examples
in East Asia and Latin America.
                                                     26

Appendix: Construction of PRODY and EXPY

       PRODY is the weighted sum of the per capita GDP of countries exporting a given
product, and thus represents the income level associated with each of these goods. Let countries
be indexed by j and goods be indexed by l. For any given year, the value of total exports of
country j equals:

                                            X j = ∑ x jl
                                                         l


Let the per-capita GDP of country j be denoted by Yj. Then the PRODY index for good k is:

                                                                x jk / X j
                               PRODY k =      ∑
                                                         ∑ (x            / X j)
                                                                               Yj
                                                 j              j   jk


The numerator of the weight x jk / X j is the value-share of the commodity in the country’s
overall export basket. The denominator of the weight,               ∑ (x j   jk   / X j ) , aggregates the value-share
across all countries exporting the good. By using export share rather than export volume, the
weighting scheme tries to ensure that adequate weight is given exports that are important to
smaller poorer countries.

       EXPY for country i is given in turn by:
                                                         x jl
                                     EXPY j = ∑                 PRODYl
                                                     l   Xj

This is a weighted index of the representative income associated a country’s exports, where the
weight is simply the value share of the product in the country’s total exports.

        Our trade data comes from the United Nations Commodity Trade Statistics Database
(COMTRADE). The dataset includes products at the 6-digit level in the Harmonized System for
the years 1992 to 2003. The value of exports is measured in current US dollars, which we then
convert to 2000 dollars for comparison with real GDP per capita series. The number of countries
that report the trade data vary considerably from year to year. However, we construct the
PRODY measure for a consistent sample of countries that reported trade data in each of the years
1999, 2000 and 2001. After deleting some missing observations, our data set consists of 5,023
PRODY observations. Note that we use the average PRODY from 1999-2001 to construct the
EXPY index, so that the PRODY that go into the construction of EXPY themselves do not vary
over the years.
                                              27

REFERENCES

Hausmann, Ricardo, and Dani Rodrik, “Economic Development as Self-Discovery,” Journal of
Development Economics, December 2003.

Hausmann, Ricardo, Jason Hwang, and Dani Rodrik, “What You Export Matters,” NBER
Working Paper, January 2006.

Huchet, Jean-Francois, “The China Circle and Technological Development in the Chinese
Electronics Industry,” in B. Naughton, ed., The China Circle: Economics and Electronics in the
PRC, Taiwan, and Hong Kong, Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 1997.

Kraemer, Kenneth L., and Jason Dedrick, “Creating a Computer Industry Giant: China’s
Industrial Policies and Outcomes in the 1990s,” Center for Research on Information Technology
and Organizations, UC Irvine, 2001.

Lardy, Nicholas, “China: The Great New Economic Challenge?” Institute for International
Economics, Washington, DC, 2004.

Lo, Dic and Thomas M. H. Chan, “Machinery and China's nexus of foreign trade and economic
growth,” Journal of International Development, 10(6), 1998, 733-749.

Mayer, Jorg, and Adrian Wood, “South Asia’s Exports in a Comparative Perspective,” Oxford
Development Studies, 29(1), 2001.

McKinsey Global Institute, New Horizons: Multinational Company Investment in Developing
Economies, San Francisco, October 2003.

Prasad, Eswar, ed., China’s Growth and Integration into the World Economy: Prospects and
Challenges, IMF Occasional Paper 232, Washington, DC, 2004.

Rodrik, Dani, “Industrial Policy for the Twenty-First Century,” unpublished paper, Harvard
University, September 2004 (http://ksghome.harvard.edu/~drodrik/UNIDOSep.pdf).

Sutton, John, “The Auto-Component Supply Chain in China and India: A Benchmarking Study,”
London School of Economics, unpublished paper, 2005.
