                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            ACTIVIST MONETARY POLICY AND EXCHANGE RATE
           OVERSHOOTING:  THE DEUTSCHE MARK/DOLLAR RATE




                           David H. Papell



                      Working Paper No. 1195




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            August 1983




I am gratefti to Eleanor Brown, Howard Kaufold, and participants at
seminars at Columbia University, New York University-, and the
National Bureau of Economic Research 1982 Summer Institute, for
their comments. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in International Studies. Any- opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper 111195
                                             August 1983




      Activist Nonetary Policy and Exchange Rate Overshooting:
                    The Deutsche Nark/Dollar Rate


                               ABSTRACT



    After a decade of generalized floating, it is clear that bilateral

exchange rates exhibit more variability than the economic aggregates;

relative prices, incomes, and money supplies, that generally comprise the

fundamentals of theories of exchange rate determination. Dornbush's over-

shooting hypothesis is the best known explanation of this phenomenon. This

paper shows that accommodative monetary policy (with respect to prices) has

the potential to cause the economy to switch from exchange rate overshooting

to undershooting. Using constrained maximum likelihood methods, the model is

estimated for Germany and the United States. The results provide strong

evidence in support of the overshooting hypothesis for the Deutsche Mark!

Dollar exchange rate.



                                            David Ii. Papell
                                            Department of Economics
                                            University of Florida
                                            Gainesville, FL 32611

                                             (904) 392—2999
I. Introduction

     It is by now well established that bilateral exchange rates exhibit more

variability than the economic aggregates—relative prices, incomes, and money

supplies——that generally form the fundamentals of theories of exchange rate

determination.1 In particular, it is clear that real exchange rate

variability, or deviations from purchasing power parity, characterized the

1970's. Real exchange rate variability provides an important channel through

which one country's economic policies affect other countries. Flexible

exchange rates no longer seem to offer the promise of macroeconomic

independence that they once did.

     The overshooting hypothesis, as exemplified by Dornbusch (1976), was an

attempt to explain this pattern of variability. Using a model with perfect

capital mobility, fixed output, and slow price adjustment, he showed how an

increase in the (exogenous) money supply would cause the exchange rate first

to depreciate beyond its long run equilibrium value, and then to appreciate

back to the steady state.2 Frankel (1979) estimated a two—country model with

many similarities to that of Dornbusch, and found evidence supporting

overshooting for the Deutsche mark/dollar rate. Subsequently, Frenkel and

Rodriguez (1982) have argued that overshooting is not an intrinsic

characteristic of the foreign exchange market. Allowing for imperfect capital

mobility in the Dornbusch model, they raise the possibility of undershooting,

where the initial depreciation, below its long run equilibrium value, is

followed by further depreciation until the steady state is attained.3

     The overshootIng results described above are derived under the assumption

that the money supply is exogenous, an assumption that is at odds with the

available empirical evidence. For example, Mussa (1981b) argues that the

behavior of exchange rates has influenced the conduct of monetary policy in



                                       1
 the United States, United Kingdom, and Germany. Taylor (1982) provides

 econometric evidence that the money supply accommodates price movements in a

number of countries.

     This paper considers the effect of activist monetary policy on exchange

rate overshooting.4 The model is a two—country, variable output version of

Dornbusch's model with the money supply responsive to price and/or exchange

rate movements. The main theoretical result is that accommodative monetary

policy (with respect to prices) can cause the economy to switch from exchange

rate overshooting to undershooting. This can occur even with fixed output,

slow price adjustment, and perfect capital mobility.

     Using quarterly data beginning in 1973, the model is estimated for

Germany and the United States. The policy and structural parameters are

jointly estimated in accordance with Lucas? (1976) critique of econometric

policy evaluation. Constrained maximum likelihood techniques, which impose

the cross equation restrictions derived from the structural equations and

assumption of rational expectations, are used for the estimation. Two

measures of the price index are used, the Wholesale Price Index (WPI) and the

Gross National Product Deflator, The results provide strong evidence in

support of the overshooting hypothesis for the Deutsche Nark/Dollar exchange

rate. For the WPI, the exchange rate overshoots because neither German nor

American monetary policy is particularly responsive to prices. For the GNP

deflator, the exchange rate overshoots because accommodative American monetary

policy is counteracted by offsetting German monetary policy. While the

combination of policies is accommodative, it is not sufficiently accommodative

to produce undershooting. Variable output is unimportant.

    The results of this paper are relevant to an analysis of recent develop—

ments in American monetary policy. They predict that a less accommodative



                                      2
American monetary policy will increase the amount of overshooting of the

Deutsche mark/dollar Rate. While the sample period is too short to formally

test for a change in the money supply rule with the advent of the Reagan

administration, it is possible to conjecture that one of the reasons for the

high volatility of the Deutsche mark/dollar rate beginning in 1981 may            be   a

less accommodative monetary policy on the part of the United States.5

      The paper is organized as follows. The model is presented in Section

II. The theoretical results concerning overshooting and undershootirig are

derived in Section III and the model is estimated in Section IV. Conclusions

and extensions are presented in Section V.


II. The Model

      The model is a two—country, variable output version of Dornbusch (1976),

which differs from the work of Dornbusch and Frankel in the specification of

the price adjustment equation and in that the domestic and foreign money

supplies are determined endogenously. In order to focus attention on the

relationship between monetary activism and exchange rate overshooting, to

provide comparability between this and previous work, and to remain tractable,

the model contains a number of simplifying assumptions.6 It consists of the

following equations.7


(1)              —   m)   —       — p)    =       — ;) — ai(it     —
                                                                       i) E
                                                                         +


(2)                           =    ÷ a2(e ÷       p — p) + 2t
(3)



       (r÷1 — r1) —           — p)    =            —         ÷ a5(et ÷   —    +
                                          a4(e1        et)

(5)                       m =     +
                                      a6 + a7( —               +



                                              3
 (6)                          m =          — a8' —          ag( —         +

                                                *
 (7)                                     it =   it + (e+i         — et)

 where m is the logarithm of the domestic money supply,

          p is the logarithm of the domestic price level,

          y is the logarithm of domestic real income,

          e is the logarithm of the exchange rate (domestic currency price of

                foreign exchange),

          i is the domestic nominal interest rate,

          *     associated with a variable indicates that itrefers to the foreign

              country,

              over a variable indicates deviation from the steady state level,

         y is the steady state level of output,
         m is the exogenous component of the money supply,

         e        is the expectation of the exchange rate for period t+i, conditional

              on information available in period t.

        The C       are random disturbances, which may be serially correlated.

        Asset     market equilibrium is described in Equation (1). Supply of and

demand for real balances in each country are equated in equilibrium, and the

demand for money depends positively on Income and negatively on the interest

rate.


        (Ia)                     in
                                  t
                                    —p
                                     t =yt —ai
                                            I t
                                                +c lit
                                     *      *       *         *
        (1 b)                            — Pt    Yt —       aii   +
                                                                      6i2t
Setting the income elasticity of the demand for money equal to unity does not

affect the theoretical results. Equating the interest rate semi—elasticities




                                                        4
of the two countries is done for tractability.8 Equation (1) is obtained by

subtracting (ib) from (Ia) and      setting Ei =            it   —
                                                                     C12t
     The deviation of output from its long run equilibrium (natural rate)

level in each country depends on the relative price of domestic and foreign

goods in equations (2) and (3). If the relative price of foreign goods is

high (e +    p   >    domestic output is above and foreign output is below

their respective long run values.'0'1' It is assumed that long run purchasing

                       +        =
power parity holds

     The behavior of prices described by equation (4) encompasses two

influential formulations. In Dornbusch (1976), the rate of inflation depends

on relative prices, which in turn represents excess demand in the goods

market. In our notation,


                       Pt+i — Pt =            +        —         +       c41t,
     (4a)                             bi(et

     (4b)             p÷, —     p = —b2(e + Pt                       +


                                                            and             =           — C42t1 becomes
which,   by subtraction and setting a5        b1 +     b2
equation (4) with a4 =     0.   Mussa (1981a, 1982) argues that a superior

formulation is to specify the rate of inflation as equal to the expected rate

of change of the equilibrium price level, plus some proportion (< 1) of the

difference between the equilibrium and actual price levels.'2 With long run

purchasing power parity and, as in Dornbusch (1976), pre—determined prices,

Mussa's specification is,'3

                                                                                           —     +
      (4c)       ÷i Pt = (et+i       +
                                         p+i)     —
                                                      (et   +
                                                                p) + a5(e +
                                                                                = 1.     Dornbusch's and
which can be manipulated to become equation (4) with at
                                                                                       with regard to
Mussa's equations produce quite similar theoretical results




                                              5
 over and undershootirig. Equation (4) spans the two formulations, and allows

 us to distinguish between them empirically.

      The money supply for each country depends on both the exchange rate and

 on the difference between domestic and foreign prices.14 The monetary

authorities are assumed to use the information conveyed by the contemporaneous

exchange rate and (pre—determined) prices.'5 From the perspective of the

domestic country, if the exchange rate depreciates (increases), the money

supply is accommodative if a, > 0, offsetting if    < 0. For example, an

offsetting rule would decrease the money supply in response to a depreciation

in order to cause the exchange rate to appreciate. From the foreign country's

perspective, since a depreciation is a decrease in e, an accommodative rule

consists of a8 > 0, an offsetting rule of a8 < 0.

     The terminology with respect to price movements is similar. If the ratio

of domestic to foreign prices increases, policy is accommodative if a7 and/or

a9 > 0, offsetting if a7 and/or a9 < 0. The money supply is constrained to

respond to the price ratio, rather than to the levels separately, because, in

the reduced form of the model, prices appear only in ratio form. This can

cause some semantic difficulties in considering foreign price movements. In

some of the discussions of supply shocks, an increase in the foreign price

level (or price of the impOrted good) would cause the domestic price index to

increase. In that context, accommodative monetary policy implies that the

domestic money supply increases when the foreign price level increases. In

this paper, accommodative monetary policy implies that the domestic money

supply decreases when the foreign price level increases. While allowing the

money supplies to respond separately to domestic and foreign price levels

would be preferable to the scheme adopted in this paper, it would make the

model analytically intractable.'6 The money supply could have been postulated



                                      6
to respond directly to output movements without affecting the theoretical

results. This would constrain a = —a'.       In this sense, monetary policy that

offsets exchange rate movements and accommodates price movements can be

interpreted as attempting to stabilize output. In addition, the money supply

rule for each country includes an exogenous term and a stochastic disturbance

term.

        Equation (7) is the representation of uncovered interest rate parity:

the domestic interest rate equals the foreign interest rate plus the expected

rate of depreciation. While the empirical evidence concerning this

proposition has been mixed, it is at worst a fairly good approximation for the

Deutsche mark/dollar rate.17


LII. Overshooting and Undershooting

        In this section, it is shown how monetary policy that accommodates price

movements can cause exchange rate undershooting in a situation that would

otherwise be characterised by overshooting. In Dornbusch (1976),

undershooting can only occur if the elasticity of demand for output with

respect to relative prices is greater than one, while in Frenkel and Rodriguez

(1982), imperfect capital mobility is necessary for undershooting. This paper

shows that, even when output is fixed and capital perfectly mobile,

sufficiently accommodative monetary policy can cause the exchange rate to

undershoot.

        The clearest way to derive and illustrate these results is through a

deterministic specification with perfect foresight expectations. (The

econometric work below will, of course, be presented in a stochastic, rational

expectation setting.) Assuming that expectations are perfect foresight,

setting the disturbances equal to zero, substituting equations (2), (3), (5),

(6) and (7) into (1), and taking deviations from steady state equilibrium, we


                                         7
obtain:

(8)
                                   De    =                    e—e   -
                                             63        64


where             Pt —   p   (the logarithm of the ratio of domestic to foreign prices)

         D is the forward difference operator, i.e., Dxt =
                                                                         x1     for

x = Ce, q).


          6
                   a2+a3—a6—a8                              1—a2—a3--a5—a7
              1                                         2
                              a1                                        a1

          63 = 61a4 + a5                               64 = 62a4 — a5


        Several configurations of the model             can be produced by considering
different money supply rules. We assume that the money supply18 either

offsets or is not too accommodative of exchange rate movements, so that

      > 0. (If           < 0, there can be either overshooting or a non—unique

solution, but not undershooting.) If monetary policy acts to stabilize

Output, a6 and             < 0, 6i > 0 and the possibility of non-uniqueness does not

arise.'9 The behavior of the model is now determined by the elasticity of

domestic and       foreign    demand with respect to relative prices (a2 + a3), and the

degree of accommodation of domestic (a7) and foreign (ag) monetary policy to

price movements. The case where output is not too variable and/or policy is

not too accommodative, so that 62 > 0, is illustrated in Figure 1.20 In order

to facilitate comparison with           previous   work, we depict Dornbusch's formulation

(a4 =   0) where the slope of the Dq =             0 curve is equal to unity. This is

solely for the purpose of illustration; the results are not affected.

       With both          and 62 > 0, the slope of the Det = 0 curve is negative.

Consider an unanticipated, permanent increase in the exogenous component of

the domestic money supply,21 starting from a position of long run equilibrium,

which shifts the Det = 0 schedule to the right.22 The motion of the variable


                                                   8
is indicated by the direction of the arrows, which are drawn in reference to

the schedules once the disturbance occurs. The unique perfect foresight

equlibrium path, the saddle path, is downward sloping. The initial

equilibrium is at E. At the time of the disturbance, the price level, being

pre—determined, is fixed. The exchange rate must jump (depreciate) to E1 so

as to be on the new saddle path, and then appreciate along the saddle path

towards the new long run equilibrium E2. This, of course, is the process of

overshooting described by Dornbusch.

     Now consider the case where there is either enough monetary accommodation

to price movements and/or the elasticity of demand with respect to relative

prices is high enough so that       < 0. As illustrated in Figure 2, 1 > 0 and

   < 0 implies that the slope of the Det = 0 curve is positive.23 Since the

slope of the saddle path is now positive, there is exchange rate

undershooting. Following the increase in , the exchange rate depreciates to

El. It then continues to depreciate until the long run equilibrium is

attained at E2.

     It is illustrative to compare these results with those of Dornbusch.      If


both countries' money supplies are exogenous, i.e., if there is no response to

either the exchange rate or the price ratio, the model reduces to Dornbusch's

flexible output case. The necessary and sufficient condition for overshooting

is that (a2 +          the elasticity of domestic and foreign demand with respect
                a3),
to relative prices, be less than one. If, in addition, output is always at

its full employment level, a2 = a3 =     0, 6 = 0,   and the Det = 0 schedule is

vertical. This is exactly Dornbusch's fixed output model; the exchange rate

always overshoots. The innovation in this model is that, even with fixed

output, the exchange rate can undershoot. All that is necessary is that the

degree of monetary accommodation to prices be sufficiently large, i.e., that



                                          9
 a7 + a9 > 1. Allowing output to respond to relative prices merely strengthens

 the case for undershooting.

      The intuition behind these results is as follows. Because of the long

 run purchasing power parity assumption, the increase in the domestic steady

 state money Supply ()   increases the steady state exchange rate () and      price

 ratio (j). Assuming that both countries' monetary policies accommodate price

 movements, this causes the component of the domestic money supply that

 responds to prices to decrease and the foreign money supply to increase.24

 First, consider the case where output is fixed. Remembering that prices are

 pre—determiried, if monetary policy is sufficiently accommodative so that

a7 + a9 > 1, the increase in the domestic steady state money supply causes a

decrease in the money suply ratio (m —              Asset market equilibrium then
                                             mr).
requires the domestic interest rate to exceed the foreIgn interest rate, which

in turn is only consistent with expected (and actual by perfect foresight)

exchange rate depreciation, Thus the exchange rate must jump (depreciate) to

a point where it will continue to depreciate; it must undershoot.

     These results are not as restrictive when output is flexible. Since

output depends on relative prices, and the price ratio is pre—deteriuined, an

increase in , by causing an immediate depreciation of the exchange rate, will

increase the relative price of foreign goods. This increases the ratio of

domestic to foreign output (y —
                                  y).    Output flexibility can substitute for

accommodative monetary policy to produce exchange rate undershooting. It is

no longer necessary that the increase in the steady state money supply produce

a decrease in the money supply ratio, only that the increase in the money

supply ratio be smaller than the increase in the output ratio. As above,

asset market equilibrium then requires the domestic interest rate to exceed

the foreign interest rate, which produces exchange rate undershooting.



                                        10
IV. Empirical Results: The Deutsch Mark/Dollar Rate

       The theoretical model derived above relates exchange rate behavior to

activist monetary policy, in particular to the extent to which monetary policy

accommodates price movements. In this section, the model is estimated for

Germany and the United States, using quarterly data since the advent of

generalized floating in 1973.

       In order to estimate the model, it is necessary to derive the reduced

form. First, substituting equations as in the perfect foresIght solution, and

interpreting all variables as deviations from their long run equilibrium

values, we obtain:


                                     +    1
                                                                 e
                            —   61                   62              +
 ()
                     clF1
                            —
                                 6
                                     3
                                                 6+1
                                                  4                      u2t



                                                 —
(10)
                                      =
                                          a2(e              + u3

(11)                            y = —a3(e —                 ÷
                                                                u4

(12)                            m =              +          +
                                                                u5
                                          a6e        a7q

                                                 —          +
(13)                            m = —a8e              a9q       u6

where the u's are combinations of the L's.

       Before proceeding further, we need to make some assumption about the

structure of the error terms. We assume that they are generated by second

                                                                     ÷         +   = 1,
order autoregressive processes, i.e., uj =                 1uj_1
  •    •, 6,   where the n's are serially uncorrelated. Since, in order to derive

the reduced form, the error terms must be finite moving average processes, we

take the infinite moving average processes implicit in the above

autoregressive processes and truncate them appropriately.25


                                                 11
        To derive the reduced form for equation (9), assume that expectations are

 determined rationally and solve by the method of undetermined coefficients to

 obtain:

                            e          e                   v1it
                                        t,L
 (14)                            = A            +   B(L)
                                                           V2t


where A and B are 2 x 2 matrices.

        The derivation of (14) is straightforward but tedious.26 The elements of

A and B are non—linear combinations of the 5's and the ct's.      The V's are

combinations of the n's, written so as to make the zero lag coefficient matrix

the identity matrix. The constraints on the parameters are caused by the form

of the structural equations, the assumption of rational expectations, and the

stability condition necessary to achieve a unique solution.27

        The model to be estimated consists of equations (1O)—(14). By truncating

the implicit moving average representation of the disturbances at third order

for u1 and fourth order for the others, a first order autoregressive fourth

order moving average model is derived. Maximum likelihood estimates

(conditional on the initial disturbances being set equal to zero) are obtained

under the assumption that (v1
                                  V2 u3 u4 u5 u6)' is multivariate
normal.28 The policy (a6 —
                           a9) and structural (a1 — a5) parameters are
jointly estimated. This, combined with the imposition of rational

expectations, satisfies several aspects of Lucas' (1976) critique of

econometric policy evaluation.29

        As described above, the model is estimated for the United States and

Germany, using quarterly data for 1973(II)—1981(iv).30 Real GNP is used to

measure output, and Ml for the money supply. It is not clear what is the

appropriate measure for the price level. While the GNP deflator is the best

aggregate for the money demand equation, the wholesale price index (WPI) is a


                                           12
better proxy for traded goods prices, and thus a better measure for relative

prices. Since, in addition, there did not seem to be any reason why monetary

policy should respond identically to the two measures, we performed the

estimation with both.31

     The maximum likelihood estimates of the structural (a1 —      a5),   policy

(a6 —          and serial correlation (cL1.) parameters are given in Table 1 along
        a9),
with their asymptotic "t—ratios," the ratio of the coefficients to their

standard errors computed from the inverse of the second derivative matrix of

the likelihood function. Germany is taken as the domestic country, so that a6

is the response of the German money supply to the exchange rate, a7 the

response of the German money supply to the price ratio, —a8 the response of

the American money supply to the exchange rate, and —a9 the response of the

American money supply to the price ratio.

        The most noteworthy aspect of the estimates is that both      and      are

positive for the two measures of the price level, implying exchange rate

overshooting.32 The policy parameters that produce this result are quite

different, however, for the two     price   level measures. For the wholesale price

index, the money supply is not responsive to either the exchange rate or the

price ratio. All four coefficients (         — ) are   small, and only one, the

response of the American money supply to the exchange rate, is significant.

For the GNP deflator, while American monetary policy is very accommodative of

prices, German policy is sufficiently offsetting so that the combined policies

are not accommodative enough to produce undershooting. German monetary policy

also offsets exchange rate movements. American monetary policy is

unresponsive to the exchange rate. Variable output is insufficient to produce

undershooting. The sum of the coefficients of relative prices in the output




                                            13
 equations (a2 + a3) is very small for the GNP deflator and not large enough to

 matter for the WPI.33

      Neither Dornbusch's nor Mussa's price equation receives much support from

 the estimates, since a4 is negative in both cases. (a4 equals zero in

 Dornbusch's and one in Musa's specifications.) Although a4 is quite small,

 especially for the CNP deflator, the values for 63 and 64 are very different

 from those that could have been generated from Dornbusch's formulation (where

 63 = —64).   The coefficient of relative prices in the price adjustment

equation (a5) and the interest rate semi—elasticity of the demand for money

(a1) are of the expected sign. For the WPI, while these structural parameters

are almost all of the expected sign and magnitude, they are at best borderline

significant. For the GNP deflator, while they are all, significant, ai is

implausibly small. We investigate this further below.

     The estimates are generally more successful for the GNP deflator than for

the WPI. For the GNP deflator, all of the structural, and all but one of the

policy, coefficients are significant. Activist monetary policy, while not

producing undershooting, is clearly important in the determination of the

Deutsche Mark/Dollar rate. For the WPI, several of the structural

coefficients are of questionable significance, and the policy coefficients are

generally insignificant. Activist monetary policy does not seem to matter

very much.

     A number of the other features of the estimates are worth mentioning.

The correlations between the estimated arid actual values of the variables are

fairly high. There is one stable root and one unstable root in each case,

indicating that the stability condition is sufficient to provide a unique

solution. A formal test of the model   is   provided by estimating an

"unconstrained" version. This imposes the same policy equations and serial



                                       14
correlation structure as the constrained version, but does not impose the

forms of the structural equations or the rational expectations restrictions.

By comparing the log—likelihoods of the constrained and the unconstrained

models, we construct a likelihood ratio test. While the likelihood ratio test

rejects the constrained model in comparison with the unconstrained for both

cases, the estimates involving the GNP deflator come much closer to not being

rejected. The rejection of the constrained model for the WPI accords with

Driskill and Scheffrin's (1981) findings for Frankel's model.35

     It is illustrative to compare these results with those obtained from

estimating a somewhat less constrained model. In this "semi—constrained"

version, the 5's are left unrestricted, but all of the other constraints of

the model are imposed. This breaks the previously imposed linkage between the

magnitude of the policy parameters (a6 —           the magnitude of tF
                                            a9),
elasticities of demand with respect to relative prices (a2 and a3), and the

question of overshooting. While all of the equations are still jointly

estimated, the policy parameters (as well as a2 and a3) now only enter into

equations (1O)—(13). They do not affect the reduced form of equation (14).

Since these parameters do not affect the estimates of e and q, they are

irrelevant for considering overshooting.

     The maximum likelihood estimates of the semi—constrained model are

presented in Table 2. They provide strong support for the overshooting

results implied by the constrained estimates. The values of         and   are


positive in both cases, and the significance levels are high.36 The signs and

magnitudes of the structural and policy parameters are quite similar between

the constrained and semi—constrained models in both cases. These results

indicate that the finding of overshooting for the constrained model is not

simply a construct imposed by the restrictions on cSi and       and the magnitudes



                                       15
 of the policy parameters. Another way of considering the results is that,

given the finding of overshooting from the semi—constrained model, the

estimates of the constrained model are consistent with the theoretical

hypotheses on the affects of activist monetary policy. This perspective can

be evaluated more formally by considering likelihood ratio tests. Comparing

the log—likelihoods of the constrained and semi—constrained models, we cannot

reject the constrained model at standard significance levels.37 This

indicates that the rejection of the constrained when compared with the

unconstrained model is caused by the assumption of rational expectations and

imposition of the stability condition necessary to guarantee a unique

solution, not by the form of the structural equations.

      One of the characteristics of the estimates for the GNP deflator is that,

since a2 is approximately equal to —as, variable output is virtually

irrelevant. With this in mind, we estimated a variant of the model where

output, assumed to be constant, does not appear once deviations are taken from

the steady state. This can be thought of as taking the model described by

equations (1O)—(14) and setting a2, a3, and their associated 5's equal to

zero. The estimates of this are presented in Table 3. The values and

significance levels of the parameters are quite similar to those in Table 1,

and the exchange rate again overshoots. One advantage of this variant is

that, with six fewer parameters to estimate, the power of the likelihood ratio

test is increased. While the constrained model can still be rejected when

compared with the unconstrained model at standard significance levels, it

comes much closer to not being rejected than the model which includes

output ,38

     The final aspect of the estimates for the GNP deflator that we

investigate is the role played by the implausibly small estimate of the



                                      16
interest rate semi—elasticity of the demand for money (a1). To accomplish

this, we first estimate (1) using a single equation method.39 This allows us

to utilize interest rate data (we use three—month money market rates for

Germany and the United States)4° and provides an estimate for a1. The

estimate (.54) is much more in accord with work on the demand for money than

the estimates of a1 in Tables 1 and 3. We then estimate the full model

(including output) as above, with•the additional constraint that a1 =    •54.
The estimates of this model are presented in Table 4. The only coefficients

that change very much are those in the price adjustment equation (a4 and a5),

and they change so as to keep the values of (53 and (54 exactly equal to their

magnitudes in Table 1. This again highlights the desirability of further

investigation of the price adjustment process. The overshooting results are

unaffected.       and     are both positive, although much smaller than in

Table


V. Conclusions

        This paper shows that, in the context of a model with perfect capital

mobility and slow price adjustment, monetary policy that accommodates price

movements has the potential to cause exchange rate undershooting. It extends

earlier work, which focused on imperfect capital mobility and variable output,

to provide another reason why overshooting is not an intrinsic characteristic

of the foreign exchange market. It also provides strong econometric evidence

that, for the current flexible rate period, the Deutsche Mark/Dollar exchange

rate does exhibit overshooting. This occurs both with the Wholesale Price

Index, where there is little price responsiveness to either country's monetary

policy, and with the GNP deflator, where, while American monetary policy is

highly accommodative to prices, German monetary policy is sufficiently

offsetting to cause overshooting.


                                        17
                                    FOOTNOTES


      'flood (1981) and Leidermarz (1982) provide recent evidence of this.

      2Dornbusch also showed how variable output would eliminate the necessity
 of overshooting. We will consider variable output in Section [II. Calvo and
 Rodriguez (1977) showed how overshooting could occur with perfectly flexible
 prices and imperfect capital mobility. Levich (1981) surveys and analyzes
 several types of overshooting models. We will not consider overshooting
 models of other than the Dornbusch type in this paper.

     31f disturbances are anticipated in Dornbusch's model, as in Wilson
(1979) or Gray and Turnovsky (1979), the initial depreciation can be below the
steady state, followed by further depreciation above the long run equilibrium,
and finally by appreciation back to the steady state. Since the exchange
rate, at some point, depreciates by more than its long run equilibrium
depreciation, this is an example of overshooting.

     4Activist monetary policy has been studied for its effect on output and
price variability in a closed economy context by Taylor (1980) and in an open
economy context by Leiderman (1981), Rehm (1982), and Taylor (1982). Flood
(1981) considers activist monetary policy (in the sense of interest rate
stabilization) and exchange rate volatility, but in a context where observers
do not correctly perceive the money supply rule.

     5rhe stochastic version of this model contains a number of implications
regarding the effect of activist monetary policy on exchange rate
variability. These will be tested, in the context of that model, in a
subsequent paper.

      6By assuming perfect capital mobility and by not incorporating lags in
the output and/or the money supply equations, we restrict the model to a
system of two first—order difference equations. This simplification allows us
to derive straightforward theoretical results using graphical solution
techniques. A complementary modeling strategy is to first specify a model
that is too complicated to be solved analytically, gain Insight into the
workings of the model through simulation, and then estimate it. While this
would be superior econometrically, the method used in the paper results in
clearer theoretical propositions.

     7The theoretical results would not have been affected if they were
presented in a single, small country model. The two—country framework was
chosen to econometrically incorporate both countries' money supply rules and
to avoid making exogeneity assumptions regarding "foreign" interest rates,
output, and prices.

     8The assumption that the interest rate semi—elasticities of the demand
for money are identical in the two countries, while not very satisfactory,
seems to be unavoidable without greatly complicating the model. Frankel
(1979) and Driskill and Sheffrin (1981) make the same assumption.

     9Mussa (1982) argues that the appropriate deflator for nominal balances
is a weighted average of domestic and foreign goods price levels (denominated


                                      18
in domestic currency). With the income elasticities of the demand for money
equal to unity, this, as shown by Flood (1981), does not affect Equation
(1). We do not incorporate the effect of the exchange rate on the domestic
goods price level through imports of intermediate goods.

     1O would be preferable to allow lags in the output equation, but this
greatly complicates the model. Allowing each country's output to depend on
the real interest rate and/or the other country's output does not
substantially affect the results. While the exact conditions for over and
undershooting are not identical, they do not change enough to make much
difference.

     11The assumption that output is demand determined is made for comparison
with Dornbusch's work. A model with a Lucas type aggregate supply function
could yield an identical reduced form.

     '2Mussa's argument is that his formulation has both a better
inicroeconomic rationale and more sensible steady state properties than
Dornbusch' s formulation.

     '3The assumption of pre—determined prices allows us to put actual (p1)
instead of expected          foreign prices in equation (4c). The equilibrium
price level (e +   p)   clears the goods market in the short run and is
consistent with long run purchasing power parity. Engle and Frankel (1982)
and Glaessner (1982) have used similar specifications of Mussa's formulation.

     '41n addition, the money supply could have been postulated to depend on
the interest rate differential which, in this model, is equivalent to the
expected rate of depreciation. The issues raised in that formulation are
discussed in Papell (1983). Allowing lags in the money supply equations
greatly complicates the analysis.

     '5Sources of error in the money supply processes from having prices not
pre—determined, as in Flood and Hodrick (1982), or the monetary authorities
not being able to use all of the information contained in the contemporaneous
exchange rate can be subsumed in c1 and C5.

     16The money supply could be allowed to respond separately to domestic and
foreign price levels if we were willing to assume that the policy coefficients
were identical across the two countries. This assumption seems less tenable
than the one made in the paper, and is not supported by the empirical results.

     17Cumby and Obstfeld (1982) find that Germany is the only country (out of
five tested) where uncovered interest rate parity cannot be rejected vis—a—vis
the United States. While Hansen and Hodrick (1982) find statistically
significant risk premia between the forward and the expected future spot rate,
their evidence indicates that these risk premia are small. In Papell (1983)
imperfect capital mobility is modeled as a flow adjustment process (as in
Frenkel and Rodriguez (1982)) to investigate overshooting of the effective
exchange rate for Germany and Japan. Modeling imperfect capital mobility as a
stock adjustment process greatly complicates the analysis.




                                        19
      18By "the money supply," we mean the sum of the coefficients of the
 domestic (a6) and foreign (a8) money supplies.

      '9We do not consider the possibility, studied by Calvo (1981), that a
 devaluation would decrease domestic income, thus making ô < 0. While   this
 "contraction—devaluation" case is more appropriate for hi focus on "southern
 cone" countries operating managed exchange rates than for our focus on
 flexible exchange rates, it is interesting to note that the "contraction-
 devaluation" case could produce non—uniqueness in our model as well as in
 his. We will explore these issues in a subsequent paper.

      20While these diagrams are more common in continuous time, Mussa uses
 them in a discrete time model. The theoretical results here are presented in
 discrete time for comparison with the empirical work in Section IV.

      21lricorporating anticipated disturbances does not change the results as
 long as overshooting is interpreted as occurring at some point in time, as in
 footnote 3, rather than necessarily on impact.

      221n general, an increase in the domestic money supply will also shift
 the Dq =  0 schedule to maintain long run purchasing power parity. For the
particular case illustrated (a = 0), the movement along the Dq 0 schedule
restores the steady state equilibrium.

     23The diagram illustrates the case where I2I <      If monetary policy
was even more accommodative, so that I2l > tS, exchange rate undershooting
would still occur.

     241n order to see this, note that equations (5) and (6) can be written
(with perfect foresight) as:

(5)

(6)


     Since q is pre—determined, the increase in     produces an immediate
decrease in the component of nit that depends on (c1 —) and   an increase in
m.
     25The advantage to using this procedure rather than starting directly
with the finite order moving average representation is that it reduces the
number of parameters to be estimated without particularly constraining the
system.

     26The derivation is available from the author upon request. The model
can, of course, be solved by other methods, such as in Blanchard and Kahn
(1980).

     27The system has two roots, A1 and A2. In order for there to be a unique
solution, one of the roots must be stable (< 1) and one unstable (> 1). The
stability condition consists of setting the coefficient of the unstable root
equal to zero. This is equivalent to restricting the economy to be on the
saddle path after a disturbance.



                                      20
     28More detail on the econometric method can be found in Taylor (1980).

     29The model clearly does not satisfy other aspects of the Lucas critique,
such as concern that macroeconomic models be derived from utility maximization
of individual agents.

     30To be exact, we started with data from 1973(I)—1981(IV) and, since one
observation is "lost" in estimating an ARMA(1, 4) model, performed the
estimation over the described period.

     31me exchange rate used was the quarterly, period average rate, taken
from International Financial Statistics. End—of—period rates were also tried;
they made little difference. The money supply was end—of—period, also taken
from IFS. It was felt that end—of—period money supply data would be a better
measure of within period responsiveness to exchange rates and prices than
period averages. The other data were taken from Survey of Current Business
(United States) and Deutsche Bundesbank (Germany). All data, except for the
exchange rate and the WPI, was seasonally adjusted. In order to achieve
stationarity, all variables, after taking logarithms, were detrended by
regression on a constant and linear time trend.

     32The concept of overshooting, as defined by Dornbusch, describes the
behavior of the exchange rate after a permanent increase in the money supply,
while for the empirical work, all disturbances are temporary. In this
context, overshooting should be interpreted as the existence of estimated
parameter values such that, in the deterministic model, a permanent increase
in the money supply would cause exchange rate overshooting. Flood (1981) and
Levich (1981) discuss other definitions of overshooting in a stochastic
context. These are related to concepts of exchange rate volatility, and do
not necessarily correspond to Dornbusch's concept of overshooting.

     33The signs of the coefficients (a2 and a3) in the output equations are
puzzling. Both German and American output declined (relative to trend) in
1974—75 and 1980—81, following the two major oil price increases, and
increased in 1976—79. Assuming that the oil shocks dominated relative price
effects, this can account for a2 and a3 being of opposite sign, but not for
the sign reversal between the estimates for the GNP deflator and the WPI. We
experimented with including the other country's output in each country's
output equation, but this neither changed the sign pattern for a2 and a3 nor
improved the estimates.

     341ri an earlier version of the paper, we estimated the model with
Dornbusch's price equation. The current formulation provides clearly superior
econometric results. We also attempted to estimate the model with Mussa's
equation, but could not get the estimates to converge at an optimum.
Comparison of the constraints (6 and 64) implied by either Dornbusch's or
Mussa's formulations with those implied by the estimated values reveals large
discrepancies, indicating the probable reason why these estimates were not
successful.
     35Let L(u) be the log of the likelihood function for the unconstrained
model, L(c) the log of the likelihood function of the constrained model, u the
number of parameters estimated for the unconstrained model and c the number
of parameters estimated for the constrained model. Then 2(L(u) — L(c)) is


                                      21
distributed chi—squared (u — c). The log of the likelihood function of the
unconstrained model for the GNP deflator is 657.880, and for the WPI is
628.369. The unconstrained model contains 28 estimated parameters, indicating
rejection of the constrained model at standard significance levels. These
results should be interpreted with caution, however, since we have relatively
few observations and the small sample properties of the likelihood ratio test
are not well known. Driskill and Scheffrin (1981) hypothesize that one of the
reasons their estimates fail the likelihood ratio test is the endogeneity of
the German money supply. While our data and estimation techniques are not
identical to theirs, our results clearly fail to support that conjecture.
Another possibility is that the assumption of pre—determined prices is
unwarranted. Glaessner (1982) estimates a similar model with an exogenous
money supply and flexible prices for Canada which is also rejected by the
likelihood ratio test. Models in which prices are neither flexible nor pre-
determined, such as in the recent theoretical work of Flood and Hodrick
(1982), provide another alternative for future empirical research.

     36Both parameters are significantly different from zero for the GNP
Deflator, and of borderline significance for the WPI.

     37me semi—constrained model contains 22 parameters. With s — c = 1,
2[L(s) — L(c)] equals .42 for the GNP deflator, significant at the 50% level,
and equals .71 for the WPI, significant at the 25% level.

     38The log of the likelihood function for the unconstrained model,
containing 20 parameters, is 413.180. With u — c = 5, 2[L(u) — L(c)] equals
12.11, significant at the 2.5% level.

     39We use the ARt procedure of TSP, which provides efficient estimates of
an equation whose disturbances display first order serial correlation.

     40The interest rates were taken from World Financial Markets.   They were
detrerided by regression on a constant and linear time trend.

     41me constrained model is again rejected in comparison to the
unconstrained by the likelihood ratio test.




                                     22
                                       REFERENCE S



Blanchard, 0. and C. Kahn (1980). "The Solution of Linear Difference Models
     Under Rational Expectations," Econometrica, Vol. 48, July, 1305—1311.

Calvo, G. A. (1981). "Staggered Contracts and Exchange Rate Policy,"
     forthcoming in J. Frenkel (ed.), Exchange Rates and International
     Macroeconomics, University of Chicago Press, 1983.

_________ and C. A. Rodriguez (1977). "A Model of Exchange Rate
     Determination Under Currency Substitution and Rational Expectations,"
     Journal of Political Economy, 85, June, 617—626.

Cutuby, R. and M. Obstfeld (1982). "International Interest—Rate and Price—
     Level Linkages Under Flexible Exchange Rates: A Review of Recent
     Evidence," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 921,
     June.

Dornbusch, R. (1976). "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of
     Political Economy, 85, December, 1161—1176.

Driskill, R. and S. Sheffrln (1981).   'On the Mark: Comment," American
     Economic Review, 71, December, 1068—1074.

Erigle, C. and J. Frankel (1982). "Why Money Announcements Move Interest
     Rates: An Answer From the Foreign Exchange Market," National Bureau of
     Economic Research Working Paper No. 1049, December.

Flood, R. (1981). "Explanations of Exchange—Rate Volatility and Other
     Empirical Regularities in Some Popular Models of the Foreign Exchange
     Market," in K. Brunner and A. Meltser (eds.), Carnegie—Rochester
     Conference Series, Vol. 15.

__________ and R. Hodrick (1982). "Optimal Price and Inventory Adjustment in
     an Open—Economy Model of the Business Cycle," unpublished, Federal
     Reserve Board.

Frankel, J. (1979). "On the Mark: A Theory of Floating Exchange Rates Based
     on Real Interest Differentials," American Economic Review, 69, September,
     6 10—22.

Frenkel, J. and C. A. Rodriguez (1982). "Exchange Rate Dynamics and the
     Overshooting Hypothesis," International Monetary Fund Staff Papers,
     March.

Glaessner, T. (1982). "Formulation and Estimation of a Dynamic Model of
     Exchange Rate Determination: An Application of General Method of Moments
     Techniques," International Finance Discussion Paper No. 208, Federal
     Reserve Board, April.

Gray, M. and S. Turnovsky (1979). "The Stability of Exchange Rate Dynamics
     under Perfect Myopic Foresights," International Economic Review, 20,
     October, 643—660.


                                           23
Hansen, L. and R. Hodrick (1982). "Risk Adverse Speculation in the Forward
     Exchange Market," in J. Frenkel (ed.), Exchange Rates and International
     Macroeconomics, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Leiderman, L. (1982). "Monetary Accommodation and the Variability of Output,
     Prices, and Exchange Rates," in K. Brunner and A. Meltser (eds.),
     Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series, Vol. 16.

Levich, R. (1981). "Overshooting in the Foreign Exchange Market," Group of
     Thirty Occasional Paper No. 5, New York.

Lucas, R. (1976). "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique," in K. Brunrier
     and A. Meltzer (eds.), The Phillips Curve and Labor Markets.

Mussa, M. (1981a). "Sticky Prices and Disequilibrium Adjustment in a Rational
     Expectations Model of the Inflationary Process," American Economic
     Review, 71, December, 1020—1027.

_________ (1981b).   "The Role of Official Intervention," Group of Thirty
     Occasional Paper No. 6, New York.

_________ (1982).   "A Model of Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of Political
     Economy, 90, February, 74—104.

Papell, D. (1983). "Activist Monetary Policy, Imperfect Capital Mobility, and
     the Overshooting Hypothesis," unpublished, University of Pennsylvania,
     February.

Rehm, D. (1982). "Staggered Contracts, Capital Flows, and Macroeconomic
     Stability in the Open Economy," Unpublished Dissertation, Columbia
     University.

Taylor, J. (1980). "Output and Price Stability: An International
     Comparison," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, February, 109—132.

__________ (1982).  "Macroeconomic Tradeoffs in an Iriternatinal Economy with
     Rational Expectations," in W. Hildenbrand (ed.), Advances in
     Econometrics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England.

Wilson, C. (1979). "Exchange Rate Dynamics and Anticipated Disturbances,"
     Journal of Political Economy, June, p. 639—47.




                                      24
                                          Table I


                       GNP   Deflator                    Wholesale Price Index

                Constrained Maximum Likelihood Estimates

Parameter     Estimate               Asymptotic        Estimate           Asymptotic
                                      "t    ratio"                          t    ratio"
   a1            .004                       3.85          .22                    1.55

   a2
                 .19                        3.73         —.30                   —2.25

   a3          —.22                        —3.65          .48                    3.22

   a4          —.007                       —3.99         —.09                   —1.56

  a5             .40                        2.51          .03                    1.39

  a6           —d24                        —5.05         —.03                   —.53

  a7          —2.71                        —8.42          .14                    1.00

  a8           —.01                        —.25           .08                    2.24

  a9           3.49                        10.73          .11                     .90
                 .86                        7.71         1.82                    6.67

  a12          —.11                        —.81        —1.58                    —3.22

  a21            .35                        3.98          .60                   4.66

  "22            .36                       4.29         —.29                    —2.83

  a31            .92                       14.15          .75                   6.96

  "32          —.03                        —.33           .19                    1.49

  "41            .28                       3.29           .27                   2.36

  "42            .39                       4.51           .16                    1.67
               1.05                        7.23          1.06                   9.08
  "51
  "52          —.29                       —1.79         —.41                 —4.32
               1.12                        10.31         1.11                   10.72
  "61
  "62          —.42                       —3.91         —.42                 —5.02


               Parameter Values Implied by the Estimates

                         53.10                                     .59

  62                     60.35                                    3.86

  63                          .03                                 —.02

  54                         —.82                                 —.38


            Correlation Between Actual and Estimated Values

  e                           .84                                  .79

  q                           .87                                  .80
  in                          .95                                  .93
                              .83                                  .76

  y                           .89                                  .90

  y*                          .89                                  .91



                                    Log   Likelihood
                        645.215                                 610.446
                                      Table 2


                       GM? Deflator                 Wholesale Price Index

             Semi—Constrained Maximum Likelihood Estimates

Parameter     Estimate             Asymptotic     Estimate           Asymptotic
                                    "t ratio"                         "t ratio'

              477.20                  17.02          .63                 1.93

  62          477.64                  15.40        2.72                  1.73
  63             .03                  15.68        —.02                —1.03
  64            —.85                 —18.96        —.29                —2.09
  a2             .20                   3.34        —.29                —2.03
  a3            —.23                  —2.95          .54                2.90
  a6            —.22                  —3.15        —.10                —1.00
  a7          —2.64                   —3.98          .18                  .99

  a8            —.oi                   —.22         .07                  1.80
  a9            4.15                   4.47         .13                  1.01

  ii             .88                  24.57        1.79                 7.01
  a12          —.13                 —13.55        —1.53                 3.34
  a21           .35                    4.04         .63                 4.37
  a22           .37                    4.12        —.28                —2.87
  a31           .91                   13.70         .81                 6.84
  a32          —.01                   —.13          .11                  .80
  a41           .29                    3.30         .27                 2.39
  U42           .39                    4.26         .18                 1.75

  U51          1.07                   24.57        1.06                 9.09
  a52          —.31                 —13.55         —.41                —4.31
  a61          1.13                   10.88        1.12                11.20
  a62          —.43                  —4.39         —.42                —5.25


            Correlation Between Actual and Estimated Values

  e                        .84                                .78
  q                        .87                                .80
  m                        .95                                .92
                           .83                                .76
  y                        .89                                .90
                           .89                                .91


                                 Log Likelihood

                       645.427                             610.801
                                  Table 3


                              GNP    Deflator
               Constrained Maximum Likelihood Estimates

Parameter                         Estimate               Asymptotic   "t ratio"
  a1                                .003                        17.70
  a4                              —.008                        —6.11

  a5                                .76                          5.77

  a6                              —.24                         —6.24
  a7                          —2.53                            —13.68
  a8                              —.02                          —.22
  a9                              3.52                          19.24

  a11                               .90                          6.68

  012                             —.13                           —.83
  021                               .34                          4.21

  022                               .41                          4.70
  031                               .92                         14.82

  032                             —.01                          —.18
  041                               .35                          3.86

  042                               .41                          4.19


               Parameter Values Implied by the Estimates

                                                 87.23
                                                  5.27

               63                                  .02
                                                 —.80


            Correlation 8etween Actual and Estimated Values

               e                                   .84
               q                                   .87
               in                                  .95
               rn*                                 .84

                            Log   Likelihood
                                  407.125
                                      Table 4


                                 GNP    Deflator
                   Constrained Ma,(imum Likelihood Estimates

Parameter                             Estimate                               ratio
                                                             Asymptotic 't

  a2                                   .21                           3.24
  a3                                  —.25                         —2.94
  a4                                  —.70                         —1.44
  a5                                   .28                           1.58
  a6                                  —.23                         —3.45
  a7                                 —2.84                         —5.96
  a8                                   .001                           .02

  a9                                  3.46                          7.05
  a11                                 1.00                          3.27
  a12                                —.05                           —.15
  a21
  a22                                                               3.93
  a31                                  .91                         12.95
  a32                                —.03                           —.29
  a41                                  .29                          3.24
  a42                                  .38                          4.26
  a51                                1.06                           7.40
  a52                                —.30                          —1.94
  a61                                1.12                          10.14
  a62                                —.43                          —4.03


                          Single Equation Estimates

  1                                  —.54                          —2.31


               Parameter Values Implied by the Estimates



               62                                      .77

               63                                      .03

                                                      —.82


            Correlation Between Actual and Estimated Values

               e                                       .83
               q                                       .87
               a                                       .95
                                                       .83
               y                                       .89
                                                       .88


                               Log    Likelihood
                                     643. 271
                            De=O



                     De=O
                                q
      Figure 1


                            Dq=O

                            De =O

                 E
 E1




                                q

Figure 2
