                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      THE LONG RUN IMPACT OF BOMBING VIETNAM

                                             Edward Miguel
                                             Gerard Roland

                                          Working Paper 11954
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11954


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2006




We are grateful to Vietnam Veterans of America Foundation (VVAF), the Defense Security Cooperation
Agency (DSCA), and the Technology Center for Bomb and Mine Disposal, Vietnam Ministry of Defense
(BOMICO) for providing access to the U.S. military data, and in particular to Major Patrick Keane, Benjamin
Reich, Michael Sheinkman, Bill Shaw, and Tom Smith. Pamela Jakiela, Melissa Knox, Khuyen Nguyen,
Rachel Polimeni, Monika Shah and especially Paul Cathcart have provided splendid research assistance. We
are also grateful to Fred Brown, Jim Fearon, Raquel Fernandez, Scott Gartner, Steve Helfand, Chang-Tai
Hsieh, Chad Jones, Dean Karlan, David Laitin, Adam Przeworski, Martin Ravallion, Debraj Ray, John
Strauss and to numerous seminar participants at Harvard / MIT, ECARES-ULB, the 2005 ASSA Meetings,
U.C. Riverside, U.C. Berkeley, University of British Columbia, the 2005 Pacific Development Conference,
University of Michigan, Center for Global Development, Stanford University, the MacArthur Inequality
Network, the 2005 BREAD-CEPR Conference, the 2005 Economic History Association Meetings, NYU,
Cornell, and Yale for useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Edward Miguel and Gerard Roland. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Long Run Impact of Bombing Vietnam
Edward Miguel and Gerard Roland
NBER Working Paper No. 11954
January 2006
JEL No. E2, O5, P5, H7

                                            ABSTRACT

We investigate the impact of U.S. bombing on later economic development in Vietnam. The

Vietnam War featured the most intense bombing campaign in military history and had massive

humanitarian costs. We use a unique U.S. military dataset containing bombing intensity at the district

level (N=584). We compare the heavily bombed districts to other districts controlling for baseline

demographic characteristics and district geographic factors, and use an instrumental variable

approach exploiting distance to the 17th parallel demilitarized zone. U.S. bombing does not have a

robust negative impact on poverty rates, consumption levels, infrastructure, literacy or population

density through 2002. This finding suggests that local recovery from war damage can be rapid under

certain conditions, although further work is needed to establish the generality of the finding in other

settings.

Edward Miguel
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
emiguel@econ.berkeley.edu

Gerard Roland
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
groland@econ.berkeley.edu
1. Introduction

The horrors inflicted by war are clear to all, and so are its disruptive effects for people’s lives. Indeed, war

displaces population, destroys capital and infrastructure, disrupts schooling, and can produce negative

environmental impacts, damage the social fabric, endanger civil liberties, and create health and famine

crises. Any of these effects could be argued to have impacts on later economic growth and development,

and their combined effects even more. Jean Drèze for one forcefully expresses the view that “[w]ars or

rather militarism is the major obstacle to development in the contemporary world” (Drèze 2000: 1171).

        Yet the net long run effects of war are unclear a priori from the point of view of theory. In

particular, standard neoclassical growth theory yields ambiguous predictions regarding the effect of war

on long-run economic performance. To the extent that the main impact of war is the destruction of

existing physical capital and temporary reduction of human capital accumulation, neoclassical models

predict rapid postwar catch-up growth as the economy converges back to its steady state growth rate,

resulting in no long-run impact. At the same time, war may also profoundly affect the quality of

institutions, technology, and social outcomes. These institutional effects of war may in turn have negative

or positive impacts on long-run economic performance. For instance, it is often argued that military

research and development lead to faster technological progress, which may offset war damage. Wars may

also promote state formation and nation building as was the case in Europe (Tilly 1975), and may induce

social progress via greater popular participation. For instance, political enfranchisement historically has

often been a byproduct of war (Keyssar 2000), and this may in turn enhance public goods provision.

        The long run economic impacts of war remain largely unexplored empirically, and this is so for

several reasons. One important issue is the difficulty of convincingly identifying war impacts on

economic growth in the presence of dual causality between violence and economic conditions, and

possible omitted variable biases (see Miguel et al 2004 for a related discussion). But a perhaps even more

fundamental constraint for empirical work is the lack of data on war damage and economic conditions in

conflict (and post-conflict) societies. We exploit a uniquely data-rich historical episode to estimate the




                                                                                                              1
impact of war on long-run economic performance, the U.S. bombing of Vietnam (what Vietnamese call

“the American War”).

        The Indochina War, centered in Vietnam, was the most intense episode of aerial bombing in

human history (Clodfelter 1995):

        “The United States Air Force dropped in Indochina, from 1964 to August 15, 1973, a total of
        6,162,000 tons of bombs and other ordnance. U.S. Navy and Marine Corps aircraft expended
        another 1,500,000 tons in Southeast Asia. This tonnage far exceeded that expended in World War
        II and in the Korean War. The U.S. Air Force consumed 2,150,000 tons of munitions in World
        War II – 1,613,000 tons in the European Theater and 537,000 tons in the Pacific Theater – and
        454,000 tons in the Korean War.”

Vietnam War bombing thus represented at least three times as much (by weight) as both European and

Pacific theater World War II bombing combined, and about fifteen times total tonnage in the Korean War.

Given the prewar Vietnamese population of approximately 32 million, U.S. bombing translates into

hundreds of kilograms of explosives per capita during the conflict. For another comparison, the atomic

bombs dropped at Hiroshima and Nagasaki had the power of roughly 15,000 and 20,000 tons of TNT,

respectively (Grolier 1995). Since general purpose bombs – by far the most common type of bomb used

in Vietnam and in our dataset – are approximately 50% explosive material by weight, each atomic bomb

translates into roughly 30,000 to 40,000 tons of such munitions. Measured this way, U.S. bombing in

Indochina represents 100 times the combined impact of the Hiroshima and Nagasaki atomic bombs.

        This study employs an unusual United States military district-level dataset on bombs, missiles,

rockets and other ordnance dropped in Vietnam. The U.S. bombing of Vietnam was largely concentrated

in a subset of regions: roughly 70% of all ordnance was dropped in only 10% of the 584 districts in the

sample. Figure 1 shows the geographic location of the 10% most heavily attacked districts, in terms of

total U.S. bombs, missiles and rockets per km2.

        The heaviest bombing took place in Quang Tri province in the central region of the country near

the 17th parallel, the former border between North Vietnam and South Vietnam. Quang Tri province was

basically bombed flat during the war, with most of its capital and infrastructure destroyed: only 11 of

3,500 Quang Tri villages were left unbombed by the end of the war (Project RENEW Report 2004: 3).



                                                                                                          2
Provinces immediately north and south of Quang Tri also received heavy U.S. bombing, although less

than Quang Tri itself. Coastal regions of North Vietnam and some districts of Hanoi were heavily

bombed, as was the so-called “Iron Triangle”, the region adjacent to Cambodia near Saigon in the South.

This region was the site of frequent incursions by North Vietnamese troops and Vietcong/NLF guerrillas

into South Vietnam through the so-called Ho Chi Minh Trail that ran from North Vietnam through Laos

and Cambodia.

         There are many reasons to think U.S. bombing could have long-run impacts on Vietnamese

economic development. We focus on three factors in particular in the empirical analysis. First, the

destruction of local infrastructure may have inhibited commerce and possibly changed later investment

patterns. For instance, U.S. bombing during the Rolling Thunder campaign of the late 1960s “destroyed

65 percent of the North's oil storage capacity, 59 percent of its power plants, 55 percent of its major

bridges” (Clodfelter 1995: 134).1 Second, U.S. bombing displaced population, and this could potentially

have reduced local economic activity if many individuals never returned home. Third, population

displacement and the destruction of physical infrastructure – including classrooms – disrupted schooling

for millions of Vietnamese. In terms of other possible factors, we do not have complete information on

unexploded ordnance (UXO), landmines or U.S. Agent Orange use, and unfortunately cannot focus on

these in the main empirical analysis (however, there is obviously a strong correlation between bombing

and later UXO density).2

         In this paper, we use the extensive variation in U.S. bombing intensity across 584 Vietnamese

districts to estimate long-run local impacts of the war. In our main finding, we find no robust adverse

impacts of U.S. bombing on poverty rates, consumption levels, electricity infrastructure, literacy, or


1
  See Tilford (1991: 155) for further details on the extent of U.S. bombing damage.
2
  UXOs as well as landmines can impair the use of agricultural land, and are expensive to find and remove. While
UXOs and landmines can seriously hurt farming families when an income earner is victimized, overall UXO and
landmine injury rates in Vietnam during the 1980s and 1990s declined rapidly relative to the immediate postwar
years (Project RENEW report 2004: 16-18). The chemical agents used by the U.S. could also generate long term
damage to population health and the environment. The best known, Agent Orange, is a defoliant containing dioxins,
and as late as 2001 traces of TCDD, the dioxin specific to Agent Orange, were still found in human blood in some
areas. Deforestation itself could also negatively affect the environment and agriculture by increasing soil instability
and affecting wildlife.


                                                                                                                      3
population density through 2002. If anything, the more heavily bombed districts may have slightly less

poverty than other districts. These results are consistent across a variety of specifications and samples.

There is suggestive evidence of a moderate negative effect of U.S. bombing on consumption levels in

1992/1993, but also evidence for a positive effect on consumption growth between 1992/1993 and 2002,

suggesting that there may have been negative war impacts on average local living standards but that these

dissipated over time as a result of rapid catch-up growth. While the precise mechanisms underlying this

result remain elusive, there is suggestive evidence that extra state investment in heavily bombed regions

played a role in the recovery. To be absolutely clear, the human welfare costs of the war in Vietnam –

which led to millions of civilian deaths by all accounts – were massive even if there are no detectable

long-run local economic growth impacts.

        The key econometric identification issue is the non-random nature of U.S. bombing patterns. If

regions with unobservably better economic growth prospects were more (or less) likely to be heavily

bombed, this could bias estimated bombing impacts. Understanding the sources of variation in U.S.

bombing is thus critical. In this regard, the identification strategy benefits from at least two factors. First,

the most heavily bombed areas were those located near the 17th parallel north latitude, the border between

North and South Vietnam during the war. This arbitrarily drawn border, set by the 1954 Geneva Accords

that ended French colonialism in Indochina, became a locus for heavy fighting during the war, and its

placement at 17 degrees, rather than 16 or 18 degrees, can be viewed as a natural experiment. The border

was not drawn by Vietnamese, but was instead the outcome of fierce negotiations among the major world

powers, including the United States and Soviet Union, in the context of the Cold War. The United States

sought to push the border farther north, the Soviet Union farther south. We use the north-south distance

from a district to the 17th parallel as an instrumental variable for U.S. bombing intensity in our preferred

empirical specification, exploiting this source of variation.

        The second main concentration of heavy U.S. bombing lies in areas where the Ho Chi Minh Trail

entered South Vietnam. While not as clearly exogenous as the North Vietnam-South Vietnam border, the

outlets of the Ho Chi Minh Trail into South Vietnam reflected, to a large extent, geographical conditions


                                                                                                                   4
along the South Vietnam-Cambodia border rather than local socioeconomic conditions within Vietnam.

At its main southern outlet, there was less mountainous terrain than is the case farther north along the

border, facilitating troop movements into the Mekong Delta flatlands.

        To further address omitted variable bias concerns, we perform regressions focusing only on areas

in Vietnam’s central and southern region that were largely rural and at broadly similar levels of economic

development in the early 1960s before the war. The analysis also includes baseline 1960 population

density and geographic and climatic characteristics as regression controls, as well as province fixed

effects in some specifications. Finally, we argue below that any remaining bias due to the non-random

placement of U.S. bombs is likely to lead to a spurious negative correlation between bombing intensity

and later living standards, probably strengthening our main findings.

        It is important to note an important limitation up front. While this econometric strategy provides

estimates of differences across districts, the approach is unable to capture any aggregate nation-wide

effects of the war on subsequent Vietnamese development. The counterfactual – Vietnamese economic

performance in the absence of “the American War” – cannot be observed or estimated. This is potentially

important to the extent that the war led to major national institutional and social changes, or if the cross-

region spillovers of the war within Vietnam were large. Still the rapid rate of economic growth in

Vietnam since the early 1990s – at 6% on average between 1993 and 2003 (World Bank 2004) – suggests

that any nation-wide impacts on long-run growth rates were not strongly negative.

        The within-country empirical approach also has merits, however. We exploit the common data

sources and postwar institutions and policies across Vietnamese regions, allowing us to pinpoint

persistent local economic impacts of bombing more precisely than would be possible in a cross-country

analysis, where controlling for national trends and institutions would be problematic.

        In related work, Davis and Weinstein (2002) show that the U.S. bombing of major Japanese cities

during World War II had no long run impact on the population of those cities relative to prewar levels,

and Brakman et al. (2004) find a similar result for postwar Germany. Organski and Kugler (1977, 1980)

find that the economic effects of the two world wars on a sample of mainly European countries tended to


                                                                                                                5
dissipate after only 15-20 years, for both capitalist and socialist economies, after which there was

typically a return to prewar growth trends. Przeworski et al. (2000) similarly find that postwar economic

recovery is rapid in a cross-country empirical analysis.

        We view our results as complementary to these earlier studies. We are able to measure the long

run impact of bombing on a larger set of outcomes than other studies, which either only focus on

population effects or on aggregate macroeconomic effects. Indeed, we look at the effect of bombing on (i)

variables that are central to understanding economic performance – physical capital, human capital and

population – and on (ii) other variables that relate directly to human welfare, including poverty rates and

consumption. We are thus able to paint a more complete picture of the long run impacts of war.

        In terms of other differences with existing studies, note that Vietnam during the 1960s and 1970s

was much poorer than either Japan or Germany and was an overwhelmingly rural country. The urban

agglomeration effects emphasized by some theories thus likely played a less important role in postwar

recovery patterns in Vietnam than elsewhere. Another major difference between postwar Vietnam and

Japan is that the former was a centrally planned economy while the latter was a market economy. This

raises the question of what general lessons we can learn from these empirical results, since other countries

with different institutions might have reacted differently than either Japan or Vietnam. Since institutions

are often quite country specific, in our view it is through the accumulation of evidence across many

settings that researchers can best begin to create a convincing picture of war’s economic effects.

        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the predictions of growth

theory regarding the long run effect of war on economic performance. Section 3 presents the data. Section

4 discusses determinants of U.S. bombing, the main empirical analysis is presented in section 5, Section 6

elaborates on the underlying mechanisms, and the final section discusses broader lessons.



2. War and the Theory of Economic Growth

In order to provide perspectives on war’s possible economic impacts, it is useful to recall the results from

the standard Ramsey growth model. If war leads to the partial destruction of the physical capital stock and


                                                                                                              6
the production function remains unchanged, there will be a temporary increase in capital acccumulation

until the steady state is reached again. In other words, war has no long run effects on the economy but

leads to a transitory increase in investment and in consumption growth relative to a situation without war.

If war leads to a loss of the capital stock in some areas but not in other areas, the former will experience

temporarily higher investment and consumption growth. If capital is mobile, capital will also flow to the

war-damaged areas so as to equalize the marginal return to capital across regions.

        Postwar recovery patterns are qualitatively similar for human capital (see Barro and Sala-i-Martin

2003 for a full treatment of the two-sector growth model). A reduction in human capital levels in a war

torn region will also result in more rapid postwar accumulation of human capital there, though again there

will be no change in steady state outcomes provided that other model parameters are unchanged.

        The effects of a loss of capital stock in a growth model with vintage capital are somewhat

different. To the extent that the postwar investment consists of more recent and better quality capital,

economic performance could eventually exceed that of the prewar economy and similarly, regions that

suffered more from the war might eventually overtake regions that suffered less. Gilchrist and Williams

(2004) indeed argue that a vintage capital growth model is more consistent with macroeconomic recovery

patterns in postwar Japan and Germany than the standard neoclassical model. Our main empirical

findings appear to be consistent with both the neoclassical growth and vintage capital views, and we do

not attempt to decisively distinguish between these two models below.

        Another reason why the steady state of the economy may be affected by the loss of capital

through war is the possibility of falling into a poverty trap (Azariadis and Drazen 1990, World Bank

2003). Given its low initial income level and the extensive U.S. bombing, if a war induced “poverty trap”

would ever be possible Vietnam would be a good candidate. Empirically we find no evidence suggesting

a poverty trap at either the local or national levels in Vietnam.

        Beyond the loss of physical and human capital, war could however also lead to institutional

changes that would affect the aggregate production function, by modifying its scale parameter.

Deterioration in institutions would thus lead to a new steady state characterized by a lower long run level


                                                                                                               7
of both capital and consumption. By symmetry, positive institutional changes brought about by war lead

to higher steady state capital and consumption postwar. However, institutional changes could go in either

direction and theory does not provide an unambiguous prediction as to the effect of war on institutions.

        The possibility of cross-regional spillovers is also important to the extent that economic

conditions in one region affect growth elsewhere. Central government taxation and transfers may benefit

some regions more than others. In the empirical analysis below, we explore the possibility of cross-

district spillovers by examining relationships at different levels of aggregation (namely, at the provincial

and district levels), and also examine postwar state investment patterns to establish whether the areas

most affected by the war benefited from additional investment.



3. The Data

We use a database assembled by the Defense Security Cooperation Agency (DSCA) housed at the United

States National Archives in Record Group 218, called “Records of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff”.3 The

database contains information on all ordnance dropped from U.S. and allied airplanes and helicopters in

Vietnam between 1965 and 1975, as well as artillery fired from naval ships and sea mines dropped.4 To

our knowledge, these files embody the most complete, comprehensive and reliable summary available of

U.S. and allied air and sea ordnance expended during the Vietnam War. Some of the original tape

archives were reportedly damaged so up to several months of data may be missing, but unfortunately we

are unable to determine the precise extent of any missing data. The data were originally recovered from

aircraft mission logs and then reported to U.S. Pacific Command and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. They were

declassified in 1975 and provided to the Vietnamese government following the war. The Data Appendix

discusses data sources in greater detail.




3
  We obtained the data from the Vietnam Veterans of America Foundation (VVAF) with authorization from DSCA
and the Vietnam Ministry of Defense Technology Center for Bomb and Mine Disposal.
4
  In particular, data come from the 1965-70 Combat Activities-Air (CACTA), the 1970-1975 South East Asia
(SEADAB), and Combat Naval Gunfire (CONGA) databases.


                                                                                                               8
         The raw data include the bombing location, a summary bomb damage assessment (which we

unfortunately do not have access to, since this would be useful in the analysis), and the quantity of

ordnance by category and type. Categories include general purpose bombs, cluster bombs, chemicals,

incendiary, rockets, missiles, projectiles, ammunition, mines and flares. Ordnance are measured in units

rather than by weight. Since the source of the data is the U.S. Air Force and Navy, we miss anti-personnel

landmines that were placed by Army ground forces, which probably accounts for a large share of U.S.

landmines, and the landmine data are thus much less reliable than the other data. The raw ordnance data

were then geo-coded by VVAF using Vietnam district boundaries employed in the 1999 Population and

Housing Census to yield the dataset used in the analysis. (Examples of the raw bombing data are

presented in Appendix Figures 1 and 2.)

         General purpose bombs are by far the most common ordnance category (Table 1). The Mark 82

and Mark 36 Destructor general purpose bombs typically weighed between 500 to 750 pounds. Average

bombing intensity is high, with an average of 32.3 bombs, missiles, and rockets per km2 nationwide

through the war, and there is extensive variation across districts for all ordnance categories. The

distribution of bombs was skewed, with 10% of districts receiving nearly 70% of all bombs, missiles and

rockets5, and some districts receiving over 500 bombs per km2. The most intense attacks took place near

the 17th parallel that formed the border between North and South Vietnam during the war.

         We focus at times in the analysis on what we call the “Central Region” of the country, which as

we define it includes 22 provinces and 229 districts straddling the 17th parallel, and includes nearly all

districts in the top 10% most bombed group. This Central Region excludes the major cities of Da Nang,

Saigon (now Ho Chi Minh City), Hanoi, and Haiphong as well as both the extreme north of the country

bordering China and the southern Mekong Delta region.6 Bombing intensity in the Central Region is


5
  Quang Tri district in Quang Tri province, which is only 6 km2 in size, actually received over 3000 bombs per km2,
the highest in the dataset by far. We exclude this outlier in the analysis below while still using data from the rest of
Quang Tri province.
6
  The provinces in the Central Region are (current names): Ba Ria, Binh Dinh, Binh Duong, Binh Phuoc, Binh
Thuan, Dak Lak, Dong Nai, Gia Lai, Ha Tinh, Khanh Hoa, Kon Tum, Lam Dong, Nghe An, Ninh Thuan, Phu Yen,
Quang Binh, Quang Nam, Quang Ngai, Quang Tri, Tay Ninh, Thanh Hoa, and Thuathien-Hue.


                                                                                                                       9
nearly double that for the nation as a whole and there is also considerably more variation in bombing

there. It was overwhelmingly rural at baseline since cities are excluded, making it a particularly useful

region to focus on in the analysis since there is far less baseline socioeconomic variation there than for the

country as a whole. Comparing heavily bombed areas only to other nearby districts also located within the

Central Region sample can be viewed as a form of matching estimation.

        Figure 2 presents the geographic distribution of bombing intensity in Vietnam in greater detail.

The poor northwestern region of Vietnam was hardly bombed at all, in part because of the Johnson

administration’s reluctance to antagonize China by bombing near its borders (Tilford 1991: 153). While

bombing intensity was highest near the 17th parallel, it was also high in the “Iron Triangle” region of

South Vietnam adjacent to Cambodia, the endpoint of the Ho Chi Minh Trail, as well as in some parts of

North Vietnam, as discussed above.

        There is a positive and statistically significant correlation across all ordnance categories dropped

in a district (Table 1). In the regression analysis below, we mostly employ total intensity of bombs,

missiles, and rockets per km2, but given the substantial correlation with other ordnance categories (e.g.

ammunition), this is also a good proxy for the overall intensity of local war activity. Unfortunately, we do

not have comparable data for ordnance used by the North Vietnamese Army or Vietcong/NLF nor do we

have ordnance damage measures. Although we do not have disaggregated data on Agent Orange

exposure, the broad regional patterns of Agent Orange exposure correspond closely with bombing

intensity, as can be seen by comparing the maps in Stellman et al (2003) with Figure 2 here.

        We obtained provincial population density in 1960-61 from both South Vietnam and North

Vietnam government sources (described in the Data Appendix) and use those data as baseline controls in

the main regressions (Table 2). A variety of local geographic and climatic characteristics – including

proportion of land at high altitude, average district temperature and precipitation, location in former South

Vietnam, and the proportion of land in 18 different soil type categories – are also included as district

explanatory variables in most specifications in order to control, at least in part, for agricultural

productivity and factors potentially affecting military operations (e.g., altitude). The soil type controls are


                                                                                                            10
excluded from the province level analysis due to limited degrees of freedom, as there are only 55

provinces in the final province sample.

        We focus on several economic outcomes. Poverty rate estimates are from Minot et al. (2003),

who use the Elbers et al (2003) local regression method. This approach matches up 1999 Population and

Housing Census data – which has excellent geographic coverage but limited household characteristics –

with detailed 1997/8 Vietnam Living Standards Survey (VLSS) household data. Log-linear regressions of

real cost-of-living-adjusted per capita consumption expenditures on the 17 household characteristics

found in both the census and VLSS are then carried out, and the regression results used to compute

predicted household consumption (details of the procedure are in the Data Appendix). The poverty rate is

defined as the proportion of district population estimated to be living on less than 1,789,871 Vietnamese

Dong per year, the official 1999 national poverty line, and approximately 41% of the national population

met this criterion (Table 2). The 1999 census also provides detailed information on household access to

electricity (71% of households nationwide have electricity) and literacy (88% of respondents), our main

proxies for past physical and human capital investments, respectively.

        We obtained per capita consumption expenditure data from both the 1992/3 and 2002 VLSS

waves for a sample of households in a subset of 166 districts, reducing the sample. We focus on province

level averages when using the VLSS, since the data was designed to be representative at this level of

aggregation. These data allows us to assess consumption levels and growth during the rapid economic

expansion of the 1990s. The VLSS also contains useful retrospective information on migration patterns

that we explore below.

        Finally, Vietnamese Statistical Yearbooks provide a consistent series on province population for

1985 to 2000, and some information on central government investment flows for 1985 data that we utilize

in the analysis below. Unfortunately, more detailed economic data is lacking for the 1970s and 1980s, a

period which constitutes a sort of statistical black hole. Recall that in the aftermath of the “American

War”, Vietnam also fought a border war with China and occupied Cambodia to end Khmer Rouge rule,

and data collection was a low priority for the regime while the country remained on a war footing.


                                                                                                           11
4. Determinants of U.S. Bombing Intensity

Before presenting the econometric analysis, we discuss the existing literature on U.S. bombing strategy

during the Vietnam War. A distinction is often made between the nature of bombing in North Vietnam

and South Vietnam. U.S. bombing in North Vietnam was largely considered strategic bombing, targeting

transportation capabilities (e.g., airfields, railroads, bridges, ports, roads), as well as military barracks,

industrial plants, and storage depots (Clodfelter 1995: 134). The selection of targets in North Vietnam

was directly supervised by Washington officials on a weekly basis during the Johnson administration’s

“Rolling Thunder” air campaign (Littauer et al., 1972: 37), and the number of approved targets regularly

fell below the requests of the military, with the bombing of Hanoi, Haiphong and areas near the Chinese

border categorically ruled out. A far broader set of targets in North Vietnam was approved under the

Nixon administration’s “Linebacker” campaign, including targets in the North’s main population centers

during the so-called “Christmas Bombing” of 1972.

        Bombing in South Vietnam, and in parts of North Vietnam near the border, in contrast, was

typically interdiction bombing or tactical air support, which aimed to disrupt enemy troop movements and

support U.S. ground troop operations, rather than explicitly to destroy infrastructure (Littauer et al 1972:

55; Schlight 1988: 292). Below we present empirical results broken down by the former North and South

Vietnam in some cases, in addition to the full sample estimates, to investigate any differential impacts.

Some existing research suggests there was no robust correlation overall between local population density

and bombing intensity (Nalty 2000: 83), but other authors claim that poorer areas were actually more

likely to be hit by U.S. bombing: “[i]n the remoter, sparsely populated regions often used by the

NLF/NVA [Vietcong/North Vietnamese Army] for staging, regroupment, and infiltration, area saturation

bombing is common” (Littauer et al 1972: 10-11).

        Turning to the statistical analysis, the north-south distance from the 17th parallel is a strong

predictor of bombing intensity and is statistically significant in the province level analysis (Table 3,

regression 1), district level analysis (regression 2), and a specification that excludes Quang Tri province,


                                                                                                                 12
the most heavily bombed province (regression 3), and is large and negative but only marginally

significant when we restrict attention to the Central Region (regression 4). The main district level

specification in regression 2 serves as the first stage regression for the subsequent IV-2SLS analysis. Note

that the instrument is highly statistically significant with a t-statistic near three in that case. In all these

specifications and those below, disturbance terms are allowed to be correlated (“clustered”) for districts

within the same province, in case there are geographic, socioeconomic or political factors correlated

among neighboring districts.7

         A remaining econometric concern is whether the instrumental variable violates the exclusion

restriction, in the sense that distance from the 17th parallel has an independent impact on postwar

outcomes beyond any effect working through bombing intensity (conditional on the control variables).

One possible concern is that the IV is correlated with distance to one of Vietnam’s two major cities,

Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City. If remoteness from these two booming metropolitan areas is associated

with lower incomes during the postwar period, as seems likely, this would generate a negative correlation

between distance to the 17th parallel and poverty in 1999. However, despite any such bias, below we find

no significant relationship between U.S. bombing and later poverty in the IV specification, strengthening

our main finding. In other words, despite the fact that districts near the 17th parallel had the double

misfortune of being heavily bombed and being far from major national markets, they are currently no

poorer than other regions conditional on baseline and geographic characteristics.

         None of the other explanatory variables is significantly related to U.S. bombing intensity in a

consistent way across the four specifications in Table 3, including the indicator for former South

Vietnam, altitude measures, climatic conditions and latitude. The one partial exception is the prewar

1960-61 province population density measure, which is negative and statistically significant across the

three district level specifications, suggesting that more rural areas were somewhat more likely to be

bombed, echoing some of the existing historical literature. However, note that this result does not hold in


7
  The use of general spatially correlated disturbance terms, as in Conley (1999), leads to standard errors very similar
to those produced by clustering districts by province throughout (results not shown).


                                                                                                                    13
the province level analysis in regression 1. Thus overall, with the exception of distance to the 17th parallel

(the instrumental variable), there are no consistent correlations between observables and bombing

intensity, partially alleviating omitted variable bias concerns.



5. The Long-run Impact of Bombing Vietnam

5.1 Impacts on Poverty and Consumption Expenditures

We consider local bombing impacts at both the province and district levels. There are a number of reasons

to consider outcomes at different levels of aggregation. First, U.S. bombing of one district could generate

negative externalities for other nearby districts. Provincial level regressions are one way to partially

capture these externalities, although this specification still misses broader cross-province externalities.

Second, the main baseline 1960-61 population density control is at the province level, and thus when

population density is the dependent variable at least (in Section 5.3 below), the analysis utilizes a true

panel design. Finally, the province results serve as a robustness check for the district level analysis.

        Total U.S. bombing intensity is negatively and marginally statistically significantly related to the

1999 poverty rate at both the province level (Table 4, regression 1) and the district level (regression 2).

The district level relationship between bombing intensity and poverty is presented graphically in Figure 3.

The main empirical results are similar if we consider only the intensity of general purpose bombs, the

major ordnance category, or if we consider a log transformation of total bombing intensity (not shown). In

terms of other factors, areas that had higher population density in 1960-61 have significantly less poverty

in 1999 as expected, as does South Vietnam as a whole on average, while higher altitude areas have

considerably higher poverty rates (regressions 1 and 2). Climatic factors and latitude, in contrast, are not

robustly associated with poverty, although high precipitation districts have significantly more poverty in

some specifications.

        The district level effect remains negative and is even more statistically significant in

specifications that include province fixed effects (Table 4, regression 3) and exclude Quang Tri

(regression 4), but is not statistically significant if attention is restricted to the Central Region sample


                                                                                                               14
(regression 5). Overall, the OLS specifications provide suggestive evidence that U.S. bombing moderately

reduced later poverty, but estimates are only marginally significant and not particularly robust. This

negative relationship may in part reflect the fact that some of the poorest provinces in Vietnam, those in

the northwest, were rarely bombed by the U.S. due to their proximity to China, potentially generating a

spurious correlation. More generally, some other unobserved source of socioeconomic variation could be

driving both the observed bombing patterns and later poverty rates. We thus next turn to estimates that

rely on the placement of the North Vietnam-South Vietnam border at the 17th parallel as exogenous

variation in bombing intensity. In the reduced form specification (Table 4, regression 6), the north-south

distance from the 17th parallel is negative but not statistically significantly related to 1999 poverty,

conditional on all other province and district geographic factors. Using this distance as an instrumental

variable for U.S. bombing intensity in our preferred specification, we find that the relationship between

bombing intensity is positive but not statistically significant (Table 4, regression 7): the coefficient

estimate on total U.S. bombing intensity is 0.00026 (standard error 0.00042).

        To get an idea of the magnitude of this bombing impact on later poverty, first consider the effect

of a change from zero bombing up to the average bombing intensity of 32.3 bombs, missiles, and rockets

per km2. The average effect in this sense is (32.3)*(0.00026) = 0.008. This is a very small average effect,

an increase in the poverty rate by less than one percentage point and it is not statistically significant. In

terms of how precise this estimate is, the 95% confidence interval ranges from 0.00026 – 2*0.00042 = -

0.00058, up to 0.00026 + 2*0.00042 = 0.0011. Thus again considering the effect of going from zero

bombing up to the average intensity of 32.3, the 95% confidence band of estimates is (32.3)*(-0.00058) =

-0.019 to (32.3)*(0.0011) = 0.035. In other words, plausible average effects range from a 1.9 percentage

point reduction in poverty up to a 3.5 percentage point increase in poverty on a base poverty rate of 41%.

This is a reasonably tight range of estimates. Carrying out the analogous exercise using the OLS estimate

(Table 4, regression 2) yields a point estimate of (32.2)*(-0.00040) = -0.013, a 1.3 percentage point

reduction in poverty (going from zero bombing up to average bombing intensity), and a 95% confidence




                                                                                                                15
interval from -2.7 percentage point decrease in poverty up to +0.1 percentage point increase, again a

narrow range of estimates around zero.

        We next present alternative specifications. The effect of bombing on poverty is negative and

statistically significant in former North Vietnam (Table 5, regression 1) but not in former South Vietnam

(regression 2,). The explanation for this North-South difference remains elusive. It might reflect a postwar

central government bias towards assisting heavily bombed areas in the North but the different nature of

bombing across the two regions might also be part of the story. Bombing effects are not statistically

significant in initially rural areas (districts with baseline 1960-1 population density less than 200 per km2,

regression 3) but are statistically significant and negative in urban areas (regression 4). There is some

evidence for a nonlinear effect of bombing intensity on later poverty rates: the linear bombing term

remains negative and statistically significant while the squared term is positive and significant (regression

5). This pattern appears to in part reflect the high poverty rates in Quang Tri province, the most heavily

bombed province in the country and may suggest that war impacts can be persistent for extremely intense

bombing like that in Quang Tri, although that is speculative. Point estimates are however not statistically

significant when an alternative nonlinear measure of high bombing intensity is used (regression 6).

        We next explore related relationships using the more detailed VLSS household consumption

expenditure data. Average consumption per capita in 2002 is not robustly associated with bombing

intensity across the full sample (Table 6, Panel A, regression 1), or in a specification that excludes Quang

Tri province (regression 2), restricting attention to the Central Region (regression 3), or in a specification

that includes the north-south distance to the 17th parallel as the main explanatory variable (regression 4).

In contrast, all four of these specifications indicate that more heavily bombed provinces were somewhat

poorer in 1992/93 (Table 6, Panel B), although none of those effects are significant at traditional

confidence levels.

        Taking the growth rate of per capita consumption expenditures as the dependent variable, we find

that provinces that experienced more intense U.S. bombing had significantly faster growth between

1992/93 and 2002 (Table 6, Panel C), and in three of the four specifications this effect is statistically


                                                                                                             16
significant at over 95% confidence. The coefficient estimate from the full sample (regression 1) implies

that going from zero to average U.S. bombing intensity is associated with (32.3)*(0.0030) or 10

percentage points faster consumption expenditure growth during that ten year period, a substantial

difference that works out to be roughly one percentage point faster growth per year on average.

         These patterns suggest that more heavily bombed areas were somewhat poorer than other areas

after the war but they later caught up during the 1990s economic boom, in line with the neoclassical

growth model’s prediction of especially rapid consumption growth along the transition path back to

steady state. Unfortunately, due to data limitations we cannot trace out consumption growth patterns in

the 1970s and 1980s, and so cannot estimate the extent of poverty in heavily bombed areas during the

immediate postwar period. Nevertheless, by 2002, nearly thirty years after the U.S. pulled out of Vietnam,

the provinces that bore the brunt of the U.S. assault are largely indistinguishable from other areas in terms

of poverty and average living standards.8



5.2 Impacts on Infrastructure and Human Capital

There is a positive relationship between U.S. bombing intensity and 1999 access to electricity across the

standard set of province and district specifications (Table 7, panel A), and coefficient estimates are

statistically significant at 95% confidence in six of these seven specifications. The relationship is weaker

when province fixed effects are included as controls (regression 3), but the point estimate on U.S.

bombing remains positive and marginally statistically significant even in that case. Note the negative and

significant coefficient estimate on north-south distance to the 17th parallel, suggesting particularly

intensive power sector investments near the former border.
8
  We examined attained adult height as recorded in the VLSS database as a measure of living standards for cohorts
born before and during the war to gauge the extent to which living standards fell in heavily bombed areas. We do
find that the average height of the 1961-70 and 1971-80 birth cohorts is significantly lower in more heavily bombed
regions. However, it is also somewhat smaller for earlier cohorts born pre-1961 in those same areas. The largest
coefficient estimate on U.S. bombing intensity (for the 1961-70 cohort) is -0.0165, implying an average reduction of
0.5 cm when going from zero to average U.S. bombing intensity – not a large effect. The relatively small sample
sizes in the VLSS, especially when broken down by year of birth, gender, and province cells, and the possibility that
children across a wide range of ages could experience some growth stunting due to the war, prevent us from drawing
any strong conclusions. The possibility of differential child and infant mortality as a result of the war could generate
selection effects that would further complicate interpretation.


                                                                                                                     17
        Taken together these estimates provide some suggestive evidence in favor of technological

“leapfrogging” in the heavily bombed regions, consistent with a vintage capital growth model, or possibly

investments in the heavily bombed regions that far exceeded war damage. Speculatively, this may have

been a political reward for regions that actively resisted the U.S. during the war. However, given the

limited immediate postwar data, we have little hope of determining the relative contributions of these two

distinct explanations. Infrastructure investment decisions in Vietnam in the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s likely

reflected a combination of central government redistributive goals as well as potential private investment

returns, especially in the aftermath of the economic reforms, and it is difficult to disentangle these

motives in the absence of detailed district-level public and private investment data, which we do not have.

International donors, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and even the U.S. government (following

the normalization of Vietnam-U.S. relations in 1995), also played increasingly important roles in funding

reconstruction projects during this period, further complicating interpretation.

        Another factor in the neoclassical growth model is human capital. There is no statistically

significant negative impact of bombing on either province or district literacy rates in 1999, an important

proxy for human capital investments (Table 7, Panel B, regressions 1-7), and similarly weak results hold

for a variety of other 1990s human capital measures from the VLSS database as well as for 1985 school

enrollment per capita from the government yearbooks (results not shown).

        Thus taking these results together, there is no evidence that more heavily bombed districts have

either less physical infrastructure or human capital stocks 25 years after the end of the war, consistent

with the rapid postwar recovery in consumption levels documented above. This is not to say that the war

left no observable marks in heavily bombed regions. For one thing, more heavily bombed provinces have

higher membership in war veterans’ associations – in a specification analogous to Table 6 regression 1,

the point estimate is 0.00022, standard error 0.00011 – and there is suggestive, though not always

significant, evidence that 2002 disability rates are also somewhat higher there (regressions not shown),

perhaps in part due to war and landmine/UXO injuries.




                                                                                                            18
5.3 Impacts on Population Density

Total U.S. bombing intensity is not significantly related to province population density in 1999 (Table 8,

regression 1), with a point estimate of 0.13 and standard error 0.49. Provinces that had high population

density in 1960-61 also tend to have high density in 1999 (the point estimate on 1960-61 density is 0.89,

standard error 0.19) as expected, and former South Vietnam has somewhat higher 1999 population

density than former North Vietnam overall, although that difference is only marginally significant. In this

province level specification, the effect of a change from zero U.S. bombing up to average province level

bombing intensity is (30.6)*(0.13) = 4.0 additional people per km2, a miniscule effect with a tight 95%

confidence range from -26 to +34 people per km2, less than 0.1 of a standard deviation in 1999 province

population density.

        In a variety of district level OLS specifications, total U.S. bombing intensity is not statistically

significantly related to 1999 district population density (Table 8, regression 2-5). Similarly, in neither the

reduced form regression of population density on the north-south distance from the 17th parallel

(regression 6), nor the IV-2SLS specification (regression 7) is the key explanatory variable statistically

significantly related to 1999 district population density. However, one caveat to all of the district level

population results are the large standard errors on the key coefficient estimates, which make these

estimates far less precise than the poverty results reported above (in Tables 4 and 5). The leading

explanation for these large standard errors in the district level regressions is the absence of a prewar

district level population density control: province population density in 1960-61 is only weakly correlated

with 1999 district population density, in sharp contrast to the precisely estimated province level results

(Table 8, regression 1).

        There is similarly no statistically significant effect of U.S. bombing intensity on 1999 district

population density in a variety of other samples and specifications, including in former North Vietnam

and South Vietnam, in rural areas (districts with baseline 1960-1 population density less than 200 per

km2), when province fixed effects are included, and using alternative measures of bombing intensity




                                                                                                               19
(regressions not shown). The estimated effect of bombing is positive for urban areas in some

specifications but the result is not robust (regressions not shown).

        We next trace out effects on population density over time from 1985 to 2000. Using data from

Vietnamese Statistical Yearbooks, we find no effect of bombing intensity on population density in 1985

(Table 9, Panel A). We also find no effects on province population density growth rates from 1985 to

2000 (Panel B). So unlike for consumption, there is no evidence of population “catch-up” growth.

Moreover, as was the case for 1999 population, there is no statistically significant effect of U.S. bombing

on province population density in any year from 1985 to 2000 (results not shown). This suggests that if

there were any population movements into the more heavily bombed regions after the war, they must

have occurred prior to 1985. Unfortunately, disaggregated population figures, as well as other official

demographic and economic measures, are incomplete for the postwar 1970s and early 1980s, preventing

us from extending this analysis back to the immediate postwar period. Thus it remains possible that there

were in fact short run local war effects on population that had dissipated by the mid 1980s.

        It is theoretically possible that this lack of postwar population density effects is due to large

postwar inflows of migrants into the heavily bombed districts, but while we cannot rule this out, nor do

we find any compelling evidence that this is in fact the case. Using the 1997/8 VLSS data, U.S. bombing

intensity does not have a robust statistically significant effect on the proportion of individuals not born in

their current village of residence (Table 9, Panel C), although the point estimate is positive and marginally

statistically significant in one specification (excluding Quang Tri province, regression 2).



6. Why No Long-run Local Impact?

Why does the most intense bombing campaign in human history seemingly have no adverse local

economic consequences 25 years later? There are a variety of explanations, based on our empirical

analysis as well as our reading of the historical literature. First, much U.S. bombing targeted South

Vietnam with the purpose of impeding the progress of enemy troops (both North Vietnamese Army and

Vietcong/NLF guerrillas) and took place in rural areas (Tilford 1991: 105-6). These areas had little fixed


                                                                                                            20
infrastructure to destroy, and instead bombing often led to the destruction of forest and farmland, much of

which could be expected to recover naturally over time. Even U.S. military planners recognized early in

the war that “the agrarian nature of the [Vietnamese] economy precludes an economic collapse as a result

of the bombing” (Pentagon Papers 1972: 232).

        The North Vietnamese also employed a variety of ingenious strategies to limit the damage to the

physical infrastructure that did exist. First of all, some industrial operations were dispersed across

multiple sites (Kamps 2001: 70). Second, according to Tilford (1991: 112) “[r]oads (such as they were)

were quickly repaired. Bridges were bombed often but, in addition to being difficult to hit, were easily

bypassed with dirt fords, underwater bridges, and pontoon bridges.” In North Vietnam up to half a million

people worked full time during the conflict rebuilding infrastructure destroyed by U.S. bombing (Herring

2002: 176).

        There was also a major Vietnamese government reconstruction effort after the war, with massive

mobilization of labor and resources to rebuild damaged infrastructure and de-mine the countryside (World

Bank 2002). Although we lack district-level investment data for the postwar period, Vietnamese

government yearbooks contain information on total state investment by province during the period 1976-

1985. For 1985 alone we are able to construct per capita state investment figures (complete province

population data is only available to us for 1985), and we find that provinces that were more heavily

bombed during the war did in fact receive somewhat greater postwar state investments (in millions of

1985 Dong per capita): in a specification analogous to Table 6, column 1, the point estimate on total U.S.

bombing intensity is 0.0113 (standard error 0.0071, regression not shown), and this effect is nearly

statistically significant at 90% confidence. This is a large effect: going from zero to average province

level bombing intensity leads to an increase of 1.5 standard deviations in per capita investment. Similarly,

over the entire period 1976-1985, the ratio of state investment flows for provinces above the median in

terms of U.S. bombing relative to provinces below median bombing is 2.0. In other words, the more

heavily bombed provinces received twice as much state investment as other provinces on average. As one

can see in Figure 4, this ratio increases rapidly after 1980, with the end of armed conflict with China and


                                                                                                           21
the complete occupation of Cambodia, suggesting that the reallocation of state investment across regions

became stronger when more resources were available. These patterns provide further evidence that the

Vietnamese government made significant efforts to allocate additional resources to the more heavily

bombed regions. This may explain some of the gains in infrastructure and may have also laid the

foundation for the rapid catch-up growth in consumption discussed above.

        In terms of population, the displacement caused by bombing seems to have been mostly

temporary. Vietnamese communities developed elaborate responses to avoid injury during periods of

intense U.S. bombing, including hiding for extended periods in well provisioned bomb shelters and in

underground tunnels – thousands of miles of which were built during the war – while others fled

temporarily before returning to rebuild (Herring 2002: 174-176).

        Finally, despite the war, large-scale school expansion and literacy campaigns were carried out

during the 1960s and 1970s, especially in North Vietnam, where promoting literacy was a central social

goal of the regime (Ngo 2004). Since school infrastructure was vulnerable to U.S. bombing, teachers and

students dispersed into small groups to avoid strikes, and schools often had foxholes and helmets for

students’ protection during U.S. attacks (Duiker 1995, Nguyen Khac Vien 1981).



7. Conclusion

We found no robust long run impacts of U.S. bombing on local poverty rates, consumption levels, or

population density in Vietnam over 25 years after the end of the “American War”. If anything, the bulk of

the empirical results point to moderate reductions in long-run poverty and somewhat better electricity

access in the areas hit by more U.S. bombing, as well as faster consumption growth during the 1990s.

Given that the bombing of Vietnam was the most intense episode of bombing in world history, this is

perhaps a surprising result. There is evidence of substantial reallocation of Vietnamese government

resources towards the regions that were more heavily bombed, and this can plausibly explain at least part

of the absence of long run local impacts.




                                                                                                         22
        As discussed above, our econometric approach compares more heavily bombed areas to other

areas and thus cannot estimate any nation-wide effects of the war on Vietnamese economic development.

The counterfactual – national Vietnamese economic outcomes in the absence of war – is impossible to

reconstruct. If the regions not greatly affected by the war assisted the more heavily bombed regions

through postwar resource transfers, as our state investment data suggest, then differences between the

more and less heavily bombed areas would be dampened but overall Vietnamese living standards could

still have fallen. In that case, the actual aggregate effects of U.S. bombing on long run Vietnamese

economic performance would be more negative than our estimates imply. Using the case of nearby

Southeast Asian countries that did not suffer during the “American War” (e.g., Malaysia and Thailand) as

a convenient counterfactual suggests that income levels in Vietnam could possibly be much higher today.

        On the other hand, the war undoubtedly fostered a strong sense of Vietnamese nationalism and

accelerated the development of capable North Vietnamese institutions, and both of these effects may have

contributed to faster postwar recovery. The legacy of the war has clearly not prevented Vietnam from

achieving rapid economic growth: Vietnamese growth in GDP per capita has recently been among the

fastest in the world, at 6% per year between 1993 and 2003 (World Bank 2004), following the reforms of

the 1980s and 1990s.

        Caution is called for, however, in drawing broader lessons regarding war’s impacts on economic

growth in general. Whether U.S. bombing impacts would have been more persistent in Vietnam in the

absence of this remarkable recent growth performance is an open question. Unlike many other poor

countries, postwar Vietnam benefited from strong, centralized political institutions able to mobilize

human and material resources in the reconstruction effort. Countries with successful postwar recovery

experiences are also probably more likely to collect the sort of systematic economic data that make this

study (as well as Davis and Weinstein 2002 and Brakman et al. 2004) possible. This may lead to a serious

form of selection bias: countries where the economy and institutions have collapsed after wars (e.g.,

Democratic Republic of Congo or Somalia) lack such data, preventing the estimation of any persistent

local war impacts in those societies.


                                                                                                           23
        Vietnam also emerged successfully from war out of a long struggle for national liberation9 against

a series of foreign occupiers (first the French, then the Japanese briefly, and finally the United States), an

experience that provided its postwar leaders considerable nationalist political legitimacy. In contrast, the

bulk of wars in the world today are internal civil conflicts, which may exacerbate political and social

divisions and weaken national institutions rather than strengthen them. Some recent research suggests that

the low-level civil conflict in the Basque region of Spain has significantly reduced economic growth there

relative to neighboring regions (Abadie and Gardeazabal 2003), for example. Collins and Margo (2004)

find that the physically destructive U.S. race riots of the 1960s had lingering effects on the average local

income of African Americans up to twenty years later. The world’s most conflict prone region today is

Sub-Saharan Africa, where state institutions are notoriously weak (Herbst 2000). In such a setting,

postwar reconstruction may drag on far longer than in Vietnam (or in Japan, where postwar political

institutions were also strong) leading to more persistent adverse legacies of war. Due to the uniqueness of

each society’s institutions, politics, and history, in our view further empirical evidence accumulated

across a variety of cases is needed before general claims about the effects of war on long run economic

performance can be made.




9
 The conflict in Vietnam was a combination of a war of national liberation and a civil conflict between the North
and the South, but the political rhetoric of the victorious North usually emphasized the former.


                                                                                                                    24
References

   Abadie, Alberto, and J. Gardeazabal. (2003). “The Economic Costs of Conflict: A Case Study of the
Basque Country”, American Economic Review, 93(1), 112-132.
   Azariadis, Costas, and Allan Drazen. (1990). “Threshold Externalities in Economic Development”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105(2), 501-526.
    Banens, Maks. (1999). “Vietnam: a Reconstitution of its 20th Century Population History.”
Quantitative Economic History of Vietnam 1900-1990: An International Workshop. Bassino, Jean-Pascal,
Jean-Dominique Giacometti, and Konosuke Odaka (eds.). Institute of Economic Research: Hitotsubashi
University.
   Barro, Robert J., and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. (2003). Economic Growth (Second Edition). MIT Press:
Cambridge MA.
   Brakman, Steven, Harry Garretsen and Marc Schramm (2004). “The Strategic Bombing of Cities in
Germany in World War II and it Impact on City Growth”, Journal of Economic Geography 4(1): 1-18.
   Carter, G. A. and J.W. Ellis, Jr. 1976. User's Guide to Southeast Asia Combat Data. R-1815-ARPA.
Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation.
    Clodfelter, Mark. (1989). Limits of Air Power. New York: Free Press.
   Clodfelter, Michael. (1995). Vietnam in Military Statistics: A History of the Indochina Wars, 1772-
1991. Jefferson, NC: McFarland.
   Collins, William J., and Robert A. Margo. (2004). “The Labor Market Effects of the 1960s Riots”,
Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs, vol. 2004, 1-46.

   Conley, Timothy. (1999). “GMM estimation with cross sectional dependence,” Journal of
Econometrics, 92(1), 1-45.
   Doleman, Edgar C., Jr. (1984). Tools of War. Boston: Boston Publishing Company.
    Davis, Donald, and David Weinstein. (2002). “Bones, Bombs, and Break Points: The Geography of
Economic Activity”, American Economic Review, 92(5), 1269-1289.
    Drèze, Jean. (2000). “Militarism, Development and Democracy”, Economic and Political Weekly,
April, 1171-1183.
    Duiker, William. (1995). Sacred War: Nationalism and Revolution in a Divided Vietnam. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
    Elbers, C., J. Lanjouw and P. Lanjouw. (2003). “Micro-Level Estimation of Poverty and Inequality.”
Econometrica, 71 (1), 355-364.
    Federation of American Scientists (FAS) (2004). United States Weapons Systems. Retrieved 8/04/04
from: http://www.fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/index.html.
   General Statistical Office. (1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1997, 1998, 2000, 2001). Vietnam Statistical
Yearbook. Statistical Publishing House, Hanoi.
   General Statistical Office. (2000). Vietnam Living Standards Survey 1997-1998. Statistical Publishing
House, Hanoi.
   Gilchrist, Simon, and John C. Williams. (2004). “Transition Dynamics in Vintage Capital Models:
Explaining the Postwar Catch-up of Germany and Japan”, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Working Paper #2004-14.
   Gilster, Herman L. (1993). The Air War in Southeast Asia: Case Studies of Selected Campaigns.
Maxwell Air Force Base, AL: Air University Press.


                                                                                                         25
    Grolier. (1995). Grolier Multimedia Encyclopedia, Danbury CT: Grolier.
    Herring, George C. (2002). America’s Longest War: The United States and Vietnam, 1950-1975
(Fourth Edition), McGraw-Hill: Boston.
    Kalyvas, Stathis, and Matthew Kocher. (2003). “Violence and Control in Civil War: An Analysis of
the Hamlet Evaluation System (HES)”, unpublished working paper, University of Chicago.
    Kamps, Charles Tustin. (2001). “The JCS 94-Target List: A Vietnam Myth That Still Distorts
Military Thought.” Aerospace Power Journal. 15(1): 67-80. (http://www.airpower.maxwell.af.mil)
    Keyssar, Alexander. (2000). The Right to Vote: The Contested History of Democracy in the United
States. New York: Basic Books.
    Knight, Malcolm , Loayza, Norman and Delano Vilanueva (1996) “The peace dividend: military
spending cuts and economic growth” World Bank Policy research Working Papers.
    Littauer, Raphael and Norman Uphoff (Editors) (1972). The Air War in Indochina. Revised Edition.
Boston: Beacon Press.
    Miguel, Edward, Shanker Satyanath, and Ernest Sergenti. (2004). “Economic Shocks and Civil
Conflict: An Instrumental Variables Approach”, Journal of Political Economy, 112(4), 725-753.
    Minot, Nicholas, Bob Baulch, and Michael Epprecht. (2003). Poverty and inequality in Vietnam:
Spatial patterns and geographic determinants. International Food Policy Research Institute and Institute
of Development Studies.
    Momyer, William W. (1978). Air Power in Three Wars. Washington, DC: Dept. of Defense, Dept. of
the Air Force.
    Mrozek, Donald J. (1989). Air Power and the Ground War in Vietnam. Washington, DC: Pergamon-
Brassey's International Defense Publishers.
    Nalty, Bernard C. (2000). Air War Over South Vietnam: 1968-1975. Washington, DC: United States
Air Force.
   National Institute of Statistics. (1959-1965). Statistical Yearbook of Vietnam. Vols. 8-12. Saigon.
   Ngo, Thi Minh. (2004). “Education and Agricultural Productivity in Vietnam”, unpublished working
paper, LSE.
   Nguyen Khac Vien. (1981). Contemporary Vietnam (1858-1980). Edited by R. River. Hanoi: Foreign
Language Publishing House.
   Nichols, John B. & Barrett Tillman. (1987). On Yankee Station: The Naval Air War Over Vietnam.
Annapolis: Naval Institute Press.
    Ordnance Shop (2004). Weapons. Retrieved August 4, 2004 from the World Wide Web:
http://www.ordnance.org/weapons.htm.
    Organski, A.F.K., and Jacek Kugler. (1977). “The Costs of Major Wars: The Phoenix Factor”,
American Political Science Review, 71(4), 1347-1366.
    Organski, A.F.K., and Jacek Kugler. (1980). The War Ledger, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
    Parsch, Andreas (2003). Designations of U.S. Aeronautical and Support Equipment. Retrieved
8/04/04 from: http://www.designation-systems.net/usmilav/aerosupport.html.
    Pentagon Papers: The Defense Department History of United States Decisionmaking on Vietnam
(1972). Gravel Ed. Vol. 4. Boston: Beacon Press.
    Project RENEW Report. (2004). “A Study of Knowledge-Awareness-Practices to the Danger of
Postwar Landmines/Unexploded Ordnance and Accidents in Quang Tri Province, Vietnam”
(www.vietnam-landmines.org).




                                                                                                      26
   Przeworski, Adam, Michael E. Alvarez, Jose Antonio Cheibub, and Fernando Limongi. (2000).
Democracy and Development: Political Institutions and Wellbeing in the World 1950-1990. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
    Schamel, Charles E., comp. 1996. “A Finding Aid to Records Relating to American Prisoners of War
and Missing in Action from the Vietnam War Era, 1960-1994.” Records Information Paper 90.
Washington, DC: National Archives and Records Administration.
   Schlight, John. (1988). War in South Vietnam: the Years of the Offensive, 1965-1968. Washington,
DC: Office of Air Force History, US Air Force.
   Smith, John T. (1998). Linebacker Raids: the Bombing of North Vietnam. Wellington House, London:
Arms & Armour Press.
    Smith, John T. (1994) Rolling Thunder: The American Strategic Bombing Campaign Against North
Vietnam, 1964-68. Walton on Thames, Surrey, England: Air Research Publications.
   Smith, Tom. 2001. “Southeast Asia Air Combat Data.” DISAM Journal, 24 (Winter): 19-20.
(www.disam.dsca.mil)
    Stellman, Jeanne Mager, Steven D. Stellman, Tracy Webber, Carrie Tomassallo, Andrew B.
Stellman, and Richard Christian, Jr. (2003). “A Geographic Information System for Characterizing
Exposure to Agent Orange and Other Herbicides in Vietnam”, Environmental Health Perspectives,
111(3), 321-328.
   Strauss, John, and Duncan Thomas. (1998). “Health, Nutrition, and Economic Development,”
Journal of Economic Literature, 36(2), 766-817.
   Tilford, Earl H., Jr. (1991). Setup: What the Air Force Did in Vietnam and Why. Maxwell Air Force
Base, AL: Air University Press.
    Tilly, Charles. (1975). The Formation of National States in Western Europe. Princeton University
Press: Princeton.
    United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) (2004). Vietnam Country Profile. Retrieved 8/04/04
from: http://www.mineaction.org/countries/countries_overview.cfm?country_id=826.
    World Bank. (2002). Vietnam Development Report 2002: Implementing Reforms for Faster Growth
and Poverty Reduction. World Bank: Hanoi.

   World Bank. (2003). Breaking the Conflict Trap: Civil War and Development Policy. World Bank:
Washington, DC.




                                                                                                       27
 Figure 1: Map of Vietnam – 10% of districts with the highest total
         U.S. bombs, missiles, and rockets per km2 shaded




                                         Hanoi / Haiphong region




17o North latitude
                                               Quang Tri Province




                                            Saigon (Ho Chi Minh City) region




                                                                               28
Figure 2: Map of Vietnam – Total U.S. bombs, missiles, and rockets per km2
        (20 quantiles, darker colors denote higher intensity districts)




                                                                             29
                             Figure 3: 1999 estimated district poverty rate vs.
                       Total U.S. bombs, missiles, and rockets per km2 in the district
      (conditional on 1960-61 province population density, South Vietnam indicator, district average
                 temperature, average precipitation, elevation, soil controls, and latitude)
              .4




                                            Quang Tri
                                                                                     Quang Tri
        -.2 -5.55e-17 .2




                                                                                            Quang Tri
                                                                                     Quang Tri
   Residuals/Fitted values




                                                                     Quang Tri


                                                               Quang Tri
                                                                 Quang Tri


                                                                                               Quang Tri
-.4           -.6




                             -200       0                          200                         400
                                                   Residuals
                                    Residuals                  Fitted values




                                                                                                        30
                                    Figure 4: State investment 1976-1985,
         ratio of more heavily bombed (above median) to less heavily bombed (below median) provinces
                                3       2.5
                   Ratio Above/Below Median
State investment

                   1.5         21




                                              76   78   80          82              84                 86
                                                             Year




                                                                                                       31
                                                      Table 1: Summary statistics – U.S. ordnance data
                                                                             Mean        S.D.       Max.         Obs.         Correlation
                                                                                                                             with general
                                                                                                                            purpose bombs
                      Panel A: District level data
                      Total U.S. bombs, missiles, and rockets per km2        32.3        68.5       561.5        584
                      Total U.S. bombs, missiles, and rockets               14692       37349      365449        584
                         General purpose bombs                              11124       30779      322111        584               1
                         Cluster bombs                                       706         2268       32403        584            0.59***
                         Missiles                                            24.7       121.7        1600        584            0.27***
                         Rockets                                            2828         7208      106445        584            0.64***
                      Cannon artillery                                        8.6        51.9        772         584            0.37***
                      Incendiaries                                           795        16431       11667        584            0.65***
                      White phosphorus                                       70.7       306.6        3580        584            0.27***
                      Ammunition (000’s of rounds)                          5677        11061      136416        584            0.54***

                      Panel B: Province level data
                      Total U.S. bombs, missiles, and rockets per km2        30.6        51.7       335.5         55

Notes: The summary statistics are not weighted by population. The minimum value is zero for all variables at the district level, and thus we do not present this in
the table. The sample throughout excludes Quang Tri district (one district within Quang Tri province), which has by far the highest total U.S. bombs, missiles,
and rockets intensity per km2, at 3148; this outlier is excluded from the analysis throughout. Significant at 90 (*), 95 (**), 99 (***) percent confidence.




                                                                                                                                                                32
                                   Table 2: Summary statistics – economic, demographic, climatic, and geographic data
                                                                                                 Mean       S.D.       Min.       Max.        Obs.
                  Panel A: District level data
                  Estimated district poverty rate, 1999                                          0.41       0.20        0.03      0.94        584
                  Population density, 1999                                                       1659       5846         10       2332        584
                  Proportion of households with access to electricity, 1999                      0.71       0.27        0.08        1         584
                  Literacy rate, 1999                                                            0.88       0.11        0.24      0.99        584
                  Proportion of land area 250-500m                                               0.11       0.19          0         1         584
                  Proportion of land area 500-1000m                                              0.11       0.21          0         1         584
                  Proportion of land area over 1000m                                             0.03       0.11          0         1         584
                  Total district land area (km2)                                                  529       513           4       3230        584
                  Average precipitation (cm)                                                     154.6      30.1        84.2      282.0       584
                  Average temperature (celsius)                                                  24.3        1.9        19.4      27.3        584
                  Former South Vietnam                                                           0.49       0.50          0         1         584
                  Latitude (oN)                                                                  18.0        5.2        9.7       25.4        584
                  | Latitude – 17oN |                                                             4.9        2.0        0.0        8.4        584

                  Panel B: Province level data
                  Population density (province), 1960-61                                          244        437        12        2868         55
                  Population density, 1985                                                        401        533        34        3196         53
                  Population density, 1999                                                        465        540        62        2908         55
                  Change in population density, 1985-2000                                        77.7       154.5     -439.4      745.1        53
                  Proportion not born in current village, 1997/98                                0.26       0.23         0          1          55
                  Per capita consumption expenditures, 1992/93 (in 1998 Dong)                    1831        591        997       3546         55
                  Per capita consumption expenditures, 2002 (in 1998 Dong)                       3084       1007       2040       7505         55
                  Growth in per capita consumption expenditures 1992/93-2002                     0.74       0.38       -0.08      1.67         55
                  Latitude (oN)                                                                  17.6        5.4       10.0       25.2         55
                  | Latitude – 17oN |                                                             5.0        2.0        0.3        8.1         55

Notes: The summary statistics are not weighted by population. District latitude is assessed at the district centroid, and province latitude is the average of the
district latitudes, weighted by district land area.




                                                                                                                                                                    33
                                                              Table 3: Predicting bombing intensity
                                                                                                   Dependent variable:
                                                                                    Total U.S. bombs, missiles, and rockets per km2
                                                                                    (1)              (2)            (3)           (4)
                              | Latitude – 17oN |                               -14.8***         -17.0***       -10.2***         -27.8
                                                                                  (5.3)            (6.0)          (2.2)         (16.2)
                              Population density (province), 1960-61            0.0050          -0.0035**     -0.0034**         -.163*
                                                                               (0.0043)         (0.0016)       (0.0014)        (0.083)
                              Former South Vietnam                              -138.5*           -134.5          -37.1         -171.3
                                                                                 (74.9)           (87.2)         (27.7)        (118.8)
                              Proportion of land area 250-500m                    89.5*            -27.6         -26.6*        -104.5*
                                                                                 (47.1)           (20.5)         (14.2)         (54.9)
                              Proportion of land area 500-1000m                   -49.6            -17.7          -10.5          -52.2
                                                                                 (65.3)           (18.9)         (16.8)         (31.8)
                              Proportion of land area over 1000m                 156.3*             -6.0          -19.8          -50.6
                                                                                 (81.4)           (30.4)         (19.1)         (31.2)
                              Average precipitation (cm)                          0.26             0.22           0.15*          0.09
                                                                                 (0.17)           (0.18)         (0.08)         (0.31)
                              Average temperature (celsius)                       15.2              -0.2           -0.6           7.6
                                                                                  (0.8)            (4.4)          (3.6)          (5.6)
                              Latitude (oN)                                        -8.7            -10.0           -2.3          -15.5
                                                                                  (6.3)            (7.1)          (2.6)         (12.9)

                              District soil controls                            No               Yes             Yes            Yes
                              Exclude Quang Tri province                        No                No             Yes             No
                              Central Region sample                             No                No             No             Yes
                              Observations                                       55              584             576            229
                              R2                                               0.54              0.33           0.25            0.43
                              Mean (s.d.) dependent variable                30.6 (51.7)       32.3 (68.5)    27.1 (50.6)    56.7 (91.0)
Notes: Ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions. Robust Huber-White standard errors in parentheses. Significant at 90(*), 95(**), 99(***) percent confidence.
Disturbance terms are clustered at the province level in regressions 2-4. The district soil type controls include the proportion of district land in 18 different soil
categories. The omitted altitude category is 0-250m.

The Central Region includes the following provinces: Ba Ria, Binh Dinh, Binh Duong, Binh Phuoc, Binh Thuan, Dak Lak, Dong Nai, Gia Lai, Ha Tinh, Khanh
Hoa, Kon Tum, Lam Dong, Nghe An, Ninh Thuan, Phu Yen, Quang Binh, Quang Nam, Quang Ngai, Quang Tri, Tay Ninh, Thanh Hoa, and Thuathien-Hue, and
excludes Da Nang (City) and Ho Chi Minh (City).




                                                                                                                                                                         34
                                               Table 4: Local bombing impacts on estimated 1999 poverty rate
                                                                                     Dependent variable: Estimated poverty rate, 1999
                                                             OLS             OLS            OLS               OLS              OLS             OLS         IV-2SLS
                                                              (1)             (2)            (3)               (4)              (5)             (6)             (7)
    Total U.S. bombs, missiles, and rockets per km2      -0.00087*       -0.00040*      -0.00065***      -0.00079***        -0.00017                        0.00026
                                                         (0.00048)       (0.00022)       (0.00012)        (0.00016)        (0.00019)                       (0.00042)
    Population density (province), 1960-61 (÷100)        -0.0089***      -0.0021**                         -0.0023**          -0.013        -0.0021**       -0.0020*
                                                          (0.0016)        (0.0009)                         (0.0010)          (0.010)        (0.0010)        (0.0010)
    Former South Vietnam                                  -0.317***       -0.174**                          -0.122*           -0.005         -0.139**         -0.104
                                                           (0.087)         (0.071)                          (0.071)          (0.047)         (0.058)         (0.082)
    Proportion of land area 250-500m                      0.341***        0.339***        0.182***          0.325***         0.285***        0.342***       0.349***
                                                           (0.096)         (0.070)        (0.067)           (0.069)          (0.111)         (0.070)         (0.073)
    Proportion of land area 500-1000m                      0.386**        0.261***        0.157**           0.261***         0.161**         0.253***       0.257***
                                                           (0.172)         (0.052)        (0.062)           (0.053)          (0.064)         (0.054)         (0.055)
    Proportion of land area over 1000m                     0.571**          -0.048         -0.001            -0.066          -0.187**         -0.044          -0.043
                                                           (0.231)         (0.113)        (0.159)           (0.111)          (0.086)         (0.120)         (0.116)
    Average precipitation (cm)                            0.00027        0.00111***       0.00060         0.00110***        0.00070*        0.00068*        0.00063
                                                         (0.00044)       (0.00035)       (0.00046)        (0.00033)        (0.00036)       (0.00038)       (0.00044)
    Average temperature (celsius)                           0.033           -0.012         -0.034            -0.013          -0.0373         -0.0143        -0.0143
                                                           (0.029)         (0.019)        (0.022)           (0.020)         (0.0219)        (0.0196)        (0.0199)
    Latitude (oN)                                          -0.0127         -0.0088         0.038            -0.0044         0.0211**         -0.0051        -0.0025
                                                          (0.0108)        (0.0088)        (0.026)          (0.0088)         (0.0092)        (0.0081)        (0.0100)
    | Latitude – 17oN |                                                                                                                      -0.0044
                                                                                                                                            (0.0069)
    District soil controls                                    No             Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes
    Province fixed effects                                    No              No            Yes                No               No              No              No
    Exclude Quang Tri province                                No              No             No               Yes               No              No              No
    Central Region sample                                     No              No             No                No              Yes              No              No
    Observations                                              55             584            584               576              229             584             584
    R2                                                       0.75            0.61           0.79              0.63             0.72            0.60              -
    Mean (s.d.) dependent variable                        0.39 (0.16)    0.41 (0.20)    0.41 (0.20)       0.41 (0.20)     0.43 (0.20)     0.41 (0.20)     0.41 (0.20)
Notes: Robust Huber-White standard errors in parentheses. Significant at 90(*), 95(**), 99(***) percent confidence. Disturbance terms are clustered at the
province level in regressions 2-8. The district soil type controls include the proportion of district land in 18 different soil categories. The omitted altitude category
is 0-250m. The instrumental variable in regression 7 is | Latitude – 17oN |.




                                                                                                                                                                     35
                               Table 5: Local bombing impacts on estimated 1999 poverty rate – alternative specifications
                                                                                             Dependent variable: Estimated poverty rate, 1999
                                                                          Ex-North        Ex-South        Rural:         Urban:       All Vietnam       All Vietnam
                                                                          Vietnam          Vietnam    1960-1 pop. 1960-1 pop.
                                                                                                        density <       density ≥
                                                                                                      200 per km2 200 per km2
                                                                             (1)              (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)               (6)
 Total U.S. bombs, missiles, and rockets per km2                         -0.00051**       -0.00009      -0.00021       -0.00088**     -0.00114***
                                                                         (0.00020)        (0.00025)     (0.00021)      (0.00017)       (0.00033)
 (Total U.S. bombs, missiles, and rockets per km2)2 (÷100)                                                                             0.00019***
                                                                                                                                       (0.00006)
 Top 10% districts, total U.S. bombs, missiles, and rockets per km2                                                                                            -0.030
                                                                                                                                                              (0.026)
 District demographic, geographic, soil controls                              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
 Observations                                                                 300             284              409             175              584             584
 R2                                                                           0.70           0.66              0.60            0.65             0.62            0.60
 Mean (s.d.) dependent variable                                            0.46 (0.20)    0.35 (0.18)      0.46 (0.19)      0.29 (0.16)     0.41 (0.20)     0.41 (0.20)
Notes: Ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions. Robust Huber-White standard errors in parentheses. Significant at 90(*), 95(**), 99(***) percent confidence.
Disturbance terms are clustered at the province level. District demographic and geographic controls include Population density (province) 1960-61, Former South
Vietnam, Proportion of land area 250-500m, Proportion of land area 500-1000m, Proportion of land area over 1000m, Average precipitation (cm), Average
temperature (celsius), and Latitude (oN). The district soil type controls include the proportion of district land in 18 different soil categories. The omitted altitude
category is 0-250m.




                                                                                                                                                                   36
                                 Table 6: Local war impacts on consumption expenditures and growth (VLSS data)
                                                                                           OLS            OLS           OLS            OLS
                                                                                           (1)             (2)          (3)             (4)
           Panel A: Dependent variable: 2002 per capita consumption expenditures
           Total U.S. bombs, missiles, and rockets per km2                                  2.4           5.3           -1.4
                                                                                           (1.7)         (3.4)          (1.6)
           | Latitude – 17oN |                                                                                                          3.3
                                                                                                                                      (54.5)
           Exclude Quang Tri province                                                      No            Yes             No             No
           Central Region sample                                                           No             No            Yes             No
           Observations                                                                    55             54             20             55
           R2                                                                             0.61           0.62           0.69           0.60
           Mean (s.d.) dependent variable                                              3084 (1007)    3092 (1014)    2898 (689)     3084 (1007)
           Panel B: Dependent variable: 1992/93 per capita consumption expenditures
           Total U.S. bombs, missiles, and rockets per km2                                 -1.5           -2.0          -1.1
                                                                                           (1.0)         (2.2)          (0.7)
           | Latitude – 17oN |                                                                                                         53.9
                                                                                                                                      (48.1)
           Exclude Quang Tri province                                                       No           Yes             No             No
           Central Region sample                                                            No            No            Yes             No
           Observations                                                                     55            54             20             55
           R2                                                                              0.46          0.44           0.59           0.47
           Mean (s.d.) dependent variable                                               1831 (591)    1847 (585)     1773 (583)     1831 (591)
           Panel C: Dependent variable: Growth in consumption, 1992/93-2002
           Total U.S. bombs, missiles, and rockets per km2                              0.0030***       0.0036**        0.0015
                                                                                        (0.0007)        (0.0017)       (0.0010)
           | Latitude – 17oN |                                                                                                            -0.057**
                                                                                                                                          (0.028)
           Exclude Quang Tri province                                                          No             Yes             No             No
           Central Region sample                                                               No             No             Yes             No
           Observations                                                                        55             54              20             55
           R2                                                                                 0.47           0.41            0.56           0.41
           Mean (s.d.) dependent variable                                                  0.74 (0.38)    0.72 (0.37)    0.73 (0.46)    0.74 (0.38)
Notes: Robust Huber-White standard errors in parentheses. Significant at 90(*), 95(**), 99(***) percent confidence. All regressions contain controls for
Population density (province) 1960-61, Former South Vietnam, Proportion of land area 250-500m, Proportion of land area 500-1000m, Proportion of land area
over 1000m, Average precipitation (cm), Average temperature (celsius), and Latitude (oN). The omitted altitude category is 0-250m.




                                                                                                                                                        37
                                               Table 7: Local war impacts on infrastructure and human capital
                                                                     OLS            OLS           OLS           OLS            OLS           OLS         IV-2SLS
                                                                     (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)             (5)          (6)            (7)
   Panel A: Dependent variable:
   Proportion of households with access to electricity, 1999
   Total U.S. bombs, missiles, and rockets per km2                0.00168***     0.00036***     0.00025       0.00043**      0.00025*                     0.0019**
                                                                  (0.00055)      (0.00012)     (0.00016)      (0.00017)     (0.00013)                     (0.0009)
   | Latitude – 17oN |                                                                                                                     -0.033***
                                                                                                                                            (0.009)
   District soil controls                                             No           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes
   Province fixed effects                                             No            No            Yes            No            No             No            No
   Exclude Quang Tri province                                         No            No             No           Yes            No             No            No
   Central Region sample                                              No            No             No            No           Yes             No            No
   Observations                                                       55           584            584           576           229             584          584
   R2                                                                0.59          0.57           0.75          0.57          0.62           0.58            -
   Mean (s.d.) dependent variable                                 0.72 (0.21)   0.71 (0.27)    0.71 (0.27)   0.71 (0.27)   0.67 (0.26)    0.71 (0.27)   0.71 (0.27)

   Panel B: Dependent variable:
   Proportion of literate respondents, 1999
   Total U.S. bombs, missiles, and rockets per km2                  0.00005       0.00003       0.00009       0.00012**      -0.00003                     0.00041
                                                                   (0.00012)     (0.00006)     (0.00006)      (0.00006)     (0.00006)                    (0.00037)
   | Latitude – 17oN |                                                                                                                        -0.0070
                                                                                                                                             (0.0052)
    District soil controls                                               No            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes
    Province fixed effects                                               No             No            Yes            No            No            No          No
    Exclude Quang Tri province                                           No             No             No           Yes            No            No          No
    Central Region sample                                                No             No             No            No           Yes            No          No
    Observations                                                         55            584            584           576           229           584         584
    R2                                                                  0.65           0.59           0.75          0.59          0.55          0.59          -
    Mean (s.d.) dependent variable                                   0.89 (0.07) 0.88 (0.11) 0.88 (0.11) 0.88 (0.11) 0.86 (0.11) 0.88 (0.11) 0.88 (0.11)
Notes: Robust Huber-White standard errors in parentheses. Significant at 90(*), 95(**), 99(***) percent confidence. Disturbance terms are clustered at the
province level in regressions 2-8. All regressions include Population density (province) 1960-61, Former South Vietnam, Proportion of land area 250-500m,
Proportion of land area 500-1000m, Proportion of land area over 1000m, Average precipitation (cm), Average temperature (celsius), and Latitude (oN). The
district soil type controls include the proportion of district land in 18 different soil categories. The omitted altitude category is 0-250m. The instrumental variable
in regression 7 is | Latitude – 17oN |.




                                                                                                                                                                      38
                                                 Table 8: Local bombing impacts on 1999 population density
                                                                                       Dependent variable: Population density, 1999
                                                               OLS             OLS           OLS             OLS           OLS                 OLS          IV-2SLS
                                                                (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)                (6)             (7)
Total U.S. bombs, missiles, and rockets per km2                0.13             2.0          12.4             6.1           -0.1                               -13.9
                                                              (0.49)           (8.9)        (10.9)          (12.5)         (0.6)                              (19.7)
Population density (province), 1960-61                       0.89***           0.66                          0.68        2.21***                 0.67*         0.62
                                                              (0.19)          (0.42)                        (0.42)        (0.43)                (0.40)        (0.45)
 Former South Vietnam                                        282.7*           857.9                         344.4          -81.9               1048.9        -821.7
                                                             (145.2)        (1890.2)                      (1735.1)       (180.5)               (862.8)      (2899.1)
 Proportion of land area 250-500m                           -1332***          -3997         -1416           -3890          -37.4                -3845         -4230
                                                              (426)          (3125)         (1721)         (3133)        (138.5)               (2830)        (3272)
 Proportion of land area 500-1000m                              13            -2164         -1762           -2181         101.9                 -1829         -2075
                                                              (261)          (1661)         (1460)         (1686)        (145.1)               (1370)        (1586)
 Proportion of land area over 1000m                         -1468***          -1264          -111           -1084        327.9**                -1316         -1399
                                                              (489)          (1983)         (1722)         (2014)        (151.8)               (1745)        (1982)
 Average precipitation (cm)                                  -1.27**           -22.7          -9.9           -22.7         -0.79                 -14.1         -11.0
                                                              (0.55)          (15.6)         (9.2)          (15.4)        (1.19)                (11.2)        (10.5)
 Average temperature (celsius)                                 -46.7          767.3          470.0          774.9           77.0                828.0         824.6
                                                              (49.2)         (846.7)       (373.6)         (849.4)        (59.2)               (887.3)       (882.9)
 Latitude (oN)                                                36.9**          103.2        -1317.1           60.4          -29.0                 91.0          -48.1
                                                              (16.5)         (177.5)       (904.5)         (164.4)        (26.3)               (120.2)       (266.0)
 | Latitude – 17oN |                                                                                                                            237.1
                                                                                                                                               (328.6)
 District soil controls                                         No             Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes           Yes
 Province fixed effects                                         No              No             Yes               No               No              No             No
 Exclude Quang Tri province                                     No              No              No              Yes               No              No             No
 Central Region sample                                          No              No              No               No              Yes              No             No
 Observations                                                   55             584             584              576              229              584           584
 R2                                                            0.86            0.16            0.56             0.15             0.52            0.15             -
 Mean (s.d.) dependent variable                             465 (540)      1659 (5846) 1659 (5846) 1678 (5884)               406 (605)       1659 (5846) 1659 (5846)
Notes: Robust Huber-White standard errors in parentheses. Significant at 90(*), 95(**), 99(***) percent confidence. Disturbance terms are clustered at the
province level in regressions 2-8. The district soil type controls include the proportion of district land in 18 different soil categories. The omitted altitude category
is 0-250m. The instrumental variable in regression 7 is | Latitude – 17oN |.




                                                                                                                                                                     39
                                            Table 9: Local war impacts on other population characteristics
                                                                                           OLS            OLS            OLS            OLS
                                                                                           (1)             (2)           (3)             (4)
          Panel A: Dependent variable: Population density, 1985
          Total U.S. bombs, missiles, and rockets per km2                                   -0.18          -0.99         -0.10
                                                                                           (0.58)         (1.15)        (0.24)
          | Latitude – 17oN |                                                                                                          -2.3
                                                                                                                                      (10.4)
          Exclude Quang Tri province                                                        No            Yes             No            No
          Central Region sample                                                             No             No            Yes            No
          Observations                                                                      53             52             20            53
          R2                                                                               0.73           0.73           0.55          0.73
          Mean (s.d.) dependent variable                                                 401 (533)      407 (536)      139 (72)      401 (533)
          Panel B: Dependent variable: Growth in population density, 1985 to 2000
          Total U.S. bombs, missiles, and rockets per km2                                  -0.008         0.090          -0.211
                                                                                          (0.164)        (0.362)        (0.274)
          | Latitude – 17oN |                                                                                                            7.5
                                                                                                                                       (6.5)
          Exclude Quang Tri province                                                         No            Yes            No             No
          Central Region sample                                                              No             No           Yes             No
          Observations                                                                       53             52            20             53
          R2                                                                                0.24           0.24          0.50           0.24
          Mean (s.d.) dependent variable                                                77.7 (154.5)   78.7 (155.8)   59.5 (84.0)   77.7 (154.5)
          Panel C: Dependent variable: 1997/98 proportion not born in current village
          Total U.S. bombs, missiles, and rockets per km2                                 0.00037        0.00127*      -0.00091
                                                                                         (0.00041)      (0.00069)      (0.00066)
          | Latitude – 17oN |                                                                                                               0.006
                                                                                                                                           (0.016)
           Exclude Quang Tri province                                                          No             Yes             No              No
           Central Region sample                                                               No              No            Yes              No
           Observations                                                                        55              54             21              55
           R2                                                                                 0.52            0.43           0.70            0.51
           Mean (s.d.) dependent variable                                                  0.27 (0.23)    0.27 (0.23)     0.34 (0.30)    0.27 (0.23)
Notes: Robust Huber-White standard errors in parentheses. Significant at 90(*), 95(**), 99(***) percent confidence. All regressions contain controls for
Population density (province) 1960-61, Former South Vietnam, Proportion of land area 250-500m, Proportion of land area 500-1000m, Proportion of land area
over 1000m, Average precipitation (cm), Average temperature (celsius), and Latitude (oN). The omitted altitude category is 0-250m.




                                                                                                                                                        40
Appendix Figure 1: Raw DSCA bombing data, Quang Binh province




                                                                41
Appendix Figure 2: Raw DSCA bombing data, Quang Tri province




                                                               42
Data Appendix

(1) U.S. Military data
The bombing data in this paper are derived from the following files, housed at the National Archives in
Record Group 218, “Records of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff”:
Combat Activities File (CACTA)
    • October 1965 – December 1970; November 1967 not available. Monthly. Derived from Combat
        Activities Reports II/III (COACT II/III), detailing daily air combat operations flown by the US
        Navy, Marine Corps, and Pacific Air Forces. Carter et al. (1976) list data cards for Army and
        USMC helicopters as primary input sources.
Southeast Asia Database (SEADAB)
    • January 1970 – June 1975. Daily records of allied air combat activities flown by the US Army,
        Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps, as well as the (South) Vietnamese Air Force, Royal Lao Air
        Force, and Khmer (Cambodian) Air Force. Includes both fixed-wing aircraft and helicopters.
Combat Naval Gunfire File (CONGA)
    • March 1966 – January 1973. Records of naval gunfire support in North and South Vietnam.

     To the best of our knowledge, these data cover all air combat operations flown by all allied forces
involved in the Second Indochina War, including Thai and Australian. Some of the original tape archives
were damaged, so several months of data may be missing.
     The data are geocoded at the district level, employing the codes and boundaries used by the General
Statistical Office in the 1999 Population and Housing census. The air ordnance data are divided into 16
categories by type: ammunition, cannon artillery, chemical, cluster bomb, flare, fuel air explosive, general
purpose (iron bomb), grenade, incendiary, mine, missile, other, rocket, submunition, torpedo, and
unknown. All entries denote number of units, rather than weight, of ordnance expended by district.
Nearly all entries denote single units; most ammunition-class entries denote thousands of units. The naval
gunfire data are divided into approximately forty specific categories.
     Type of ordnance, quantity of ordnance, and drop location were originally recorded by the pilots and
gunners who fired the weapons. Such records were created every time ordnance was expended. The data
were reported to Pacific Command and ultimately the Joint Chiefs, who declassified the CACTA,
SEADAB, CONGA files in 1975, after which they were sent to the National Archives.
     The data were provided by Tom Smith at the Defense Security Cooperation Agency (DSCA), in
cooperation with Michael Sheinkman of the Vietnam Veterans of America Foundation (VVAF). We are
indebted to Tom Smith, Michael Sheinkman, and Bill Shaw A01 (AW) USN (ret.) for their assistance in
understanding the data. VVAF sought and obtained permission from the Technology Center for Bomb
and Mine Disposal (BOMICO), a department of the Engineering Command of the Vietnam Ministry of
Defense to provide us the data.
         Clodfelter (1995: 216-7) summarizes U.S. ordnance: “Most bombs dropped by U.S. aircraft were
either 750-pounders (favored by the U.S. Air Force) or 500-pounders (favored by the U.S. Navy), but
bombs of up to 2,000 pounds and other ordnance of unconventional design and purpose were employed.
Included among America’s air arsenal were antipersonnel bombs whose outer casing opened to release a
string of small warheads along a line of one hundred yards. Some of the other U.S. antipersonnel and
high-explosive bombs were the Lazy Dog, which exploded thirty yards above the ground to release a steel
sleet of hundreds of tiny darts; cluster bombs, which were ejected from large canisters by small explosive
charges after they had penetrated the upper canopy of the forest; and Snake Eyes, which oscillated
earthward under an umbrellalike apparatus that retarded the rate of fall long enough to allow the bombing
aircraft to come in low with its bomb load and then escape the resulting effects of the detonation.” The
following table provides more details.




                                                                                                         43
                        Appendix Table 1: U.S. Ordnance Categories
Ordnance category                                     Description

General purpose bombs      Conventional iron bombs, free-falling and unguided. “These account
                           for the greatest fraction of the total weight of aerial munitions used;
                           they are carried by fighter-bombers, attack bombers, and high-flying
                           strategic bombers (B-52s), and delivered by free fall. ... Weight ranges
                           from 100 pounds to 3000 pounds; most common range is 500-1000
                           pounds; about 50 percent of weight is explosive. The bomb works
                           mostly by blast effect, although shrapnel from the casing is also
                           important. ... The crater from a 500-lb. bomb with impact fuze (e.g.,
                           MK 82) is typically 30 feet in diameter and 15 feet deep (this
                           obviously varies greatly with the terrain). Shrapnel is important over a
                           zone about 200 feet in diameter. Simple shelters (sandbags,
                           earthworks, even bamboo) protect against all but close hits.” (Littauer
                           et al 1972: 222). “The biggest of [the GP bombs] was the 15,000-
                           pound BLU-82B ‘Daisy Cutter’.” (Doleman 1984: 127)

Cluster bombs              Cluster bomb units (CBUs) scatter the submunitions they contain—
                           ranging from under forty to over 600 in number—over a wide area,
                           yielding a much broader destruction radius than conventional iron
                           bombs. The outer casing is “blown open (by compressed gas) above
                           ground level (typically 500-foot altitude), distributing bomblets over
                           an area several hundred feet on a side.” (Littauer et al 1972: 222). In
                           our dataset these are primarily fragmentary general purpose, anti-
                           personnel, and anti-material weapons, and occasionally tear gas or
                           smoke, ranging in total bomb weight from 150 to over 800 lbs.

Missiles                   Self-guided air-deployed munitions. Includes self-propelled air-to-air
                           and air-to-ground missiles (that typically hone in on radiation from
                           engines or radar) as well as free-fall “smart bombs” (guided toward
                           their targets by laser reflection or electro-optical imaging, e.g., AGM-
                           62 “Walleye”). “The most important anti-radiation air-to-ground
                           missiles used by the U.S. forces in Vietnam were the AGM-45 Shrike
                           and AGM-78 Standard ARM. Radar-directed like the Sparrow, the
                           Shrike was carried by navy and air force jets, including the Wild
                           Weasels. Its purpose was to knock out the ground radar stations that
                           controlled the deadly SAMs and radar-guided anti-aircraft guns.”
                           (Doleman 1984: 125).

Rockets                    Self-propelled unguided munitions. “The most common size is 2.75"
                           diameter, delivered singly or in bursts from tubes mounted under the
                           aircraft. Accuracy of delivery is generally higher than for free-fall
                           weapons. Warheads include fragmentation (flechette), high explosive
                           (including shaped charge against armored vehicles), and incendiary
                           action (most white phosphorus or plasticized white phosphorus, PWP).
                           Phosphorus may be used as anti-personnel weapon, but also serves to
                           generate white smoke (often for target designation for further strikes).”
                           (Littauer et al 1972: 223)



                                                                                                     44
Cannon artillery                 High-velocity projectiles too large to be labeled ‘Ammunition’.
                                 Chiefly, high explosive shells from 105mm Howitzers. (Sources:
                                 personal communication with Bill Shaw, 4/16/04)

Incendiaries / white             Napalm fire bombs and white phosphorus smoke bombs (<5%). Total
phosphorus                       fire bomb weights range from 250lb to 750lb, containing between 33-
                                 100 gallons of combustible napalm gel. Napalm was primarily
                                 successful as a wide-area anti-personnel weapon: “Most effective
                                 against entrenched infantry, napalm gave off no lethal fragments and
                                 could be used close to friendly forces without the dangers of
                                 fragmentation posed by conventional bombs. Often the fire from
                                 napalm would penetrate jungle that was immune to shrapnel. A single
                                 napalm canister spread its contents over an area a hundred yards long.”
                                 (Doleman 1984: 127)

Land mines                       Primarily air-dropped ‘Destructor’ mines. “Destructor Mines are
                                 general purpose low-drag [GP] bombs converted to mines. They can
                                 be deployed by air, either at sea as bottom mines or on land as land
                                 mines. … When dropped on land, they bury themselves in the ground
                                 on impact, ready to be actuated by military equipment, motor vehicles
                                 and personnel. When dropped in rivers, canals, channels, and harbors,
                                 they lie on the bottom ready to be actuated by a variety of vessels
                                 including war ships, freighters, coastal ships, and small craft.” (FAS
                                 2004) With just over 55,000 mines listed for the entire country in our
                                 dataset, compared with an outside estimate of 3,500,000 mines
                                 (UNMAS 2004), our data capture a trivial fraction of total presumed
                                 landmine presence in Vietnam. This is likely because a large share of
                                 landmines were placed in the ground by U.S. army troops.

Ammunition (000’s of rounds)     Projectiles fired from air at high-velocity. Cross-sectional diameter
                                 (caliber) ranges from 5.56mm to 40mm, spanning the traditional
                                 categories of small-arms (≤0.50 caliber/inches = 12.7 mm), regular
                                 ammunition, and cannon artillery (≥20mm). (Sources: FAS (2004);
                                 personal communication with Bill Shaw, 4/16/04)



(2) Vietnam Poverty, Geographic, and Climatic Data
 District-level estimates of poverty were provided by Nicholas Minot of the International Food Policy
Research Institute (IFPRI). The estimates were generated through poverty mapping, an application of the
small-area estimation method developed in Elbers et al (2003). This method matches detailed, small-
sample survey data to less-detailed, large-sample census data across geographic units, to generate area-
level estimates of an individual- or household-level phenomenon—in our case, district-level poverty
incidence in Vietnam. For more detailed information, see Minot et al. (2003).

The two datasets used by Minot et al. (2003) are the 1997/8 Vietnam Living Standards Survey (VLSS)
and a 33% subsample (5,553,811 households) of the 1999 Population and Housing Census. The VLSS,
undertaken by the Vietnam General Statistical Office (GSO) in Hanoi with technical assistance from the
World Bank, is a detailed household-level survey of 4270 rural and 1730 urban Vietnamese households.
The 1999 Population and Housing Census was conducted by the GSO with technical support from the



                                                                                                         45
United Nations Family Planning Agency and United Nations Development Program (UNDP). We also
use data from the 1992/3 and 2002 VLSS survey rounds in this paper.

Minot et al. use the VLSS data to estimate a household-level, log-linear regression of real cost-of-living-
adjusted per capita consumption expenditure on 17 household characteristics common to both the VLSS
and the Population and Housing Census. These characteristics include: household size, proportion over 60
years old, proportion under 15 years old, proportion female, highest level of education completed by head
of household, whether or not head has a spouse, highest level of education completed by spouse, whether
or not head is an ethnic minority, occupation of head over last 12 months, type of house (permanent;
semi-permanent or wooden frame; “simple”), house type interacted with living area, whether or not
household has electricity, main source of drinking water, type of toilet, whether or not household owns a
television, whether or not household owns a radio, and region. Minot et al. (2003) partition the sample to
undertake separate parameter estimates for the correlates of rural and urban poverty.

Predicted consumption expenditures per capita for each of the district-coded households in the 1999
Population and Housing Census sample are then generated using the parameter estimates from these
regressions. Properly weighting by the size of each household, this enables Minot et al (2003) to generate
an estimate of district-level poverty incidence, the percentage of the population in each district that lives
below the official national poverty line of 1,789,871 Vietnam Dong (VND) per person per year (GSO
2000).

All district-level topographic, geographic, and climatic data used in this paper were provided by Nicholas
Minot and are identical to those used in Minot et al. (2003). The topographical data used in Minot et al.
(2003) are taken from the United States Geological Survey.

Province population figures in the 1980s and 1990s are from the Vietnam Statistical Yearbooks (Vietnam
General Statistical Office). Unfortunately, we have been unable to locate complete and consistently
defined province level demographic data from the mid-1970s through the mid-1980s. These Yearbooks
also contain information on total state investment flows by province from 1976-1985, data that is also
used in the statistical analysis.

(3) Data from the pre-“American War” period
Pre-war, province-level demographic data on South Vietnam were taken from the 1959-1965 editions of
the Statistical Yearbook of Vietnam, published by the National Institute of Statistics in Saigon, and for
North Vietnam from the Vietnam Agricultural Statistics over 35 Years (1956-1990), published by the
GSO Statistical Publishing House in Hanoi (1991). Province level agricultural statistics are also available
(e.g., rice paddy yields), but it is widely thought that such prewar data are unreliable as a result of the
prewar ideological conflict between North and South Vietnam (Banens 1999), and thus we do not use
those data in the analysis.

A final data source we considered is the HAMLA/HES database collected by the U.S. government
starting in South Vietnam in 1967-68 (described in Kalyvas and Kocher 2003), which collected rough
proxies for village socioeconomic conditions. The two main drawbacks of this data is that first, the exact
procedure for assigning the local SES measures is not transparent or well-described in existing sources,
and second the data was collected several years into the war, and thus may be endogenous to earlier U.S.
bombing patterns. For these reasons we do not utilize this data in the empirical analysis.




                                                                                                          46
