NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRODUCTION TARGETS
Guillermo Caruana
Liran Einav
Working Paper 11958
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11958
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2006

An earlier version of this paper had the title “Quantity Competition with Production Commitment: Theory
and Evidence from the Auto Industry.” We thank Susan Athey, Tim Bresnahan, Uli Doraszelski, Ken Judd,
Ignacio Palacios-Huerta, Chris Snyder, and especially Esteban Rossi-Hansberg for helpful conversations,
and seminar participants at IO Fest 2004, Bilbao, Carlos III, CEMFI, ECARES, and Olin School of Business
for comments. We are extremely thankful to Maura Doyle and Chris Snyder for so kindly sharing their data
with us. All remaining errors are ours. Address Correspondence to Liran Einav, Department of Economics,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-6072; Tel: (650) 723-3704. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Guillermo Caruana and Liran Einav. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Production Targets
Guillermo Caruana and Liran Einav
NBER Working Paper No. 11958
January 2006
JEL No. C72, C73, D43, L13, L62
ABSTRACT
We present a dynamic quantity setting game, where players may continuously adjust their quantity
targets, but incur convex adjustment costs when they do so. These costs allow players to use quantity
targets as a partial commitment device. We show that the equilibrium path of such a game is humpshaped and that the final equilibrium outcome is more competitive than its static analog. We then
test the theory using monthly production targets of the Big Three U.S. auto manufacturers during
1965-1995 and show that the hump-shaped dynamic pattern is present in the data. Initially,
production targets steadily increase until they peak about 2-3 months before production. Then, they
gradually decline to eventual production levels. This qualitative pattern is fairly robust across a range
of similar exercises. We conclude that strategic considerations play a role in the planning phase in
the auto industry, and that static models may therefore under-estimate the industry's competitiveness.
Guillermo Caruana
CEMFI
caruana@cemfi.es
Liran Einav
Stanford University
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
leinav@stanford.edu

1

Introduction

Economists often model strategic interactions using simultaneous one-shot games. It is as if
decisions were taken in the blink of an eye and realized instantaneously. This is, of course, a
simplification. Complex decisions, such as entry, exit, or production are normally the result of a
long preparation process. If plans cannot be hidden from competitors and changing them is costly,
incentives to behave strategically during the preparation stage should be explicitly considered, as
they may be an important determinant of the final equilibrium outcomes.
Consider, for example, the automobile industry. Suppose that, ahead of time, an auto manufacturer has planned a certain production target. In order to achieve it, the firm needs to take
certain actions, such as hiring labor, canceling vacations, purchasing parts from suppliers, etc. If
the firm then decided to change its desired production level, it would likely need to incur some
costs adjusting the previous actions. To the extent that such preparations are not or cannot be
fully hidden from competitors, they may play a strategic role. Given the costly nature of these
adjustments, the preparation stage acts as a gradual commitment device. Firms realize that their
planned production levels aﬀect their rivals’ production plans, and use this to their advantage,
adjusting their own intentions strategically.
The main goal of the paper is to develop this argument in the context of a quantity setting
game, and to establish its empirical relevance using data from the U.S. auto industry. The first part
of the paper constructs a dynamic quantity setting game with a planning phase and adjustment
costs. In the second part, we use data on monthly production targets by the Big Three auto
manufacturers — General Motors, Ford, and Chrysler — and show that the empirical pattern is
consistent with the theoretical prediction.
The paper makes three separate contributions. First, we present new theoretical predictions
for quantity setting games regarding the non-monotone evolution of production targeting. Since
the framework is fairly simple and general, these predictions may be relevant in a wide range of
strategic interactions. Second, we present empirical evidence that shows a similar non-monotonic
pattern of production targets in the U.S. auto industry. Since this is one of the largest industries
in the U.S., we think that documenting this pattern is of interest, even in the absence of the
underlying theoretical framework. Finally, the match between the theory and the data suggests
two important implications for the auto industry: (i) adjustment costs and strategic considerations
may play an important role in the planning phase of production; and (ii) static models may underestimate the competitiveness of the industry.
Section 2 contains the theoretical part of the paper. We first present a benchmark model.
At some specified date in the future two symmetric firms engage in Cournot competition. At
date zero, each firm inherits a production structure, which serves as its initial production target.
From that point onwards, each firm can make continuous adjustments to its future production
structure, but incurs convex adjustment costs every time it does so. When inherited production
targets are not too high, both firms begin by gradually increasing their production plans. Firms

1

use these intended plans as a commitment device; they want to commit to high production levels
in order to obtain a Stackelberg leadership position in the industry. In equilibrium, however, both
firms are provided with similar commitment opportunities, and thereby engage in a “Stackelberg
warfare,” each trying not to become a Stackelberg follower. As the horizon gets closer, however,
both firms become suﬃciently committed to producing high quantities. Thus, at a certain point
before the final date, the (dynamic) commitment eﬀect becomes less important, while the (static) incentive to best respond to the opponent’s high production target increases and becomes
dominant. Therefore, from that point on both firms start to gradually decrease their production
plans in the direction of their static best-response levels. The eventual equilibrium outcome still
remains more competitive than its static analog.
The rest of Section 2 extends the benchmark model along several dimensions and shows that
all these extensions retain the same qualitative predictions. We allow for more than two players,
various forms of asymmetries between players, time-varying adjustment costs, and uncertainty
(common across players). We then nest the benchmark model as the stage game of an infinitely
repeated game. We solve for the Markov Perfect Equilibrium of this game, and show that its
stationary equilibrium path exhibits the same non-monotonic pattern. Moreover, the repeated
game provides a natural way to endogenize the initial production plans, which are taken as given
in the benchmark model. It also takes the model one step closer to the reality of the empirical
application we study later in the paper.
There are three key assumptions that are important for our results. First, control variables are
strategic substitutes, leading to a commitment incentive. Second, adjustment costs are convex,
so commitment advantage monotonically increases with planned production levels. Third, all the
payoﬀs (net of adjustment costs) are collected in the end, leading to strong competitive eﬀects
once the production date is suﬃciently close. Other assumptions, we believe, are less important.
For example, all the results are obtained using a linear-quadratic structure. Namely, with linear
demand, constant marginal costs, and quadratic adjustment costs. This is done for tractability,
as solving for the equilibrium outside of the linear-quadratic framework is not feasible. Moreover,
linear-quadratic games can be viewed as second-order approximations to more general games. We
could also accommodate asymmetric costs, upwards and downwards, without aﬀecting the results,
but this again would take us out of the linear-quadratic framework.1
The model we present is a model of endogenous commitment and is therefore related to
Caruana and Einav (2005), in which we mainly focus on discrete decisions, such as entry and
exit. The current work is also close to the dynamic quantity competition literature (Cyert and
DeGroot, 1970; Hanig, 1986; Fershtman and Kamien, 1987; Maskin and Tirole, 1987; Reynolds,
1987 and 1991; Lapham and Ware, 1994; and Jun and Vives, 2004). These papers focus on the
stationary equilibrium of an infinite-horizon model (or on the limit of a finite-horizon one, as
1

Saloner (1987) and Romano and Yildirim (2005) study an extreme two-period version of such a model, in which
adjustement costs upwards are free while adjustment costs downwards are infinitely costly. Unfortunately, this
extreme version gives rise to a wide range of equilibria, and therefore does not provide sharp predictions.

2

the horizon tends to infinity); they typically find that (when actions are strategic substitutes)
the stationary equilibrium is more competitive than its static analog, as players engage in a
“Stackelberg warfare.”2 Our model shares this feature, but unlike this literature our main focus
is on the non-stationary dynamic pattern of the planning phase. One advantage in studying the
dynamics of the planning phase is its strong non-stationarity; it provides clear testable prediction
with respect to an observed and exogenous state variable, namely time. Stationary dynamic
models are much harder to test, as the static benchmark is typically not available (for example,
marginal costs are typically not observed).
Section 3 tests the predictions of the model using data on monthly production targets by
the Big Three auto manufacturers in the U.S. during 1965-1995. These production targets are
published in a trade journal approximately every month starting as early as six months before
production. We normalize production targets by subsequent production, pool production targets from diﬀerent production months, and estimate a kernel regression in order to describe the
evolution of these targets as the production date gets closer. The results show that, on average, production targets exhibit a non-monotonic pattern, which is consistent with the theoretical
prediction. Early targets, about six months prior to production, overstate eventual production
by about five percent. Then they start to slowly increase, until they peak at ten percent about
2-3 months before production. At this point, they start to gradually decline towards the eventual production levels. This result is robust to alternative measurements and across diﬀerent
subsamples.
The end of Section 3 is devoted to a careful discussion of the relationship between the data
analyzed and the theory previously developed. First, we discuss potential sources of adjustment
costs in the production planning phase of the industry. In particular, we emphasize the nature and
timing of contracts with suppliers of parts. Second, we discuss the link between the real production
plans held by firms and the published figures in the study. We argue that these are likely to be very
related. Finally, we discuss some relevant diﬀerences between the stylized theoretical model and
the nature of competition in the industry (e.g. inventories and product diﬀerentiation), and argue
that these gaps are unlikely to change the qualitative results. Thus, establishing the relationship
between the empirical pattern and the theoretical predictions allow us to conclude that adjustment
costs and strategic considerations play an important role in the planning phase of production and
that static models may therefore under-estimate the competitiveness of the industry.
At some general level, this work can be classified within the recent empirical studies of dynamic
oligopolies (e.g. Benkard, 2004; and Ryan, 2004). In contrast to these studies, which primarily
focus on estimating the parameters associated with a given theoretical framework, which is assumed, our theoretical framework provides testable implications. Therefore, the primary objective
here is testing the qualitative prediction of the theoretical framework. Once validated, the next
obvious step, which is outside of the scope of this paper, is to parameterize the model and estimate
2

This can also be viewed as a dynamic extension of a “top dog” strategy within the Fudenberg and Tirole (1984)
taxonomy of strategic behavior.

3

structural parameters.
The data we use in this work is also used in Doyle and Snyder (1999), who investigate the role
of the published production targets as an information sharing device by focusing on the positive
correlation among manufacturers in the revisions to their production targets. Our results are
consistent with their theoretical framework, which provides no restrictions on the way production
targets evolve over time. Their results are also consistent with ours, as the model of this paper
predicts that manufacturers would follow similar patterns over time, thereby creating positive
correlation in revisions of production targets. Therefore, we view the two studies as complementary; the observed pattern of production plans may well be driven by both information-sharing
motives as well as strategic commitment considerations. In fact, we pool observations from diﬀerent periods in order to average out the period-specific “noise.” The period-specific patterns vary
quite substantially and may be driven by diﬀerent realizations of uncertainties. Our framework
is therefore more relevant for the average pattern rather than for the period-by-period pattern,
while information-sharing motives are more likely to be important and observed within production periods. We believe that any attempt to quantify either eﬀect, by, for example, estimating
structural parameters, should take both eﬀects of strategic considerations and uncertainty into
account.

2

Theory

2.1

The benchmark model

There are two players. At time t = 0, they start with exogenously inherited initial production
plans of (q1 (0), q2 (0)). At all points t ∈ [0, T ] each player i chooses xti ∈ R, which controls the rate

at which she changes her production plan, i.e. qi0 (t) = xti . Note that xti can be either positive or
negative. If a player changes her plans at a rate of xi , she has to pay adjustment costs of ci (xi , t).
At time T , and given their final plans, q1 (T ) and q2 (T ), players compete in quantities and collect
final payoﬀs of π i (qi (T ), qj (T )).
In order to make the model more tractable, we use a linear-quadratic structure. Thus, we
assume that inverse demand is linear, given by p = a − b(q1 + q2 ), and marginal costs are constant

and given by c. Thus, we have that

π i (qi (T ), qj (T )) = (a − bqi (T ) − bqj (T ))qi (T ) − cqi (T ) =
=

(1)

(a − c)qi (T ) − bqi2 (T ) − bqi (T )qj (T )

In addition, we assume that adjustment costs are quadratic and take the form of
θ
(2)
ci (xi , t) = x2i
2
Note that adjustment costs are constant over time,3 symmetric across players, and symmetric for
3

For simplicity, there is no time discounting. Time discounting is a special case of the extension of the model to
time-varying adjustment costs, which we analyze later.

4

positive and negative rates. None of these properties is important for the main results.
We solve for the Markov Perfect Equilibrium of the model. Thus, strategies only depend on
the state variables, q1 and q2 and time t. Let Vit (qi , qj ) be the value function for player i at time t,
with state variables qi and qj . If Vit (qi , qj ) exists and is continuous and continuously diﬀerentiable
in its arguments, then it satisfies the following Bellman equation
¶
µ
θ ¡ t ¢2 ∂Vit t ∂Vit t ∂Vit
=0
x +
x +
max
− xi +
2
∂qi i
∂qj j
∂t
xti

(3)

The first order condition for xti implies that

xti =

1 ∂Vit
θ ∂qi

(4)

We can now substitute this back into equation (3), and obtain the following diﬀerential equation
µ
µ
¶2
¶Ã t!
∂Vj
1 ∂Vit
1 ∂Vit
∂V t
(5)
+
+ i =0
2θ ∂qi
θ ∂qj
∂qj
∂t
The linear-quadratic structure is attractive. It is known that in this case, if one restricts the
strategies to be analytic functions of the state variables, there exists a unique equilibrium of the
game, which is also the limit of its discrete-time analog. Moreover, in such a case the unique
value function is a quadratic function of the state variables.4 Note that due to the inherent
non-stationarity of the model, the parameters of this quadratic equation will depend on t in an
unspecified way. We can express the value function as
Vit (qi , qj ) = At + Bt qi + Ct qj + Dt qi2 + Et qj2 + Ft qi qj

(6)

which, using equation (4), implies that
xti (qi , qj ) =

1
(Bt + 2Dt qi + Ft qj )
θ

(7)

Given that players are symmetric, we can substitute equations (6) and (7) into equation (5)
and obtain
0 =

1
1
(Bt + 2Dt qi + Ft qj )2 + (Ct + 2Et qj + Ft qi ) (Bt + 2Dt qj + Ft qi ) +
2θ¡
θ
¢
+ A0t + Bt0 qi + Ct0 qj + Dt0 qi2 + Et0 qj2 + Ft0 qi qj

(8)

This is a polynomial in qi and qj . Since it has to be satisfied for all values of qi and qj , all its
six coeﬃcients (which are functions of t) have to be equal to zero. This gives the following set of
ordinary diﬀerential equations. To ease notation, we can just think of time as going backwards.
4

See Kydland (1975), who shows uniqueness for a discrete-time version, and Lukes (1971), Papavassilopoulos
and Cruz (1979), and Papavassilopoulos and Olsder (1984) for analysis of existence and uniqueness in finite-horizon
linear-quadratic diﬀerential games.

5

This is convenient as our boundary condition is for t = T . Thus, all derivatives with respect to
time (A0 , B 0 , etc.) reverse signs, and the law of motion for the parameters is given by




1 2
A0
B
+
BC
2


 0 
 2BD + BF + CF 
 B 




 C 0  1  BF + 2BE + 2CD 





 0 = 
2 + F2

 D  θ
2D






 E0 
1 2




2 F + 4DE
0
4DF + 2EF
F

(9)

with boundary condition (for t = T )













AT





0

 

BT 
  a−c

CT  
 0
=

DT 
  −b

ET  
 0
−b
FT

which is provided by the profit function in equation (1).

2.2













(10)

Illustration

The system of ordinary diﬀerential equations given by equation (9), with its boundary condition,
defines the solution. It defines the value function at any point in time, which in turn allows us
to compute the equilibrium strategies using equation (7). Unfortunately, the system cannot be
solved analytically, so we approximate the equilibrium through the solution of the discrete-time
analog of the game for very small time intervals.
Throughout this section, unless otherwise specified, we set a = b = 1, c = 0, θ = 1, and T = 10.
This implies that marginal costs are zero and that inverse demand is given by p = 1 − q1 − q2 .
Adjustment costs are ci (xi , t) = 12 x2i .5 For later comparison, it is useful to observe that, for this

choice of parameters, the static Nash equilibrium of this game involves each player producing her
Cournot quantity of q = 13 , while the Stackelberg leader and follower production levels are q =

1
2

and q = 14 , respectively.
Figure 1 shows how the parameters of the (symmetric) value function, as given in equation (6),
evolve over time. As the horizon becomes longer (i.e. as T → ∞) A0 converges to approximately
0.0925 and all other parameters approach zero. Thus, for games with long horizon the equilibrium
profits converge to 0.0925, which are approximately 17% lower than the static Cournot profits of
1
9

(14% is due to higher production and lower equilibrium prices, while 3% is due to adjustment
5

One should note that some of these restriction are not important. The eﬀect of a and c only enters through their
diﬀerence a − c, so setting c = 0 is only a normalization. Similarly, optimal strategies are invariant to monotone
transformations of the objective function, so, for example, setting b = 1 is a normalization.

6

costs). This is the first illustration of how the dynamic interaction leads to a reduction in profits.
If they could, the two parties would have liked to avoid the “preparation race” and commit to the
static Cournot outcome throughout.
Figure 2 presents the symmetric equilibrium path for the game in which both players inherit
an initial production plan at the static Cournot level. The two parties begin by increasing their
targets, each trying to become a Stackelberg leader, or at least not to fall behind and become
a Stackelberg follower. As the deadline gets closer, both firms realize that they are suﬃciently
committed to high output, but that they are much above their static best responses, and optimally
decide to gradually adjust towards it. Given that adjusting is costly, the parties do not adjust all
the way to the static Nash equilibrium.6 In this particular example, the equilibrium outcome is
about 0.37, compared to the static outcome of 13 . Finally, we also depict one oﬀ-equilibrium-path
strategy for each player. Suppose that player i receives an unexpected shock to her intended plan
at t = T − 4 and has her plan reverted to the Cournot level. Both players realize that player j has

achieved a leader position in the market. Player j capitalizes on this advantage by increasing her
own plans even further. Meanwhile, player i’s best response is to rebuild its size. Nevertheless, the
advantageous position acquired by player j never fully diminishes and is kept until the production
date.
Figure 3 presents the symmetric equilibrium path for diﬀerent initial production plans. If these
are not too high, one observes the same pattern as in the previous figure. If initial production

plans are suﬃciently high (greater than about 0.44 in this particular example), both parties are
suﬃciently committed to high production from date zero and do not need to engage in further
increases of production targets. The rate at which they decrease their production targets over
time is not constant, however, due to the commitment eﬀect. They first decrease quantities slowly,
so they remain committed to high quantities, and only later they speed up adjustments in the
direction of their static best response levels.7
Figures 4 and 5 present comparative statics with respect to the length of the horizon and
with respect to the size of the adjustment cost parameter. An inspection of equation (9) reveals
that these two exercises are similar. A proportional increase in the adjustment cost can be
viewed as a slowdown in the evolution of the value function. Loosely speaking, it is a horizontal
stretch of Figure 1. Thus, changes in the adjustment cost parameter are similar to a rescaling of
time.8 Figure 4 shows how the length of the horizon aﬀects the equilibrium path. As the horizon
6

With convex adjustment costs, the optimal strategy always leads to partial adjustments. This is because the
static profit function is flat at the static best response level. Thus, the marginal cost of adjustment is zero for small
adjustments and higher for greater ones, while the marginal benefit is strictly positive for small adjustments but
zero for full adjustments.
7

Note that if the initial targets were very low and the adjustment parameters high, one could also see a fully
increasing equilibrium path.
8

It is similar but not identical. Think of the game in discrete time. A lower θ is similar to increasing the length
of a period, without changing the number of periods. Increasing T is similar to increasing the number of periods,
without changing their length. Thus, loosely speaking, stretching of time allows for more opportunities to adjust

7

gets longer, there is more time to build up commitment. Similarly, Figure 5 shows that as the
adjustment costs decrease, building commitment becomes cheaper. In both cases this leads to
higher targets and an ultimate faster decline.

2.3

Intuition from a two-period model

The key qualitative prediction of the model, namely that players have an incentive to exaggerate
their production intentions as a way to achieve commitment, can be obtained within the context
of a simple two-period model. Suppose that firms start with inherited production targets of y.
At t = 1 they can revise their plans to z1 and z2 , but pay a quadratic adjustment cost when they
do so. Then, in period t = 2 firms have a final opportunity to revise the quantities they want
to produce and set them to q1 and q2 , paying the corresponding adjustment costs. Given these
production levels, market price is given by p = 1 − q1 − q2 . There is no discounting, so payoﬀs are

the final Cournot profits (with zero marginal costs) minus any adjustment costs incurred in the
process.

We can solve for the Subgame Perfect Equilibrium of the game using backward induction. In
period t = 2 each player i chooses qi to solve
θ
max(1 − (qi + qj ))qi − (qi − zi )2
qi
2

(11)

Best response functions are
1 − qj + θzi
2+θ
and the second period equilibrium strategies are
qi =

qi (zi , zj ) =

(12)

1 + θ (1 + (2 + θ)zi − zj )
(θ + 3) (θ + 1)

(13)

One can easily observe that if firms target the Cournot quantities, zi = zj =

1
3,

then setting

qi = zi for each i is an equilibrium. In general, the first order conditions define a best-response
function which is a rotation of the static best-response at the previously targeted production level
(see Figure 6). Each player’s response to a change in her opponent’s quantity is not as strong as
in the absence of adjustment costs. Thus, if zi = zj are greater (less) than

1
3

the players end up

adjusting in the direction of their static best responses, but not fully, thereby ending up in a more
(less) competitive equilibrium.
In period t = 1 firms choose zi and zj , accounting for the equilibrium strategies at t = 2.
Thus, each player i chooses zi to solve
θ
θ
max(1 − qi (zi , zj ) − qj (zi , zj ))qi (zi , zj ) − (qi (zi , zj ) − zi )2 − (zi − y)2
xi
2
2
implying the following first order condition for each player:
µ
¶
µ
¶
∂qi
∂qi
∂qi ∂qj
(1 − qi − qj ) − qi
+
− 1 − θ(zi − y) = 0
− θ(qi − zi )
∂zi
∂zi
∂zi
∂zi
behavior.

8

(14)

(15)

This yields a solution z(y, θ) and q(y, θ).9 For example, if y = 13 , i.e. firms’ inherited targets are
at the Cournot level, their final productions would be
1
θ
1
q( , θ) = + 3
2
3
3 3θ + 30θ + 78θ + 54
which are always above

1
3

(16)

for any θ > 0. When θ = 1, for example, equilibrium targets at t = 1

are z ≈ 0.357 and final productions are q ≈ 0.339. Thus, the qualitative conclusions are the same
as in the continuous time case: planned production levels increase first, and decrease later.

2.4

Extensions to the benchmark model

Here we present some of the most natural extensions to the benchmark model. The main message
is that all of them retain the same qualitative predictions of the model. The derivations are
provided in the appendix.
N players: The benchmark model is constructed for two players only for convenience. Results
remain unchanged with more than two players. The value function has one additional element,
P P
j6=i
k6=i,j qj qk , which results in an additional equation in the system of diﬀerential equations.

We computed the equilibrium for diﬀerent sets of parameters and the equilibrium patterns are
qualitatively identical to those obtained for the two-player model.
Asymmetric players: Asymmetries among firms can be introduced either through the final
payoﬀ function (for example, firms may vary in their marginal costs) or through the adjustment
costs (for example, labor may be more unionized in one firm than the other). In the appendix we
treat them jointly, but we do comparative statics on each dimension separately.
Figure 7 illustrates the case of asymmetric marginal costs. In particular, it uses the same
parameter values as in Section 2.2, but introduces a (constant) marginal cost of 0.2 for player 2.
The figure presents the equilibrium paths for diﬀerent (but symmetric) initial conditions. The
general pattern is similar to the benchmark case. Now the more eﬃcient player produces more
than her opponent, and more than her static Nash equilibrium quantity (q1 = 0.4 and q2 = 0.2).
In this case the less eﬃcient player may produce less than her static Nash quantity. This is shown
in the thin solid line. The reason for this is that asymmetric marginal costs introduce asymmetries
in the commitment opportunities. Given that the more eﬃcient player is producing more, her
static payoﬀ function is steeper around the equilibrium. This allows her to enjoy higher levels of
commitment and attain a Stackelberg advantage. In all cases, however, overall quantity is higher
(more competitive) than the static equilibrium level of 0.6. This might hint a welfare improvement,
due to both higher consumer surplus and more eﬃcient allocation of resources among the firms,
but one has to include the adjustment costs in the analysis to obtain a definitive answer.
9

The solution is z(y, θ) =

4+4θ+θ 2 +y(θ+1)(θ+3)2
(26θ+10θ2 +θ3 +18)

and q(y, θ) =

9

(yθ+2)(θ+1)(θ+3)

(26θ+10θ2 +θ3 +18)

.

Figure 8 presents the case of asymmetric adjustment costs for diﬀerent values of the θ coefficients. The shape of the equilibria is the same as before. It is interesting to notice that it is
the more flexible player who is able to end up producing more. When adjustment costs are high
(θ1 = 1 and θ2 = 5) this is simply because player 2 cannot aﬀord to increase her plans so rapidly
(recall that initial plans and the length of the horizon are fixed in this exercise). When the costs
are lower the leadership position is achieved through the higher ability of the flexible player to
increase her plans further as a way to commit to high output.10
Time-varying adjustment costs: One may argue that adjustment costs may vary over time.
One reason may be discounting, which would result in declining adjustment costs. It is also
reasonable to consider that adjustments become more expensive as the production date gets
closer. As an example, hiring temporary labor three months before production may be cheap,
while labor availability one day before production is scarce, and will require higher wages or higher
search costs on the employer part.11
It is straightforward to incorporate such eﬀects into the benchmark model. The adjustment
cost function would be

θ(t) 2
x
(17)
2 i
where no restrictions are imposed on θ(t). The derivation of the system of ordinary diﬀerential
ci (xi , t) =

equations is the same as in equation (9), with θ replaced by θ(t). Notice that θ enters into the
system in a proportional way. Therefore, replacing it by θ(t) is similar to a rescaling of time.
When θ(t) is low the coeﬃcients on the value function change fast, and when θ(t) is high the
coeﬃcients change slow. Qualitatively, the predictions of the model remain unchanged.
Uncertainty: In the presence of uncertainty, there is a general trade-oﬀ between commitment
and flexibility, as remaining flexible would allow firms to adjust to unexpected events. The
precise impact of considering uncertainty within the context of this work will depend on the type
of uncertainty explored. In the appendix we consider a model with a natural source of common
uncertainty within the linear-quadratic framework. Suppose that final demand can be high or
low depending on whether the state of the economy is either high (H) or low (L). The economy
(symmetrically) fluctuates between the two states following a Poisson process: at each point, at
hazard rate λ the state changes.
Initially, with the horizon far enough in the future, the current state is not particularly informative about the final state of demand. Given that firms only care about the eventual realization
of demand, on equilibrium they start by having a similar behavior independently of the actual
state. As the production date draws near, however, firms become more responsive to changes in
10

Note that if the initial inherited positions were higher, say q0 = 0.4, and the adjustment costs high as well, the
previous result could be reversed. In this case the non-flexible player would be at a credible position not to change
her plans far away from 0.4, which would force the flexible player to adjust downwards.
11

This second case is closer to the framework studied in Caruana and Einav (2005).

10

the state of the economy. This typically results in upwards (downwards) adjustments to production targets in response to changes into the high (low) state. As firms foresee this happening,
they are more reluctant to adjust early, compared to the benchmark model, and therefore build up
commitment more slowly. While the equilibrium path is random as it depends on the realization
of uncertainty, the expected equilibrium path (computed numerically) exhibits a non-monotonic
pattern as in the benchmark model.

2.5

Repeated interaction

Many real-world situations, like the monthly production decisions in the auto industry we study
later, are repeated in nature. Here we consider an infinitely repeated game in which the benchmark
model is the stage game and there are adjustment costs between stages. These costs between
stages capture the fact that firms are constrained in their future plans by their actual production
infrastructure.
Formally, each stage of the game is played as follows. Given last period production of (y1 , y2 ),
players first decide simultaneously on their initial production plans q1 (0) and q2 (0) for next period,
but pay a cost of

ϕ
2

(qi (0) − yi )2 when they do so. For the next T units of time they play the

benchmark model with inherited initial plans of (qi (0), qj (0)) and quadratic adjustment costs with
parameter θ. That is, they can continuously adjust their production targets, paying an adjustment
cost of

θ
2

(qi0 (t))2 if they do so (where t is the time elapsed since the beginning of the period). At

the end of each stage, production takes place and the stage payoﬀs are collected. Players discount
profits with a common discount factor β per period. For simplicity we assume that players do not
discount payoﬀs within a period.
We solve for a symmetric Markov Perfect Equilibrium (MPE). Thus, the state variables are the
most recent production plans and the elapsed time t. Given that the game has a linear-quadratic
structure, we guess that the value function is quadratic in the state variables. We search for an
equilibrium satisfying this assumption and find one, justifying the initial guess. The solution to
the value function within each stage follows the same law of motion as in the benchmark model
and thus satisfies equation (9). The boundary condition is diﬀerent: in this case, it is determined
endogenously as part of the equilibrium. In particular, there is a relationship between the value
function at the beginning of the stage game and the value function at the end of it. We establish
this relationship below.
In equilibrium, players set initial production plans to satisfy
¡
¢ ϕ
max A0 + B0 qi + C0 qj + D0 qi2 + E0 qj2 + F0 qi qj − (qi − qi (T ))2
qi
2

(18)

which leads to the following first order condition:

B0 + 2D0 qi + F0 qj − ϕ (qi − qi (T )) = 0

(19)

Equation (19), together with its analog for qj , provides a closed-form relationship between (q1 (0),
11

q2 (0)) and (q1 (T ), q2 (T )). Since, by construction
ViT (qi (T ), qj (T )) = π i (qi (T ), qj (T )) − β

ϕ
(qi (0) − qi (T ))2 + βVi0 (qi (0), qj (0))
2

(20)

we can substitute the relationship between (q1 (0), q2 (0)) and (q1 (T ), q2 (T )) into equation (20). As
this has to be satisfied for any qi (T ) and qj (T ) we can equate coeﬃcients, and obtain a system
of six equations that provides a closed-form relationship between A0 , ..., F0 and AT , ..., FT . This
is the boundary condition that substitutes equation (10) of the benchmark game. The solution
to equation (9) and this new boundary condition constitutes the MPE of the repeated game.
Finally, we focus on the steady state of the equilibrium, in which the production decisions (but
not production plans) are constant at every stage.
The equilibrium is computed by numerically searching for a solution. One starts with a guess
for AT , ..., FT , and then iterates the law of motion in equation (9) to obtain A0 , ..., F0 . Then,
using the boundary condition one obtains new values for AT , ..., FT . We iterate this procedure
until convergence. Although, in general, one cannot establish uniqueness (or even existence) for
this game, the problem seems to be well behaved. The procedure converges extremely rapidly to
the same values for a wide range of initial conditions. Thus, on numerical grounds, we believe
that the repeated interaction game has a unique symmetric MPE, or at least a unique symmetric
linear-quadratic MPE.
In Figure 9 we show the equilibrium path for the usual benchmark parameter values (a = b = 1,
c = 0, θ = 1, T = 10), a discount factor of β = 0.9, and ϕ = 0.1. As one can see, the equilibrium
stage pattern exhibits the same hump shape as in the benchmark model. The production levels
are now higher than what would be produced in the benchmark model if the inherited plans were
the ones from the steady state equilibrium. This is because, in addition to the commitment eﬀect
already described, there is a dynamic eﬀect of commitment through the adjustment costs between
stages. This second eﬀect is the same that is present in all dynamic quantity games with sticky
controls analyzed in the literature (Maskin and Tirole, 1986; Reynolds, 1987 and 1991; Jun and
Vives, 2004). Its importance is diminished in this model by the fact that the planning phase
provides an additional opportunity to revise production levels. Naturally, this additional dynamic
eﬀect increases with θ and decreases with T . Figure 10 provides some comparative statics with
respect to the relative importance of the two types of adjustment costs by varying ϕ and θ. As one
can observe, ϕ primarily aﬀects the size of the jump between production levels and initial plans
for the subsequent production period, with high values of ϕ implying small jumps. In contrast, θ
primarily aﬀects the shape of the production plan adjustments and final equilibrium production
levels.
One important special case of the repeated game is the one in which ϕ = 0. In such a
case, there is no link between consecutive production periods and the model collapses to the
benchmark model with free initially chosen plans. That is, at t = 0 players decide simultaneously
and costlessly on their initial plans (q1 (0), q2 (0)) and then continue playing as in the benchmark
model. In the simultaneous-move game played at date zero players solve equation (18) (with
12

ϕ = 0), implying a unique equilibrium of
qj = qi =

−B0
2D0 + F0

(21)

These initial plans give rise to an equilibrium path, in which production plans are flat at t = 0
and gradually decline thereafter (see also Figure 10).12 For any ϕ > 0, however, the equilibrium
path presents the hump-shaped pattern emphasized throughout.

3

Evidence

3.1

Data

We use data on domestic production targets of the major auto manufacturers in the U.S. These are
the same data used by Doyle and Snyder (1999).13 Therefore, we focus only on the dimensions of
the data that are relevant for our empirical analysis; Doyle and Snyder (1999) provide descriptive
statistics and further details of the data.
The unit of analysis is a production month. Prior to each production month, the Big Three
U.S. auto manufacturers — General Motors (GM), Ford, and Chrysler — decide about their production targets for future months.14 These targets are posted in a weekly industry trade journal,
Ward’s Automotive Reports, which specializes in industry data and statistics. Targets are posted
approximately every month, starting as early as six months prior to actual production.
Production targets are summarized by the number of cars to be produced by each manufacturer, aggregated over all models. Thus, variation across models or the introduction of new
models cannot be directly used. The data set has a panel structure and covers the years 1965
to 1995, for a total of 372 production months.15 Every time a production target is published, it
includes production targets for all three manufacturer. Thus, manufacturers do not decide when
to post their targets, as this is requested by Ward’s. Overall, we observe 1, 621 production targets
for each manufacturer.16 This amounts to an average of 4.42 production targets per production
12

This path is initially flat because, in equilibrium, initial production plans (qi∗ , qj∗ ) satisfy

equation (4), the rate of adjustment at t = 0 is given by
13

x0i (qi , qj )

=

i
1 ∂V0 (qi ,qj )
,
θ
∂qi

implying

∂Vii0 (qi∗ ,qj∗ )
∂qi

x0i (qi∗ , qj∗ )

= 0. From

= 0.

We are extremely grateful to Maura Doyle and Chris Snyder for the willingness to share their data with us.

14

These targets are being described by various synonyms: “assembly targets,” “assembly schedules,” “production
plans,” “production forecasts,” etc.
15

Some of the observations in the data include post-production revisions. We discard these observations. We
only focus on targets posted before production. Five production months have no pre-production targets, and are
therefore omitted from the analysis.
16

The data also include production targets for American Motors (AMC) until its exit from the market in 1987.
We do not use these data for the reported results. AMC has a small market share (2.3% on average) and it exhibits
a similar pattern to that of the Big Three, with the exception of its last three years of operation, during which
AMC’s market share, production, and production targets rapidly declined. The qualitative results of the paper
remain unchanged if we use pre-1984 AMC data.

13

month, ranging from some cases with a single production target to others with up to 12 associated
targets.17
Figure 11 presents the total number of published targets made at each 10 day interval prior to
actual production.18 It shows that production targets are published approximately once a month,
typically on the last week of the month, although one can see some density between the monthly
peaks. One can also observe that the number of observations is quite stable over the 3-4 months
before production. There are significantly fewer earlier observations.

3.2

Empirical Analysis

Let us first introduce some notation. Denote by Qit the actual quantity produced by manufacturer
i during month t. Denote by Adit the production target made by manufacturer i for production
month t, with −d representing the number of days between the date of the production target and

the target date. Namely, if a production target Adit is made at date t0 then d = t0 − t. The focus
of the analysis is on the way in which Adit evolves with d.

In order to make targets comparable over time and across manufacturers, we normalize all
targets by eventual production. Namely, a (normalized) production target is defined as
adit ≡

Adit − Qit
Qit

(22)

Thus, adit is the percentage deviation of the target from the eventual production; it is positive
(negative) when a production target is higher (lower) than eventual production.19,20 Our key
theoretical prediction concerns the change of adit with respect to d. We expect adit to gradually
increase early on, when d is high (in absolute value), and decrease later, as it gets closer towards
the production date.
Our analysis is based on pooling observations from multiple production months. The underlying assumption is that, up to the normalization, the same game is played repeatedly over time.
This enables us to treat diﬀerent production targets in diﬀerent games as if they are made in the
17

The frequency of posted production targets significantly increased in the 1970s. The average number of production targets per production month was 2.13 during 1965-1975, compared to 5.94 and 5.32 during 1976-1985 and
1986-1995, respectively.
18

Since production decisions reflect total production for the month, we follow Doyle and Snyder (1999) and use
the last day of the production month as the relevant “date” of production.
19

This transformation of the data is similar to the P P E measure used in Doyle and Snyder (1999). Our measure
uses a slightly diﬀerent normalization to relate it more closely to the theoretical predictions. All the qualitative
results are robust to alternative normalization choices, including the P P E measure of Doyle and Snyder.
20

There are six instances of extreme outliers. Five of them are due to unexpected low Qit ’s, which generate high
more than three times eventual production (adit > 2). The sixth instant is of zero announcements by Chrysler.
While these cases do not aﬀect the general pattern in any important way, we drop them to reduce noise. We take
a conservative approach and also drop all other production targets (at diﬀerent times and by other manufacturers)
associated with the same production month. This leaves us with 361 production months and 1, 598 targets by each
manufacturer for the empirical analysis.
adit ’s,

14

same context. We then use quartic (biweight) kernel regressions of adit on d to non-parametrically
describe the evolution of production targets over time. In all figures, we use a bandwidth of
30 days. We
³ repeat this exercise for each
´ manufacturer i separately, for the Big Three average,
1
d
d
d
d
aBig3,t = 3 aGM,t + aF ord,t + aChrysler,t , and for diﬀerent subsamples of the data. In this section we describe our findings; we defer to the next section the discussion of the link between the

empirical exercise and the theoretical assumptions.
The key evidence is presented in Figure 12, which pools all production months in the data.
The qualitative picture is of a non-monotonic pattern. On average, production targets start about
5 percent above eventual production levels and gradually increase. They peak 2-3 months before
production at about 10 percent, and then gradually decline towards actual production levels. This
pattern is not uniform across manufacturers. While Ford and Chrysler, the two smaller firms,
follow a similar non-monotonic pattern of production targets, GM exhibits a diﬀerent behavior.
GM’s average initial production target is about 15 percent above its eventual production level,
and it gradually declines as the deadline gets closer. This is not inconsistent with the model: if
initial production targets are high, the model predicts a gradual decline over time. It would be
interesting to explain why GM’s (relative) initial production plans are consistently higher than
those of Ford and Chrysler. In the repeated game model, for example, such variation could arise
if the ϕ parameter for GM is suﬃciently close to zero.
The dashed lines in Figure 12 report 95 percent confidence intervals. These are computed
by bootstrapping the data, and running the same kernel regression on each bootstrapped sample; the dashed lines in each figure report the point-by-point 2.5 and 97.5 percentiles. These
show that the observed decline in planned production towards the production deadline is quite
precisely estimated. This is a pattern that it extremely consistent across manufacturers and for
diﬀerent subsamples. Figure 12 also shows that the confidence intervals significantly shrink as the
production deadline gets closer. This happens for two reasons. First, as may be expected, the
variance in the estimates is lower close to the day of production. This may be due to information
shocks, which are likely to be more pronounced when the production deadline is further away in
the future. The second reason is apparent from Figure 11: the number of observed production
targets 3-6 months before production is significantly smaller than the number of observations 0-3
months before production.
Our theoretical prediction concerns a non-monotonic pattern of production targets with respect
to the same production month. A potential concern may be that while the average pattern shown
is qualitatively consistent with the theoretical prediction, it may be generated by aggregation over
periods, but is not present in individual patterns.21 To address this concern, we repeat the same
exercise for diﬀerent subsamples of the data. Figure 13 divides the sample into three decades.
Figure 14 performs the analysis for each calendar month separately to account for potential
21

For example, one could imagine an extreme case in which half of the patterns are monotonically increasing
and concave and half are monotonically decreasing and concave. In such a case, the average pattern may show
non-monotonicity even though none of the individual patterns is such.

15

seasonal variation (due, for example, to model-year product-life-cycle eﬀects; see Copeland, Dunn,
and Hall, 2005). Figure 15 repeats the exercise separately for months in which production growth
is positive and months in which production growth is negative. All these exercises show similar
qualitative patterns. First, the declining production targets during the last 2-3 months before
production are present in every single regression. Second, in the majority of the cases one can
observe the increase in production targets early on. This second observation does not hold in
every regression. This may be expected because, as already mentioned, the data are more noisy
for early targets.
As already discussed, the non-monotonic pattern predicts a positive slope of adit with respect
to d early on, and a negative slope towards production. In order to test directly for the change in
slopes, we perform two final exercises. First, we divide production targets into three categories —
Early, Middle, and Late — according to how far in advance these targets are made. Table 1 reports
the frequencies in which (i) early targets are lower than intermediate targets, (ii) intermediate
targets are higher than late targets, and (iii) late targets are higher than eventual production. We
report this for each manufacturer, as well as for the Big Three average. All these 12 frequencies
except one are greater than 50%. None of them is significantly lower than 50% and the majority
of them are significantly higher. This is all consistent with the theory, and gives support to the
non-monotonic pattern.
Second, we define the percentage change, per day, in production targets by
sdit ≡

0

Adit − Adit
0
(d − d0 )Adit

(23)

0

where Adit and Adit are two consecutive production targets associated with the same production
month. We then run similar kernel regressions of sdit with respect to d. Figure 16 reports these
regressions. One can observe that in all cases the slope of production targets is positive between
130 days and 80 days before production, and that the confidence interval for the slope estimates
lies entirely or almost entirely, depending on the manufacturer, in the positive region. Later on,
the slope is significantly negative in all regressions, establishing the non-monotonic pattern.

3.3

Discussion

The theoretical model presented abstracts from certain important aspects of the empirical application, such as inventories, product diﬀerentiation, and multi-product manufacturers. While
any quantitative analysis ought to account for these eﬀects explicitly, we argue that the qualitative predictions should still hold. The key for the theoretical results is that control variables are
strategic substitutes. Thus, as long as production decisions, rather than sales, operate as strategic
substitutes, the existence of inventories should not have a qualitative eﬀect on the theory, and
therefore on the interpretation of the empirical exercise. Moreover, as long as inventories (and,
to a lesser extent, quantity produced abroad) are roughly stable over time, it seems diﬃcult for

16

inventory fluctuations per se to generate the pattern of production targets we observe.22 Similarly, product diﬀerentiation and multi-product firms are also unlikely to change the maintained
assumption that control variables are strategic substitutes. These assumptions are also consistent
with earlier works, which use a Cournot framework to model competition among the Big Three.
Berndt et al. (1990) cannot reject the Cournot model in this context, and Doyle and Snyder
(1999) use it to test for information-sharing.
In the previous section we show that the pattern of production targets in the U.S. auto industry
is consistent with the theoretical framework. To complete the analysis, it is important to discuss
two key aspects. First, we identify sources of adjustment costs in the auto industry. Second, we
question the manufacturers’ incentives to reveal their production targets truthfully. We discuss
each aspect in turn.
First, the model assumes that production targets are associated with some real actions, which
cannot be costlessly reversed. Auto manufacturers are continuously taking actions that aﬀect
their future production capabilities. They contract parts from suppliers, hire temporary labor,
cancel vacations, etc. It seems natural to assume that such production-related decisions are costly
to change. A late order of parts may be more expensive, revising previously signed contracts
may involve penalties, firing workers results in compensation payments, and changing promises
may have reputational costs. Moreover, auto manufacturers deal with many third parties, both
on the supply and the retail level. If these parties also organize their plans according to the
manufacturers’ publicly posted targets, a change in these targets may cause them some adjustment
costs which may later feed back to the manufacturers’ profits.
The contracting channel is one of the main sources of adjustment costs. Given the magnitude
and timing of the processes involved in the industry, forward contracts are widespread. In principle, every change in plans would involve renegotiating these contracts. In reality this does not
happen so often, as contracts often stipulate clauses that deal with these instances. Typical part
contracts in the industry explicitly specify minimum and maximum monthly orders, assigning
financial penalties to deviations from this contracted range. Even if these contracts are never
renegotiated, implicit adjustment costs arise when contracting with diﬀerent parties does not simultaneously take place. Since parts are complements in production (consider, for example, an
O-ring production function), once contracts are signed sequentially each new contract represents
a stronger commitment to a certain production level. Therefore, signing new contracts, which are
not fully consistent with earlier signed contracts, carries an implicit adjustment cost, as it would
have been cheaper if previous contracts had been set diﬀerently.
Second, in the analysis we assume that the manufacturers’ reported production targets to
Ward’s truthfully represent their real production plans. This is an important assumption. If
these announcements were not anchored to any real decision, they would constitute pure cheap
talk. Our view, which is consistent with conversations with manufacturers and Ward’s publishers,
22

See Kahn (1992) and Bresnahan and Ramey (1994) for theory and evidence about the relationship between
sales and production. See also Judd (1996) for a dynamic model of inventories in a framework similar to ours.

17

is that real actions taken by these firms are diﬃcult to hide from others. Hiring processes for
extra shifts, orders of big amounts of windshields, or the construction of a new plant can be easily
monitored, not only by competitors, but also by Ward’s, by the press, and by other external
analysts. The main task of the trade journal is to report these actions to third parties (suppliers,
dealers, etc.), which cannot perform the monitoring so easily.23 As we argue above, third parties’
plans crucially depend on this information. Moreover, firms are aware that both Ward’s and
other external parties monitor the information they provide to Ward’s. Finally, one should note
that strategic considerations may also work towards providing incentives for truthful reporting.
If commitment is achieved by credible higher production targets, then credibility can only be
achieved by a reputation for truthful reporting. Given all the above, we consider the production
targets published at Ward’s a good proxy for real decisions being taken by firms. They may
represent monthly snapshots of the real underlying continuous decision processes taking place,
like the one described by our theoretical model.

4

Concluding remarks

This paper studies the dynamics of pre-production preparation as a commitment device in a
quantity setting framework with adjustment costs. We show that firms have a strategic incentive
to exaggerate their production targets in an attempt to achieve a Stackelberg leadership position.
More precisely, firms start by first steadily increasing their intended production levels and only
as production gets closer, do production targets gradually decline. As a result, final production
levels are higher than in a static framework.
We test the main predictions of the theory using data on production targets in the U.S.
auto industry. The observed production targets exhibit a non-monotonic pattern similar to the
one predicted by the theory. While one can write down a variety of theoretical models that
could explain why production targets are higher than eventual production,24 it is harder to find
alternative explanations for the non-monotonic pattern. This encourages us to view these findings
as empirical support for the existence of adjustment costs and for the relevance of the strategic
role of pre-production preparations in determining final production decisions.
This study has intentionally abstracted from informational issues as a way to focus on the
strategic aspects. Our view is that in reality both components are important and should be accounted for. Given that the model can be easily extended to accommodate (common) uncertainty,
as well as multiple players, asymmetries, and a repeated interaction, one could seriously pursue a
23

One could argue that the only reason to publish such information would be its commercial value to third parties.
Potential readers are encouraged to subscribe to Ward’s with the following quote: “News and numbers you can’t do
without. Auto analysts and decision-makers must get the latest, vital statistics on the industry’s health, plus updated news, analysis and projections that impact their companys’ futures.” (http://wardsauto.com/war/index.htm)
24

For example, in the presence of uncertainty, if adjusting quantity downwards is cheaper than adjusting it
upwards, then over-targetting would have an option value.

18

more structural estimation approach. This would be interesting for policy purposes, as one could,
for example, quantify the intensity of competition (estimating how far the equilibrium is from the
Cournot levels) or perform welfare analysis.25 We leave this exercise for future work.
On a methodological level, we think that our exercise illustrates the empirical potential of nonstationary predictions. As they exhibit rich interesting dynamics, they provide sharp qualitative
predictions which have the potential to be empirically verified or falsified. All they require is
exogenous variation in time, which is typically satisfied, but do not require further exogeneity
assumptions.

References
[1] Benkard, C. Lanier (2004), “A Dynamic Analysis of the Market for Wide-Bodied Commercial
Aircraft,” Review of Economic Studies, 71(3), 581-611.
[2] Berndt, Ernst R., Ann F. Friedlander, and Judy S. Wang Chiang (1990), “Interdependent
Pricing and Markup Behavior: An Empirical Analysis of GM, Ford, and Chrysler,” NBER
Working Paper no. 3396.
[3] Bresnahan, Timothy F., and Valerie A. Ramey (1994), “Output Fluctuations at the Plant
Level,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 593-624.
[4] Caruana, Guillermo, and Liran Einav (2005), “A Theory of Endogenous Commitment,”
mimeo, Stanford University.
[5] Copeland, Adam, Wendy Dunn, and George Hall (2005), “Prices, Production, and Inventories
over the Automotive Model Year,” mimeo, Yale University.
[6] Cyert, R. M., and M. H. DeGroot (1970), “Multiperiod Decision Models with Alternating
Choice as the Solution to the Duopoly Problem,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84, 410429.
[7] Doyle, Maura P., and Christopher M. Snyder (1999), “Information Sharing and Competition
in the Motor Vehicle Industry,” Journal of Political Economy, 107(6), 1326-1364.
[8] Fershtman, Chaim, and Morton I. Kamien (1987), “Dynamic Duopolistic Competition with
Sticky Prices,” Econometrica, 55(5), 1151-1164.
[9] Fudenberg, Drew, and Jean Tirole (1984), “The Fat-Cat Eﬀect, the Puppy-Dog Ploy, and
the Lean and Hungry Look,” American Economic Review, 74, 361-366.
[10] Hanig, Marco (1986), “Diﬀerential Gaming Models of Oligopoly,” Ph.D. Dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
[11] Judd, Kenneth L. (1996), “Cournot versus Bertrand: A Dynamic Resolution,” mimeo, Hoover
Institution.
25

The welfare implications of the model are ambiguous. Compared with static models, welfare increases as a
result of higher production, but decreases as a result of “lost” adjustment costs during the planning phase.

19

[12] Jun, Byoung, and Xavier Vives (2004), “Strategic Incentives in Dynamic Duopoly,” Journal
of Economic Theory, 116(2), 249-281.
[13] Kahn, James A. (1992), “Why is Production More Volatile than Sales? Theory and Evidence
on the Stockout-Avoidance Motive for Inventory-Holding,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
107, 481-510.
[14] Kydland, Finn (1975), “Noncooperative and Dominant Player Solutions in Discrete Dynamic
Games,” International Economic Review, 16(2), 329-341.
[15] Lapham, Beverly, and Roger Ware (1994), “Markov Puppy Dogs and Related Animals,”
International Journal of Industrial Organization, 12(4), 569-593.
[16] Lukes, D. L. (1971) “Equilibrium Feedback Control in Linear Games with Quadratic Costs,”
SIAM Journal on Control, 9, 234-252.
[17] Maskin, Eric, and Jean Tirole (1987), “A Theory of Dynamic Duopoly III: Cournot Competition,” European Economic Review, 31, 947-968.
[18] Papavassilopoulos, G. P., and J. B. Cruz (1979), “On the Uniqueness of Nash Strategies for
a Class of Analytic Diﬀerential Games,” Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications,
27, 309-314.
[19] Papavassilopoulos, G. P., and G. J. Olsder (1984), “On the Linear-Quadratic, Closed-Loop,
No-Memory Nash Game,” Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications, 42, 551-560.
[20] Reynolds, Stanley S., (1987), “Capacity Investment, Preemption and Commitment in an
Infinite Horizon Model,” International Economic Review, 28(1), 69-88.
[21] Reynolds, Stanley S., (1991), “Dynamic Oligopoly with Capacity Adjustment Costs,” Journal
of Economic Dynamics and Control, 15(3), 491-514.
[22] Romano, Richard, and Huseyin Yildirim (2005), “On the Endogeneity of Cournot-Nash and
Stackelberg Equilibria: Games of Accumulation,” Journal of Economic Theory, 120(1), 73107.
[23] Ryan, Stephen P. (2004), “The Costs of Environmental Regulation in a Concentrated Industry,” mimeo, Duke University.
[24] Saloner, Garth (1987), “Cournot Duopoly with Two Production Periods,” Journal of Economic Theory, 42, 183—187.

20

Appendix
The appendix derives the equations that describe the solutions to three extension of the benchmark
model, as discussed in Section 2.4.
N players Consider N > 2 symmetric players. We can write the Bellman equation for the value
function as


¡ t ¢2 ∂Vit t X ∂Vit t ∂Vit
θ
=0
max − xi +
x +
x +
2
∂qi i
∂qj j
∂t
xti


The first order condition for

(24)

j6=i

xti

implies

xti =

1 ∂Vit
θ ∂qi

(25)

We can now substitute this back into equation (24), as well as the symmetric solution for all other
xtj ’s, rearrange, and obtain the following diﬀerential equation
Ã
!µ
µ
¶2
¶
∂Vit
1 ∂Vit
1 X ∂Vjt
∂V t
0=
+
+ i
2θ ∂qi
θ
∂qj
∂qj
∂t

(26)

j6=i

We guess that the value function will be symmetric in the opponents’ state variables, so that
the quadratic value function can be written as
X
X
X
XX
Ct qj + Dt qi2 +
Et qj2 +
Ft qi qj +
Gt qj qk = (27)
Vit (qi , qj ) = At + Bt qi +
j6=i

where Q−i =

=
P

j6=i

j6=i

j6=i k6=i,j

At + Bt qi + Ct Q−i + Dt qi2

j6=i qj ,

This also implies that

R−i =

+ Et R−i + Ft qi Q−i + Gt S−i
P P
2
2
j6=i qj , and S−i =
j6=i
k6=i,j qj qk . Note that Q−i = R−i + S−i .

P

xti (qi , qj ) =

1
(Bt + 2Dt qi + Ft Q−i )
θ

(28)

Thus, we can rewrite equation (26) as
1
1X
0 =
(Bt + 2Dt qi + Ft Q−i )2 +
(Ct + 2Et qj + Ft qi + 2Gt (Q−j − qi )) (Bt + 2Dt qj + Ft Q−j ) +
2θ
θ
j6=i
¢
¡
(29)
+ A0t + Bt0 qi + Ct0 Q−i + Dt0 qi2 + Et0 R−i + Ft0 qi Q−i + G0t S−i

After collecting terms (and reversing signs for A0 , B 0 , etc. as in the benchmark model) and
equating coeﬃcients, we obtain the following law of motion:



1 2
A0
2 B + (N − 1)BC
 0 

 B 

2BD + BF (N − 1) + CF (N − 1)



 0 

 C 
 BF + 2BE + 2CD + CF (N − 2) + 2BG(N − 2)



 D0  = 1 
2D2 + F 2 (N − 1)

 θ
 0 

1 2
 E 

2 F + 4DE + 2F G(N − 2)



 F0 

4DF + 2EF + F 2 (N − 2) + 2F G(N − 2)



1 2
G0
2 F + 2EF + 4GD + 4F G(N − 3)
21
















(30)

with the boundary condition (for t = T ) given by

 
0
AT

 
 BT   a − c

 

 
 CT   0

 
 DT  =  −b

 

 
 ET   0

 
 F   −b
T

 
0
GT
















(31)

Asymmetric Players We keep notation as before, with the addition of superscripts to denote
the identity of the player. Thus, player i’s adjustment costs function is now ci (xi , t) =
(constant) marginal cost is

ci ,

and

Ait

to

Fti

θi 2
2 xi ,

her

denote i’s value function coeﬃcients.

One can start by following the same steps as in Section 2.1. The first diﬀerence appears in
equation (5), which now reads
µ t ¶2
µ
¶Ã t!
∂Vj
1
∂Vi
1 ∂Vit
∂Vit
=0
+
+
∂qj
∂t
2θi ∂qi
θj ∂qj

(32)

The value function for each player is
Vit (qi , qj ) = Ait + Bti qi + Cti qj + Dti qi2 + Eti qj2 + Fti qi qj
Substituting it into equation (32) gives
´
¢2
¢³ j
1 ¡ i
1 ¡ i
j
j
i
i
i
i
0 =
+
2D
q
+
F
q
+
+
2E
q
+
F
q
+
2D
q
+
F
q
B
C
B
t
t i
t j
t
t j
t i
t
t j
t i +
2θ¡i
θj
¢
+ Ai0t + Bti0 qi + Cti0 qj + Dti0 qi2 + Eti0 qj2 + Fti0 qi qj

(33)

(34)

By collecting terms one obtains the law of motion for the coeﬃcients in player i’s value function

(symmetrically for player j):

Ai0
 i0
 B

 C i0

 i0
 D

 E i0

F i0





 
 
 
 
 
=
 
 
 
 

with the boundary condition given by












1
B i2 + θ1j B j C i
2θi
2 i i
B D + θ1j B j F i + θ1j C i F j
θi
1 i i
B F + θ2j B j E i + θ2j C i Dj
θi
2 i2
D + θ1j F i F j
θi
1
F i2 + θ4j Dj E i
2θi
2 i i
D F + θ2j Dj F i + θ2j E i F j
θi

AiT





0

 
i

BTi 
  a−c

CTi 
  0
=



DTi 
  −b

i
ET  
 0
i
−b
FT
22













(35)













(36)

Uncertainty We follow the same steps as in Section 2.1 with few modifications. Now there are
two value functions, depending on the state of the economy. Let these two value functions be VL
and VH . Thus, the Bellman equation if one is in state L is
Ã
!
t
t
t
¡ t
¢
θ ¡ t ¢2 ∂VL,i t ∂VL,i t ∂VL,i
t
+ λ VH,i (qi , qj ) − VL,i
x +
x +
(qi , qj )
− xi +
max
=0
2
∂qi i
∂qj j
∂t
xti

(37)

and symmetrically for VH . The optimal adjustment rate is given by
t

xi =

1 ∂VL,i
θ ∂qi

(38)

and symmetrically for H. Now one can obtain the corresponding diﬀerential equations as in
equations (5) and (8), resulting in a system of twelve ODE’s. The law of motion for the coeﬃcients
associated with the L

A0L
 0
 BL

 C0
 L
 0
 DL

 E0
 L
FL0

state is












 = λ









AH − AL





1 2
2 BL

+ BL CL



 2BL DL + BL FL + CL FL
BH − BL 



CH − CL  1 
 BL FL + 2BL EL + 2CL DL
+ 
θ
DH − DL 
2DL2 + FL2



1 2
EH − EL 


2 FL + 4DL EL
FH − FL
4DL FL + 2EL FL













(39)

Additional six symmetric equations are associated with the H state. This structure is identical
to the benchmark model except for the fact that, in each equation, with probability λ we switch

to the other value function. Finally, the boundary conditions are given by the diﬀerent profit
functions at each state.

23

Figure 1: Parameters of the value function
This figure plots the value function parameters in the benchmark model, when parameters are
set to a = b = 1, c = 0, and θ = 1. The value function is given by equation (6):
Vit (qi , qj ) = At + Bt qi + Ct qj + Dt qi2 + Et qj2 + Ft qi qj
and the figure below shows how each of its parameters change over time. The parameters can
be thought of either as initial value functions for games with diﬀerent horizons (so T is on the
horizontal axis), or as continuation values within a particular game (so t is on the horizontal axis).
Due to the Markov structure, these two interpretations are identical. One can see (and we verify
with longer horizons) that as the horizon becomes longer all parameters, except for the constant
A0 , approach zero. A0 converges to approximately 0.0925. Thus, for games with long horizons
the values converge to 0.0925, which are almost 20% lower than the static Cournot profits of 19 .

1

0.8
B
0.6

A

E

0.2

0

-0.2

C
F

-0.4
A
B
C
D
E
F

D
-0.6

-0.8

-1
-10

-9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

t

Figure 1: Parameters of the value function

24

-1

parameter value

0.4

Figure 2: Equilibrium path and oﬀ-equilibrium strategies
This figure plots the equilibrium path in the benchmark model, when parameters are set to
a = b = 1, c = 0, and θ = 1, and initial production plans are at the Cournot level of

1
3.

It

shows that equilibrium path is non-monotonic: it peaks at about 0.4 and then declines towards
0.37, which is the equilibrium production level. This level is higher than the Cournot level of
1
3.

The dashed lines illustrates oﬀ-equilibrium path strategies. It simulates a shock, occurring at

date t = −4, which exogenously and unexpectedly drops one of the player’s production target
to 13 . The subsequent dashed lines present the equilibrium path in the continuation game, after
the shock. It shows that the leadership position persists, illustrating why players cannot credibly
coordinate on sticking to the Cournot levels.

0.5

0.42

0.38

0.34

0.3
-10

-9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

t

Figure 2: Equilibrium path and oﬀ-equilibrium strategies

25

-1

0

production target

0.46

Figure 3: Equilibrium path with diﬀerent (symmetric) initial actions
This figure plots the equilibrium path in the benchmark model, when parameters are set to
a = b = 1, c = 0, and θ = 1. It does so for diﬀerent values of initial production plans:

1
3

(the

Cournot level), 0.37, 0.4, 0.43, 0.46, and 0.5 (the Stackelberg level). All cases are of full symmetry,
in parameters and in initial actions, so the equilibrium path is identical for both players in each
case. Clearly, equilibrium paths of the diﬀerent cases do not cross each other. Note, however,
that final production levels are much closer (around 0.37 in all cases, but not the same, keeping
the same ordering as that of initial levels) to each other compared to the initial production plans.
Note also that the equilibrium path is non-monotonic when initial actions are suﬃciently low (less
than about 0.44 in this case), with the peak being closer to the deadline as the initial actions are
lower. When initial actions are higher, equilibrium path is monotone, but the rate of decrease in
production targets is much higher towards the deadline, due to the commitment eﬀect.

0.5

0.42

0.38

0.34

0.3
-10

-9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

t

Figure 3: Equilibrium path with diﬀerent (symmetric) initial actions

26

-1

production target

0.46

Figure 4: Equilibrium path with diﬀerent horizons
This figure plots the equilibrium path in the benchmark model, when parameters are set to
a = b = 1, c = 0, and θ = 1, and initial production plans are

1
3

(the Cournot level). It does so for

diﬀerent horizons: 100, 50, 10, and 1. As can be seen, as the horizons gets longer, players have
more time to smooth out their production target increase, therefore peaking at a higher level.
Once the deadline gets closer, however, this higher build-up declines faster, leading to an increase
in cost. Final production levels do not change by much, unless the horizon is very short (as is the
case when T = 1).

0.45

0.39

0.36

0.33

t

Figure 4: Equilibrium path for diﬀerent horizons

27

0

-4

-8

-12

-16

-20

-24

-28

-32

-36

-40

-44

-48

-52

-56

-60

-64

-68

-72

-76

-80

-84

-88

-92

-96

-100

0.3

production target

0.42

Figure 5: Equilibrium path with diﬀerent adjustment cost parameters
This figure plots the equilibrium path in the benchmark model, when parameters are set to
a = b = 1, c = 0, and initial production plans are

1
3

(the Cournot level). It plots diﬀerent

cases for the adjustment cost parameters, θ (0.1, 1, and 10). One can clearly observe that as
adjustment costs are lower, production targets peak higher, as it is both cheaper to achieve these
levels, and lower targets do not provide enough commitment. The picture also suggests that
final production levels decrease with θ. This may be misleading. Since production level is

1
3

for

θ = 0, we suspect that they may increase with θ close to zero. We could not, however, verify this
conjecture numerically.

0.45
Theta = 0.1

0.435

0.42
Theta = 1

0.39

0.375
Theta = 10

0.36

0.345

0.33
-10

-9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

t

Figure 5: Equilibrium path with diﬀerent adjustment cost parameters

28

production target

0.405

Figure 6: Illustration of how the best response functions change
as a result of adjustment costs
This figure sketches the dynamic eﬀect of adjustment costs in the context of a two-period
model. The solid lines are the static best response functions. The dashed lines are the best
response functions when production targets are higher than the Cournot level. Due to adjustment
costs, the best response function rotates at the level of the production target, and becomes less
responsive to the opponent’s action. The new equilibrium is therefore given by the intersection
of the two dashed lines, giving rise to production levels which are more competitive than the
Cournot level.

q2

Static BR1(q2)

“Dynamic” BR1(q2;z1)

“Dynamic” BR2(q1;z2)

z2

Static BR2(q1)
q1

z1

Figure 6: Illustration of how the best response functions change as a result of adjustment costs

29

Figure 7: Asymmetric players with diﬀerent marginal costs
This figure plots the equilibrium path in a two-player model with asymmetric players. Parameters are set to a = b = 1, and θ = 1. One player has zero marginal costs (c1 = 0), while the other
has positive marginal costs (c2 = 0.2). The figure plots three diﬀerent cases, for diﬀerent initial
production plans. As players are asymmetric, each case has two paths, one for each player. The
thin solid lines present the case where initial production plans are at the Cournot level (q1 = 0.4,
q2 = 0.2). The dashed lines present the case of a reversed initial production plans (q1 = 0.2,
q2 = 0.4), and the thick solid lines present the case of identical initial plans (q1 = q2 = 0.3). As
the horizon is reasonably long, in all cases the lower marginal cost player (player 1) eventually
gains higher market share. Her market share is higher the higher is her initial production plan. It
is somewhat interesting to note that player 2 ends up producing (slightly) less than her Cournot
level in one of the cases (0.195 compared to her Cournot level of 0.2). Total production is higher
than the Cournot level in all cases.

0.51
0.48
0.45
0.42

0.36
mc1 = 0
mc2=0.2

0.33
0.3
0.27
0.24
0.21
0.18
-10

-9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

t

Figure 7: Asymmetric players with diﬀerent marginal costs

30

-1

0

production target

0.39

Figure 8: Asymmetric players with diﬀerent adjustment costs
This figure plots the equilibrium path in a two-player model with asymmetric players. Parameters are set to a = b = 1, and c = 0. One player (player 1), however, has higher adjustment
cost parameter than her opponent. As discussed in the text, it is somewhat interesting that once
initial conditions are suﬃciently low (as in the figure), it is the more flexible player who is able to
obtain higher market shares. It is not clear if this commitment advantage persists for any value
of θ > 0. For θ = 0 the flexible player always best responds at time T and therefore cannot enjoy
a commitment advantage.

0.48

0.42

Theta1 = 0.5
Theta2 = 1

0.39

Theta1 = 0.05
Theta2 = 0.1

Theta1 = 1
Theta2 = 5

0.36

0.33
-10

-9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

t

Figure 8: Asymmetric players with diﬀerent adjustment costs

31

-1

0

production target

0.45

Figure 9: Equilibrium path in the repeated game
This figure plots the equilibrium path of the repeated game described in Section 2.5. Parameters are set to a = b = 1, c = 0, θ = 1, T = 10, ϕ = 0.1, and β = 0.9. Production plans follow
the same pattern before every production period, and production levels (approximately 0.37) are
constant. Initial plans in this case are not exogenous, but are set endogenously as part of the
equilibrium.

0.45

0.39

production target

0.42

0.36
Production Dates

0.33 …

Figure 9: Equilibrium path in the repeated game

32

t

Figure 10: Comparative statics in the repeated game
This figure plots the equilibrium path of the repeated game for diﬀerent levels of adjustment
costs. The rest of the parameters are set to a = b = 1, c = 0, T = 10, and β = 0.9. The figure
presents a snapshot of one stage of the game. Since we solve for a steady state, this snapshot
repeats itself forever, as in Figure 9. As one can observe, ϕ mainly aﬀects the initial plans, while θ
aﬀects the dynamic pattern of plans. As discussed in the text, the case of ϕ = 0 is a special case in
which the equilibrium of the repeated game is identical to the benchmark model with free initial
decisions. Note, however, that even small values for ϕ are suﬃcient to generate non-monotonic
pattern. This is because continuation values do not change much with initial plans.

0.45

0.435
Theta = 1
Phi = 0

0.42

Theta = 1
Phi = 10

0.39

0.375
Theta = 10
Phi = 10

0.36

0.345

0.33
-10

-9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

t

Figure 10: Comparative statics in the repeated game

33

-1

production target

0.405
Theta = 1
Phi = 0.1

Figure 11: Frequency and timing of production target observations
This figure provides information about the timing of the observations available. Each observation includes separate production target by each of the Big Three associated with a particular
production month. Recall, there are 372 production months in the data. Thus, one can see
that starting at around four months before production, observations are available at least on a
monthly basis, typically at the last week of the month. Earlier (more than four months in advance)
observations about production targets are not as regular.

300

258
250

160

158

154

148

146

150

113
99

100
74
53

42

2

5

4

191200

181190

171180

57

42
25

23

141150

131140

48

50

10
0
161170

151160

121130

111120

101110

91- 81-90 71-80 61-70 51-60 41-50 31-40 21-30 11-20 1-10
100

days before production

Figure 11: Frequency and timing of production target observations

34

Number of observations

200

Figure 12: Production targets over time, pooling all data
This figure presents quartic (biweight) kernel regressions of production targets, measured by
adit (see equation (22)), as a function of the number of days before production, d. It does so for
each of the major three manufacturers (GM, Ford, and Chrysler), as well as for the (unweighted)
average (Big Three). Each series is based on 1,598 observations. All estimates use bandwidth of 30
days. The dashed lines present 95 percent confidence intervals. Confidence intervals are computed
by bootstrapping the data, and running the same kernel regression on each bootstrapped sample.
The dashed lines in each figure report the point-by-point 2.5 and 97.5 percentiles.

GM

Big Three

30%

16%

10%
8%
6%
4%
2%
0%
-200

-190

-180

-170

-160

-150

-140

-130

-120

-110

-100

-90

-80

-70

-60

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10

25%

production targets relative to actual production (q)

12%

20%

15%

10%

5%

production targets relative to actual production (q)

14%

-2%
0%
-200

-4%

-190

-180

-170

-160

-150

-140

-130

-120

-110

-100

-90

-80

-70

-60

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10

days before production

days before production

Ford

Chrysler
20%

5%

0%
-200

-190

-180

-170

-160

-150

-140

-130

-120

-110

-100

-90

-80

-70

-60

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10

-5%

15%

10%

5%

0%
-200

-190

-180

-170

-160

-150

-140

-130

-120

-110

-100

-90

-80

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10

-10%

-15%
days before production

Figure 12: Production targets over time, pooling all data

35

-60

-5%

-10%
days before production

-70

production targets relative to actual production (q)

10%

production targets relative to actual production (q)

15%

20%

Figure 13: Production targets over time, by period
This figure presents quartic (biweight) kernel regressions of production targets, measured by
adit (see equation (22)), as a function of the number of days before production, d. It does so for
each of the major three manufacturers (GM, Ford, and Chrysler), as well as for the (unweighted)
average (Big Three). Each figure reports the kernel regression estimates, estimated separately
for each decade of the data: 1965-1975 (thick solid line), 1976-1985 (dashed line), and 1986-1995
(thin solid line). The estimates for the first decade (1965-1975) only start about 120 days before
production, as during this period they were no early production target observations.

Big Three

GM
15%

9%

7%

5%

3%

1%
-180

-170

-160

-150

-140

-130

-120

-110

-100

-90

-80

-70

-60

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10

-1%

15%

10%

5%

0%
-200

-3%

-190

-180

-170

-160

-150

-140

-130

-120

-110

-100

-90

-80

-70

-60

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10

-5%

-5%

days before production

days before production

Ford

Chrysler
13%

9%

7%

5%

3%

1%
-200

-190

-180

-170

-160

-150

-140

-130

-120

-110

-100

-90

-80

-70

-60

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10

20%
1965-1975
1976-1985
1986-1995

11%

-1%

production targets relative to actual production (q)

1965-1975
1976-1985
1986-1995

15%

10%

5%

0%
-200

-190

-180

-170

-160

-150

-140

-130

-120

-110

-100

-90

-80

-70

-60

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10

-3%

-5%

-5%

days before production

days before production

Figure 13: Production targets over time, by period

36

production targets relative to actual production (q)

-190

20%

production targets relative to actual production (q)

11%

-200

25%
1965-1975
1976-1985
1986-1995

13%
production targets relative to actual production (q)

1965-1975
1976-1985
1986-1995

Figure 14: Production targets over time, by calendar month
This figure presents quartic (biweight) kernel regressions of production targets, measured by
adit (see equation (22)), as a function of the number of days before production, d. It does so for
each calendar month separately, to account for potential seasonality of model-year product-lifecycle eﬀects. Each figure presents the kernel regression estimates for each of the Big Three, as
well as for their average.

February

January

March

35%

35%

30%

30%

25%

25%

20%

20%

15%

15%

10%

10%

5%

5%

0%

0%

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%
-200

-190

-180

-170

-160

-150

-140

-130

-120

-110

-100

-90

-80

-70

-60

-50

-40

-30

-20

-200

-10

-190

-180

-170

-160

-150

-140

-130

-120

-110

-100

-90

-80

-70

-60

-50

-40

-30

-20

-200

-190

-180

-170

-160

-150

-140

-130

-120

-110

-100

-90

-80

-70

-60

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10

-10
-5%

-5%

April

-5%

May

June

10%

10%

5%

5%

20%

15%

10%

5%
0%
-200

-190

-180

-170

-160

-150

-140

-130

-120

-110

-100

-90

-80

-70

-60

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10

0%
-200

-190

-180

-170

-160

-150

-140

-130

-120

-110

-100

-90

-80

-70

-60

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10
0%
-200

-5%

-190

-180

-170

-160

-150

-140

-130

-120

-110

-100

-90

-80

-70

-60

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10

-5%

July

-5%

August

September
25%

10%

20%

20%
15%

15%

5%

10%

10%

5%
0%
-200

-190

-180

-170

-160

-150

-140

-130

-120

-110

-100

-90

-80

-70

-60

-50

-40

-30

-20

5%

-10
0%
0%
-200

-190

-180

-170

-160

-150

-140

-130

-120

-110

-100

-90

-80

-70

-60

-50

-40

-30

-20

-200

-190

-180

-170

-160

-150

-140

-130

-120

-110

-100

-90

-80

-70

-60

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10

-10

-5%

-5%

October

-5%

November

December
35%

30%

25%

30%

25%

20%
25%

20%
15%
20%
15%
15%

10%

10%
10%
5%
5%
5%
0%

0%
-200

-190

-180

-170

-160

-150

-140

-130

-120

-110

-100

-90

-80

-70

-60

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10

0%
-200

-190

-180

-170

-160

-150

-140

-130

-120

-110

-100

-90

-80

-70

-60

-50

-40

-5%

-30

-20

-200

-190

-180

-170

-160

-150

-140

-130

-120

-110

-100

-90

-80

-70

-60

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10
-5%

Big 30 Average
GM
Ford
Chrysler

Figure 14: Production targets over time, by calendar month

37

-10

-5%

Figure 15: Production targets over time, for positive and negative
production growth
This figure presents quartic (biweight) kernel regressions of production targets, measured by
adit

(see equation (22)), as a function of the number of days before production, d. It does so for

each of the major three manufacturers (GM, Ford, and Chrysler), as well as for the (unweighted)
average (Big Three). Each figure reports the kernel regression estimates, estimated separately for
production months with positive production growth (thick line) and negative production growth
(thin line). Much of the variation in production growth is due to seasonality. As discussed in the
text, one can notice that much of the non-monotonic pattern in the data is driven by months with
positive production growth.

Big Three

GM
13%

25%

Negative Growth Periods
Positive Growth Periods

Negative Growth Periods
Positive Growth Periods

7%

5%

3%

1%
-190

-180

-170

-160

-150

-140

-130

-120

-110

-100

-90

-80

-70

-60

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10

-1%

15%

10%

5%

0%
-200

-3%

-190

-180

-170

-160

-150

-140

-130

-120

-110

-100

-90

-80

-70

-60

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10

-5%

-5%

days before production

days before production

Chrysler

Ford

20%

15%

11%

9%

7%

5%

3%

1%
-200

-190

-180

-170

-160

-150

-140

-130

-120

-110

-100

-90

-80

-70

-60

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10

Negative Growth Periods
Positive Growth Periods

13%

-1%

production targets relative to actual production (q)

Negative Growth Periods
Positive Growth Periods

15%

10%

5%

0%
-200

-190

-180

-170

-160

-150

-140

-130

-120

-110

-100

-90

-80

-70

-60

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10

production targets relative to actual production (q)

-200

20%

production targets relative to actual production (q)

9%

production targets relative to actual production (q)

11%

-3%

-5%

-5%
days before production

days before production

Figure 15: Production targets over time, for positive and negative production growth

38

Figure 16: Revisions in production targets
This figure presents quartic (biweight) kernel regressions of the revisions in production targets,
measured by sdit (see equation (23)), as a function of the number of days before production, d.
The units of sdit are in basis point change, per day. The figures present the pattern for each of
the major three manufacturers (GM, Ford, and Chrysler), as well as for the (unweighted) average
(“Big Three”). Each series is based on 1,239 observations (taking first diﬀerences, we lose the
earliest observed announcement for each production month). All estimates use bandwidth of 30
days. The dashed lines present 95 percent confidence intervals. Confidence intervals are computed
by bootstrapping the data, and running the same kernel regression on each bootstrapped sample.
The dashed lines in each figure report the point-by-point 2.5 and 97.5 percentiles.

GM
0.80

0.60

0.60

0.40

0.20

0.00
-180

-170

-160

-150

-140

-130

-120

-110

-100

-90

-80

-70

-60

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10

-0.20

0.40

0.20

0.00
-190

-180

-170

-160

-150

-140

-130

-120

-110

-100

-90

-80

-70

-60

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10

-0.20

-0.40

-0.40

days before production

days before production

Ford

Chrysler
0.80

0.60

0.60

0.40

0.20

0.00
-190

-180

-170

-160

-150

-140

-130

-120

-110

-100

-90

-80

-70

-60

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10

-0.20

revision in production target per day (basis points)

0.80

0.40

0.20

0.00
-190

-180

-170

-160

-150

-140

-130

-120

-110

-100

-90

-80

-70

-60

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10

-0.20

-0.40

-0.40

days before production

days before production

Figure 16: Revisions in production targets

39

revision in production target per day (basis points)

-190

revision in production target per day (basis points)

0.80

revision in production target per day (basis points)

Big Three

Table 1: Frequency estimates of revision signs
This table provides frequency estimates of the direction of production target revisions. The
inequalities are constructed in such a way that estimates of 0.5 imply random revisions and
estimates greater than 0.5 are consistent with the theoretical predictions. As one can observe, all
numbers but one are greater than 0.5, none of them is significantly less than 0.5, and the majority
of them are significantly greater than 0.5.

∗∗
a

P r(AMiddle
> AEarly
)a
it
it

P r(ALate
< AMiddle
)a
it
it

a
P r(Qit < ALate
it )

Big 3 Average

0.614∗∗

0.628∗∗

0.740∗∗

GM

0.474

0.584∗∗

0.763∗∗

Ford

0.667∗∗

0.509

0.676∗∗

Chrysler

0.511

0.528

0.543

Obs.

135

286

359

Significantly diﬀerent from 0.5 at 95% confidence level.

For each i and t we construct AEarly
as the average of Adit such that d < −110. Respectively,
it

for AMiddle
we use d ∈ [−110, −50] and for ALate
we use d > −50. Changing the cutoﬀ levels for
it
it

these variables has no eﬀect on the results.

40

