NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DETERMINANTS OF MORTALITY
David M. Cutler
Angus S. Deaton
Adriana Lleras-Muney
Working Paper 11963
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11963
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2006

We are grateful to Jeffrey Hammer and to participants in the NIA-sponsored workshop on the Determinants
of Mortality, Princeton, July 16, 2004. The views here are those of the authors and not of the participants.
Cutler and Deaton gratefully acknowledge financial support from the NIA through NBER, Grant No. P01
AG05842-14, Cutler acknowledges support from the NIA through grant R01 AG015911 and Deaton
acknowledges support from the NIA through Grant No.R01 AG20275-01. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by David M. Cutler, Angus S. Deaton, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Determinants of Mortality
David M. Cutler, Angus S. Deaton, and Adriana Lleras-Muney
NBER Working Paper No. 11963
January 2006
JEL No. I1, J1, O1, N3
ABSTRACT
Mortality rates have fallen dramatically over time, starting in a few countries in the 18th century, and
continuing to fall today. In just the past century, life expectancy has increased by over 30 years. At
the same time, mortality rates remain much higher in poor countries, with a difference in life
expectancy between rich and poor countries of also about 30 years. This difference persists despite
the remarkable progress in health improvement in the last half century, at least until the HIV/AIDS
pandemic. In both the time-series and the cross-section data, there is a strong correlation between
income per capita and mortality rates, a correlation that also exists within countries, where richer,
better-educated people live longer. We review the determinants of these patterns: over history, over
countries, and across groups within countries. While there is no consensus about the causal
mechanisms, we tentatively identify the application of scientific advance and technical progress
(some of which is induced by income and facilitated by education) as the ultimate determinant of
health. Such an explanation allows a consistent interpretation of the historical, cross-country, and
within-country evidence. We downplay direct causal mechanisms running from income to health.
David M. Cutler
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dcutler@harvard.edu
Angus S. Deaton
Woodrow Wilson School
and Department of Economics
328 Wallace Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1013
and NBER
deaton@princeton.edu

Adriana Lleras-Muney
Woodrow Wilson School
and Department of Economics
320 Wallace Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1013
and NBER
alleras@princeton.edu

The pleasures of life are worth nothing if one is not alive to experience them.
Through the twentieth century in the United States and other high-income countries,
growth in real incomes was accompanied by a historically unprecedented decline in
mortality rates that caused life expectancy at birth to grow by nearly 30 years.
The value of reductions in mortality risk can be roughly estimated from
(admittedly heroic extrapolations of) differential wages in the labor market corresponding
to differentials in the risk of death (Viscusi and Aldy, 2003). Applying this methodology,
Nordhaus (2002, p. 35) has calculated that “to a first approximation, the economic value
of increases in longevity in the last hundred years is about as large as the value of
measured growth in nonhealth goods and services.” Falling mortality has also usually
meant better health for the living, so that people are also living better, healthier, and
longer lives than did their forebears (Costa and Steckel, 1997). Murphy and Topel (2005),
who measure both the value of mortality decline and also include the benefits of better
health for the living, estimate that, between 1970 and 2000, the annual value of
increased longevity was about half of conventionally measured national income.
Improvements in life expectancy in the United States have been matched by
similar improvements in other rich countries. Indeed, there has been a rapid convergence
of older adult mortality rates since 1970 in rich countries, particularly among men
(Deaton, 2004, Figure 7). Outside of the rich countries, average health is strongly
correlated with income. As shown in Figure 1, the current version of a graph first drawn
by Preston (1975) in which countries are represented by circles and the size of the circle

2

is proportional to population, life-expectancy is profoundly lower for countries with
lower levels of per capita income.
In the years just after World War II, life expectancy gaps between countries were
falling across the world. Now-poor countries enjoyed rapid increases in life-expectancy
in the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s, with the gains in some cases exceeding an additional year
of life expectancy per year (Gwatkin, 1980). The HIV/AIDS epidemic and the transition
in Eastern Europe have changed that situation. The best estimates of life-expectancy in
some sub-Saharan African countries are lower now than they were in 1950. Life
expectancy in Russia fell by nearly seven years over the 1990s. However, and at least up
to the 1990s, compound welfare measures that incorporate both health and income show
both much greater inequality at any point in time and much greater international
convergence than do income measures alone (Becker, Murphy and Soares, 2005).
There is a positive relationship between income and health within countries, too --- low-income people live shorter lives than high-income people in a given country.
Americans in the bottom 5 percent of the income distribution in 1980 had a lifeexpectancy at all ages that was about 25 percent lower than the corresponding lifeexpectancies of those in the top 5 percent of the income distribution (Rogot, Sorlie,
Johnson and Schmitt, 1992). These “health inequalities,” also known as gradients, are
part of a wider patterning of mortality by measures of socio-economic status. For
example, American blacks had a life expectancy in 2002 that was 5.4 years less than that
of American whites (National Center for Health Statistics, 2004, Table 27). In England
and Wales in 1997-2001, male manual workers could expect to live 8.4 years less than

3

professionals, a gap that has increased since the early 1970s (Office of National Statistics,
2005).
The decline in mortality over time, differences in mortality across countries, and
differences in mortality across groups within countries are phenomena worthy of serious
attention by economists and others. We will first lay out the historical decline in
mortality, then move to mortality differences between rich and poor countries, and then
discuss differences in mortality within countries. A good theory of mortality should
explain all of the facts we will outline. No such theory exists at present, but at the end of
the paper we will sketch a tentative synthesis.

Determinants of the Historical Decline in Mortality

For most of human history, life was properly described in the famous phrase of
Thomas Hobbes as “nasty, brutish, and short.” From the dawn of Homo sapiens perhaps
100,000 years ago until the first agricultural revolution in roughly 10,000 BC, world
population was about four million people. Life expectancy at birth for our huntergatherer ancestors was perhaps 25 years (Acsádi and Nemerskéri, 1970). There had been
little, if any progress by the Roman Empire, and even in 1700, life expectancy at birth in
England – after The Netherlands, the richest country in the world at the time (Maddison,
2001, Table B-21) – was only 37 years (Wrigley and Schofield, 1981).
In the eighteenth century, mortality began to decline. In England and Wales
(which we refer to as just “England” for convenience), the decline started around the
middle of the eighteenth century. By 1820, life expectancy at birth in England was about

4

41 years, up six years over the previous century. Between 1820 and 1870, the period of
greatest industrialization, life expectancy remained stable at about 41 years. Since 1870,
mortality has fallen relatively continuously as well as more rapidly than in the first phase.
Life expectancy in England climbed to 50 years in the first decade of the twentieth
century, and is about 77 years today. A similar transition, with some moderate
differences in timing, took place in all developed countries. Mortality reduction in
France was broadly similar to that in England. In the United States, the mortality
reduction appears to start in about 1790, with a similar overall pattern. Life expectancy
at birth rose from 47 years in 1900 to 78 years today.
The reduction in mortality was not uniform by age. The vast bulk of the historical
reduction in mortality occurred at younger ages. Figure 2 shows trends in life expectancy
by age in England since 1840. Between 1841 and 1950, life expectancy at birth increased
by 30 years, while life expectancy at age ten increased by only half that amount. The
decline in infectious disease explains this disparate age pattern. In 1848, 60 percent of
deaths in England were from infectious disease. Between then and 1971, infectious
disease mortality declined by 95 percent. Since infants and children are the most
vulnerable to infections, their mortality rate was most affected by the decline in
infections. The sources of the reduction in infectious disease mortality have been
extensively debated in the demographic community. We discuss the relevant factors in
(possible) order of historical importance and conclude with some open issues.

Improved Nutrition

5

Agricultural yields increased significantly during the eighteenth century. Better
fed people resist most bacterial (although not viral) disease better, and recover more
rapidly and more often. The British physician and demographer Thomas McKeown was
the first person to argue for the importance of nutrition in improved health, writing
several seminal papers on the topic which culminated in his widely read 1976 book.
McKeown argued by residual analysis: neither personal health care nor public health
appeared to have had much impact prior to the 1900s, when most of the mortality decline
had already occurred. In a famous example, McKeown showed that mortality from
tuberculosis fell by 80 percent before there was any effective treatment for the disease.
The same is true for other infectious diseases as well. However, many analysts
(especially Szreter, 1988 and Guha, 1994) found unconvincing both McKeown’s
dismissal of public health, as well as the argument by elimination that nutrition was the
crucial factor.
Direct evidence on the role of nutrition in improved health and mortality
reduction comes from the work of Robert Fogel, in a series of papers summarized in
Fogel (1997) and in his 2004 book. Fogel begins by showing the enormous increase in
caloric intake after the middle of the eighteenth century, measured both directly from
agricultural output and diary surveys, and indirectly through changes in adult height.
Between the middle of the eighteenth century and today, for example, caloric intake per
person increased by more than a third, and heights in most of Europe increased by 10
centimeters or more (Fogel, 1994, Table 1). Mortality is U-shaped in the body mass
index (weight divided by height squared), and declines with height given the body mass
index (Waaler, 1984). Fogel and Costa and Steckel (1997) use these results to argue that

6

nearly all of the reduction in mortality from the late eighteenth century to the late
nineteenth century can be attributed to improved nutrition, as well as half of the mortality
improvement in the century after that.
But the evidence on calorie availability has not convinced everyone. One line of
argument is that the increase in life expectancy in England from 1750 to 1820 had
nothing to do with increased income per head, but was just one of the fluctuations in
mortality that characterized pre-industrial Europe. Indeed, Wrigley and Schofield (1981)
estimate that life expectancy in 1600 was the same as in 1820, with 1750 a low point of a
two-century swing. Steckel (2004) argues on the basis of skeletal remains that people
were taller (and presumably better nourished) in early medieval times. If we accept this
argument and date the modern decrease in mortality from 1870, when it began in earnest
in England and several other European countries, the link between economic growth and
mortality becomes tenuous, because the timing of the beginnings of modern growth is far
more dispersed across countries than is the onset of the modern mortality decline
(Easterlin, 2004). And as we shall see, improvements in public health offer a more
coherent explanation for mortality declines after 1870.
Another concern with the nutritional story is that, from the sixteenth to the
eighteenth centuries, English aristocrats had no life expectancy advantage over the rest of
the population, despite presumably better nutrition. Nor was mortality lower in well-fed
populations of the same period, such as in the United States (Livi-Bacci, 1991; Harris,
2004).
Further, there are powerful two-way interactions between disease and nutrition
(Scrimshaw, Taylor and Gordon, 1968). Children who are frequently malnourished often

7

continually suffer from poorly-controlled infectious disease. Diseases such as diarrhea
prevent food intake from nourishing the body; children who suffer repeated episodes of
diarrhea may be able to digest less than 80 percent of what they consume (Dasgupta and
Ray, 1990). As a result, some argue that it was disease, not nutrition, that was the primary
exogenous influence, and that disease burdens changed most strongly as a result of public
health intervention.

Public Health
The argument for the role of public health in reduced mortality is made most
prominently by Samuel Preston (1975, 1980, 1996). If economic growth were the sole
reason for improved health, countries would move along the “Preston curve” shown in
Figure 1, but the curve itself would remain fixed. However, even at a given level of
income, people live substantially longer today than they did in the past. For example,
China in 2000 has the income level of the United States in the 1880s, but the life
expectancy of the United States in 1970, about 72 years. Preston estimates that only
about 15 percent of the increase in life expectancy between the 1930s and 1960s is a
result of increases in income alone. While income was certainly mis-measured
historically, there is no income in 1930 that would have resulted in the life expectancy
observed in many countries in 1960.
Public health improvements are an obvious explanation for this shift. Macro
public health involves big public works projects: filtering and chlorinating water supplies,
building sanitation systems, draining swamps, pasteurizing milk and undertaking mass
vaccination campaigns. Micro public health are changes made by individuals but

8

encouraged by the public sector, including boiling bottles and milk, protecting food from
insects, washing hands, ventilating rooms and keeping children’s vaccinations up to date.
Macro public health was always present to some extent. Even in the Middle Ages, it was
known that people living in areas where bubonic plague was rampant should be
quarantined (but rats were not). Benjamin Latrobe built a water system in Philadelphia
early in the nineteenth century, at least partly to reduce the disease burden. In 1854 John
Snow compared cholera fatalities between households supplied by two different water
companies, one of which was recycling human waste, and one of which was not. He thus
demonstrated that cholera was water-borne and that its spread could be halted by
uncontaminated water supplies (Freedman, 1991). But big public health did not fully
come into its own until the acceptance of the germ theory of disease in the 1880s and
1890s, which led to a wave of new public health initiatives and the conveyance of safe
health practices to individuals (Mokyr, 2002, ch. 5; Tomes, 1998).
The dramatic reduction in water and food-borne diseases after that time -typhoid, cholera, dysentery, and non-respiratory tuberculosis -- highlights the role of
public health. From a mortality rate of 214 per 100,000 in 1848-54, these diseases were
virtually eliminated in the US by 1970. By one estimate, water purification alone can
explain half of the mortality reduction in the United States in the first third of the
twentieth century (Cutler and Miller, 2005).

Urbanization
If rising living standards were good for health, urbanization was not, at least
initially. The preponderance of the evidence suggests that the lack of improvement in

9

mortality between 1820 and 1870 is due in large part to the greater spread of disease in
newly enlarged cities. Nutrition may or may not be the culprit here; debate about
whether nutrition and real wages were rising or falling in the middle of the nineteenth
century continues to rage (for example, Feinstein, 1998). But the effect of unsanitary
conditions was larger and the spread of disease was easier in bigger, more crowded cities
(Rosen, 1993).

Vaccination
Prior to the 20th century, there was little effective medical treatment for infectious
disease. Over the course of the twentieth century, however, the role of medical advances
increased in importance.
The first important medical interventions were vaccinations. Variolation against
smallpox, practiced in China as early as the 10th century, was an early from of
immunization whereby matter from the scabs of previous victims was introduced into the
bodies of healthy people. Variolation was introduced to Europe from Turkey and to the
American colonies by African slaves in the early 18th century. George Washington
variolated his entire army. Vaccination was introduced by Jenner at the end of the 18th
century, but wide scale research on vaccines depended on the germ theory of disease and
did not occur until a century later. Since the late 19th century, there have been a number
of vaccines (CDC, 1999), including those for rabies (1885), plague (1897), diphtheria
(1923), pertussis (1926), tuberculosis (1927), tetanus (1927), yellow fever (1935), polio
(1955 and 1962), measles (1964), mumps (1967), rubella (1970), and hepatitis B (1981).

10

The morbidity consequences of these diseases were high, but the best available
historical data suggest that, in the now rich countries, immediately prior to introduction
of vaccines direct mortality from these diseases was relatively rare, except for
tuberculosis. As many as half a million people contracted measles in the US just before
the vaccine was developed, for example, but measles directly accounted for fewer than
1,000 deaths. Exclusive of tuberculosis, reductions in these causes of death account for
only 3 percent of the total mortality reduction. The reduction in tuberculosis mortality is
another 10 percent, but in the US, unlike most other countries, the TB vaccine has never
been routinely used, so none of the reduction was due to vaccination. These conclusions
parallel those by McKeown (1976); the BCG vaccine for tuberculosis was widely used in
Britain, but without any evidence of an effect on trend mortality. Apart from polio, the
same is true for the introduction of other vaccines. Of course, the indirect consequences
of eliminating infectious diseases may be greater; people with measles may succumb
more readily to other diseases, for example. Evidence suggests there are indirect
mortality effects for some water-born diseases (Cutler and Miller, 2005), but the extent of
such indirect effects in the disease environment as a whole is not known.

Medical Treatments
Quantitatively more important for mortality was the development of new
therapeutics for people with disease. Figure 3 shows mortality for infectious diseases and
cardiovascular disease. Infectious disease declined greatly in the first half of the century,
while cardiovascular disease mortality reductions were particularly important after 1960.

11

Antibiotics, developed in the 1930s and 1940s, were the first of the new wave of
medical therapies. Sulfa drugs and penicillin were the wonder drugs of their era. By
1960, mortality from infectious diseases had declined to its current levels.
More intensive medical interventions date in importance largely from the postWorld War II era, and are associated with a different cause of mortality. Since 1960,
cardiovascular disease mortality has declined by over 50 percent, and cardiovascular
disease mortality reductions account for 70 percent of the 7 year increase in life
expectancy between 1960 and 2000. Cutler (2004a) matches the results of clinical trials
to actual mortality declines, and attributes the bulk of the decline in cardiovascular
disease mortality – as much as two-thirds of the reduction – to medical advance. Beyond
medical advance, the major factor in reduced cardiovascular disease mortality is the
reduction in smoking. Smoking rates in the United States have fallen to half their level at
the time of the Surgeon General’s 1964 report on the harms of smoking. Continued
public health campaigns against tobacco use have been an important part of this decline
(Cutler, 2004b).
An additional 19 percent of the increase in life expectancy since 1960 is a result
of reduced infant mortality. Cutler (2004a) attributes a large share of continued infant
mortality reductions to improved neonatal medical care for low birth-weight infants. The
remainder of the decline in mortality since 1960s includes reduced mortality from
external causes, primarily motor vehicle accidents, reduced mortality from
pneumonia/influenza, and a slight decrease in cancer mortality.
The importance of medical technology and smoking behavior can also be seen in
the simultaneous decline and rapid convergence of mortality rates for all developed

12

countries, particularly for men, and particularly for cardiovascular disease. Smoking
causes cardiovascular disease with a relatively short lag, and lung cancer with a much
longer lag. In consequence, the increase in smoking among men in the second quarter of
the twentieth century contributed to the slowdown in mortality decline in the third
quarter, and the reduction in smoking, which is now widespread throughout the rich
countries, is currently acting in concert with technical progress in medicine. Women
began to smoke later than men, and have been slower to quit, and women’s smoking rates
are still rising in some European countries. As a result, the current gap between men’s
and women’s life expectancy is low by historical standards; the decline and convergence
of mortality from cardiovascular disease has been slower for women than for men; and
women’s mortality rate from lung cancer is still rising in many countries, though it has
recently reversed in some, including the United States.
Some analysts would continue to give nutrition the primary role in reducing life
expectancy, even after 1870 and well into the twentieth century, rather than public health
and medical care. In most countries of the world, although not the United States, people
are continuing to get taller, and relationships that link mortality to physical characteristics
will predict much of the recent mortality decline based on body size and function alone
(Costa, 2004). Fogel gives the personal healthcare system much credit for reducing
morbidity (hip replacement, cataract surgery, and so on) but none for mortality decline:
“The main thing that physicians do is to make life more bearable: reduce morbidity and
tell people how to take care of themselves” (2004, p. 103).

The Long-Term Reach of Early Life Factors

13

The “fetal origins” (or “womb with a view” hypothesis) of Barker (1995, 1990)
posits that in conditions of nutritional deficiency, the developing fetus will differentially
compromise functions that are operative only late in the life-cycle, beyond the normal age
of reproduction, thus maximizing the chances of survival through reproductive ages and
the number of offspring. The consequence for modern populations is that better nutrition
decades ago could be having its effect only today.
The fetal origins theory is supported by the robust correlation between health in
adulthood and birth weight, a marker for in utero nutrition (though a relatively poor one
according to the theory, which stresses body shape more than weight), even when
controlling for current socioeconomic status (Barker, 1995).1 A more compelling
analytical approach is to examine late life health of children who were in utero during
famines. Children who survived in utero the brief Dutch famine at the end of World War
II had higher levels of risk factors associated with coronary heart disease at age 50
(Roseboom et al., 2001a), though this is not true of mortality from heart disease itself
(Roseboom et al., 2001b; it is perhaps too early to find such effects.) On the other hand,
no exposure effects were found for families in Finland in 1866-68 (Kannisto,
Christensen, and Vaupel, 1997) and in Leningrad during the siege of World War II
(Stanner et al., 1997; Rasmussen, 2001). Even if the theory is correct, Kramer (2000)
argues that the effects of nutritional improvements in utero on cardiovascular mortality in
adulthood are small compared to the effects of reductions in risk factors in adulthood.
The seasonality of life-expectancy with respect to month of birth is another type
1

Huxley, Neil and Collins (2002) find that the association between birth weight and blood pressure is only
significant in studies with small sample sizes, a finding that is attributed to publication bias (selection of
papers with significant findings) rather than any real effects. But it is also true that the larger studies tend to
use less satisfactory measures of fetal malnutrition, so that measurement error may also explain the
findings.

14

of evidence. Doblhammer and Vaupel (2001) and Doblhammer (2002) have shown a
relationship between month of birth and longevity at age 50; those born in the northern
hemisphere in October to December live about as much as 0.6 year longer than those
born in April to June. As expected, the southern hemisphere is out of phase with the
north by six months. After examining alternative explanations, such as selective infant
mortality, these studies conclude the month-of-birth effect is most likely due to the
seasonal availability of fresh fruit, vegetables and eggs to the pregnant mother in the first
and second trimesters.
After birth, the environment during childhood, including disease prevalence and
conditions at home, predicts the onset of disease in adulthood (Costa, 2000). For
example, Case, Fertig and Paxson (2005) use the data from the 1958 British birth cohort
to calculate that each chronic condition at age seven raises by 4 percent the probability of
reporting a chronic condition at age 42; if the condition is still present at 16, the effect is
twice as large. More recently Lindeboom, Portrait and van der Berg (forthcoming) look
at cohorts born in Holland between 1812 and 1912 and find that per capita GDP up to age
seven is associated with large effects on mortality at ages above 50; in fact, the health
effects from economic conditions at age seven are larger than the effects of
contemporaneous macroeconomic conditions at ages 50 and above.
Overall, childhood factors such as nutrition and the disease environment have the
potential to significantly affect mortality at older ages, although the magnitude is open to
some debate. For this reason, some of the decline in mortality at the end of the 20th
century might be attributable to improvements in diet and public health many years ago,
with the possibility of still more improvement to come.

15

Summary
Looking at this evidence as a whole, we see the history of mortality reduction as
encompassing three phases. The first phase, from the middle of the 18th century to the
middle of the 19th century, is the one where improved nutrition and economic growth
may well have played a large role in health, although this is hotly debated, and incipient
public health measures were certainly important as well. In the closing decades of the
nineteenth century and into the twentieth, the second phase occurred, in which public
health mattered more – first negatively, because of high mortality in cities, then
positively in the delivery of clean water and removal of wastes, and advice about
personal health practices. The third phase, dating from the 1930s on, has been the era of
big medicine, starting with vaccination and antibiotics, and moving on to the expensive
and intensive personal interventions that characterize the medical system today.

Determinants of Mortality in Poor Countries

Life expectancy is much lower and mortality rates are much higher in poor
countries than in rich countries, see Figure 1 and Table 1. There are also marked
differences in who dies and from what. In poor countries, 30 percent of deaths are among
children, compared with less than 1 percent among rich countries. In rich countries, most
deaths are from cancers and from cardiovascular diseases; in poor countries, most deaths
are from infectious diseases, most of which are but a historical memory in rich countries

16

today, and which nowadays kill people almost exclusively in poor countries.
Yet there have been enormous improvements in life expectancy over the last half
century in today’s poor countries. In India and China, life expectancies have risen by
nearly 30 years since 1950 and, even in Africa, where there has been much less economic
progress, life expectancy rose by more than 13 years from the early 1950s to the late
1980s, before declining in the face of HIV/AIDS. The world-wide decline in mortality
after the Second World War happened because two-hundred years worth of progress
against mortality in the now-rich countries was rapidly brought to bear on mortality in the
rest of the world. Measures such as improvements in water supply, cleansing the
environment of disease vectors (e.g. anopheles mosquitoes that carry malaria, or rats that
carry lice), the use of antibiotics, and the widespread immunization of children, the
combined development of which in the west had taken many years, were introduced to
the rest of the world over a relatively very short span of time. Because those who had
previously died were mostly children, and because subsequent reductions in fertility
followed only slowly (and in some countries not at all), this rapid deployment of life
saving public health led to the population explosion of the last half century.
Table 1 shows that there is a great deal more to be done before health in poor
countries resembles that in rich countries today. As is also clear from the table, the
problem is not primarily lack of suitable treatments. Diarrheal disease and respiratory
infections – the first and fourth leading causes of death worldwide – are easily and
cheaply treatable, with oral rehydration therapy (a mixture of salts and sugar that stops
the dehydration that kills children with diarrhea), and with antibiotics. Malaria has been
fully controlled in the rich world by environmental measures and can arguably be

17

controlled by similar measures—although it will certainly be more difficult given the
more difficult environments—or by the use of insecticide-impregnated bed nets in poor
countries. (Induced evolutionary changes in the anopheles mosquitoes will eventually
make ineffective any given insecticide, and the outcome of the resulting arms race is
unclear.) Cheap and effective antibiotics exist for most kinds of tuberculosis, though
therapy must be maintained for a considerable period of time. The infectious “children’s
diseases” of whooping cough, tetanus, polio, diphtheria and measles kill more than a
million children each year, and all have been eliminated in rich countries by near
universal immunization. Deaths within the first 7-days of life are rare in the west, where
pre- and post-natal healthcare are routinely available, but common in the rest of the
world. The anti-retroviral drugs that have controlled mortality from HIV/AIDS in the rich
world are expensive and not generally available in sub-Saharan Africa, even in South
Africa which is by far the wealthiest country in the region.
Of course, the fact that treatments already exist for many conditions does not deny
that new technology could be valuable. It is speculated that vaccines could be developed
for many of the key killers in developing countries (especially AIDS, tuberculosis, and
malaria; see Kremer 2002), which would make disease prevention much easier. Easier to
use therapies could also be important, to the extent that the difficulty of using therapies
such as anti-retroviral medications explains their low use. However cheap and easy-toadminister treatments that are already available for many diseases are not being used.
These diseases themselves are the result of other risk factors and disease
exposures. The World Health Organization (2003) has identified a set of risk factors for
mortality in poor countries. Included in the risks are unsafe sex (certainly important for

18

HIV/AIDS), unsafe drinking water (one cause of diarrheal disease), and a variety of other
factors such as undernutrition, and indoor smoke from burning solid fuels (important in
respiratory conditions). The list of underlying factors is – more or less – the right one,
but the quantitative magnitude of the particular factors is unknown. In thinking about
ways to improve health in poor countries, we focus less on particular risk factors and
more on the overall medical and economic environment that can affect those factors.
Health delivery is often of low quality in both public and private sectors.
Absenteeism among medical staff is often a problem (with a third or more not showing
up for work), particularly in rural areas, Chaudhury et al (2005). Recent surveys in India
have shown that, while public doctors are more likely to be qualified, they are also more
likely to be absent, and have insufficient time or medicines to provide effective treatment.
Private providers are often ill-qualified, and face competitive pressure to over treat, for
example by giving everyone an injection of antibiotics without any prior testing
(Banerjee, Deaton and Duflo, 2003; Das and Hammer, 2004). Countries which are unable
to provide effective public healthcare are often also those that do not have the
institutional ability to regulate and to monitor the private sector. At the same time, many
countries spend so little on healthcare that, no matter how organized, it is unlikely to be
effective.
Paradoxically, many consumers report that they are well-satisfied even with
objectively unsatisfactory provision, so that there is little political demand for
improvement. And whatever the reasons, the fact that many countries cannot deliver the
cheap, effective, and widely available drugs that currently exist has been a persistent
argument by those who doubt that the patents on antiretroviral drugs can be blamed for

19

the lack of success in dealing with HIV/AIDS in Africa.
Many of the most successful health programs in poor countries, such as
immunization campaigns, the (successful) eradication of smallpox and the (close to
successful) eradication of polio, have been “vertical” campaigns run from outside the
country by international organization such as WHO or UNICEF. Some critics argue that,
although successful, these programs have done little to improve (and may bid resources
away from) the domestic healthcare systems on which further progress in reducing
mortality may arguably depend. That health inputs are so inelastic in the long run seems
unlikely to be true, however. More consequentially, there is some evidence that the
international immunization campaigns have run out of steam in recent years. They are
less well funded than in the past, and past campaigns may have successfully targeted the
easiest to reach segments of the population (Bloom and Canning, 2005). Perhaps in
consequence, there has been a worldwide slowdown in the rate of reduction of infant
mortality in the 1990s compared with the 1980s (Ahmad, Lopez, and Inoue, 2000).
Broader social factors are also important for reductions in mortality. In his
pioneering work, Preston (1980) attributed about half of the gain in life expectancy in
developing countries (excluding China) from the 1930s to the late 1960s to the combined
effects of changes in income, in literacy, and the supply of calories, although the last was
not significant in his regressions. He attributed the rest of the gain to new (to the third
world) public health measures, although he recognized the difficulties of attribution, if
only because of likely interactions; income or education may facilitate the adoption and
effectiveness of some public health measures.
The importance of education, particularly women’s education, has been confirmed in

20

many subsequent studies, see for example Murthi, Guio and Drèze (1995) and Drèze and
Murthi (2001) for Indian districts, who demonstrate a correlation, not only in the crosssection, but in changes over time. The importance of women’s education is likely a result
of the fact that as primary care takers, they are most likely to implement the health
behaviors that can improve their children’s health. To the extent that education improves
an individual’s ability to undertake these changes, more educated mothers will have
healthier babies (for example they will smoke less, Meara 2001, Currie and Moretti
2003).
The role of economic growth in health improvements in poor countries has been
as controversial as it is in the history of mortality decline. If Figure 1 were a causal
relationship, it would show that the effects of income on health are strong at low levels of
income, where absolute deprivation (including lack of food and clean water) is common.
Such income-based explanations emphasize the nutritional factors brought up in the
historical account, as well as the fact that higher income makes it easier to provide the
infrastructure of public health, such as water and sanitation. In recent years, a number of
authors have followed Pritchett and Summers (1996) and argued from cross-country
regressions that income is more important than any other factor, and have endorsed
policies that downplay the role of any deliberate public action in health improvement.
According to this view, if countries are growing, their health will look after itself. As
was certainly intended, Pritchett and Summers’ title, “Wealthier is Healthier,” has
become a banner under which some economists defend economic liberalization against
claims by the public health community and others that it has harmed health, for example
Dollar (2001).

21

Yet the cross-country data show almost no relationship between changes in life
expectancy and economic growth over 10, 20, or 40 year periods between 1960 and 2000.
Many countries have shown remarkable improvements in health with little or no
economic growth, and vice versa. For the two largest countries, India and China, there is
a negative correlation between decadal rates of economic growth and progress in
reducing infant and child mortality, see Figure 4. Almost all of China’s remarkable postwar reduction in infant mortality happened prior to the acceleration in economic growth
after 1980, after which there was relatively little progress in child health. Similarly, in
India, the acceleration of the rate of growth after the economic reforms in the early 1990s
was accompanied by a slowdown in the rate of decline in infant mortality, see in
particular Drèze and Sen (2002, chapter 4). Drèze and Sen argue that the slowdown in
progress in China was a direct result of the change in policy and switch in resources that
generated the growth.
Just as in the historical record, then, there is no presumption that economic
growth will improve health without deliberate public action. This may seem paradoxical
if only because income brings so many things that favor better health for the poor: better
nutrition, better housing, the ability to pay for healthcare, as well as the means for the
public provision of clean water and sanitation. There are a number of possible hypotheses
for why income is not more important. As we have seen in the historical account, income
growth and health are not always associated. As was the case in Europe, economic
growth has been accompanied by urbanization in much of the poor world, and with some
of the same consequences that attended urbanization in Europe. This seems unlikely to
be the explanation for India or China, however.

22

More importantly, nutrition and housing may have limited effects without macro
public health measures, which require political action. Income can only buy so much if
the disease burden is overwhelming. Some rapidly growing economies have not
provided that public health environment, indeed have substituted out of it to promote
economic growth. Other countries that rely on more of a command and control economic
system have used their command over labor to undertake public health measures that
might not feasible in a more democratic state. Examples from China range from the
coerced mobilization of whole villages to deal with health threats or pests, such as
mosquitoes, to the one child policy itself, Horn (1969). Similarly, Cuba has a program of
local doctors that is the envy of many countries, even as the overall economy is in
shambles. Ironically, the weakness of the economy as a whole may make it easier for
countries to afford the distribution of resources to health care.
Finally, and on the opposite side of the argument, there is an old view, recently
endorsed by Acemoglu and Johnson (2005), that improvements in health technology and
the associated reduction in child mortality should reduce GDP per head, at least
temporarily, if health innovations result in large increases in population. Since growth
and health improvements are close to uncorrelated in the data, the negative effects of
health improvements through increased population must have been almost completely
offset by some positive effect of economic growth on health. If this story is right, growth
does indeed improve health, but the effect has been hidden for much of the postwar
period by the negative effects of population growth on income per head.

Determinants of Mortality within Countries

23

A vast literature shows that individuals with low income, low wealth, low
education, or low social status often die younger than those who are better off or better
educated; and this is true for many countries and for many (if not all) periods. The British
census of 1851 showed differences in mortality across (occupationally defined) social
classes, with those in lower (manual) classes having higher mortality than skilled workers
or professionals (Macintyre, 1997).2 More recently the famous study of Whitehall civil
servants in Britain shows a difference in mortality rates across groups defined by their
civil-service ranks (Marmot et al., 1991); all-cause mortality diminishes with rank, as
does mortality from most causes, although the effects are much stronger for
cardiovascular disease than for cancer.
In the United States, an array of studies has found similar patterns by income,
education, and race (for a compendium, see Rogers, Hummer and Nam, 2000). The
National Longitudinal Mortality Study, which matches death certificates into earlier data
from the Current Population Survey, shows inverse (partial and total) correlations
between both education and income and mortality (Elo and Preston, 1996), as well as
correlations between mortality and race, urban/rural residence, and other factors.
These socioeconomic differences in health extend even to babies. White infants of
mothers with less than 12 years of education have a mortality rate that is twice as high as
that of white infants of mothers with a high school degree (10 versus less than 5 per
1,000). Infants of black mothers have higher mortality rates than whites for every
education level—furthermore children of black mothers with a college degree have

2

This finding is not universal, however. Preston and Haines (1991) do not show large differences in infant
mortality by occupation group around the turn of the twentieth century in the United States. And as we
noted above, there was no difference in life-expectancy between the families of British dukes and those of
general population in the two hundred years prior to 1750.

24

higher mortality rates than children of white high school dropouts (Pamuk et al 1998,
Figure 9). Income gradients in non-fatal health begin in early childhood, and grow larger
as the child moves into adulthood (Case, Lubotsky and Paxson, 2002).
Similar “gradients”-- the term is used to emphasize that there are “graded”
differences in health running across ranked groups, not just between poor and rich -- are
found in Canada (Wolfson et al., 1993) and in European countries (Fox, 1989, Macintyre,
1997). Although data on adult mortality are lacking in many poor countries, the World
Bank has documented a strong negative link between infant and child mortality and an
index of living standards based on the ownership of durable goods, and sometimes more
directly on income or consumption (for example, Gwatkin et al., 2000, for India). In
most places, mortality differences by social class are particularly well-defined for
cardiovascular disease and for lung cancer. Mortality differences are a good deal less
sharp for other cancers, and are reversed for breast cancer in women, where highly
educated, high income women are more likely to die.3
The elimination or at least reduction of differences in health by income, race, or
geography has become a major focus of health policy in many countries, including the
United States and Britain. Our concern here is why these inequalities exist and whether
their existence is consistent with our accounts of historical and contemporaneous
mortality decline, and with differences in mortality between rich and poor countries.

Medical care

3

This pattern is hypothesized to be driven by differential fertility. More educated women have fewer
children. As a result throughout life they are exposed to higher levels of hormones which are believed to
increase the risk of breast cancer, Weinberg (1998).

25

One possible answer is that those with high incomes receive more health care.
Health insurance is related to income in the United States, and while health care coverage
is universal in most other countries, better and less well off have access to different
physicians and sometimes hospitals. For example, in the United States, standards of care
appear to be lower in hospitals that mostly treat blacks (Bach et al., 2002, Skinner et al.,
2005).
But access to health care cannot explain everything. As several studies, including
Whitehall in the UK and the Health and Retirement Study in the United States show, the
incidence of adverse health conditions is higher among those of lower rank or lower
education, even before the health care system has become involved. Moreover, some
large changes in access to health care have had only minor effects on health gradients.
The introduction of Medicare in 1965 had no clear effects on the mortality of the elderly
(Finkelstein and McKnight, 2005), and no effect on U.S. relative to British mortality rates
for the relevant age groups (Deaton and Paxson, 2004).4 Strikingly, Britain’s class-based
differences in health survived the introduction of the National Health Service after the
Second World War.

Resources
An alternative theory of resources is that money matters because of the non-health
care things it can buy. This theory may have made more sense in the past, when adequate
food, clothing, and shelter were constant struggles, but it makes less sense today, at least

4

This extends to the generosity of insurance as well. The Rand Health Insurance Experiment in the 1970s,
which randomly offered different levels of health insurance to families, found very small differences in
health across insurance plans, although utilization of care was significantly higher for those with more
generous insurance (Manning et al. 1987, Newhouse 1993).

26

in rich countries. Indeed, access to cheap food is a risk factor for poor health in the
United States and many countries (Cutler, Glaeser and Shapiro, 2003). There is no
evidence that, as living standards rise, the health gradient disappears. In fact, according to
some measures, health gradients appear to be increasing in both the United States (Pappas
et al. 1993, Elo and Preston, 1996) and Europe (Marmot 1991; Kunst et al., 2004).

Differences in health-related behaviors
More educated people are less likely to smoke, and this difference has increased
over time; between the mid-1970s and the mid-1990s, the difference in prevalence of
smoking between high-school graduates and college graduates grew from about 9
percentage points to 15.5 percentage points (Pamuk et al., 1998). Smoking is a substantial
factor in differences in lung cancer and cardiovascular disease mortality across education
groups. Drinking, exercise, eating habits, use of preventive care (such as annual
mammography), adherence to therapy, and other health behaviors are also correlated with
measures of socioeconomic status (Adler et al., 1994, Goldman and Smith, 2002).
But again, observed behavior is not everything. Health gradients by
socioeconomic status persist even when differences in smoking, drinking, and other
factors are taken into account (Marmot, 1994). In Whitehall, looking at non-smokers
only reduces the difference in life-expectancy between the top and bottom groups from
six to four years. In the United States, non-Hispanic Caucasian Americans are more
likely than blacks to have ever smoked or to have smoked heavily (Rogers et al., 2000, p.
245), so smoking does nothing to help explain the black-white differences in U.S.
mortality patterns.

27

Moreover, a behavioral explanation for gradients in mortality does nothing to
explain why people from different socioeconomic groups behave differently. Economic
theories of differences in health behaviors across groups (pioneered by Grossman, 1972)
generally work off of differences in information, prices, the value of long life, or discount
rates.5 Information differences between those of different socioeconomic status are an
easy explanation, but less promising when examined closely (Kenkel 1991, Meara,
2001); to take but one example, knowledge about the harms of smoking is nearly
universal in the United States. Prices, too, are similar for rich and poor.
The value of long life may well be different for the rich and the poor. For poor
people with little wealth and education, their bodies may be the primary assets that are
available for earning income or generating pleasure. As a result, it may be optimal, given
their constraints, to wear them out more quickly (Muurinen and Le Grand, 1980; Case
and Deaton, 2003).
A final strand of the economic work on differences in socioeconomic status
stresses differences in discount rates (Fuchs, 1982, Farrell and Fuchs, 1982), although
these differences appear to explain only a small share of the gradient. This theory
parallels theories in psychology about self-control, positive outlook, and locus of control
(Salovey, Rothman, and Rodin, 1998).

Social structures, stress and health
Outside of economics, the currently dominant theory of health differentials is that
the poor health of low status individuals is caused by “psychosocial stress” – the wear

5

Grossman (1972) models education as like technology; it helps the better educated combine inputs more
efficiently into health. This is similar conceptually to superior information.

28

and tear that comes from subordinate status, and from having little control over one’s
own life. This account is heavily influenced by both the Whitehall evidence, and by
accounts of rank and health within other primates. For example, Sapolsky’s work on
baboons in Kenya (1993, 1998) shows that subordinate baboons have worse levels of
various markers of chronic stress, such as glucocorticoids, and are in poorer health.
Furthermore, the stress-related symptoms emerge after hierarchies become established
and change when the hierarchy changes, suggesting they are related to an individual’s
rank rather than to fixed individual characteristics such as genetic traits.
Some biological evidence supports this theory. The mechanism that helps
animals deal with stress in the wild, “the flight-fight response,” is a series of short-run
responses that help save animal’s life from an immediate threat, at the expense of other
functions relevant for long-term survival. Individuals who are in low-status and
subordinate situations who are subject to arbitrary demands by others, or who are
discriminated against because of their race, are continually having these biochemical
responses triggered in a way that eventually causes permanent malfunction, a build up of
what is known as “allostatic load” (Seeman, Singer, Rowe, Horwitz and McEwen, 1997;
Brunner and Marmot 1999). This cumulative distress leads to an increased probability of
disease, particularly cardiovascular disease.
One concern with this work is that concept of socioeconomic status is often a
convenient catchall for a range of variables – including income, education, occupation
and race –but it is not helpful for thinking about how these variables might have separate
effects on health. Nor is grouping these variables together helpful for policy analysis,
which requires knowing which variables to alter.

29

A second concern is that the relationship between socioeconomic status and
health must work in both directions. Income is a case in point—there is substantial
evidence that poor health leads to low income, rather than the other way around. In the
United States and elsewhere, ill-health is a leading reason for retirement (Smith, 1999
and 2005) or for dropping out of the labor force (Case and Deaton, 2003), each of which
are typically accompanied by a substantial drop in income. Conditional on education,
which is protective against new episodes of illness, changes in income do not predict
changes in health, and lagged income does not predict future incidence of ill health
(Smith, 2003; Adams, Hurd and McFadden et al., 2003). Similarly, if income were the
main factor, it would be difficult to explain why mortality fell most rapidly in the United
States in the period after 1970, during which median real income growth had slowed to a
crawl, or why it is that different European countries, with different economic
performance in the post-war period, should have such convergent experiences of
mortality decline (Deaton, 2004, Deaton and Paxson, 2004). The behavior of health and
income over the business cycle is also inconsistent with a strong effect of income on
health; Ruhm (2000, 2005) documents that recessions actually improve health, because
individuals are more likely to exercise, and less likely to drink, smoke or engage in other
health damaging activities during downturns.
The effects of education are more consistent than the effects of income with
theories that health is determined by socioeconomic status. Looking at the US, Currie and
Moretti (2003) find that women in counties where colleges opened were more likely to
attend college and had healthier babies. Lleras-Muney (2005) finds that the populations
of states that first enacted compulsory schooling laws subsequently lived longer;

30

Oreopolous (2003) also finds that increases in minimum schooling laws in England and
Ireland improved the health of the population. And as noted earlier, maternal education is
strongly inversely correlated with infant and child mortality in developing countries.
Education is likely to provide general human capital that can be used to maintain
and improve health in a wide range of circumstances. As emphasized by the
“fundamental causes” literature, Link and Phelan (1995), educational differences (like
other forms of power differences) will maintain a gradient in health whenever there exists
a mechanism or technology that more knowledgeable and educated people can use to
improve their health. Such explanations, unlike psychosocial stress, help explain shifting
gradients over time in specific diseases, for example that lung cancer and cardiovascular
disease were once more common among the more educated population. It also predicts
that, if breast cancer screening becomes more effective, it will soon reverse the current
gradient where highly educated women are more likely to die of breast cancer (Link,
Northbridge, Phelan and Ganz 1998).
But as was the case for income, there is also evidence of a reverse relationship
running from health to education, certainly among children, and poor health in childhood
may predict poor health later. Case, Fertig and Paxson (2005) find that children who
experienced poor health in childhood entered adulthood with significantly lower
educational achievement. Miguel and Kremer (2004) and Bleakley (2002) find that
provision of deworming drugs significantly improved schooling in contemporary Kenya
and the pre-war American south, respectively. But it is not clear how much of the
observed relationship between education and health in adulthood can be explained by the
fact that children in poor health obtain fewer years of schooling.

31

Summary
The link between social status and health is complex, perhaps too complex for a
single explanation. It seems clear that much of the link between income and health is a
result of the latter causing the former, rather than the reverse. There is most likely a direct
positive effect of education on health. While the exact mechanism underlying this link is
unclear, stress and the differential use of health knowledge and technology are almost
certainly important parts of the explanation.
These cross-sectional findings have implications for our time-series analysis as
well. If better education leads to better health, some of the post-1970 decrease in
mortality in the United States and elsewhere might be attributable to the large increases in
the average education of the population, with correspondingly less attributed to medical
care.

Conclusion

What sense can we make of all of these disparate accounts in different contexts,
and what can we expect for the path of mortality in the future? There is no consensus on
these issues. Here, we hazard our own best guess, recognizing that the evidence is weak
or missing for many of the links in our argument.
Knowledge, science, and technology are the keys to any coherent explanation.
Mortality in England began to decline in the wake of the Enlightenment, directly through
the application to health of new ideas about personal health and public administration,

32

and indirectly through increased productivity that permitted, albeit with terrible reversals,
better levels of living, better nutrition, better housing, and better sanitation. Ideas about
the germ theory of disease were critical to changing both public health infrastructure and
personal behavior. Similarly, knowledge about the health effects of smoking in the
middle of the twentieth century has had profound effects on behavior and on health. Most
recently, the major life-saving scientific innovations in medical procedures and new
pharmaceuticals have had a major effect, particularly on reduced mortality from
cardiovascular disease. There have also been important health innovations whose effect
has been mainly in poor countries, for example the development of freeze-dried serums
that can be transported without refrigeration, and of oral rehydration therapy for
preventing children dying from diarrhea.
Perhaps controversially, we tend to downplay the role of income. Over the broad
sweep of history, improvements in health and income are both the consequence of new
ideas and new technology, and one might or might not cause the other. Between rich and
poor countries, health comes from institutional ability and political willingness to
implement known technologies, neither of which is an automatic consequence of rising
incomes. Within countries, the lower earnings of people who are sick explain much of the
correlation between income and health, rather than a causal relationship from higher
income to better health.
There seems no reason to suppose that the flow of health-enhancing knowledge
and technology will slow. Indeed, there are enormous incentives for the discovery of new
basic knowledge, as well as for the development of new drugs and new medical
treatments; richer people are prepared to pay more for longer lives, and people who live

33

longer are prepared to pay more to cure diseases, such as Alzheimer’s, that few people
used to live long enough to contract. Of course, the pace of progress is hard to predict.
Optimistic assessments are truly fantastic. Oeppen and Vaupel (2002) show that in the
160 years from 1840, life expectancy in the leading country or region of the world has
increased by three months per calendar year. If this trend continues, the leading country
will have a life expectancy at birth of 100 by the middle of this century, and even a
laggard like the United States will get there before the century is out.
However, changes in knowledge, science and technology will often increase the
gradient in health, at least for a time. There was no health gradient between English
aristocrats and ordinary people prior to the Enlightenment, but one developed soon
thereafter, so that average life expectancy and the gap between rich and poor rose
together. There was no gradient in infant mortality between the children of physicians
and non-physicians prior to an understanding of the germ theory of disease. More
educated people quit smoking faster after the health consequences were understood. Our
hypothesis is that greater speed of introduction of new health-relevant knowledge and
technology will tend to raise the health gradient, a hypothesis that is consistent with
rising gradients in rich countries in the recent past.6
If our analysis of the gradient is correct, our prediction of an acceleration in the
production of new knowledge and new treatments is likely to make the gradient steeper,
with increasing gaps across educational and social class (occupational) groups, and
possibly race as well. Gaps between countries may also widen. The incentives for
research and discovery are much weaker or absent for the diseases, such as malaria or
tuberculosis, that are largely confined to the poor of the world. Even when treatment is
6

This hypothesis is also presented in Glied and Lleras-Muney (2003).

34

available in rich countries, there is no guarantee that it can be made available elsewhere,
as we have learned during the AIDS pandemic and indeed from the several million
people who die each year from vaccine-preventable diseases. Steepening gradients within
and between nations are likely to provoke much soul-searching, and it is clearly an
appropriate aim of public policy to improve equality of access for everyone to new, lifesaving technologies. Yet, if we are right, increases in the gradient also have a silver
lining. They indicate that help is on the way, not only for those who receive it first, but
eventually for everyone.

35

Bibliography
Acsádi György Y., and János Nemeskéri, History of Human Life Span and Mortality,
Budapest: Akademiai Kiado, 1970.
Acemoglu, Daron and Simon Johnson, 2005, “Disease and Development: the Effect of
Life Expectancy on Economic Growth,” Department of Economics, MIT, processed.
(July 30.)
Adams, P, M. D. Hurd, D McFadden, A Merrill, T Ribeiro - "Healthy, wealthy, and
wise? Tests for direct causal paths between health and socioeconomic status", Journal of
Econometrics, 2003
Adler, Nancy et al., “Socioeconomic Status and Health: The challenge of the Gradient”
American Pschychologist, January 1994
Ahmad, Omar B., Alan D. Lopez, and Mie Inoue, “The decline in child mortality: a
reappraisal,” Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 2000, 78(10), 1175-1191.
Bach, Peter B., Hoangmai H. Pham, Deborah Schrag, Ramsey C. Tate, and J. Lee
Hargraves, 2004, “Primary care physicians who treat blacks and whites,” The New
England Journal of Medicine, 351 (6), 575-84., August 5.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Angus Deaton and Esther Duflo, 2004, “Wealth, health, and health
services in rural Rajasthan,” American Economic Review, papers and proceedings, 94(2),
326-330
Barker, D. J. P. “Fetal Origins of Coronary Disease” British Medical Journal 1995;
311:171-174 (15 July)
Barker, D. J. P. “The fetal and infant origins of adult disease,” British Medical Journal.
1990 Nov 17;301(6761):1111
Becker, Gary S., Tomas J. Philipson and Rodrigo R. Soares, “The quantity and quality of
life and the evolution of world inequality,” American Economic Review, 2005, 95(1),
277-291.
Bleakly, Hoyt “Disease and Development: Evidence from Hookworm Eradication in the
American South.” Mimeo, Population Research Center, NORC and the University of
Chicago, 2002.
Bloom, David E., David Canning, and Mark Weston, 2005, “The value of vaccination,”
World Economics, 6(3), 15-39.

36

Brunner, Eric, and Michael Marmot, 1999, “Social organization, stress, and health,” in
Michael Marmot and Richard G. Wilkinson, eds., Social Determinants of Health, Oxford,
Oxford University Press, pp. 17-43
Case, Anne, Darren Lubotsky and Christina Paxson, “The Origins of the Gradient,”
American Economic Review, December 2002.
Case, Anne, Angela Fertig and Christina Paxson, “The Lasting Impact of Childhood
Health and Circumstance,” Journal of Health Economics, 2005, 24, 365-389.
Case, Anne and Angus Deaton, “Broken down by age and sex: how our health declines,”
NBER Working Paper No. 9821, July 2003.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Achievements in Public Health, 1900-1999
Impact of Vaccines Universally Recommended for Children -- United States, 19901998”, Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, April 2, 1999, 48(12) 243-248.
Chaudhury, Nazmul, Jeffrey Hammer, Michael Kremer, Karthik Muralidharan and F.
Halsey Rogers, 2005, “Missing in action: teacher and health worker absence in
developing countries,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, forthcoming.
Das, Jishnu and Jeffrey Hammer, 2004, “Strained mercy: the quality of medical care in
Delhi,” Washington, DC, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 3228, March.
Costa, Dora L., “Understanding the Twentieth Century Decline in Chronic Conditions
among Older Men,” Demography, Vol 37, No. 1 February 2000.
Costa, Dora L., “The Measure of Man and Older Age Mortality: Evidence from the
Gould Sample,” Journal of Economic History, 2004, 64(1), 1-23.
Costa, Dora L., and Richard H. Steckel, “Long Term Trends in Health, Welfare, and
Economic Growth”, in Richard H. Steckel and Robert Floud, eds., Health and Welfare
During Industrialization, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997.
Currie, Janet and Enrico Moretti, “Mother's Education and the Intergenerational
Transmission of Human Capital: Evidence from College Openings,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 118(4), 2003.
Cutler, David M., Your Money or Your Life, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004.
Technical Appendix at
http://post.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/dcutler/book/technical_appendix.pdf
Cutler, David M., “Behavioral health interventions: what works and why,” in Norman B.
Anderson, Rodolfo A. Bulatao, and Barney Cohen, eds., Critical perspectives on racial
and ethnic differences in health in late life, Washington, D.C. The National Academies
Press, 2004.

37

Cutler, David, Edward Glaeser and Jesse Shapiro, "Why Have Americans Become More
Obese?", Journal of Economic Perspectives 17(3), Summer 2003, 93-118.
Cutler, David M. and Ellen Meara, “Changes in the Age Distribution of Mortality over
the 20th Century,” Cambridge, MA. NBER Working Paper No. 8556, 2001.
Cutler, David M., and Grant Miller, "The Role of Public Health Improvements in Health
Advances: The Twentieth-Century United States," Demography 42, no. 1 (February
2005): 1-22
Dasgupta, Partha, and Debraj Ray, 1990, “Adapting to undernourishment: the biological
evidence and its implications,” in Jean Drèze and Amartya Sen, eds., The political
economy of hunger: Volume 1. Entitlement and wellbeing. Oxford.
Deaton, Angus, 2003, “Health, inequality, and economic development,” Journal of
Economic Literature, 41, 113-158.
Deaton, Angus, 2004, “Health in an age of globalization,” Brookings Trade Forum 2004,
83-130.
Deaton, Angus, and Christina Paxson, "Mortality, Income, and Income Inequality over
Time in Britain and the US", in D. Wise (ed.) Perspectives in the Economics of Aging,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2004.
Doblhammer, Gabriele and Vaupel, James W., “Lifespan depends on month of birth,”
PNAS, Feb 2001; 98: 2934 - 2939.
Doblhammer, Gabriele “Differences in Lifespan by Month of Birth for the United States:
The Impact of Early Life Events and Conditions on Late Mortality,” MPDIR working
paper WP 2002-019, May 2002.
Dollar, David, “Is Globalization Good for Your Health?” Bulletin of the World Health
Organization, 2001, 79(9), 827-833.
Drèze, Jean, and Amartya K. Sen, “India: Development and Participation,” Delhi. Oxford
University Press, 2002.
Drèze, Jean, and Mamta Murthi, 2001, “Fertility, Education, and Development,”
Population and Development Review, 2001, 27, 33-63.
Easterlin, Richard A., “How beneficent is the market? A look at the modern history of
mortality,” in Easterlin, Richard A., The reluctant economist, Cambridge. Cambridge
University Press, 2004. pp 101-138.

38

Elo, Irma T. and Samuel H. Preston, “Educational Differentials in Mortality: United
States, 1979-85,” Social Science and Medicine 42(1), 1996
Farrell, Phillip and Victor Fuchs, “Schooling and Health: The Cigarette Connection,”
Journal of Health Economics, 1982, pp. 217-230
Feinstein, Charles H., “Pessimism Perpetuated: Real Wages and the Standard of Living in
Britain During and After the Industrial Revolution”, Journal of Economic History, 58
(1998), 625-658.
Finkelstein, Amy and Robin McKnight, 2005, “What did Medicare do (and was it worth
it)?, Cambridge, MA. NBER Working Paper No. 11609, September.
Fogel, Robert W., “Economic Growth, Population Theory, and Physiology: The Bearing
of Long-Term Processes on the Making of Economic Policy”, American Economic
Review, 1994, 84(3), June, 369-395.
Fogel, Robert “New Findings on Secular Trends in Nutrition and Mortality: Some
Implications for Population Theory” Chap 3 in Handbook of Population and Family
Economics, Edited by M. R. Rosenzweig and O Stark, Elsevier Science BV, 1997
Fogel, Robert W., The Escape from Hunger and Premature Death, 1700-2100,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Fox, A. John, Health Inequalities in European Countries, Aldershot. Gower, 1989.
Freedman, David A., “Statistical Models and Shoe Leather,” Sociological Methodology,
1991, 21, 291-313.
Fuchs, Victor R. (1982), “Time Preference and Health: An Exploratory Study”, in V.
Fuchs (ed.) Economic Aspects of Health (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press).
Glied, Sherry and Adriana Lleras-Muney, “Health Inequality, Education and Medical
Innovation,” NBER Working Paper #9738, May 2003
Goldman, Dana P. and James P. Smith, "Can patient self-management explain the SES
health gradient? Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 2002. 99(16):1092934.
Grossman, Michael , 1972, “On the concept of health capital and the demand for health,”
Journal of Political Economy, 80. 223-55.
Guha, Sumit “The Importance of Social Intervention in England’s Mortality Decline: The
Evidence Reviewed”, Social History of Medicine, 7 (1), 1994: 89-113.
Gwatkin, Davidson R., “Indications of change in developing country mortality trends: the

39

end of an era” Population and Devlopment Review, 6(4), Dec 1980, 615-44.
Gwatkin, Davidson R., Kiersten Johnson, Rohini P. Pande, Shea Rutstein, and Adam
Wagstaff, 2000, India: Socioeconomic differences in health, nutrition, and population,
Washington, DC. The World Bank, Working Paper 30544. http://wwwwds.worldbank.org/servlet/WDS_IBank_Servlet?pcont=details&eid=000012009_200412
06145841 (Accessed September 9th, 2005)
Harris, Bernard, “Public Health, Nutrition, and the Decline of Mortality: The McKeown
Thesis Revisited”, Social History of Medicine, 2004, 17(3), 379-407.
Horn, Joshua S., Away with all pests. . .; an English surgeon in People’s China, London
and New York. Hamlyn, 1969.
Huxley, Rachel, Andrew Neil and Rory Collins, “Unraveling the fetal origins hypothesis:
Is There Really an Inverse Association between Birthweight and Subsequent Blood
Pressure? ,” Lancet, 2002, 360: 659-65.
Kannisto, V., K. Christensen, and James W. Vaupel, 1997, “No increased mortality in
later life for cohorts born during famine,” American Journal of Epidemiology, 145, 987994.
Kenkel, Donald, "Health Behavior, Health Knowledge, and Schooling," Journal of
Political Economy, 99(2), Apr. 1991, 287-305.
Kramer, Michael S., “Invited Commentary: Association between Restricted fetal growth
and Adult Chronic Disease: Is It Causal? Is it Important?” American Journal of
Epidemiology, Vol. 152, No. 7, 2000
Kremer, Michael, 2002, “Pharmaceuticals and the developing world,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 16(4), 67-90.
Kunst, Anton E., Vivian Bos, Otto Andersen, et al, 2004, "Monitoring of trends in
socioeconomic inequalities in mortality: experiences from a European project,"
Demographic Research, Special Collection 2, Article 9, 229-254.
Lindeboom, Maarten, France Portrait and Gerard J. van der Berg, “Individual Mortality
and Macro-Economic Conditions from Birth to Death,” American Economic Review,
forthcoming.
Link, Bruce G and Jo Phelan, “Social conditions as the fundamental causes of disease,”
Journal of Health and Social Behavior, Vol. 35, Extra Issue: Forty Years of Medical
Sociology: The state of the Art and Directions for the Future (1995), 80-94.

40

Link, Bruce G., Mary E. Northridge, Jo C. Phelan, and Michael L. Ganz, 1998, “Social
epidemiology and the fundamental cause concept: on the structuring of effective cancer
screens by socioeconomic status,” Milbank Quarterly, 76(3), 375-402.
Livi-Bacci, Massimo, Population and Nutrition: an Essay on European Demographic
History, Cambridge. Cambridge University Press, 1991.
Lleras-Muney, Adriana, "The Relationship Between Education and Adult Mortality in the
U.S.," Review of Economic Studies, Vol.72(1), January 2005
Macintyre, Sally, “The Black Report and Beyond: What are the Issues?” Social Science
and Medicine, 44(6), 1997, 723-745.
Maddison, Angus, 2001, The world economy: a millennial perspective, Paris. OECD
Manning, Willard; Newhouse, Joseph; Naihua, Duan; Keeler, Emmett; and Leibowitz,
Arleen. “Health Insurance and the Demand for Medical Care: Evidence from a
Randomized Experiment.” American Economic Review 77 (June, 1987): 251-277
Marmot, Michael G et al., “Health Inequalities among British Civil Servants: The
Whitehall II study,” Lancet June 8 1991, pp. 1387-93
Marmot, Michael G., “Social Differences in Health Within and Between Populations,”
Daedalus, Fall 1994
McKeown, Thomas, The Modern Rise of Population, New York: Academic Press, 1976.
Meara, Ellen, "Why is Health Related to Socioeconomic Status? The Case of Pregnancy
and Low Birth Rate" (April 2001). NBER Working Paper No. W8231.
Meara, Ellen, Seth Richards, and David M. Cutler, 2005, “Growth in mortality and lifeexpectancy disparities by education 1982-2000,” Department of Economics, Harvard,
processed.
Miguel, Edward, and Michael Kremer (2004). “Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education
and Health the Presence of Treatment Externalities”, Econometrica, 72(1), 159-217.

Mokyr, Joel, The Gifts of Athena: Historical Origins of the Knowledge Economy,
Princeton, NJ. Princeton University Press, 2002.
Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert H. Topel, “The value of health and longevity,”
Cambridge, MA. NBER Working Paper No. 11045, June 2005.
Murthi, Mamta, Anne-Catherine Guio, and Jean Drèze, “Mortality, Fertility, and Gender
Bias in India: a District Level Analysis,” Population and Development Review, 1995,
21(4), 745-782.

41

Muurinen, Jana Marja, and Julian Le Grand, 1985, “The economic analysis of
inequalities in health,” Social Science and Medicine, 20(10), 1029-1035.
National Center for Health Statistics. Health, United States, 2004 With Chartbook on
Trends in the Health of Americans. Hyattsville, Maryland: 2004.
Newhouse, Joseph, Free for all. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 1993
Nordhaus, William, “The Health of Nations: The Contribution of Improved Health to
Living Standards,” in Kevin Murphy and Robert Topel, eds., The Economic Value of
Medical Research, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 2002
Oppen, Jim and James W. Vaupel, “Enhanced: Broken Limits to Life Expectancy.”
Science, Vol 296, Issue 5570, 1029-1031 , May 2002
Oreopolous, Philip, 2003, “Do dropouts drop out too soon? Wealth, health, and happiness
from compulsory schooling,” Cambridge, MA. NBER Working Paper No. 10155, Dec.
Office of National Statistics, United Kingdom, 2005, “Trends in life-expectancy by social
class 1972-2001,”
http://www.statistics.gov.uk/downloads/theme_population/Life_Expect_Social_class_19
72_01/Life_Expect_Social_Class_1972-2001.pdf (Accessed September 9, 2005)
Pamuk E, Makuc D, Heck K, Reuben C, Lochner K. Socioeconomic Status and Health
Chartbook. Health, United States, 1998. Hyattsville, Maryland: National
Center for Health Statistics. 1998.
Pappas, Gregory, Susan Queen, Wolber Hadden, and Grail Fisher, “The Increasing
Disparity in Mortality Between Socioeconomic Groups in the United States, 1960 and
1986,” New England Journal of Medicine, 1993
Preston, Samuel H., “The Changing Relation Between Mortality and Level of Economic
Development”, Population Studies, 29(2), July 1975, 231-248.
Preston, Samuel H., “Causes and consequences of mortality declines in less developed
countries during the 20th century,” in R. A. Easterlin, ed., Population and economic
change in developing countries. Chicago. University of Chicago Press for National
Bureau of Economic Research, 1980.
Preston, Samuel H., “American Longevity: Past, Present, and Future”, Syracuse
University Policy Brief No 7, 1996.
Preston, Samuel, and Michael Haines, Fatal Years: Child Mortality in Late NineteenthCentury America, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1991.
Pritchett, Lant, and Lawrence H. Summers, “Wealthier is Healthier,” Journal of Human
Resources, 1996, 31(4), 841-868.

42

Rasmussen, Kathleen M., “The fetal origins hypothesis,” Annual Review of Nutrition,
2001, 21: 73-95.
Rogers, Richard G., Robert A. Hummer, and Charles B. Nam, Living and dying in the
USA. Behavioral, health, and social differences in adult mortality, New York. Academic
Press, 2000.
Rogot, Eugene, Paul D. Sorlie, Norman J. Johnson, and Catherine Schmitt, A Mortality
Study of 1.3 million persons, Bethesda, MD. National Institutes of Health, National Heart
Lung and Blood Institute, 1992.
Roseboom T. J., J. H. P. van der Meulen, A.C. Ravelli, C. Osmond, D. J. Barker, and O.
P. Bleker, “Effects of prenatal exposure to the Dutch famine on adult disease in later life:
an overview,” Twin Research, 2001a Oct;4(5):293-8.
Roseboom T. J., J. H. P. van der Meulen, C. Osmond, D. J. P. Barker, A.C. J. Ravelli,
and O. P. Bleker, “Adult survival after prenatal exposure to the Dutch famine 1944-45,”
Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology, 2001b, 15, 220-225.
Rosen, George, 1958, A History of Public Health, New York, MD Publications.
Ruhm, Christopher J., “Healthy Living in Hard Times”, Journal of Health Economics,
24(2), March 2005, pp. 341-63.
Ruhm, Christopher J., “Are Recessions Good For Your Health?”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 115, No. 2, May 2000, pp. 617-650.
Sapolsky, Robert M. “Endocrinology Alfresco: Psychoendocrine Studies of Wild
Baboons,” Recent Progress in Hormone Research, 1993, 48: 437-468.
Sapolsky, Robert M. Why Zebras Don’t Get Ulcers. An updated guide to stress, stressrelated diseases, and coping. Freeman, New York, 1998.
Salovey, Peter, Alexander J. Rothman, and Judith Rodin, “Health Behaviors”, in Daniel
T. Gilbert, Susan T. Fiske and Gardner Lindzey, The Handbook of Social Psychology,
Volume II, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998.
Scrimshaw, Neville S., C. E. Taylor, and J. E. Gordon, Interactions of nutrition and
infection, Geneva. World Health Organization, 1968.
Seeman, Teresa, Burt Singer, John Rowe, Ralph Horwitz, and Bruce McEwen, 1997,
“Price of adaption-allostatic load and its health consequences,” Archives of Internal
Medicine, 157, 2259-2268

43

Skinner, Jonathan, Amitabh Chandra, Douglas Staiger, Julie Lee, and Mark McClellan,
2005, “Mortality after Acute Mycardial Infarction in Hospitals that Disproportionately
Treat African-Americans,” Circulation, .112, 2634-2641.
Smith, James P., “Healthy Bodies and Thick Wallets: The Dual Relation between Health
and Economic Status,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 13(2), Spring 1999, pp 145166
Smith, James "Consequences and Predictors of New Health Events," NBER WP10063
November 2003
Stanner, S. A., K. Bulmer, C. Andrès, Œ Landseva, V. Borodina, et al., 1997, “Does
malnutrition in utero determine diabetes and coronary heart disease in adulthood? Results
from the Leningrad siege study; a cross sectional study,” British Medical Journal, 315,
1342-49.
Steckel, Richard, “New Light on the “Dark Ages”: the Remarkably Tall Stature of
Northern European Men during the Medieval Era,” Social Science History, 28(2), 211219.
Szreter, Simon, “The importance of social intervention in Birtain’s mortality decline
1859_1940,” Social History of Medicine , 1988, 1(1), 1-37.
Tomes, Nancy, The Gospel of Germs: Men, Women, and the Microbe in American Life,
Cambridge, MA. Harvard University Press, 1998.
Viscusi, W. Kip, and Joseph E. Aldy, 2003, “The value of a statistical life: a critical
review of market estimates from around the world,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 27,
5-76.
Waaler, Hans, “Height, Health, and Mortality: The Norwegian Experience”, Acta Medica
Scandinavica supplement, 1984, 679: 1-51.
Weinberg, Robert A., 1998, One renegade cell: how cancer begins, New York, Basic
Books.
Wolfson, Michael C., G. Rowe, J. F. Gentleman, and M. Tomiak, “Career earnings and
death: a longitudinal analysis of older Canadian men,” Journal of Gerontology, 1993, 48,
S167-179.
World Health Organization, World Health Report 2003, Geneva.
Wrigley, Edward A., and Roger Schofield, The Population History of England, 15411871: A Reconstruction, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1981.

44

Table 1
The worldwide structure of mortality in 2002

Deaths per 100,000

World
916

Low
Income
Countries
1,113

High
Income
Countries
846

Percent of total deaths by age
Children (0-4)
Elderly (60+)

18.4%
50.8

30.2%
34.2

0.9%
75.7

12.4

6.3

26.2

29.3

21.5

38.1

3.96
2.78
2.46
1.80
1.57

2.90
2.14
1.83
1.54
1.09

0.34
0.02
0.03
--0.01

1.27

1.24

---

1.12

1.07

---

Treatments/
Prevention

Percentage of deaths from chronic diseases
Cancer
Partially preventable and
treatable
Cardiovascular disease
Partially preventable and
treatable
Numbers of deaths, millions
Respiratory infections*
HIV/AIDS
Perinatal deaths*
Diarrheal diseases*
Tuberculosis
Malaria*
DPT/Polio/Measles*

Antibiotics
HAART
Pre- and post-natal care
Oral rehydration therapy
Preventable with public
health; usually treatable
Partially preventable;
treatable
Vaccinations

Notes: Based on WHO data and subject to large margins of error, particularly for adult mortality in low income
countries, most of which lack complete vital registration systems. DPT stands for diptheria, pertussis (whooping
cough) and tetanus. * indicates that the disease is most commonly fatal in children, except respiratory disease in
high income countries. B indicates less than 10,000 deaths. Low income and high income are World Bank
designations of countries; these can be thought of as corresponding to below $5,000 PPP and above $10,000 PPP in
Figure 1. Perinatal deaths are deaths in the first 7 days of life and are primarily associated with low birth weight.

Circles are proportional to population. Reproduced from Deaton (2003, Figure 1).

Figure 2: Expected Age at Death, England and Wales
90

80

Age 65
70
Age 45

60

Age 10
50

40
Birth

Note: Data for 1751-1841 are from Wrigley and Schofield, 198, Table 7.15, p. 230; Data from 1841
on are from the Human Mortality Database.

17
51
17
61
17
71
17
81
17
91
18
01
18
11
18
21
18
31
18
41
18
50
18
60
18
70
18
80
18
90
19
00
19
10
19
20
19
30
19
40
19
50
19
60
19
70
19
80
19
90

30

Figure 3: Mortality From Infectious Disease and Cardiovascular Disease, US 1900-2000
300

900
Infectious disease
800

Infectious Disease (deaths per 100,000)

700

200

600
Cardiovascular disease
500

150
400

100

300

200
50
100

0

0
1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Cardiovascular Disease (deaths per 100,000)

250

2000

India

China

China

1000

India

1950

1960

1970

year

1980

1990

2000

Figure 4: Infant mortality and PPP GDP per head, India and China

Real GDP per capita, PPP chained (PWT)

GDP (right
log scale)

3000 4000

Infant mortality rate per 1,000 (UN data)
50
100
150
200

Infant Mortality
Rate (left scale)

