                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             LESSONS FROM THE DEBT-DEFLATION
                                 THEORY OF SUDDEN STOPS

                                           Enrique G. Mendoza

                                          Working Paper 11966
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11966


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2006




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Enrique G. Mendoza. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Lessons From the Debt-Deflation Theory of Sudden Stops
Enrique G. Mendoza
NBER Working Paper No. 11966
January 2006
JEL No. F41, F32, E44, D52

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper reports results for a class of dynamic, stochastic general equilibrium models with credit
constraints that can account for some of the empirical regularities of the Sudden Stop phenomenon
of recent emerging markets crises. In these models, credit constraints set in motion Irving Fisher's
debt-deflation mechanism and they bind as an endogenous equilibrium outcome when agents are
highly indebted. The quantitative predictions of these models yield three key lessons: (1) Sudden
Stops can occur as an endogenous response to typical realizations of adverse shocks to fundamentals,
in environments in which agents plan their actions taking credit constraints and expectations of
Sudden Stops into account. (2) Credit constraints cause output declines during Sudden Stops when
collateral constraints limit debt to a fraction of the market value of capital, when there are limits on
access to working capital, or when debt-deflation lowers the value of the marginal product of factors
of production. (3) The debt-deflation mechanism has significant quantitative effects in terms of the
amplification, asymmetry and persistence of the responses of macroeconomic aggregates to standard
shocks, and in the occurrence of Sudden Stops as infrequent events nested within regular business
cycles. Precautionary saving rules out the largest Sudden Stops from the stochastic stationary state,
but Sudden Stops remain a positive-probability event in the long run.


Enrique G. Mendoza
Department of Economics
3105 Tydings Hall
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
mendozae@econ.umd.edu
                           Lessons from the Debt-Deflation Theory of Sudden Stops
                                           By Enrique G. Mendoza*
     The “Sudden Stop” phenomenon of the recent emerging markets crises is one of the key new
questions facing International Macroeconomics. Sudden Stops are defined by unusually large recessions
marked by: sharp, abrupt current account reversals, large contractions in output and absorption, and
collapses in goods and asset prices. In Mexico’s 1995 Sudden Stop, for example, the current account
shifted by nearly 9 percentage points of GDP, and consumption, investment and output fell by
magnitudes that exceeded their business cycle standard deviations by almost a factor of 3. Only the Great
Depression shows a recession with comparable magnitudes in the country’s economic history.
     The dominant paradigms of the early 1990s, International Real Business Cycle Theory (IRBC) and
the New Open Economy Macroeconomics, were unable to explain Sudden Stops because they assume a
perfect global credit market that allows households to smooth consumption, and firms to finance
production and investment efficiently. For example, small open economy (SOE) models in the IRBC
tradition predict that, when a negative, transitory shock hits total factor productivity (TFP), households
borrow to smooth consumption, firms keep investment plans unaltered, and the current account falls
slightly. If the shock has some persistence, households borrow less and adjust consumption more, and
firms cut investment and production, resulting in regular, countercyclical current account fluctuations.
Indeed, SOE-IRBC models proved quite good at mimicking the business cycles of industrial economies.
     Sudden Stops are strikingly different. At the time that output experiences Great-Depression-size
declines, the current account takes an abrupt jump up and domestic absorption plummets. Just when the
dominant paradigms predict that agents need capital markets the most, agents cannot borrow at all.
     A growing literature aiming to explain Sudden Stops emerged in recent years. The starting point of
this literature is to replace the assumption of perfect credit markets with plausible financial frictions.
Despite important progress in theoretical work, three key issues are still unresolved:
(a) Sudden Stops are modeled as large, unexpected shocks. In most Sudden Stop models (for example,
Guillermo A. Calvo (1998), V.V. Chari et al. (2005)), current account reversals are a surprise –a large,
sudden exogenous shock to foreign borrowing. This assumption has several unappealing implications:
First, the defining feature of Sudden Stops (the abrupt current account reversal) remains unexplained.
Second, agents are not allowed to make optimal plans considering the probability that Sudden Stops may
occur. Third, we cannot tell whether the predictions of particular models are robust to changes allowing
agents to act on expectations of Sudden Stops. Precautionary savings theory suggests that this can be a
flaw because, when faced with possible catastrophic events, agents build a buffer stock of savings to lower
the long-run probability of these outcomes.
(b) Sudden Stop models cannot explain the output collapse in the initial stages of a Sudden Stop. Most
existing models consider financial frictions affecting consumption and/or investment, which affect output
after the initial current account reversal. Moreover, growth accounting exercises (Raphael Bergoeing et al.
(2002) and Enrique G. Mendoza (2005a)) show that capital and labor account for a small fraction of the
initial output collapse, so even if the models could mimic observed investment collapses, they would not
explain the output collapse. We should not conclude from this, however, that Sudden Stops are driven by
TFP shocks unrelated to financial frictions, because there can be endogenous financial links between
measured TFP (e.g. Solow residuals) and Sudden Stops. In particular, Sudden Stops feature large swings
in imported input prices and capacity utilization (see David Cook and Michael B. Devereux (2006) and
Mendoza (2005a)), and swings like these are easy to misrepresent as true TFP changes in standard
estimates of Solow residuals (see Mary G. Finn (1995)).
(c) The quantitative relevance of financial mechanisms driving Sudden Stop models is largely unknown.
Narayana Kocherlakota (2000) casts doubt on the ability of credit constraints to yield sizable asymmetry,
                                                                                                            2
amplification and persistence in the responses of macroeconomic aggregates to adverse shocks. Moreover,
because of the scarcity of quantitative findings, we cannot tell whether a financial friction with reasonable
Sudden Stop features can produce Sudden Stops as infrequent events nested within typical fluctuations, as
observed in the data. The structure of emerging economies does not change abruptly when they hit a
Sudden Stop, so a theory that could explain Sudden Stops by introducing frictions that result in
unrealistic business cycles would not be very helpful. It is equally important to distinguish mechanisms
that enlarge “typical” business cycle variability from mechanisms that create Sudden Stops. Chari et. al
(2005) mix the two in referring to Pablo A. Neumeyer and Fabrizio Perri’s (2005) model of large business
cycles driven by large interest rate shocks as a model of Sudden Stops. Sudden Stops are not observable
in standard business cycle moments because unusually large recessions are, by definition, swamped by
typical cycles.
    This paper reports results for a class of equilibrium models with credit constraints that aim to make
progress in addressing the above problems. The two key features common to these models are that:
whether the credit constraints bind is an endogenous equilibrium outcome, and when they bind, they set
in motion Irving Fisher’s (1933) debt-deflation mechanism. This mechanism induces nonlinear feedback
between a country’s access to credit and the prices and allocations of goods and assets on which debt is
leveraged. Several theoretical articles in the Sudden Stops literature study models with the debt-deflation
mechanism (see Cristina Arellano and Mendoza (2003) for a limited survey). The contribution of the
models reviewed here is the quantitative analysis of this mechanism in a dynamic, stochastic general
equilibrium (DSGE) framework.
    The quantitative debt-deflation models of Sudden Stops yield three key lessons:
(1) Sudden Stops emerge endogenously without large, unexpected shocks. They are an endogenous
outcome in environments in which agents plan their actions taking credit constraints and expectations of
Sudden Stops into account. A Sudden Stop is an equilibrium response to typical realizations of adverse
shocks to fundamentals (e.g. world interest rates, the terms of trade, or TFP) when agents are highly
indebted. In turn, these high-debt states are reached with positive probability in the long run as a result
of the equilibrium dynamics of the economy.
(2) Collateral constraints do cause output declines during Sudden Stops. Output falls on impact when a
Sudden Stop begins if credit constraints limit access to working capital, or if the debt-deflation
mechanism lowers the value of the marginal product of factors of production. In addition, contrary to the
findings of Chari et al. (2005), output does fall after an initial current account reversal in the presence of
endogenous collateral constraints that limit debt to a fraction of the market value of physical capital.
(3) The quantitative effects of the debt-deflation mechanism are important. This mechanism yields
significant amplification and asymmetry in the responses of macro variables to standard shocks. In
addition, Sudden Stops are infrequent events nested within regular business cycles. If the credit
constraints do not bind, the economy responds to adverse shocks as SOE-DSGE models predict.
Precautionary saving rules out the largest Sudden Stops from the stochastic stationary state, but Sudden
Stops remain a positive-probability event even though their effect on business cycle statistics is negligible.
                      I. Debt-Deflation Models of Business Cycles and Sudden Stops
    The models are based on Mendoza’s (1991) SOE-IRBC framework, which is not described in detail
due to space constraints, but replacing the assumption of perfect credit markets with borrowing
constraints. The models represent the decentralized competitive equilibrium of economies where the
agents’ ability to borrow in a world market of one-period bonds (b) is limited to a fraction κ of the market
value of the income or assets offered as collateral:
                                 bt +1 ≥ −κg ( pt , yt , kt +1,kt , bt ) ,   κ≥0                      (1)
                                                                                                              3
The collateral function g(⋅) depends on a vector of market prices p (for goods, factors, or assets), on
income, y, on asset holdings, k, and on existing debt. This setup includes a wide variety of borrowing
limits. At the extremes, κ=0 represents a no-borrowing constraint and κ=∞ is the perfect-credit-markets
case. When g(⋅) is a constant, the constraint is an ad-hoc debt limit. The case with g(⋅)=qtαt+1k, where qt
is the price of equity and αt+1 are equity shares, is Rao Aiyagari and Mark Gertler’s (1999) margin
constraint. Kocherlakota (2000) examined the constraint g(⋅)=qtk, with k as a factor in inelastic supply
(e.g. land). The case with g(⋅)=ytT+ptNytN, where yT and yN are incomes from tradables and nontradables
respectively and pN is the relative price of nontradables, is the liability dollarization credit constraint
(foreign debt is in units of tradables but leveraged in part on nontradables income). The price of
nontradables is endogenous and a drop in pN (i.e., a real depreciation) can trigger the constraint.
     On the side of firms, the credit constraint (1) can represent a limit on the firms’ access to working
capital. For instance, bt+1 can represent working capital loans and g(⋅) could be the firms’ sales (as if these
loans were trade credits guaranteed by sales) or the market value of the firms’ physical assets. Constraints
of this type produce a credit transmission channel that links the loss of access to world credit with an
immediate drop in output, as Section II explains.
                   A. Distortions Induced by Credit Constraints in Debt Deflation Models
    Constraints in the family defined in (1) introduce distortions akin to endogenous financing premia. In
general, the consumption Euler equation of models with these constraints can be written as:
                                           λt = Et [ λt +1R ] + µt                                     (2)
where λt is the lifetime marginal utility of date-t consumption (i.e. the Lagrange multiplier on the budget
constraint), µt is the Lagrange multiplier on the credit constraint, and R is the world-determined real
interest rate (assumed to be time-invariant for simplicity). Defining the households’ intertemporal relative
price of consumption as Rth+1 ≡ λt Et [ λt +1 ] , it follows that, when (1) binds, households face the following
endogenous financing premium:
                                        Et ⎡⎣ Rth+1 − R ⎤⎦ = µt Et [ λt +1 ]                          (3)
In models that allow for asset accumulation, this premium alters excess asset returns as follows:
                                                  ⎛ µ ( 1 − κ ) − covt (λt +1, Rtq+1 ) ⎞⎟
                            Et [ Rtq+1 − R ] = ⎜⎜⎜ t                                    ⎟,            (4)
                                                  ⎝             Et [λt +1 ]            ⎠⎟
where Rqt+1 is the return on assets. Thus, a binding credit constraint has a direct effect that increases the
equity premium by the fraction (1-κ) of the hike in the financing premium. This effect is limited to the
fraction (1-κ) because, on the margin, agents can relax their credit constraint by holding more assets,
with the marginal increase in “debt capacity” given by κ.1 A binding credit constraint also induces the
Heaton-Lucas indirect effect because the constraint hampers the ability of agents to smooth consumption,
and hence makes the covariance between marginal utility and asset returns “more negative,” thereby
increasing excess returns. The forward solution for the households’ asset valuations yields:
                                           ⎛ ∞ ⎡ j ⎛               1        ⎞⎟ ⎤         ⎞
                                  qt = Et ⎜⎜⎜ ∑ ⎢ ∏ ⎜⎜
                                                   ⎢       ⎜       q         ⎟ ⎥⎥dt +1+i ⎟⎟⎟
                                                                             ⎟
                                                                                                      (5)
                                          ⎝⎜ j = 0 ⎣ i = 0 ⎝ Et [ Rt +1+i ] ⎠ ⎦          ⎠⎟
where d represents dividends. Expressions (4) and (5) show that a credit constraint that binds at present,
or is expected to bind at any point in the future, increases excess returns and lowers asset prices bid by
the agents facing the constraint. As Section II explains, however, this is necessary but not sufficient for
equilibrium asset prices to fall when the credit constraints bind.
     In models in which firms can hit limits on working capital, firms face a financing premium that
increases effective factor costs when the limit binds. If, for example, working capital financing is available
up to a fraction κf of the value of the firms’ assets at the end of the production period, the optimality
condition for the demand for factor nj for which a fraction φ of the cost is paid with credit is:
                                                                                                              4
                                    εtAFn j (N t )   =   pεtp   [ 1 + φ(r + χt R) ]                     (6)
Fn j (N t ) is the marginal product of nj in a production function F(N) that uses a vector of inputs N, r is the
net interest rate on working capital (i.e., R-1), χt is the Lagrange multiplier on the working capital
constraint, and εA and εP are shocks to TFP and the market price of nj. If χt=0, condition (6) reduces to
the optimality condition of SOE-IRBC models with the standard working capital setup (e.g. Neumeyer
and Perri (2005)). P. Marcelo Oviedo (2005) showed that these models require interest rate processes with
high mean and variance for working capital to make a difference. In contrast, when the limit on working
capital binds, the marginal cost of nj rises because the effective financing cost of working capital goes up
by χtR. This endogenous financing premium amplifies the responses of factor demands to shocks, and this
mechanism can be triggered by shocks to TFP or factor prices, even with a constant interest rate.
Moreover, if the amplified factor demand responses make asset prices fall, the debt-deflation mechanism is
set in motion because the fall in the value of the collateral tightens further the limit on working capital.
     The credit constraints examined here are endogenous because they respond to equilibrium prices and
allocations (as in Macroeconomics literature on credit constraints by Nobuhiro Kiyotaki and John Moore
(1997), Aiyagari and Gertler (1999) or Kocherlakota (2000)), but they are not modeled as outcomes of
optimal credit contracts. Still, the above financing premia represent endogenous premia, varying across
time and states depending on whether the credit constraints bind and on how binding they are, which
foreign lenders could charge so that borrowers find it optimal to respect the credit constraints in a credit
market where the constraints are not imposed directly.2 The justification for this could be that, for
example, limited enforcement prevents lenders from recovering more than κ or κf of the market value of a
debtor’s assets in case of non-repayment.
           B. Amplification, Sudden Stops & Debt Deflations: A Liability Dollarization Example
     The endogenous, nonlinear feedback between price deflation and debt access sets the debt-deflation
mechanism apart from other credit constraints studied in the Sudden Stops literature. This point can be
illustrated with an example based on a simple deterministic, two-sector model. The model features a time-
invariant endowment of nontradables and a sequence of tradables endowment tilted towards the future
(so that agents wish to borrow at present).3 With standard stationarity assumptions and perfect credit
markets, the equilibrium of this economy is a textbook example of Permament Income theory: tradables
consumption is perfectly smooth, nontradables consumption and the relative price of nontradables are
constant, and the current account moves to keep tradables consumption as a constant fraction of wealth
(with wealth equal to the present value of the tradables endowment). Add now the liability dollarization
credit constraint bt+1 ≥ -κ(ytT+ptNytN), and hit the economy with wealth-neutral shocks that reduce y0T and
increase y1T. As long as the credit constraint does not bind, the equilibrium with perfect credit markets is
preserved. There is, however, a critical value of y0T low enough for the constraint to bind, and below this
value the frictionless equilibrium is no longer attainable.
    Figure 1 illustrates the date-0 equilibrium of this debt-deflation model. The equilibrium with the
credit constraint binding must satisfy two conditions: First, the resource constraint for tradables with
debt set at the borrowing limit must hold (which is the case along the SS line — notice that SS shifts
horizontally to the left as y0T falls). Second, p0N must equal the marginal rate of substitution between
consumption of tradables and nontradables. This condition is represented by the PP curve. The line TT
represents tradables consumption with perfect credit markets (or when the credit constraint does not
bind), which is independent of the price of nontradables. TT and PP intersect at the equilibrium with
perfect credit markets (point A). The curve SS is drawn for the critical value of y0T at which the
constraint begins to bind, so SS intersects TT and PP at point A.
    Assume that y0T falls below its critical level causing SS to shift to SS′. The new equilibrium is
                                                                                                             5
determined at point D, and the change from A to D can be broken down into three moves. First, if
prices were sticky and the borrowing constraint were set as an ad-hoc debt limit, the new equilibrium
would be at point B. At B, however, tradables consumption is lower than in the perfect credit markets
case and equilibrium requires p0N to fall. Thus, the second move, from B to C, reflects the pure balance
sheet effect of liability dollarization (as in Calvo (1998)). If the credit constraint were independent of the
nontradables price (i.e., without debt deflation), C would be the new equilibrium, with a lower
nontradables price and lower tradables consumption. But at C the debt deflation has yet to take place.
Hence, the third move, from C to D, occurs because the lower price at C tightens the credit constraint by
lowering the value of the nontradables endowment. This forces tradables consumption to fall so as to
satisfy the constraint at a point in SS′, but at that point p0N falls again to re-attain a point along PP, but
at that point tradables consumption falls again because the credit constraint tightens further. This debt-
deflation process continues until it converges to point D. In short, the response to the shock hitting y0T is
amplified because of the combined balance sheet and debt-deflation effects.
     Two important observations about the Sudden Stop equilibrium: First, the abrupt current account
reversal (i.e., the amplification of the response of the current account form C to D) is an endogenous
outcome, not an assumption. Second, the Sudden Stop occurs even with fully flexible prices and is not
driven by a self-fulfilling shift across multiple equilibria.
     Mendoza (2005b) conducts some numerical experiments with this basic model using parameter values
set to match roughly key features of emerging economies, particularly the elasticity of substitution
between consumption of tradables and nontradables. This elasticity is crucial because it determines the
response of pN to a given contraction in tradables consumption. The results show that the debt-deflation
mechanism generates substantial amplification that dwarfs the balance sheet effect. For example, setting
κ=0.34, a 5-percent wealth-neutral shock to y0T reduces the debt position by 15 percentage points of
permanent income, and makes tradables consumption and p0N fall to levels nearly 60 percent below those
of the equilibrium with perfect credit markets. The debt-deflation mechanism contributes all but 3
percentage points of these declines in consumption and the price of nontradables.
                                        II. The Quantitative Lessons
                              A. Liability Dollarization in a DSGE Model
    Mendoza (2002) examines a DSGE model with the liability dollarization credit constraint that
considers production of nontradables with labor demand and supply. The credit constraint limits
households’ tradables-denominated debt to a fraction of their income, as is standard practice in household
debt markets (where lenders use scoring algorithms to set ceilings on debt-income ratios). With a Cobb-
Douglas production technology, this translates at equilibrium into the constraint bt+1 ≥ -κ(ytT+ptNytN).
Agents know that this constraint is a feature of the credit market and they take it into account in
formulating their optimal plans. If the economy’s debt is sufficiently large, the credit constraint binds as
an endogenous equilibrium response to adverse one-standard-deviation (1SD) shocks to TFP, R, and an
inflation-equivalent consumption tax. In these Sudden Stops output falls on impact because the collapse
in pN lowers the value of the marginal product of labor, and hence labor demand.
     Simulations based on a calibration to Mexican data show that the impact effects of 1SD shocks are
amplified significantly during Sudden Stops. Comparing with the responses under perfect credit markets,
the current account reversal is 5 percentage points of GDP larger, consumption and nontradables output
fall 10 percentage points more, and the price of nontradables falls 8 percentage points more. However,
agents build a large stock of precautionary savings, worth about 35 percent of GDP in terms of the mean
of b, and with this “war chest” the long-run probability of binding credit constraints is only 0.33 percent.
     The debt-deflation mechanism induces offsetting supply-side effects in this model. On one hand, labor
demand falls because the value of the marginal product of labor falls with the price of nontradables. On
                                                                                                                6
the other hand, the marginal gain of labor supply rises because extra labor income allows agents to
borrow more. If labor supply is sufficiently elastic, this second effect can dominate at very high debt levels
(i.e., with a very tight credit constraint), but, because of precautionary savings, these states have zero
long-run probability.
                             B. Debt-Deflation Mechanics in Global Asset Trading
     The debt-deflation spiral can affect asset prices if collateral constraints affecting some agents coexist
with trading frictions that produce a less-than-infinitely-elastic demand for assets from other agents. In
this case, agents that hit collateral constraints and fire-sale assets in efforts to “meet margin calls,” trade
with agents that have downward-slopping asset demand curves. Asset prices therefore fall, and as they do
the collateral constraint tightens further, setting the debt-deflation mechanism in motion (and magnifying
the direct and indirect asset pricing effects of collateral constraints). If the agents fire-selling assets could
trade in a frictionless, competitive market, in which market demand is infinitely elastic at the
fundamentals price qft (i.e., the expected present value of dividends discounted at the world interest rate),
asset prices could not fall and the debt-deflation mechanism could not function.
     Mendoza and Smith (2006) model the asset trading friction as trading costs incurred by foreign
securities firms, which may include conventional trading costs as well as costs due to informational,
institutional or other intangible frictions. Mendoza and Smith study a two-agent equilibrium asset pricing
setup in which domestic agents face the Aiyagari-Gertler margin constraint bt+1 ≥-κqtαt+1k. Explicit
lending on margin takes place mainly amongst investors in securities markets, and regulators also impose
statutory margin requirements. In addition, widely-used risk management tools (e.g. value-at-risk
collateralization) operate as implicit margin requirements by making creditors sell assets and cut credit
when systemic shocks increase market volatility, resulting in even higher volatility and further asset sales.
Foreign traders incur trading costs of the form: qt
                                                          a
                                                          2
                                                            ( ( )                    2
                                                              αt*+1 − αt* + θ ) , where a is a trading cost
coefficient and θ represents costs paid regardless of trading activity. This setup produces a closed-form
solution for the foreign traders’ demand function: ( αt*+1 − αt* ) = ( 1 a ) ⎡⎢ ( qtf qt ) − 1 ⎤⎥ − θ . Thus, the foreign
                                                                              ⎣                 ⎦
traders’ demand elasticity with respect to the percent deviation of qft from qt is 1/a.
     Mendoza and Smith calibrate the model to Mexican data and show that it can produce Sudden Stops
as endogenous responses to 1SD productivity shocks when: (a) agents are sufficiently leveraged (i.e., when
-bt/qtαtk is sufficiently high), and (b) the asset market is relatively liquid (i.e., when short-selling limits are
not binding).4 The ability of the model to yield asset price collapses hinges, however, on the foreign
traders’ demand being sufficiently inelastic.
     Figure 2 shows the model’s conditional impulse responses (i.e., conditional forecast functions of the
nonlinear equilibrium Markov processes) to a 1SD, negative TFP shock when a Sudden Stop occurs. The
Figure shows simulations for an elasticity of 0.5 in the demand of foreign traders. Relative to the outcome
with perfect credit markets, consumption collapses 8 percentage points more, the current account
increases by 6 percentage points of GDP more, and asset prices decline by 8 percentage points more.
Thus, the debt-deflation mechanism induces significant amplification effects. Moreover, the effects on
consumption and the current account persist for several periods.
     The size of the trading costs predicted by the model can be assessed by examining total trading costs
in percent of equity returns. Trading costs are negligible, at less than 1/5 of a percent of returns, when
the collateral constraint does not bind, but they rise rapidly as the leverage ratio rises inside the Sudden
Stop region (i.e., in the region of the state space where the constraint binds), peaking at about 6.4 percent
of returns. Mendoza and Smith (2006) document findings from the finance literature suggesting that costs
of this magnitude are in line with empirical evidence.
                   C. The Debt-Deflation Mechanism in an Equilibrium Business Cycle Model
                                                                                                    7
    The models reviewed in A. and B. are incomplete business cycle models because they abstract from
capital accumulation and make strong simplifying assumptions about the supply-side of the economy (in
Mendoza and Smith (2006), for example, output is unaffected by credit frictions and responds to TFP
shocks just like in a frictionless economy). Mendoza (2005a) examines a business cycle model with the
collateral constraint bt+1 ≥-κqtkt+1 and a constraint limiting working capital financing to the fraction κf of
sales. Chari et al. (2005) claim that these are subtle constraints for which there is little direct evidence.
Firm-level data show, however, that corporate leverage ratios rise sharply in the run up to Sudden Stops,
and collapse abruptly in the aftermath (see Figure 3). There are also extensive accounts of the role played
by highly leveraged agents in these events (in the famous case of the Russian crisis, massive margin calls
on these agents reached even U.S. capital markets and led the Federal Reserve to lower interest rates).
     In Mendoza (2005a), firms use working capital to pay for a fraction φ of the cost of imported inputs,
for which they pay a world-determined price, and for costs of capacity utilization. Firms also face capital
adjustment costs, so they feature a demand for investment (or supply of equity) that rises with the price
of capital (i.e., Tobin’s Q). This is the trading friction that makes agents fire-selling equity interact with
agents that buy equity only if the price falls. When Tobin’s Q falls as a result of the debt-deflation
mechanism, it brings down investment, and with it future capital, output and wealth.
     Mendoza (2005a) calibrates the model to quarterly Mexican data for the period 1993:1-2004:4. The
model includes shocks to R (the real rate on 90-day U.S. T-bills), shocks to the relative price of imported
inputs, and TFP shocks. The latter are estimated using a production function for gross output that
includes imported inputs and variable capital utilization, so as to correct for the bias affecting Solow
residuals. Agents form their expectations using the stochastic process for these shocks taken from the
data, without any large, unexpected shocks.
     The results show that the key findings of the other debt-deflation models extend to the business cycle
model: The debt-deflation mechanism is a powerful vehicle for inducing amplification, asymmetry and
persistence in the response of real variables to exogenous shocks of “typical” size. Sudden Stops occur
when households and firms have debts large enough for the credit constraints to bind, and these high-debt
states are reached with positive probability in the stochastic stationary state. Precautionary saving rules
out the “largest” Sudden Stops and results in a long-run probability of binding collateral constraints of
1.7 percent (low but significantly higher than in the liability dollarization and asset trading economies)
     Sudden Stops occur in the model even if the limit on working capital never binds. Starting from a
positive-probability Sudden Stop state where the collateral constraint binds and with κf high enough so
that χt=0 always, the model predicts the following impact effects relative to the economy with perfect
credit markets: an excess current account reversal of 6 percentage points of GDP, and excess drop in
consumption of 2 percentage points and an excess investment collapse of 24 percentage points. Asset
prices decline only by an excess of 0.5 percent, which is much less than in the data, but still implies
substantial amplification relative to the frictionless case (where equity prices hardly move). Output begins
to fall one period after the current account reversal, as the impact effect on investment begins to hit
installed capital, and it falls by an excess of up to 2 percentage points four periods later. The Sudden
Stops on investment, Tobin’s Q and the current account are short-lived, but those affecting output,
consumption, and labor are persistent.
     Introducing a binding limit on working capital improves the above results by producing an excess
output decline on impact as the Sudden Stop begins. The decline cannot account for the full magnitude of
initial output collapses of actual Sudden Stops because of two limitations of the working capital constraint
linked to sales. First, this constraint induces offsetting effects on factor demands: On one hand, the
financing premium in (6) increases effective factor costs. On the other hand, the effective marginal benefit
of employing these factors increases when the working capital constraint binds because increased factor
                                                                                                            8
demands support higher output and sales, and the latter increases the firms’ ability to borrow. Second,
the Cobb-Douglas production function reduces the effectiveness of the working capital constraint because
the ratio of sales (i.e., output) to factor payments is unaffected by shocks to TFP or input prices, and
thus is only affected by interest rate shocks. Since only a fraction of factor costs is paid with credit, and
only the small interest-rate shocks reflected in the U.S. real interest rate are considered, the findings from
Oviedo (2005) apply: interest rate shocks have small effects on factor demands. The effects are larger than
he found because of the endogenous risk premium operating when the limit on working capital binds, but
they are small compared to what is needed to explain the initial decline in output of a Sudden Stop.
                                  III. Further Research & Policy Lessons
     Research in quantitative models of Sudden Stops is at an early stage and needs to move in several
directions. A revision in progress of Mendoza (2005a) addresses the shortcomings of the sales-linked limit
on working capital by linking it to the value of the firm’s assets instead (see eq. (6)). This change also
adds a new feedback channel for the debt-deflation process, since the fall in Tobin’s Q now tightens the
working capital constraint. The Tobin Q setup has limitations, however, because the results reviewed here
suggest that it may not be able to account simultaneously for the asset price crashes and the investment
collapses of Sudden Stops: the high adjustment costs that may produce the former would yield small
investment declines. On a different vein, it would be interesting to explore the quantitative significance of
the debt-deflation mechanism at work with the liability dollarization credit constraint in a full-blown
equilibrium business cycle model. Beyond debt-deflation models, other financial frictions are producing
important quantitative findings in terms of their ability to produce Sudden Stops that suggest promising
areas for further research. These include search frictions in foreign investment (Guita Gopinath (2004)),
the interaction of transactions costs in goods and asset markets (Philippe Martin and Helene Rey (2006)),
and signal extraction frictions in asset markets with imperfectly informed agents (Emine Boz (2006)).
     Debt-deflation models of Sudden Stops also have important policy lessons that are fertile ground for
further research. Since debt-deflation effects are significant, it seems natural to conclude that policies
aimed at preventing deflation are a good option. Fisher (1933) himself made this argument, and Calvo’s
(2002) proposal to provide price guarantees on the emerging markets asset class is in a similar vein. His
and other recent proposals for managing Sudden Stops by containing large deviations of asset prices below
their fundamentals levels can be examined using the framework described in this paper. For example, C.
Bora Durdu and Mendoza (2006) explore the implications of price guarantees in the debt-deflation model
of Mendoza and Smith (2006). The guarantees introduce a moral-hazard-like distortion that leads foreign
traders to “overinvest” and domestic agents to “overborrow.” With precise knowledge of the data, the
model yields a state-contingent schedule of guarantees for which the benefit of undoing the distortions
that cause Sudden Stops exceeds the costs of the moral hazard distortion. Yet, whether we have such
knowledge of the data, and whether the model is a sufficiently accurate representation of reality to use it
for implementing the price guarantees system, are still open questions.
     The indexation of debt to GDP or to the relative prices relevant for liability dollarization, and the
adoption of hard currencies to replace domestic currencies, have also been proposed as remedies for
Sudden Stops, and some countries have adopted them (e.g., Argentina’s GDP-linked debt or El Salvador’s
adoption of the dollar). However, their effectiveness at preventing Sudden Stops is yet to be tested.
     If “creative” new policies seem risky, the debt-deflation models provide their own remedy: build a
“war chest” of foreign exchange reserves to minimize the long-run probability of Sudden Stops. This Neo-
merchantilist strategy has its problems, because holding reserves is costly and in the short-run building
them up can imply a costly sacrifice (as Ricardo Caballero and Stavros Panageas (2005) showed). On the
other hand, this is the strategy many emerging economies are following, and if the alternative is to be
exposed to re-live the experiences of the last ten years, Merchantilism may not be so unreasonable.
                                                                                                        9
                                            REFERENCES
Aiyagari, S. Rao and Gertler, Mark. “Overreaction of Asset Prices in General Equilibrium.” Review of
   Economic Dynamics, 1999.
Arellano, Cristina and Mendoza, Enrique G. “Credit Frictions and Sudden Stops in Small Open
   Economies: An Equilibrium Business Cycle Framework for Emerging Markets Crises,” in Altug,
   Chadha, and Nolan eds., Dynamic Macroeconomic Analysis, Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Boz, Emine. “Do Miracles Lead to Crises? An Informational Frictions Explanation of Emerging Market
   Financial Crises,” Ph.D. diss., University of Maryland, 2006.
Bergoeing, Raphael, Kehoe, Patrick J., Kehoe, Timothy J., and Soto, Raimundo. “Decades Lost and
  Found,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 2002, 26 (1), pp. 3–30.
Caballero, Ricardo and Panageas, Stavros. “A Quantitative Model of Sudden Stops & External Liquidity
   Management,” Natl. Bureau of Econ. Research Inc., NBER Working Papers: No. W11293, 2005.
Chari, V.V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan. “Sudden Stops and Output Drops.” American
   Economic Review, 2005, 95(2), pp. 381-387.
Calvo, Guillermo A. “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple Economics of Sudden Stops,”
   Journal of Applied Economics, 1998, 1, pp 35-54.
     , “Globalization Hazard and Delayed Reform in Emerging Markets,” Economia, 2002, 2(2).
Cook, David and Devereux, Michael B. “External Currency Pricing and the East Asian Crisis,” Journal
  of International Economics,” forthcoming, 2006.
Durdu, C. Bora and Mendoza, Enrique G. “Are Asset Price Guarantees Useful for Preventing Sudden
   Stops?” Journal of International Economics, forthcoming, 2006.
Finn, Mary G. “Variance Properties of Solow’s Productivity Residual and their Cyclical Implications,”
   Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 1995, 19, pp. 1249-1281.
Fisher, Irving. “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions,” Econometrica ,1933, 1, pp. 337-57.
Gopinath, Gita. “Lending Booms, Sharp Reversals and Real Exchange Rate,” Journal of International
   Economics, 2004.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and Moore, John. “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Pol. Economy, 1997, 105, pp. 211-248.
Kocherlakota, Narayana. “Creating Business Cycles Through Credit Constraints,” Federal Reserve Bank
  of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 2000, 24(3), pp. 2-10.
Martin, Philippe and Rey, Helene. “Globalization and Emerging Markets: With or Without Crash?,”
  American Economic Review, forthcoming, 2006.
Mendoza, Enrique G. “Real Business Cycles in a Small Open Economy,” American Economic Review,
   1991, 81, pp. 797-818.
        “Credit, Prices, and Crashes: Business Cycles with a Sudden Stop,” in J. Frankel and S. Edwards
   eds. Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, Univ. of Chicago Press, 2002.
        and Smith, Katherine A. “Quantitative Implications of a Debt-Deflation Theory of Sudden Stops
   & Asset Prices,” Journal of International Economics, forthcoming, 2006.
        “Sudden Stops in a Business Cycle Model with Credit Constraints: A Fisherian Deflation of
   Tobin’s Q,” unpublished paper, International Monetary Fund, 2005a.
        “Real Exchange Rate Volatility and the Price of Nontradables in Sudden-Stop-Prone Economies,”
   Economia, forthcoming, 2005b.
Neumeyer, P. Andres and Perri, Fabrizio. “Business Cycles in Emerging Economies: The Role of Interest
   Rates,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2005.
Oviedo, P. Marcelo. “World Interest Rate, Business Cycles and Financial Intermediation in Small Open
   Economies,” Unpublished Paper, 2005.
                                                                                                                      10
                                                    FOOTNOTES

*
    Research Department, International Monetary Fund, 700 19th St. N.W., Washington DC, 20431, University of
Maryland and NBER. I am grateful to Guillermo Calvo, Bora Durdu, and Katherine Smith, for their valuable
contributions to the findings reported in this paper and to Helene Rey and Enrica Detragiache for her comments.
1
    This effect does not imply that agents will increase investment at equilibrium, instead of reducing it, because their
goal is to reallocate resources to the present so as to reduce the effect of the credit constraint on consumption, and
increasing investment moves resources in the opposite direction.
2
    Lenders would find these financing premia optimal if they are extremely averse to non-repayment states as an agent
with CRRA preferences, rather than being risk-neutral.
3
    Mendoza (2005b) provides a formal mathematical treatment of this setup.
4
    Since precautionary saving moves the long-run averages of debt and equity away from the “cliff’s edge” where these
conditions hold, Sudden Stops occur far from the means of the stochastic steady state. This implies that the model’s
business cycle moments are unaffected by Sudden Stops, and that Sudden Stops cannot be studied as features of near-
steady-state dynamics (as in Chari et al. (2005)).
FIGURE 1. Debt-Deflation Equilibrium in the Economy with Liability Dollarization
Figure 2. Sudden Stop Dynamics in Mendoza-Smith Model with Foreign Demand Elasticity of 1/2
              (percent deviations relative to economy with perfect credit markets)

           8

           6

           4

           2

           0

           -2

           -4

           -6

           -8

         -10
                1   2   3   4    5    6    7   8    9   10 11 12 13 14 15 16

           consumption               current account-GDP ratio             equity price

      Note: Forecast functions conditional on a negative, one-standard-deviation productivity shock
      and a leverage ratio of 12.2% at date 1 (see Mendoza and Smith (2006) for details) .
                 Figure 3. Leverage Ratios of Listed Corporations in South East Asia
                              (Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia and Thailand)


                                                                                                                       380

190

                                                                          debt to market value of equity
                                                                                                                       330
                                                                          (right axis)
170



150                                                                                                                    280

               debt to book value of equity
               (left axis)
130
                                                                                                                       230



110
                                                                                                                       180


 90

                                                                                                                       130

 70

                                                        debt to sales
                                                        (left axis)                                                    80
 50



 30                                                                                                                    30
  1993           1994         1995            1996   1997          1998          1999          2000        2001     2002




      Note: Cross-country arithmetic average of median leverage ratios across all publicly listed corporations in
      each country. Data from Worldscope database.
