                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           CONSUMPTION, INCOME, AND MATERIAL
                            WELL-BEING AFTER WELFARE REFORM

                                             Bruce D. Meyer
                                            James X. Sullivan

                                          Working Paper 11976
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11976


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2006




We would like to thank Caroline Hoxby, Erik Hurst, Kara Kane and seminar participants at the Fundacion
Ramon Areces, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, the University of California, Berkeley, the University of Virginia,
the Institute for Research on Poverty at the University of Wisconsin, Madison, Harvard University, the
NBER Summer Institute, the University of Chicago, the University of Notre Dame, Indiana University-
Purdue University Indianapolis, and Queen’s University. We would also like to thank the Annie E. Casey
Foundation for generous support and Vladimir Sokolov and Anjali Oza for excellent research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Bruce D. Meyer and James X. Sullivan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Consumption, Income, and Material Well-Being After Welfare Reform
Bruce D. Meyer and James X. Sullivan
NBER Working Paper No. 11976
January 2006
JEL No. D31, I31, I32, I38, J22

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper investigates how material well-being has changed over time for those at the bottom of
the distributions of income and consumption. We document the sharp differences between recent
trends in measured income and consumption, focusing on families headed by a single mother. Since
the early 1990s, income in the bottom decile has fallen by nearly 30 percent, while income has risen
by more than 15 percent for the fourth and fifth deciles. The trends for consumption, on the other
hand, show neither a sharp decline at low percentiles nor a large increase at higher percentiles. These
patterns are evident in two income and two consumption data sources. We then examine several
explanations for these differences. We argue that it is unlikely that reported income provides a
consistent measuring stick in recent years due to large changes in both the sources of income and the
reporting rates of the main income sources for single mothers during this period. Accounting for
changes in the characteristics of single mothers can reconcile most of the income consumption
difference above the bottom decile. For the bottom decile, simulations accounting for transfer under-
reporting can account for much of the reported income decline. Finally, we consider how these trends
translate into changes in well-being by investigating changes in disaggregated consumption and time
use. Increases in spending on housing account for much of the increase in consumption in the bottom
quintile, while increases in transportation spending account for much of the rise in the second
quintile. Two datasets indicate modest improvement in housing quality, but the evidence is less
strong at the very bottom. Although expenditures on food away from home and child care also rise,
these categories are small, on average. The consumption of non-market time for those in the bottom
half of the consumption distribution falls sharply indicating a loss in utility for those families if non-
market time is valued above $3/hour. Evidence from time-use surveys suggests that the lost non-
market time reflects a shift away from shopping, food production, and housework.

Bruce D. Meyer                                           James X. Sullivan
Harris School of Public Policy                           University of Notre Dame
University of Chicago                                    Department of Economics and Econometrics
1155 E. 60th Street                                      447 Flanner Hall
Chicago, IL 60637                                        Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER                                                 sullivan.197@nd.edu
bdmeyer@uchicago.edu
I. Introduction

       There is a long-standing debate over how poverty and the material well-being of the

disadvantaged have changed over time in the U.S. This debate has intensified in light of notable

increases in income inequality in the 1970s and 1980s and, more recently, dramatic changes in

tax and transfer programs that target poor families. Much research has informed this debate.

One strand of this literature examines poverty rates using either income or consumption.

Consumption poverty rates are generally lower than income rates when the same dollar cutoff is

used for both poverty measures, but there is controversy over the trend in recent years.1 Another

strand of this literature, which does not focus on the poor, examines overall measures of

inequality. This research has generated a fair amount of disagreement; while some researchers

argue that overall inequality has fallen, most argue that it has risen.2 Lastly, there is a body of

research on the effects of the recent welfare and tax reforms which, in large part, increased

assistance to those with jobs, but cut assistance to those not working. This research has noted

that reforms have sharply altered the patterns of program receipt, employment, and earnings.3

Prognosticators argued that the 1996 welfare reform would lead to severe deprivation.4

However, within this body of research there is little consensus on how the material well-being of

poor families has changed over the past decade.

       This paper analyzes changes in material well-being between 1993 and 2003 for


1
  See Cutler and Katz (1991), Slesnick (1993), Triest (1998), and Jencks, Mayer and Swingle
(2004a,b).
2
  See Cutler and Katz (1991), Johnson and Smeeding (1998), Blundell and Preston (1998),
Krueger and Perri (forthcoming), Attanasio, Battistin and Ichimura (2004), Autor, Katz, and
Kearney (2004), and Mayer and Jencks (1993).
3
  See Blank (2002) and Grogger and Karoly (2005) for reviews of this literature. See Moffitt
(2001, 2003) for background and methods.
4
  Daniel Patrick Moynihan predicted that the welfare reform would lead to “children sleeping on
grates, picked up in the morning frozen...”
disadvantaged families.5 We examine trends for both income and consumption. The very

distinct patterns at the bottoms of these two distributions in recent years highlight that how one

measures well-being is of critical importance. We then investigate why these trends differ so

sharply, and examine how these recent trends translate into changes in well-being. Our analysis

focuses on single mother headed families because they constitute a large share of the poor,

especially poor children, and because they can be selected based on demographic characteristics

rather than being selected on having low values for an outcome of interest, such as income or

consumption. In addition, using a single family type avoids the sensitivity to equivalence scales

found in past work with aggregate income and consumption (Triest, 1998), and methods to

handle comparisons across family type are even less established for disaggregated consumption

and time use. We report below that the prevalence of this family type is roughly constant over

our time period. Recent trends in well-being for single mother families are of particular interest

because substantial changes in welfare and tax policy during the 1990s, including expansions in

the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), welfare waivers, and the passage of the Personal

Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA), were associated with a

dramatic fall in welfare receipt and increase in work. As we will show, these changes are most

striking near the bottom of the distribution for single mothers; between 1993-1995 and 1997-

2000 reported receipt of welfare or Food Stamps drops by more than 20 percentage points in four

of the bottom five income deciles, while hours worked more than doubles for three of these five



5
 Our analyses, which focus on material well-being, do not constitute an overall evaluation of
welfare reform because these reforms included other explicit goals which we do not directly
address such as ending dependence on government benefits and promoting work, marriage, and
two-parent families.

                                                 2
deciles. The emphasis of this paper will be on determining the underlying trends in well-being

for disadvantaged families during this dynamic period, rather than attempting to separate out the

causal effects of individual policies or macroeconomic conditions. However, we do present

results for single mothers relative to comparison groups that strongly suggest that recent policy

changes played an important role in the outcome changes that we observe.

        The first part of this study documents the recent trends in income and consumption. For

income, the trends differ remarkably at different points in the distribution for single mothers.

For example, between 1993-1995 and 1997-2000, reported income in the bottom decile falls by

nearly 30 percent, while reported income rises by more than 15 percent in the fourth and fifth

deciles. These trends are evident in two nationally representative surveys–the Current

Population Survey (CPS) and the Consumer Expenditure (CE) Survey–and are consistent with

other recent studies of income (Primus, 2003; Blank and Schoeni, 2003). The trends for reported

consumption, on the other hand, tell a very different story. Using data from both the CE Survey

and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), we find that consumption data show neither

the sharp decline at low percentiles nor the large increases at the remaining percentiles in the

bottom half of the distribution of single mothers. Rather, we find a modest rise in consumption

at nearly all points in the distribution.

        We then examine several explanations for these differences, including changes in the

composition of the pool of single mothers, changes in income under-reporting, changes in prices

of goods such as housing, and other reporting and measurement issues. We present evidence that

measurement issues, which we highlighted in previous work (Meyer and Sullivan, 2003), are

crucial to understanding recent trends in the well-being of the poor. We argue that it is unlikely


                                                 3
that reported income provides a consistent measuring stick in recent years. Specifically, there

were large changes in both the sources of income and the reporting rates of the main income

sources for single mothers during this period. Accounting for changes in the characteristics of

single mothers adjusts income changes downward but has little effect on consumption. These

adjustments reconcile most of the income consumption difference above the bottom decile. For

the bottom decile, simulations accounting for transfer under-reporting can account for much of

the reported income decline.

       The last part of this paper analyzes how material well-being has changed in recent years

by looking at components of consumption as well as data on non-market time. Patterns for

components of consumption indicate that increases in spending on housing account for much of

the increase in consumption in the bottom quintile, while increases in transportation spending

account for much the rise in the second quintile. Although spending on food away from home

and child care also rise, these categories are too small, on average, to have an important effect on

changes in total consumption. Part of the increase in housing spending may reflect reduced

subsidies and higher rents as a result of increased earnings for this group (more than half of those

in the bottom quintile live in public or subsidized housing). However, we present evidence from

the CE Survey and the American Housing Survey (AHS) that housing conditions improve

modestly for this group. The consumption of non-market time for those near the bottom of the

consumption distribution falls as time spent at market work grows significantly. Evidence from

time use surveys suggests that this reflects a shift from shopping, food production and house

work to market work. The significant drop in non-market time suggests that utility has fallen for

those in the bottom half of the consumption distribution if this non-market time is valued at more


                                                 4
than $3/hour.

       The paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses the relative merits of income and

consumption as measures of material well-being. Section III summarizes research related to

income and consumption trends for single mothers in recent years. In Section IV we describe the

three nationally representative surveys used in our analyses of income and consumption

trends–the CPS, the CE Survey and the PSID–as well as data on housing characteristics from the

AHS and data from two national time use surveys. We also discuss how we define income and

consumption. Section V presents the trends for both income and consumption at different points

in the distributions for single mother families and compares them to those for other families. We

examine the robustness of these changes in Section VI. In Section VII we explore several

possible explanations for differences that arise in the changes for income and consumption. In

Section VIII we examine components of consumption and measures of non-market time to

provide some evidence on the degree to which changes in total consumption reflect actual

changes in well-being. In Section IX we conclude.



II. Income and Consumption as Measures of Well-Being

       In previous work we evaluate the merits of income and consumption as measures of well-

being (Meyer and Sullivan, 2003). Conceptual arguments as to whether income or consumption

is a better measure of the material well-being of the poor almost always favor consumption. For

example, consumption captures permanent income, reflects the insurance value of government

programs and credit markets, better accommodates illegal activity and price changes, and is more

likely to reflect private and government transfers. Reporting arguments for income or


                                                5
consumption are more evenly split, with key arguments favoring income and other important

arguments favoring consumption. Income data are easier to collect and therefore are often

collected for larger samples. For most people, income is easier to report given administrative

reporting and a small number of sources of income. However, for analyses of families with few

resources these arguments are less valid. These families tend to have many income sources, but

a substantial fraction of their consumption spending is on food and housing. In addition, income

appears to be substantially under-reported, especially for categories of income important for

those with few resources.

       This earlier work also provides evidence that for disadvantaged groups consumption is a

better predictor of well-being than income. For example, other measures of material hardship or

adverse family outcomes are more severe for those with low consumption than for those with

low income, indicating that consumption does a better job of capturing well-being for

disadvantaged families. Research has shown that key components of income are substantially

under-reported in commonly used household surveys. Weighted micro-data from these surveys,

when compared to administrative aggregates, show that government transfers and other income

components are severely under-reported (Roemer, 2000). Comparisons of survey micro-data to

administrative micro-data for the same individuals also indicate severe under-reporting of

government transfers in survey data (Marquis and Moore, 1990). There is also some under-

reporting of expenditures, but because expenditures often exceed income, we might be more

concerned about over-reporting of expenditures, of which there is little evidence.

       We also present strong evidence that income under-reporting and mis-measurement are

particularly problematic for those with few resources such as low-educated single mothers.


                                                6
Expenditures for those near the bottom greatly exceed reported income. This result is evident in

the percentiles of the expenditure and income distributions, and in comparisons of average

expenditures and income among low-educated single mothers. These differences between

expenditures and income cannot be explained with evidence of borrowing or drawing down

wealth; we show that these families rarely have substantial assets or debts. We argue that the

difference between income and consumption for these disadvantaged families is largely

explained by the misreporting of income. Thus, our null model for these analyses (and the

current paper) is that true income equals true expenditures. In other words, for the families on

whom we focus–those with limited resources–saving or dissaving to compensate for fluctuations

in income is minimal.



III. Past Research on Trends in Income and Consumption for Single Mother Families

       A few recent papers examine income or consumption trends for single mother families.

In Meyer and Sullivan (2004), we find that the level of total consumption for single mothers

increases in real terms during the 1990s. Through controls for unemployment rates and the use

of comparison groups, we provide evidence that these changes are largely due to recent changes

in welfare and tax policy. Relative to comparison groups, there is some evidence that average

consumption rises for low-educated single mothers. We also find a similar pattern at the 15th and

25th percentiles of the consumption distribution for this group. In most cases, we report a

statistically significant increase in relative total consumption for single mothers between 1984-

1990 and 1996-2000. Our results also show that some of these gains in consumption for single

mothers occur after 1995, but these changes are smaller and in many cases not statistically


                                                 7
significant. Because we do not examine consumption below the 15th percentile, these results do

not provide information on how reforms affected single mothers at the very bottom of the

consumption distribution.

       Two other papers that examine income show that the trends for income during this period

differ noticeably at different points in the income distribution. Primus (2003) uses CPS data to

examine recent changes in disposable income (after-tax income plus the cash value of non-cash

transfers such as Food Stamps) for single mothers, focusing on changes for the bottom ten

percent of the distribution. He finds substantial increases in income between 1993 and 1996 up

to the 20th percentile of income. However, between 1996 and 2000 there are declines, often

substantial ones, for those in the bottom 10 percentiles. Based on these data, Primus argues that

welfare reform has caused income to fall for many individuals at the very bottom.

       Blank and Schoeni (2003) also analyze CPS data on single parent families in the 1990s.

They compare pre-tax money income in the 1992-1995 period to that in the 1997-2000 period.

They suggest that income at the very bottom may be reported with substantial error and they are

wary of conclusions based on observed movements in the bottom few percentiles of the

distribution. They emphasize changes for the remaining part of the bottom half of the

distribution of single mothers, noting that “strikingly, many poor families have increases in their

income of around 30 percent.” These patterns can be seen in Figure 1 which is a reproduction of

Figure 1B from Blank and Schoeni (2003). While these changes could be due to improved

macroeconomic conditions, based on evidence that the income gains were most noticeable in

states that implemented strong work incentives, the authors attribute the increase in income to

welfare reform.


                                                 8
       As a starting point for our analyses, in Figure 2 we report trends for a CPS sample similar

to that used by Primus (2003) and Blank and Schoeni (2003). These trends show the key results

from these previous studies, the decline in income at low percentiles and the large gains

throughout much of the remaining bottom half of the distribution. The trend for money income

for our sample of single mother families is very similar to the trend reported in Figure 1 for a

sample of children without both parents present. Because many single mothers receive

substantial shares of income from non-money income sources such as the EITC or Food Stamps,

we also examine the trends for other measures that better approximate disposal income, or the

resources individuals have available for consumption. As shown in Figure 2, the trends differ

somewhat across these different definitions of income. Adding in Food Stamps reduces the

gains in income in the bottom half of the distribution, while adding in income tax payments and

credits increases the gains. The measures that better capture disposable income show declines in

income for a wider range of percentiles at the bottom than is evident for money income. These

measures also show much lower increases in income between the 10th and 60th percentiles.



IV. Data

A. Surveys

       Our analyses of trends in well-being for the disadvantaged draw on income and

consumption data from three nationally representative surveys: the Consumer Expenditure

Interview (CE) Survey, the March Current Population Survey (CPS), and the Panel Study of

Income Dynamics (PSID). In addition, we will present recent trends for housing characteristics

from both the CE Survey and the Annual Housing Survey (AHS), and data on time use from the


                                                 9
1992-1994 National Time Use Survey (NTUS) and the 2003 American Time Use Survey

(ATUS).

          Much of our analysis relies on data from the CE Survey because it is the only national

survey that provides data on both income and total expenditures. The CE Survey, which is

conducted by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), is a rotating panel survey of approximately

7,500 families each quarter (5,000 prior to 1999). Each family in the survey reports information

on both income and expenditures from a number of different sources for up to four consecutive

quarters. As explained below, we will use the expenditure data to derive a measure of

consumption. The CE Survey also reports some information on the characteristics of the housing

unit as well as detailed data on demographic characteristics and employment for each family

member older than 14.6 Expenditure data are reported at the family level only. For more

information on the CE Survey see Meyer and Sullivan (2003) or Bureau of Labor Statistics

(1997).

          The CPS is a nationally representative monthly survey of approximately 60,000

households (nearly 100,000 after 2001). The CPS is the most commonly used source of

nationally representative income data and the survey is the source for official U.S. poverty

statistics. We use the March CPS files that include the Annual Income Supplement data. In the

March interview respondents are asked to provide detailed retrospective information including

usual hours worked, weeks worked during the previous year, and income for the previous year


6
 The unit of observation in the CE Survey, a consumer unit, includes all related family members
or two or more persons living together who use their income to make joint expenditure decisions.
For a subset of individuals within a dwelling to be considered a separate consumer unit in the CE
Survey, at least two of the three major expense categories—housing, food, and other living
expenses—have to be made jointly.

                                                 10
from a variety of sources including earnings, asset income, monetary transfers, and the cash

value of Food Stamps. The March CPS does not include data on expenditures.

         The PSID is a panel survey that has followed a sample of families, their offspring, and

coresidents annually from 1968-1997, and biennially since 1997. The survey provides detailed

economic and demographic information for both families and individuals for a sample of about

7,000 families each year. The PSID collects data on a number of different income sources as

well as data on food and housing expenditures at the family level.

         The American Housing Survey (AHS) gathers data through personal interviews of

occupants of apartments, single-family homes and mobile homes. Questions concerning housing

quality, available appliances and facilities, building quality, neighborhood quality, and housing

costs are included. Household members are also asked about personal characteristics such as

age, gender, race, marital status, education, and income. A national sample of roughly 60,000

housing units is conducted biennially. We use the data from the surveys from 1993 through

2003.7

         Our time use data come from two nationally representative surveys. The NTUS is a

single cross-sectional survey that was conducted for the Environmental Protection Agency by the

Survey Research Center at the University of Maryland between 1992 and 1994. Survey

respondents report all activities, and where they were during those activities, for the previous

day. The NTUS includes 9,386 completed surveys–7,514 adult interviews and 1,872 child



7
 The AHS changed from a paper questionnaire to computer assisted interviewing between 1995
and 1997. At the same time the questionnaire changed slightly. We verify that this change does
not affect the trends we report for our subsamples by examining the full sample for evidence of
trend breaks around the survey change.

                                                 11
interviews. The NTUS also includes a limited number of demographic variables. We do not

observe the marital status of the respondent, but we do know the number of adults living in the

household.8 The ATUS, which started in 2003, is a repeated cross-sectional survey of a random

sample drawn from households that have completed their final interview for the CPS. One

individual is randomly chosen from each selected household, and this respondent is interviewed

once about how they spent their time on the previous day. The ATUS also collects information

on where the respondent was during each activity and whom they were with. ATUS data can be

linked to economic and demographic information in the CPS. More than 20,000 respondents

completed the ATUS survey in 2003.

B. Samples

       Although we examine trends for a number of different samples, the results that follow

focus on single mother families for the period between 1993 and 2003. We concentrate on this

sample for several reasons. First, selecting the sample based on demographic characteristics is

preferable to restricting attention to families that report limited resources, because the latter

approach will systematically bias comparisons of income and consumption by conditioning on

the variables under study (Meyer and Sullivan, 2003). In addition, it is easier to adjust for

differences in family size within a demographic group. In fact, equivalence scale adjustments

have little impact on our results for single mothers. Second, this restriction allows us to

concentrate on families with children that are particularly disadvantaged. Single mother families

account for about 60 percent of all families with children living in poverty. Third, tax and

transfer programs that primarily target single mother families changed dramatically during the

8
Codebooks, data, and additional information for the NTUS are available at
www.webuse.umd.edu.

                                                  12
1990s. These policy changes were associated with a dramatic fall in welfare receipt and increase

in work, as we will show in the following section. This dramatic change in sources of income

and time spent in the labor market has sparked much debate about how the well-being of these

families has changed in recent years.9 Furthermore, these policy changes, which included work

requirements and tax credits on formal labor market earnings, significantly increased the returns

to formal work. At the same time under-reporting rates for non-labor income grew substantially.

These factors suggest that there could be substantial bias in recent trends in income for single

mothers.

       We focus on families headed by a single woman between the ages of 18 and 54 who lives

with her own children only and who has at least one of her own children under the age of 18

living with her.10 This excludes single mothers living with other related or unrelated adults

unless the adult is a child of the female head. We use sample weights from each survey so that

all results reported in the following section are representative of the U.S. population of primary

families headed by single mothers. For comparison purposes, we also perform some analyses on

samples including all single women, all women with children, all families except single mothers,

as well as a sample of families with a disabled head.

       It is important to note that changes in the characteristics of single mothers might bias

comparisons over time. Data for a sample of all women between the ages of 18 and 54 in the

CPS indicate that the fraction of these women that are single mothers does not change noticeably

between 1993 and 2003. As shown in Appendix Table A1, the fraction of women that are lone

9
 See Blank (2002) and Grogger and Karoly (2005) for overviews.
10
  A woman is classified as single if she reports her marital status as never married, divorced,
separated or widowed. “Own children” include blood-related sons and daughters, step children
and adopted children.

                                                13
single mothers—those living with their own children only—falls by 1.5 percentage points

between 1993 and 2001, and then rises somewhat after 2001.11 This pattern is similar to that for

the broader sample of all single mothers. The fraction of women that are married with children

also falls slightly in the late 1990s, indicating a more general trend of falling fertility during this

period. Similarly, data from the CE Survey show very small declines in single mother and

married parent families relative to other family types. Nevertheless, in many of the analyses that

follow we control for a large number of observable characteristics of single mothers.

        To simplify the analysis of the trends for income and consumption, we group the data

into three separate periods: 1993-1995, 1997-2000, and 2001-2003. The first period begins after

the end of the recession in the early 1990s, and ends prior to the passage of PRWORA legislation

in 1996. The second period starts after PRWORA was implemented in most states. The final

period includes data for two years after the recession of 2001.12 Changes between the first two

periods are informative about the immediate effects of welfare reform, and are less likely to be

influenced by any changes in the characteristics of the pool of single mothers, which changes

slowly over time. Changes between the first and third periods are informative about medium

term effects, but are more likely to be influenced by any changes in the pool of single mothers.

We also examine changes in income and consumption between earlier periods. These trends are

discussed in Section VI.

        The reference period for expenditures in the CE Survey is the previous three months and



11
   The break in the downward trend in 2002 occurs at a time when several significant survey
changes were implemented, including a shift to weights based on the 2000 Census as well as a
significant expansion to the March CPS sample that added more than 34,000 households.
12
   Originally, we selected these periods to facilitate comparisons with previous research. Our
analyses are not sensitive to the precise specification of these periods.

                                                  14
for income it is the previous twelve months.13 Thus, our first period includes data from the

second quarter of 1993 survey through the first quarter of 1996 survey, the second period

includes data from the second quarter of 1997 survey through the first quarter of 2001 survey,

and the third includes data from the second quarter of 2001 through the first quarter of 2004.

Stacking the quarterly surveys for single mothers yields 3,075 family-quarter observations in the

first period, 4,470 family-quarter observations in the second period, and 4,065 family-quarter

observations in the third period. Because we have multiple observations for the same family, we

correct all standard errors for within household dependence (Appendix 2).

C. Measures of Income and Consumption

       In the following section we present trends for both income and consumption as well as

components of consumption. We examine several different measures of income, including pre-

tax money income as well as other measures of spendable resources. Our measure of disposable

family income includes all money income including earnings, asset income, and public money

transfers for all family members. From money income, we deduct income tax liabilities

including state and federal income taxes, and add tax credits such as the EITC. In addition, we

add the face value of Food Stamps received by all family members.14 This income measure more



13
   Respondents in the CE Survey generally report income only in the second and fifth interviews.
Income reported at the second interview is carried over to the third and fourth interviews unless a
member over 13 is new to the CU, or a member of the CU that was not working at the time of the
second interview is working in a subsequent interview. In these cases new values for family
income are reported.
14
   While Food Stamps are an in-kind transfer we include their face value in our measure of
disposable income. Because transfer amounts are low, it is likely they are less than the
unconstrained choice for the vast majority of all families. Whitmore (2002) indicates that Food
Stamps are valued at 80 percent of face value for those whose transfer exceeds the unconstrained
choice, and that Food Stamps are traded on the underground market for about 65 percent of their
face value.

                                                15
accurately reflects the resources available to the family for consumption than the gross money

income measure currently used to calculate official U.S. poverty figures. The calculation of

after-tax income in this study varies slightly across surveys. For the PSID, we calculate tax

liabilities and credits using TAXSIM (Feenberg and Coutts, 1993) and impute FICA taxes using

reported labor income. In the CPS, state and federal income taxes, FICA taxes, and tax credits

are imputed by the BLS using respondent income and family characteristics. Tax data in the CE

Survey are based on reports from the respondent. Another reason income may differ across

surveys is that the PSID and CPS impute missing values for components of income, while the

CE Survey does not impute missing values for income. For this reason, we restrict our samples

from the CE Survey to include only complete income reporters—excluding those with missing

data for primary sources of income. About 10 to 15 percent of CE Survey respondents are

classified as incomplete income reporters.

       Our measures of family consumption in the CE Survey are derived from expenditure

questions. Three major adjustments distinguish our measure of total consumption from the

measure of total expenditures reported in the CE Survey. First, our consumption measure

excludes spending on individuals or entities outside the family, such as charitable contributions

and spending on gifts to non-family members. Second, consumption does not include spending

that is better interpreted as an investment such as spending on education and health care and

outlays for retirement including pensions and social security. Finally, reported expenditures on

durables tend to be lumpy because the entire cost of new durable goods is included in current

expenditures. To smooth these lumpy durable expenditures, we convert reported housing and

vehicle spending to service flow equivalents for our measure of consumption. For a detailed



                                                16
description of how we calculate these service flows, see Meyer and Sullivan (2001). See

Appendix 1 for more precise definitions of our various measures of income and consumption in

each survey.

         We adjust both income and consumption to express these measures on the same scale

across observations with different family sizes by dividing each outcome by the appropriate

poverty threshold for each family, which also converts the measures to constant dollars using the

CPI-U. As explained in Section VI, the results are not sensitive to the choice of equivalence

scale.



V. Trends in Income and Consumption

         In this section we present trends for both income and consumption for single mothers

between 1993 and 2003. We examine trends for the entire distribution of income and

consumption, because trends in mean outcomes may miss important differences across parts of

the distribution.15 While it is well known that welfare and tax reform were associated with

increased work and decreased receipt of welfare, less emphasis has been given to the fact that

these changes are most pronounced at the bottom of the income and consumption distribution.

Table 1 shows that between 1993-1995 and 1997-2000 the drop in welfare caseloads and the rise

in employment are most noticeable at the bottom of the income (top panel) and consumption

(bottom panel) distributions. For example, reported receipt of welfare or Food Stamps drops by

more than 20 percentage points in four of the bottom five income deciles, while hours worked

more than doubles for three of these five deciles. Changes in welfare receipt and hours worked

15
 Bitler, Gelbach, and Hoynes (forthcoming) show, using experimental data, that mean impacts
miss much of the effect of welfare reforms, even for narrowly defined groups of single mothers.

                                                17
are much less evident in the top half of the income and consumption distributions.

        We present trends from several national datasets, but focus on those from the CE Survey

because with this survey we observe income and total consumption for the same families at a

point in time. Figure 3 reports the percentage change in various measures of income and

consumption between the 1993-1995 and 1997-2000 periods for each percentile of the

distribution for that measure. These trends show sharp differences between income and

consumption measures. The CE Survey income data show patterns that are remarkably similar

to those for the CPS reported in Figure 2. Total consumption, however, shows neither the

pronounced drop for the bottom ten percent nor the sharp increase over the 10th - 50th percentiles

that one sees with income. We see slight increases in the bottom decile of consumption. For the

10th through the 50th percentiles, consumption increases by between 4 and 12 percent. The trends

for food consumption also show much less variation across quantiles than is evident for income.

Food consumption exhibits modest declines for the bottom half of the distribution, but changes

little at higher percentiles.16

        The trends for after-tax income and consumption from Figure 3 are summarized in Table

2 (Columns 1 and 4 of Panel A), where we report means by deciles. Comparing within decile

trends across these two measures, we can reject the hypotheses that these trends are the same for

many deciles. For example, average consumption in the bottom decile of the consumption

distribution increases by 4.2 percent over the sample period, while average income in the bottom



16
 Food spending falls at the bottom for other groups in the CE Survey as well (see Figure 4).
Other data sets such as the PSID show that food consumption changes very little during this
period (Figure 5). In addition, other studies using CE Interview data (Meyer and Sullivan, 2004)
and CE Diary data (DeLeire and Levy, 2005) have shown that food consumption for low-
educated single mothers does not fall relative to comparison groups during this period.

                                                18
income decile falls by 29.3 percent. The difference between these changes–33.6 percentage

points (Column 7)–is statistically significant.17 We can also reject that the trends are the same in

the second, fourth, and fifth deciles.

          It is important to note that the trends in Columns 1 and 4, and those in Figures 2 and 3,

reflect changes at various points of the distribution when the observations are sorted by the

material well-being measure in question. Thus, for example, a family at the 10th percentile of

income is not necessarily the same family at the 10th percentile of consumption. To verify that

the differences at the bottom are not due to some peculiar sorting of individuals over time we

also examine the trends for average income by decile of consumption (Column 2) and vice versa

(Column 3). These results show that reported income also falls noticeably between 1993-1995

and 1997-2000 for those with low consumption. The difference between the trends for average

income and average consumption in the bottom consumption decile is 20.7 percentage points.

The difference in trends for those in the bottom income decile is even more pronounced–average

income falls by 29.3 percent while average consumption for these same families rises by 14.5

percent. By contrast, no matter how the observations are sorted, there is little difference between

the trends for income and consumption in the top part of the distributions. Differences between

the trends for income and consumption at the bottom are also evident for the period from 1993-

1995 to 2001-2003 (Panel B). When comparing trends at the bottom of the consumption

distribution to those for the bottom of the income distribution over this longer period, we can

reject that the trends for income and consumption are the same for four of the bottom five deciles

(Column 7).



17
     See Appendix 2 for a discussion of how the bootstrapped standard errors are calculated.

                                                   19
       Some of the statistics behind Figure 3 and Table 2 are reported in Appendix Table A2,

including the 5th percentile and the decile cutoffs for consumption and income in each of the

three periods by number of children. The numbers represent annual measures of consumption

and income for the entire family. As we emphasize in earlier work, the consumption numbers at

low percentiles are much larger than the corresponding income numbers. For example, for

families with one child, the 5th percentile of consumption in the 1997-2000 period is 2.41 times

the 5th percentile of income.18 Nevertheless, even the consumption numbers are very low–the 5th

percentile of the consumption distribution for single mothers with two children in the 1993-1995

period is less than half the poverty line, and single mothers with three or more children face even

greater deprivation. It is also noteworthy that there is little or no tendency for the consumption

numbers to rise with family size, indicating that material well-being tends to be much worse in

larger families.

       The sharp differences in recent trends for income and consumption are unique to single

mothers. In Figure 4 we report trends for income and consumption measures for a sample of all

families except single mothers. Income for families in the bottom decile of the rest of the

population does not drop sharply. Nor does income rise between the 10th - 50th percentiles.

Also, unlike the trends for single mothers, the trends in Figure 4 are very similar for both income



18
  Differences in the reference period in the CE Survey suggest that the differences in levels of
income and consumption are understated. In the CE Survey, income is reported for the previous
year, while expenditures are reported for the previous quarter. This is not of particular concern
for comparing the means of these outcomes. However, because annual averages must have less
variance than annualized measures over a shorter period, our consumption measures are over-
dispersed relative to those for annual measures. Evidence from a sample of families that are in
the CE Survey for four consecutive quarters shows that the standard deviation of an annualized
measure of consumption derived from quarterly observations is 11 percent greater than the
standard deviation for annual consumption derived from annual observations on consumption.

                                                20
and consumption. At every percentile below the 90th changes in after-tax income plus Food

Stamps are not more than 5 percentage points greater than changes in consumption. Trends in

income and consumption for families with a disabled head (not reported) also fail to show the

sharp differences between income and consumption that are evident for single mothers.19 Total

consumption and after-tax income exhibit little change for this group. For all percentiles

between the 10th and 90th, income and consumption change by no more than 7 percent. In the

bottom decile, income on average rises by about 5 percent while consumption falls, but only

slightly.

        The characteristics of single mothers are changing over time, and these changes may

affect both income and consumption. To address this concern, we estimate quantile regressions

of the following form:

ln(Ziq) = $1 + $21{year=(1997-2000)} + $31{year=(2001-2003)} + Xiq $4 + ,iq                            (1)

where the dependent variable is either log consumption or log income divided by the poverty

line for family i in quarter q; 1{year=(1997-2000)} and 1{year=(2001-2003)} are period dummies; Xiq is a vector

of demographic characteristics including a cubic in the age of the head, the number of children

less than 18, the number of girls age 2-15, the number of boys age 2-15, education and race of

the head, and region; and ,iq is a household-quarter error term. We calculate bootstrap standard

errors, resampling at the household level, rather than at the household-quarter level in order to

allow for within household dependence. Columns 1 and 3 of Table 3, report estimates at various

quantiles for $2 and $3 when no demographic controls are included ($4 = 0). As expected, these

estimates are in close agreement with those plotted in Figure 3. The estimates for the


19
 This sample includes all families, except those headed by a single mother, whose head has not
worked in the previous twelve months due to illness or disability.

                                                         21
specifications including demographic controls are reported in Columns 2 and 4. Adding controls

has little effect on the trend for consumption, although changes between the 1993-1995 and

2001-2003 periods shift downward somewhat. Estimates for income that account for changes in

the characteristics of single mothers no longer exhibit large increases above the bottom quintile.

In fact, these income trends mirror those for consumption very closely above the 15th percentile.

However, the addition of demographic controls has little effect on changes in income at the

bottom. Income still falls between 1993-1995 and 1997-2000 by 19 percent at the 5th percentile

and by 8 percent at the 10th percentile and the former change is significant. We also estimated

Equation (1) for the sample of single mothers in the CPS (not reported). Consistent with the

pattern for CE income, in the CPS we find that much of the significant rise in income above the

bottom decile reported in Figures 1 and 2 disappears with the addition of demographic controls.

However, as in the CE Survey, we still see a sharp drop in income in the bottom decile.

       Table 3 also presents estimates for changes in income and consumption relative to two

comparison groups: single women without children and married mothers. These comparison

groups provide an indication as to whether the changes we observe are part of a larger pattern of

change for other groups due to changes in macroeconomic conditions, or other sources. In

particular, for a sample including single mothers and a comparison group we estimate

specifications similar to Equation 1 that also include interactions of a single mother indicator

with each of the three period indicators. Columns 5 through 8 report, for various percentiles, the

difference between the coefficient on this interaction with the first period and this interaction

with each of the later periods. These results are consistent with the pattern for the absolute

changes. At percentiles below the 25th, consumption for single mothers rises modestly, but in

many cases significantly, relative to both comparison groups. At percentiles above the 25th, the

                                                 22
change in relative consumption is very small. Changes in relative income mirror those for

consumption above the 25th percentile. However, we again see noticeable differences at the

bottom, where relative income falls for single mothers at the 5th and 10th percentiles, and this

drop is significant for the all mothers sample. Similar quantile estimates for food consumption

(not reported) indicate that food changes very little in the bottom half of the distribution relative

to both comparison groups.

       If recent macroeconomic changes affect these three groups similarly, then the trends in

Columns 5 through 8 suggest that recent changes in welfare and tax policy had a modest positive

effect on consumption for single mothers in the bottom quartile, and a very small effect on both

consumption and income at higher percentiles.20 The noticeable difference between changes in

relative income and consumption at the bottom is a puzzle that we will explore further in Section

VII.



VI. Robustness of the Consumption and Income Changes

       We find little evidence that the trends reported in Figures 2 through 4 and Tables 2 and 3

are sensitive to alternative approaches to adjusting for family size or inflation or the precise

sample definition. Given the types of analyses that we perform and the narrow demographic

group on which we focus, these trends are not sensitive to the choice of equivalence scale. The

results do not change noticeably when consumption and income are adjusted by the scale



20
  These three groups of women have similar wages, and this similarity is especially strong for the
two groups of single women and when one conditions on educational attainment. Previous
research has shown that employment for single women without children responds in an similar
way to changes in aggregate unemployment as does employment for single mothers (Meyer and
Rosenbaum, 2001).

                                                 23
proposed by the National Research Council (1995)21 rather than expressing income and

consumption relative to the poverty line. The trends also are not sensitive to the nature of price

adjustments. The trends reported in Section V are expressed in real terms using the CPI-U for all

items. One nice feature of consumption is that one can account for changes in the relative prices

of various components by adjusting major components such as food, housing, transportation, and

apparel, using the respective CPI index for each component. This alternative approach has a

negligible effect on the trends for total consumption and food consumption. We also verify that

the trends are not sensitive to the precise definition of single mother families. As explained in

Section IV, the main results are for single mothers living with their own children only. Results

for a broader sample that includes single mothers with other adults present, such as a grandparent

or a cohabiting partner, do not differ noticeably from those presented in Section V. In addition,

the trends are not sensitive to imputation of major consumption components in the CE Survey.

When we calculate the distribution of changes in consumption for a sample that excludes

observations for which a major component of consumption, such as food or rent, is imputed–this

accounts for about 20 percent of the sample in each period–the results do not change noticeably.

       We also examined income and consumption trends for single mothers for the years from

1984 through 1992, although we do not report these trends here.22 For this earlier period, we

again see the most noticeable differences between the trends for income and consumption at the

bottom of the distributions. Throughout this earlier period consumption changes very little at all

points in the distribution, while food consumption falls slightly throughout the distribution. The



21
   The number of adult equivalents is (the number of adults + the number of children*0.7)0.7.
22
   The CE Survey has been administered quarterly since 1980. The 1982 and 1983 surveys,
however, only sampled urban areas.

                                                24
top half of the income distribution also shows little change during this earlier period. At lower

percentiles, however, income noticeably rises more than consumption.

       As an additional robustness check, we examined income and consumption trends in

another major dataset. We have already shown that the trends for income in the CPS are very

similar to those in the CE Survey (Figures 2 and 3). Figure 5 reports the income and

consumption measures from Figure 3 that are also available in the PSID. PSID food

consumption exhibits little change during this period. This is similar to the pattern for food

consumption in the CE Survey, although the PSID does not show declines in food consumption

in the bottom half of the distribution. While the PSID does not provide data on total

consumption, data are available for housing spending. Together, food and housing account for

more than seventy percent of total consumption for single mothers, as we will show in Section

VIII.23 The trend for food and housing in the PSID is remarkably similar to the trend for total

consumption in the CE Survey shown in Figure 3. These results show that the consumption

changes are not an anomaly due to some aspect of the CE Survey. The trends for PSID income

show increases over most percentiles. These trends are quite similar to those for the CPS and the

CE Survey except in the bottom quintile. Other research indicates that this rise at the bottom in

the PSID is due to unusually low levels of reported income in the PSID during the 1993-1995

period. Gouskova and Schoeni (2002) compare PSID and CPS income between 1970 and 2001

for many points in the distribution. They show that below the 20th percentile PSID income

exceeds CPS income for the years prior to 1990. In the early 1990s, however, PSID income at



23
 Housing in the PSID includes rent for renters, a service flow based on the market value of the
home for owners, and a reported rental equivalent for non-homeowners that do not pay any rent.
Unlike the CE housing measure, it does not include utilities. See Appendix 1 for more details.

                                                25
low percentiles falls sharply relative to CPS income, and after 1997 PSID income at these low

percentiles grows at a much faster rate than does CPS income.



VII. Reconciling the Differences at the Bottom

       The results in Sections V and VI demonstrate that reported income and consumption for

single mother families follow different trends at the bottom of the distribution in recent years.

We see the same qualitative patterns in two income and two consumption datasets. In this

section we investigate potential explanations for this difference. The permanent income

hypothesis (PIH) is the standard economic explanation for differences between consumption and

income at a point in time; individuals borrow or draw down assets to allow consumption to

exceed income. Data on assets from the CE Survey, however, suggest that there is little

intertemporal substitution of income for single mothers at the bottom of the distribution. Less

than a quarter of all single mothers with responses to the asset questions in the CE Survey report

liquid assets valued at more than $1,500.24 Among single mothers with expenditures that exceed

income and who are in the bottom half of the income distribution, less than 10 percent have

liquid assets exceeding $500. Moreover, there is no evidence that single mothers with

expenditures that exceed income have greater ex ante asset holdings than those with

expenditures that are less than income. These descriptive statistics are consistent with previous

work where we show that differences between consumption and income at the bottom cannot be

explained with evidence of borrowing or drawing down wealth using data from the PSID (Meyer



24
 CE Survey respondents only report asset information in the fifth interview. Other studies that
use different datasets also show that liquid asset holdings are small among single mothers
(Sullivan, 2006).

                                                 26
and Sullivan, 2003).

       Measurement error is another potential explanation for differences in recent trends for

income and consumption. While both income and consumption are surely measured with some

error, the concern here is whether measurement error for either outcome has changed noticeably

during our sample period. Previous research shows ratios of total expenditures based on CE

Survey data to national aggregates based on Personal Consumption Expenditures are less than

one and have declined steadily since the mid 1980s (Deaton 2005).25 However, components of

consumption such as rent and utilities, food at home, and vehicle purchases match more closely

with aggregate data than other components of consumption, and comparisons of these

components to their respective aggregates do not change significantly between 1984 and 2000

(Garner et al., 2003).26 These components account for a significant fraction of total consumption

for single mothers, particularly those at the bottom. Food at home, housing, and transportation

together account for about three-quarters of total consumption for those in the bottom quintile,

and this share does not change noticeably over time (see Table 7).

       Two recent trends indicate that income measurement error might be of particular concern

for single mothers in recent years: increasingly high under-reporting rates for welfare income

and a noticeable shift from welfare income to labor market earnings. Table 4 shows

AFDC/TANF and Food Stamp under-reporting rates calculated by dividing weighted survey

reports by administrative totals. In 1993 15 percent of cash welfare dollars were not reported in



25
   Given that consumption significantly exceeds income at the bottoms of the distributions (Table
A2), under-reporting of income is of greater concern than under-reporting of consumption.
26
   Garner et al. (2003) and Deaton (2005) are not directly applicable to our analyses because their
studies use the CE integrated data, which combine the Interview and Diary surveys, whereas we
use the Interview survey exclusively.

                                                27
the CE survey, but by 2000 the share not reported had more than tripled to 53 percent. Under-

reporting rates for Food Stamps also rose noticeably during this period. Significant increases in

under-reporting rates for welfare income are also evident in the CPS.27 Table 5, which reports

the dollar amounts and shares represented by the main income sources for each decile of the

income distribution, demonstrates why under-reporting might lead to significant bias,

particularly at the bottom. First, the share of reported income from AFDC/TANF and Food

Stamps in the bottom income decile is substantial, accounting for about two-thirds of income in

the bottom quintile. Second, reported welfare income as a share of pre-tax income, falls

substantially from 0.63 to 0.34 between 1993-1995 and 1997-2000, as single mothers shift from

welfare income to formal labor market earnings.

       There is also evidence that reporting rates for earnings have changed for single mothers.

In an earlier paper (Meyer and Sullivan 2003, pp. 1197-1198) we argued that unusually low

hourly wages calculated by dividing reported earnings by reported hours are an indicator of

earnings under-reporting (or possibly hours over-reporting). We examined the fraction of

people reporting implied hourly wages below the minimum wage, excluding those working in

uncovered occupations. Expanding this analysis, we examine whether there is evidence that

earnings under-reporting changes over time. Comparing CPS data for 1993-1995 and 1997-

2000, we find that the fraction of single mothers reporting wages below the federal minimum

falls from 29.1 percent to 22.6 percent, a statistically significant drop. At the same time, the

fraction for those besides single mothers with a sub-minimum wage rises from 3.9 to 4.2. This

finding is consistent with less under-reporting of earnings by single mothers in recent years.


27
 For additional evidence on income under-reporting see Marquis and Moore (1990), Coder and
Scoon-Rogers (1996), Roemer (2000).

                                                 28
          The potential effect of changes in under-reporting and income sources on recent income

trends is unclear. On the one hand, given that welfare and Food Stamps account for a large

fraction of income, sharp increases in under-reporting of transfer income could lead to a

significant downward bias in changes in income. Moreover, because most of the under-reporting

is due to a failure to report receipt at all,28 not reporting welfare could make the income of non-

reporting recipients appear extremely low. If the increased transfer under-reporting is

disproportionately among those with low reported income, then it would seem that changes in

reporting have the potential to explain the differences between income and consumption at the

very bottom. On the other hand, despite the tripling of the under-reporting rate, the number of

dollars not reported rose slowly between 1993 and 2000, as one can calculate from Table 4.

Thus, it is possible that declining true receipt could reverse much of the effect of a lower

reporting rate. In addition, high rates of under-reporting of welfare income could bias income

trends upward as labor market earnings replace welfare income, because this change in income

sources represents a shift from a source that is significantly under-reported to one that is

typically well-reported (Roemer, 2000).

          Suggestive evidence that there is a potential problem with under-reporting of government

transfers in the bottom income decile comes from Table 1. In all three periods, the fraction of

families reporting AFDC/TANF or Food Stamps is lower in the bottom decile than the second

decile. This pattern is sharply different from that seen for the consumption deciles where

reported transfer receipt is higher in the bottom decile than in the other deciles in all three

periods. In fact, transfer receipt rises monotonically as one moves from the higher to lower


28
     See Moore, Marquis and Bogen (1996).


                                                  29
consumption deciles.

       To determine the potential effect of the sharp increase in under-reporting rates of welfare

income on trends in reported income, we examine trends for measures of income that are

adjusted for changes in the under-reporting of transfers over time. For those who have reported

expenditures that exceed income, but who report no welfare income, we impute welfare income

equal to the minimum of the welfare income for which a mother appears eligible and the

difference between reported expenditures and reported income. Welfare income is allocated to

single mothers starting with those with the lowest expenditures (in a separate imputation we

allocate by income) until the total amount allocated equals the aggregate amount not reported

based on the comparisons to aggregates for that year as reported in Table 4. Specifically, let E

be reported expenditures, Yr be reported income, Ya be adjusted income, Wr be reported welfare

income, Wa be adjusted welfare income, and We be welfare income for which an individual is

eligible based on state rules. Then

     ⎧Y       if Wr > 0 or E < Yr
Ya = ⎨ r                                                                           (2)
     ⎩Yr + Wa if Wr = 0 and E > Yr



where Wa = min(We , E − Yr ) . A full description of the methodology for this simulation is


provided in Appendix 3. The results from this simulation are reported in Columns 2 and 3 of

Table 6. For comparison, the results from Table 2 for the changes in mean income by decile of

income are reported again in Panel A, Column 1 of Table 6. The trends for the second decile

and above mirror those for the non-imputed measure. However, accounting for under-reporting,

as described above, raises the ratio of means for the bottom decile from 0.707 to 0.884. We


                                               30
should note that because we are adjusting for under-reporting in both periods, the changes in

mean income from the adjustment do not need to go in this direction. When imputed welfare

income is allocated to those with the lowest reported income first (Column 3), the entire drop in

income in the bottom decile disappears. The trend for imputed income in the bottom decile in

this simulation is very similar to the change for consumption reported in Table 2. Quantile

estimates reported in Table 3 that control for demographic characteristics indicate that income

falls by 19 percent and 7.9 percent at the 5th and 10th percentiles respectively. Analogous

quantile estimates for imputed income in Panel B of Table 6 indicate that the change in income

ranges between -3.7 percent and zero at the 5th percentile and between 2.5 and 4.6 percent at the

10th percentile, depending on whether imputed income is allocated by expenditures or income.

Moreover, none of these quantile estimates for imputed income are significantly different from

zero.

         The trends for our simulated income measure indicate that most of the decline in income

in the bottom decile after welfare reform could be due to the rise in under-reporting of transfers.

A drawback to our approach is that we rely on very simple imputation rules. To improve these

rules we would need administrative micro-data that could be matched to our survey data.

Nevertheless, given the evidence of large increases in under-reporting rates of transfer income

and significant changes in major income sources, it is unlikely that reported income provides a

consistent measuring stick for single mothers near the bottom of the distribution during the

1990s.



VIII. Disaggregated Consumption and Non-market Time

         To determine how these recent trends translate into changes in material well-being we

                                                 31
examine components of consumption and data on non-market time. Unlike income, consumption

data can be disaggregated into its components in order to explore more fully the relationship

between changes in consumption and changes in material well-being. For example, analyses of

the components of consumption can shed light on the degree to which total consumption changes

are the result of increased work expenses.29 These analyses will provide evidence on whether

recent increases in consumption among single mothers reflect improved well-being.30

       As shown in Table 7, which reports shares for various components of consumption for

both periods, many of the changes in these shares seem consistent with the trend toward increased

work for single mothers during this time. Food at home falls while transportation spending

increases for every decile of the consumption distribution. Over this same period, food away

from home and child expenses also increase,31 but these components account for only a small

fraction of total consumption. In the bottom five deciles, spending on food away from home

averages about 3 percent of consumption and child care averages about 2 percent of consumption.

Thus, even substantial percentage increases in these categories of spending do not have a very

important effect on changes in total consumption. Changes in transportation spending are more



29
   Another advantage of looking at the components of consumption is that we can discern, in part,
whether changes in total consumption reflect changes in the relative prices of different
components. As discussed in Section VI, adjusting major components of consumption by their
respective CPI does not affect our consumption trends.
30
   Research that considers different outcome measures suggests that material well-being among
the disadvantaged has changed little or improved slightly in recent years. Sullivan, Turner, and
Danziger (2005) show that the prevalence of material hardships falls insignificantly between
1997 and 2003 for a sample of single mothers originally on welfare. Rates of food pantry use
and gifts of food from others reported in Winship and Jencks (2004) do not suggest that there has
been increased hardship among the poor. However, without data on any changes in the supply of
assistance, this evidence is not conclusive.
31
   Deleire and Levy (2005) also report a shift from food at home to food away from home among
single mothers during the 1990s.

                                                32
important. While there is little change in the bottom decile, for the second through fifth deciles

the average share for transportation rises from 10.0 to 13.4 percent.

       We can summarize the contribution of various components of consumption to changes in

the total in a more orderly way. Using consumption shares we decompose the change in total

consumption into its major components in order to determine which components have had the

largest impact on changes in the total.32 Figure 6 shows the overall change in consumption for

each decile, as well as the contribution to the overall change from various components of

consumption. We see that food falls in the bottom decile, but total consumption does not fall

because housing goes up sharply. Overall, housing pulls total consumption up sharply in the

bottom two deciles, while increases in transportation expenditures account for much of the

increase in total consumption for deciles two through four, and to a lesser extent for higher

deciles.

       This decomposition demonstrates that an analysis of changes in total consumption alone

may result in misleading conclusions about changes in well-being. For example, in the second

decile consumption increases by 9.3 percent, but this increase may not reflect improvements in

material well-being if the increase is driven by increases in transportation spending that is related

to work. A substantial share of this increase in transportation spending is probably work related.

The difference in average transportation shares between those with substantial work hours (more

than 500 hours/year) and those with lower hours or who do not work at all averages between 3

and 4 percent in the bottom five deciles. Given that the fraction with substantial work hours



32
 Our decomposition weights the percentage change in a given consumption category by its
average share over the two periods. Any residual from this decomposition is added to the
category “other”.

                                                 33
increased by about 25 percentage points in the bottom half of the consumption distribution after

welfare reform, about one-third of the increase in transportation spending, or over 1.4 percent

consumption, may be due to increased work.33

       This decomposition also indicates the importance of increases in housing spending.

However, increases in housing spending may not indicate improved living conditions if greater

out-of-pocket spending on housing is a result of reduced housing subsidies as earnings rise.

Understanding housing trends is particularly important because housing is the largest category of

consumption for single mothers. As indicated in Table 7, aside from the bottom decile, housing

accounts for at least 40 percent of measured consumption. Even these statistics are biased

downward because we do not impute a value for the part of public or subsidized housing that is

not paid for by the recipient.

       Given the increase in housing consumption, particularly in the bottom two deciles, we

examine whether the increase reflects an improvement in well-being for these families. Table 8

reports a number of characteristics of housing spending from the CE Survey. A large share of

single mothers live in public or subsidized housing as can been seen in Panel A, and this fraction

has increased in recent years, particularly at the bottom of the consumption distribution. Rates of

home ownership are fairly low, though they have risen over time as reported in Panel B. Much of

the increase in housing spending reflects higher rental payments, which rose by more than twenty

percent for those in the bottom three deciles for those in public or subsidizing housing or the

bottom two deciles for those in private housing between 1993-1995 and 1997-2000 (Panels C and


33
  The change in total consumption that results from increased work is slightly larger because
there are other work expenses included in categories such as clothing, child care, and food away
from home. However, these components are much smaller than transportation or change little, as
shown in Table 7 or Figure 6.

                                                 34
D of Table 8). The rent increases tend to be somewhat larger for those in public housing,

suggesting that these families may have qualified for smaller rent subsidies as their earnings

increased, resulting in increased out-of-pocket rental expenses.

       To discern how much of this increase in rents reflects improved living quarters we turn to

data on housing characteristics from two datasets. The CE Survey provides data on the number of

rooms in the unit and the presence of major appliances. We look at major appliances that are

amenities often included in rental units and that may reflect the quality of the unit. The trends for

these characteristics, which are presented separately by decile of the consumption distribution in

Table 9, provide some evidence that housing quality has improved in recent years for those at the

bottom–the group whose rise in consumption is driven by increases in housing. Between 1993-

1995 and 1997-2000 the number of rooms and number of bedrooms (adjusted for family size) fall

somewhat for those in the bottom decile, and then rises after 2000. However, these changes are

not significant. We do find significant improvements between 1993-1995 and 2000-2003 in the

bottom decile for the number of bathrooms as well as for the likelihood of having air

conditioning, a clothes washer, and a dryer. Overall, the evidence from the CE Survey suggests

that the quality of housing for those in the bottom half of the consumption distribution has risen.

       Additional evidence on housing quality is available in the American Housing Survey

(AHS), which also has the advantage of a larger sample size than the CE Survey. Although we

cannot examine housing conditions in the AHS at different points of the consumption distribution,

we can examine these characteristics for the worst off single mothers by looking at those without

a high school degree. These low-educated single mothers are over-represented in the bottom of

the consumption distribution in the CE Survey; more than three-quarters are located in the bottom

half of the distribution. The trends from the AHS are summarized in Table 10. As with those

                                                 35
from the CE Survey, the point estimates suggest slight improvement in housing conditions,

although many of the changes are not statistically significant. Between 1993-1995 and 1997-

1999, we see significant increases in the fraction of units with a dryer or air conditioning.

Looking at outcomes that we expect to affect disproportionately the worst off among this already

disadvantaged group of single mothers, we see declines in the frequency of inoperative toilets and

leaks in the roof, and the latter decrease is significant. Improvements are somewhat more

noticeable when comparing the 1993-1995 and 2001-2003 periods. Thus, while housing spending

does rise, it appears that single mothers with low consumption are receiving more or better

housing on average for their money. Overall, the evidence from disaggregated consumption,

particularly transportation and housing, suggests that the increases in well-being are only slightly

smaller than that suggested by aggregate consumption.

       While the trends discussed above indicate that consumption rises somewhat for single

mothers during the 1990s, non-market time falls sharply for this group as shown in Table 1,

especially for those in the low deciles of the distributions of income and consumption. How one

evaluates this loss of non-market time is crucial to any utility-based analysis of the effects of

welfare reform on material well-being. To evaluate recent changes in well-being for single

mothers, we calculate the ratio of changes in mean annual consumption to changes in average

hours worked per year. While well-being reflects disaggregated consumption and time use, as

well as other indicators, for simplicity let utility of single mothers be U(C,L), where C is

consumption of goods and L is non-market time. A representative single mother’s consumption

bundle goes from (C0, L0) before welfare reform to (C1, L1) after, with C1 > C0, but L1 < L0. We

calculate w* = (C1 - C0)/(L0 - L1). Then w* is the per hour valuation of the loss in non-market

time needed to make the representative single mother indifferent about the consumption bundle

                                                  36
change. If the mother values non-market time greater than w* she is worse off after welfare

reform.34

        These non-market time values are reported in Table 11 for each of the bottom five deciles

of the consumption and income distributions. These results indicate that if single mothers value

non-market time on the margin at a substantial fraction of the market wage, those in the bottom

half of the distribution are likely to be worse off after welfare reform than before. For example, a

single mother in the bottom decile of the consumption distribution would have to value her non-

market time at $1.21 per hour in order to be indifferent between her bundle of consumption and

non-market time in 1993-1995 as compared to her bundle of consumption and non-market time in

1997-2000. The interpretation of these results depends on how one values non-market time. On

the one hand, if this time is valued near the market wage then these results suggest many single

mothers are worse off. On the other hand, if little value is given to the non-market time of single

mothers (as implicitly was the case in some political debates over welfare reform which

emphasized the importance of work), recent consumption trends suggest that single mothers are

better off.

        To explore further the nature of the reduction in non-market time among single mothers,

we examine data on time use from two national surveys. The patterns for hours per week spent in

market work, non-market work, and non-work time for single mothers and comparison groups are




34
  More precisely, U(C1, L1) must be less than U(C0, L0) if (MU/ML)/(MU/MC) evaluated at (C0, L0)
is greater than w*. This condition is sufficient, but not necessary for a single mother to be
worse off after welfare reform. Since the marginal rate of substitution rises as L declines, even if
(MU/ML)/(MU/MC) is slightly below w* at (C0, L0) the discrete change may make the single mother
worse off. Similarly, (MU/ML)/(MU/MC) evaluated at (C1, L1) being greater than w* is a necessary
condition for a representative single mother to be worse off after welfare reform.

                                                 37
presented in Table 12.35 These data indicate that the increase in time spent in market work has

been associated with declines in non-market work rather than declines in non-work time. There is

evidence of less time spent in food preparation, housework, and shopping. The drop in time spent

shopping and obtaining goods and services is statistically significant both in absolute terms and

relative to two comparison groups. This decline in shopping time raises the question as to

whether increases in expenditures overstate changes in true consumption, because, for example,

single mothers spend less time shopping for bargains. Recent research has shown that market

expenditures can be a poor proxy for consumption if individuals substitute market expenditures

for time (Aguiar and Hurst, 2005a).



IX. Conclusions

       Trends in income and consumption tell very different stories about what has happened to

the well-being of disadvantaged families in recent years. On the one hand, income data suggest a

noticeable fall for a subgroup of single mothers with incomes well below the poverty line, while

income increases sharply for single mothers at higher points in the distribution. On the other

hand, consumption data suggest that the material circumstances of single mother families

improved modestly between 1993 and 2003 at most points in the distribution. We argue that

consumption data better reflect recent changes in well-being. Measurement issues indicate that

there is reason to be skeptical about recent trends in income for this group. First, accounting for



35
  The 1992-1994 NTUS does not include income or consumption data, so we cannot examine
time use patterns for those at the bottom of the distribution. Also, because of small sample sizes,
we do not restrict the sample to low educated single mothers. Our time use categories follow
Aguiar and Hurst (2005b). We thank Erik Hurst for making available programs for processing
the time use data.

                                                 38
changes in the characteristics of single mother families eliminates most of the increase in income

above the bottom decile. Second, under-reporting of mean-tested transfer income–an important

source of income for those at the bottom of the distribution–has increased noticeably in recent

years in both the CPS and the CE Survey. Simulations indicate that the rise in under-reporting

rates could potentially explain a substantial fraction of the drop in income in the bottom decile.

Third, there were significant shifts in sources of income for single mothers from sources that are

typically under-reported, such as transfer income, or unreported, such as informal labor income,

to sources that tend to be well-reported such as formal labor market earnings.

       Our analysis of the components of consumption suggests a complicated picture of changes

for low-resource single mothers. Aggregate consumption is an insufficient summary of their

circumstances. Increased spending on housing accounts for much of the increase in consumption

in the bottom quintile. While part of the increase in housing spending may reflect reduced

subsidies and higher rents as a result of increased earnings, we present evidence that housing

conditions do improve modestly for this group. Some of the increases in consumption are

potentially the result of the increased market work by single mothers during the 1990s;

expenditures on transportation, food away from home, and child care all rise, although the latter

two categories are, on average, too small to have an important effect on changes in total

consumption. Overall, the evidence from disaggregated consumption, particularly transportation

and housing, suggests that the increases in well-being are slightly smaller than that suggested by

aggregate consumption. The consumption of non-market time for those near the bottom of the

consumption distribution falls sharply; time spent at market work more than doubles for those in

the bottom consumption quartile between 1993 and 2003. Evidence from time-use surveys

suggests that this change reflects a shift from shopping, food preparation and other housework to

                                                 39
market work. If single mothers value this lost non-market time at more than $3 per hour, most of

those in the bottom half of the consumption or income distribution are worse off after 1996 than

they were before welfare reform. It is important to note that this drop in utility does not arise

from increases in material deprivation as some observers had predicted and some analysts have

concluded. Rather, this drop results from the fact that increases in consumption do not

sufficiently offset reductions in non-market time.

       Our analyses should inform studies of the well-being of disadvantaged families. First, we

have demonstrated that how one measures well-being is of critical importance. We show sharp

differences between consumption and income measures and likely biases in income measures.

Second, we show how standard measures of inequality may give a very narrow and potentially

biased view of the circumstances of the poor. Our analysis shows how one can go beyond Gini

coefficients and other summary measures of income or consumption distributions. There are

interesting changes throughout the distribution of resources with different explanations for

differences between income and consumption at different percentiles. Lastly, going beyond

aggregate income or consumption, we have also shown how the use of disaggregated measures,

non-market time, and time use may better capture well-being when work and consumption

bundles change.



                                             References

Aquiar, Mark and Erik Hurst (2005a): “Consumption vs. Expenditure” Journal of Political
       Economy, 113:5, 919-948.
Aquiar, Mark and Erik Hurst (2005b): “Measuring Trends in Leisure ” University of Chicago
       working paper.
Attanasio, Orazio, Eric Battistin, and Hidehiko Ichimura (2004), “What Really Happened to
       Consumption Inequality in the US?” NBER Working Paper, No. 10338.
Autor, David, Lawrence F. Katz and Melissa S. Kearney (2004): “Inequality in the 1990s:

                                                 40
        Revising the Revisionists,” Working Paper, MIT.
Bitler, Marianne, Jonah Gelbach, and Hilary Hoynes (forthcoming), “What Mean Impacts Miss:
        Distributional Effects of Welfare Reform Experiments,” American Economic Review.
Blank, Rebecca (2002), “Evaluation Welfare Reforin in the U.S.” Journal of Economic
        Literature, 1105-1166.
Blank, Rebecca and Robert Schoeni, “Changes in the Distribution of Child Well-Being Over the
        1990s, American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 2003, 93(2): 304-308.
Blundell, Richard and Ian Preston. 1998. “Consumption Inequality and Income Uncertainty”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(2): 603-640.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. 1997. BLS Handbook of Methods. http://www.bls.gov/opub/hom/.
Coder, John and Lydia Scoon-Rogers. 1996. “Evaluating the Quality of Income Data Collected
        in the Annual Supplement to the March Current Population Survey and the Survey of
        Income and Program Participation.” Housing and Household Economic Statistics
        Division. Washington D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau.
Cutler, David M. and Lawrence F. Katz. 1991. “Macroeconomic Performance and the
        Disadvantaged.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2: 1-74.
Deaton, Angus. 2005. “Measuring Poverty in a Growing World (or Measuring Growth in a Poor
        World),” Review of Economics and Statistics, 87:1, 1-19.
DeLeire, Thomas and Helen Levy. 2005. “The Material Well-Being of Single Mother
        Households in the 1980s and 1990s: What Can We Learn from Food Spending?” National
        Poverty Center Working Paper #05-1.
Feenberg, Daniel and Elisabeth Coutts. 1993. "An Introduction to the TAXSIM Model", Journal
        of Policy Analysis and Management 12(1): 189-94. http://www.nber.org/~taxsim/.
Garner, Thesia, George Janini, William Passero, Laura Paszkiewicz, and Mark Vendemia. 2003.
        “The Consumer Expenditure Survey in Comparison: Focus on Personal Consumption
        Expenditures.” Working paper prepared for the Federal Economic Statistics Advisory
        Committee Meeting, March 21, 2003, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Washington, D.C.
Gouskova, Elena, and Robert F. Schoeni. 2002. “Comparing Estimates of Family Income in the
        Panel Study of Income Dynamics and March Current Population Survey, 1968-1999.”
        Working paper, Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan.
Grogger, Jeffrey and Lynn A. Karoly (2005), Welfare Reform: Effects of a Decade of Change.
        Harvard University Press, forthcoming.
Gruber, Jonathan, “The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment Insurance,”
        American Economic Review, 87:1 (1997), 192-205.
Jencks, Christopher, Susan E. Mayer, and Joseph Swingle. 2004a. “Who Has Benefitted from
        Economic Growth in the United States Since 1969? The Case of Children.” in Edward N.
        Wolff, ed. What Has Happened to the Quality of Live in the Advanced Industrial Nations?
        Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Jencks, Christopher, Susan E. Mayer, and Joseph Swingle. 2004b. “Can We Fix the Federal
        Poverty Measure So it Provides Reliable Information About Changes in Children’s Living
        Conditions?” Working Paper. Harvard University.
Johnson, David S. and Timothy M. Smeeding (1998): “Measuring the Trends in Inequality of
        Individuals and Familes: Income and Consumption,” Working Paper, Bureau of Labor
        Statistics.
Krueger, Dirk and Fabrizio Perri (forthcoming), “Does Income Inequality Lead to Consumption

                                              41
        Inequality? Evidence and Theory,” Review of Economic Studies.
Marquis, Kent H. and Jeffrey C. Moore. 1990. “Measurement Errors in SIPP Program Reports.”
        In Proceedings of the 1990 Annual Research Conference, 721-745. Washington, DC.:
        U.S. Bureau of the Census.
Mayer, Susan E. and Christopher Jencks. 1993. “Recent Trends in Economic Inequality in the
        United States: Income versus Expenditures versus Material Well-Being.” In Poverty and
        Prosperity in the USA in the Late Twentieth Century, ed. Edward N. Wolff, 121-203.
        New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Meyer, Bruce D. and Dan T. Rosenbaum, “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the Labor
        Supply of Single Mothers,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVI (August 2001),
        1063-1114.
Meyer, Bruce D. and James X. Sullivan (2004). “The Effects of Welfare and Tax Reform: The
        Material Well-Being of Single Mothers in the 1980s and 1990s.” Journal of Public
        Economics, 88, 1387-1420.
       . 2003. “Measuring the Well-Being of the Poor Using Income and Consumption.” Journal
        of Human Resources, 38:S, 1180-1220.
       . 2001. “The Effects of Welfare and Tax Reform: The Material Well-Being of Single
        Mothers in the 1980s and 1990s.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
        No. 8298. Cambridge, MA: NBER.
Moffitt, Robert A. (2003): “The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program,” in Means-
        Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, Robert A. Moffitt, editor. Chicago:
        University of Chicago Press.
Moffitt, Robert A. and Michele Ver Ploeg, editors (2001): Evaluating Welfare Reform in an Era
        of Transition: Panel on Data and Methods for Measuring the Effects of Changes in Social
        Welfare Programs, Committee on National Statistics, National Research Council.
Moore, Jeffrey C., Kent H. Marquis, and Karen Bogen. 1996. “The SIPP Cognitive Research
        Evaluation Experiment: Basic Results and Documentation.” The Survey of Income and
        Program Participation, Working Paper No. 212. Washington D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau.
National Research Council. 1995. Measuring Poverty: A New Approach, eds. Constance F. Citro
        and Robert T. Michael. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Primus, Wendell (2003): “Disconnected Families” Slides for The Brookings Institution Luncheon
        Seminar, Joint Economic Committee, November, 2003.
Roemer, Marc I. 2000. “Assessing the Quality of the March Current Population Survey and the
        Survey of Income and Program Participation Income Estimates, 1990-1996.” Staff Papers
        on Income, Housing and Household Economic Statistics Division. Washington D.C.: U.S.
        Census Bureau.
Slesnick, Daniel T. 1993. “Gaining Ground: Poverty in the Postwar United States.” Journal of
        Political Economy 101(1): 1-38.
Sullivan, James (2006), “Welfare Reform, Saving, and Vehicle Ownership: Do Asset Limits and
        Vehicle Exemptions Matter?” Journal of Human Resources, 41:1.
Sullivan, James, Leslie Turner, and Sheldon Danziger (2005), “How Do Financial Resources
        Affect Material Hardship?” University of Notre Dame Working Paper.
Triest, Robert K. 1998. "Has Poverty Gotten Worse?" Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12:
        97-114.
Urban Institute (2002), “Assessing the New Federalism State Database,” Washington DC: The

                                              42
       Urban Institute, http://www.urban.org.
USDA (2004), “Characteristics of Food Stamp Households: Fiscal Year 2003,” U.S. Department
       of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service.
Whitmore, Diane (2002): “What Are Food Stamps Worth?” Princeton University Industrial
       Relations Working Paper #468.
Winship, Scott and Christopher Jencks (2004): “How Did Welfare Reform Affect Material
       Hardship among Single Mothers? Evidence from the Food Security Survey,” Working
       Paper, John F. Kennedy School of Government.
Zeldes, Stephen P., “Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: an Empirical Investigation,”
       Journal of Political Economy, 97:2 (1989), 305-346.




                                            43
                                          Appendix 1
                                        Data Description

Money income: This pre-tax income measure includes all money income as defined by the U.S.
Census Bureau, including: wages, salary, and self-employment income; Social Security;
Supplemental Security Income; public assistance or welfare payments; investment income,
income from estates or trusts, and net rental income; veterans' payments; unemployment
insurance; workers' compensation; pension income; alimony or child support; regular
contributions from persons not living in the household; and other periodic income. This is
measured at the family (CPS and PSID) or consumer unit (CE Survey) level.

After-tax family income: This is our standard measure of disposable income. It is defined as
money income plus the face value of Food Stamps and tax credits less state and federal income
taxes and FICA taxes. See text for description of how taxes are measured in each survey.

Total Family Expenditures (CE Survey): This summary measure includes all expenditures
reported in the CE Survey. Expenditures are reported for three-month periods. We scale these
quarterly expenditures to an annual level.

Total Family Consumption (CE Survey): Consumption includes all spending in total expenditures
less spending on health care, education, pension plans, and cash contributions. In addition,
housing and vehicle expenditures are converted to service flows. The rental equivalent for owned
dwellings is used instead of spending on mortgage interest, property taxes, and spending on
maintenance, repairs, and insurance. For vehicles we estimate the value of new car purchases for
each household that owns a car, and calculate a service flow that is a function of this predicted
value of vehicle purchases and the age of each vehicle the household owns assuming a constant
geometric vehicle depreciation of 5 percent per quarter. See Meyer and Sullivan (2001) for more
details.

Food Consumption (CE Survey): This includes spending for food at home (including food bought
with Food Stamps), food purchased away from home, and meals received as pay.

Food Consumption (PSID): This is the sum of expenditures on food at home, expenditures on
food away from home, and dollars of Food Stamps received. For food at home respondents are
asked “in addition to what you bought with Food Stamps, did you spend any money on food that
you used at home?” As several other studies have argued (see Zeldes 1989, Gruber 1997), it is
likely that the respondent will report consumption levels at the time of the interview. For this
reason, we interpret the consumption response as pertaining to the interview year rather than the
previous year.

Housing (CE Survey): This measure includes rent for renters and the reported rental equivalent of
the property for non-renters. In addition, this includes spending on miscellaneous lodging
expenses, utilities, spending on household operations such as domestic services, and spending on
house furnishings and equipment.


                                                44
Housing (PSID): This is a more narrow definition of housing consumption than the one from the
CE Survey. It does not include utilities or other housing costs because they are not available
throughout our sample period in the PSID. It includes rent for renters and the reported rental
equivalent for those who neither rent nor own. For homeowners, we calculate a service flow of
housing consumption based on the value of the home. This flow is calculated as a constant
fraction (r) of the reported property value. This is the service flow for a durable with an after-tax
interest rate r and with no depreciation. The results reported in Figure 5 are for r = 0.07, but we
verify that the results do not change when we use values of r between 0.05 and 0.1. In addition,
within the CE Survey this flow matched up fairly well with reported rental equivalent of the
home.

Equivalence Scales: In most cases we adjust for differences in family size by dividing our income
and consumption measures by the poverty line. As a robustness check, and when we report levels
instead of trends, we use an alternative equivalence scale equal to s/(mean of s), where s =
1/(number of adults + number of children*0.7)0.7. This is a fairly standard equivalence scale that
follows National Research Council (1995).




                                                 45
                                            Appendix 2
                   Bootstrapped Standard Errors for Comparison of Quantile Means

             In this appendix we outline the procedure used to calculate standard errors for the
comparisons of mean income and consumption by deciles of income and consumption. Let
C t ,i , z represent mean consumption in period t (t = 1,2) for decile i (i = 1,…,10) of outcome z,
where z = 1 if the observations are sorted into consumption deciles and z = 2 if sorted into
income deciles. For example, C1,5, 2 represents mean consumption in the first period for those
in the fifth decile of the income distribution. Mean income is defined analogously ( Yt ,i , z′ )
where z′ = 1 if the observations are sorted into consumption deciles and z′ = 2 if sorted into
income deciles. For each t, i, z, and z′, the variance of C t ,i , z and Yt ,i , z′ are computed by
bootstrapping with 200 replications a two-step procedure where in the first step the deciles are
determined and in the second step the mean for each decile is calculated. Observations are
clustered within the bootstrap routine by resampling at the household level rather than the
household-quarter level, because households can remain in the CE Survey for up to 4 quarters.
Given this variance of mean income and consumption for all t, i, z, and z′, the variance of the
ratios ( C 2,i , z / C1,i , z and Y2,i , z′ / Y1,i , z′ ) are computed using the delta method, assuming that
observations are independent across the two periods. It is important to note that
simultaneously bootstrapping the decile cutoffs and the means within decile has a significant
effect on the magnitude of the standard errors. For example, relative to using just the within
decile sampling variation, this approach magnifies the standard errors of C 2,i , z / C1,i , z and
Y2,i , z′ / Y1,i , z′ (as reported in columns 1-4 of Table 2) by a factor of about 4 on average, ranging
from a factor of 1.13 to a factor of 9.44.

        Within each bootstrap routine discussed above, we also calculate the variance of the
difference between mean consumption and mean income (Var( C t ,i , z - Yt ,i , z′ )), which allows us
to compute the covariance between C t ,i , z and Yt ,i , z′ for each t, i, z, and z′: 2Cov( C t ,i , z , Yt ,i , z′ ) =
Var( C t ,i , z ) + Var( Yt ,i , z′ ) - Var( C1i - Yt ,i , z′ ). Then, by the delta method, the variance of the
difference between two ratios is calculated. For example, if θi,z,z′ = ( C 2,i , z / C1,i , z - Y2,i , z′ / Y1,i , z′ ),
then for each i, z, and z′ we compute (ignoring subscripts i, z, and z′) Var(θ) =
                                                                                                       ⎡ ∂θ ⎤
                                                                                                       ⎢ ∂C ⎥
                                              Cov(C1 , C 2 ) Cov(C1 , Y1 ) Cov(C1 , Y2 ) ⎤ ⎢ ∂θ ⎥
                                                                                                               1
                             ⎡ Var (C1 )
                             ⎢                                                                   ⎥ ⎢               ⎥
 ⎡ ∂θ    ∂θ     ∂θ ∂θ ⎤ ⎢Cov(C 2 , C1 )        Var (C 2 )    Cov(C 2 , Y1 ) Cov(C 2 , Y2 )⎥ ⎢ ∂C 2 ⎥
 ⎢                         ⎥                                                                           ⎢           ⎥
 ⎣ ∂C1 ∂C 2 ∂Y1 ∂Y2 ⎦ ⎢ Cov(Y1 , C1 ) Cov(Y1 , C 2 )          Var (Y1 )      Cov(Y1 , Y2 ) ⎥ ⎢ ∂θ ⎥
                             ⎢                                                                   ⎥
                             ⎣⎢ Cov(Y2 , C1 ) Cov(Y2 , C 2 ) Cov(Y2 , Y1 )        Var (Y2 ) ⎦⎥ ⎢ ∂Y1 ⎥
                                                                                                       ⎢ ∂θ ⎥
                                                                                                       ⎢ ∂Y ⎥
                                                                                                       ⎣ 2⎦
and given independence across periods, Var(θ) =

                                                           46
                                                                                         ⎡ C2 ⎤
                                                                                         ⎢− 2 ⎥
                           ⎡ Var (C1 )        0          Cov(C1 , Y1 )     0         ⎤   ⎢ C1 ⎥
                           ⎢                                                         ⎥   ⎢ 1 ⎥
⎡ C2   1    Y2        1⎤ ⎢      0          Var (C 2 )        0         Cov(C 2 , Y2 )⎥   ⎢ C ⎥
⎢− 2                 − ⎥                                                                 ⎢ 1 ⎥
⎣ C1   C1   Y1
                 2
                      Y1 ⎦ ⎢Cov(Y1 , C1 )     0           Var (Y1 )        0         ⎥   ⎢ Y2 ⎥
                           ⎢                                                         ⎥   ⎢ Y1 2 ⎥
                           ⎢⎣   0         Cov(Y2 , C 2 )     0          Var (Y2 ) ⎥⎦
                                                                                         ⎢ 1 ⎥
                                                                                         ⎢− ⎥
                                                                                         ⎣⎢ Y1 ⎦⎥




                                               47
                                        Appendix 3
           Adjusting Income for Under-reporting of Welfare and Food Stamp Benefits

        In Table 6 we report trends by income decile for a measure of income that adjusts for
under-reporting of welfare and Food Stamps in the CE Survey. This appendix outlines how we
calculate this measure of adjusted income.

AFDC/TANF Eligibility

        We determine which households are eligible for AFDC/TANF and the dollar amount of
their benefit using state welfare rules from 1993-2000. For the years 1993-1996, we use the state
rules from Meyer and Rosenbaum (2001). After 1996, state rules are provided by the Welfare
Rules Database, Urban Institute (2002).

        The monthly AFDC/TANF benefit is calculated as a function of reported earnings and
state specific parameters such as the maximum benefit, the ratable reduction, the payment
standard, the benefit reduction rate, and the earnings disregard. See Meyer and Rosenbaum
(2001) for more details on this benefit formula. We also apply the gross income test: if monthly
earnings exceed the product of the gross income test and the needs standard set by each state, then
the mother is designated as ineligible. In addition, if the calculated benefit is less than the state’s
specified minimum monthly benefit then the mother is designated as ineligible.

       For families living in states where the identifier in the CE Survey has been suppressed
(between 9 and 10 states during our sample period) we use the median value across the
suppressed states for the needs standard, payment standard, and maximum benefit. For other
parameters we take the modal value.

Food Stamps Eligibility

        We determine which households are eligible for Food Stamps and the dollar amount of
their benefit using USDA rules from 1993-2000. In general, Food Stamp parameters are the same
for the contiguous states. Separate parameters apply for Alaska and Hawaii. The monthly Food
Stamp benefit is calculated as (See USDA (2004) for detailed definitions of the parameters
capitalized below):

   food stamps benefit = MAXIMUM FOOD STAMP BENEFIT – 0.3 * [monthly earnings * (1
           – EARNINGS DEDUCTION PERCENTAGE) + welfare benefit – STANDARD
           DEDUCTION – SED]

where SED is the shelter expense deduction. The “welfare benefit” is the reported welfare benefit
in the CE Survey, although we use the imputed welfare benefit for those with imputed benefits.
The SED is determined using a family’s reported shelter expenses (SE) in the CE Survey as
follows:



                                                  48
   SED = MIN{SHELTER EXPENSE DEDUCTION CEILING, SE – 0.5 * [monthly earnings *
         (1 – EARNINGS DEDUCTION PERCENTAGE) + welfare benefit – STANDARD
         DEDUCTION]}

We also apply the countable and gross income tests.

Imputing Welfare and Food Stamp Benefits in the CE Survey

        To account for under-reporting of welfare and Food Stamps we impute these benefits for
some families that do not report receiving them. Welfare benefits are imputed first because the
imputed welfare benefit affects the calculation of imputed food stamp benefits. To determine
which households receive an imputed value for welfare we first sort the sample by reported total
expenditures. Then, starting at the bottom of the expenditure distribution we impute a welfare
benefit for those who report zero welfare dollars received in the past 12 months and who report
annualized expenditures that exceed after-tax income. For these families we set the value of
imputed benefits equal to the value determined using the welfare benefit formula up to the
difference between expenditures and income, as shown in Equation 2 in the text.

        We continue imputing benefits along the expenditure distribution until the cumulative
amount of weighted benefits imputed reaches the maximum total amount of welfare benefits
imputed for our sample in each year. This maximum amount ( I ) is calculated using the
reporting rates (RR) for the entire CE Survey sample in each year (Table 4). For our sample of
single mothers in each year we calculate:

        I = (∑ benefiti * weighti ) * (1 − RR) / RR                                     (A1)
              i
where benefiti is the value of annual welfare dollars reported by family i and weighti represents
the population weight for each single mother. This approach implicitly assumes that the under-
reporting rates for our sample of single mothers are the same as those for the entire CE sample.

        The imputation of Food Stamps follows this same procedure. To determine the maximum
amount of Food Stamps to impute, benefiti in Equation (A1) refers to annual Food Stamps dollars
reported by family I. In a separate simulation, we adjust income by first allocating imputed
benefits to those at the bottom of the income distribution (see Column 3 of Table 6).

        While ( I ) represents the maximum amount to impute, the total amount of benefits
imputed in each year by this simulation is often less than ( I ) because not enough single mothers
satisfy our three criteria: reported benefits are zero, expenditures exceed income, and the family is
deemed eligible for benefits based on state rules. The total amount of benefits imputed is less
than the ( I ) in 1994 for welfare benefits and in 1993, 1994, 1995, and 1998 for Food Stamps.

        The fact that under-reporting rates for welfare and Food Stamps are higher in more recent
years (as shown in Table 4) does not necessarily imply that this adjustment procedure will


                                                      49
increase income by a larger fraction in the latter period, because the size of both transfer
programs contracted significantly during the 1990s. Also, the effect of this adjustment procedure
depends on where those eligible to receive imputed benefits are located in the reported income
distribution. When allocating by expenditures, the adjustment procedure imputes a value of
welfare for 42 percent of those in the bottom income decile during the 1993-1995 period and 49
percent during the 1997-2000 period. The conditional mean value of imputed welfare benefits
was $4,471 for the first period and was $4,162 for the second period (in constant 2000 $). The
value of imputed Food Stamps was likewise higher in the second period. For Food Stamps, the
adjustment procedure imputes benefits for 33 percent of those in the bottom income decile during
the early period and 44 percent during the latter period, with conditional means of $3,130 and
$3,523 respectively.




                                               50
                Figure 1
                Percent Change in Income-to-Needs Ratio by Centile of Income-to-Needs: 1992-95 to 1997-2000
                Children without Both Parents Present (A Reproduction of Figure 1B from Blank and Schoeni, 2003)




Notes: Income-to-needs is the ratio of pre-tax money income to the poverty line for each family.
                       Figure 2
                       Changes in Income at Each Percentile, 1993-1995 to 1997-2000, Single Mothers, Current Population Survey
            40%
                                                                                                                              After-Tax Money Income + Food Stamps
                                          After-Tax Money                                                                     Money Income
                                          Income
                                                                                                                              Money Income + Food Stamps
            30%                                                                                                               After-Tax Money Income

                                                         Money Income



            20%
                                                             After-Tax Money
                                                             Income + Food Stamps
 % Change




                                                                  Money Income + Food Stamps
            10%




             0%
                   1
                       4
                           7
                               10
                                    13
                                         16
                                              19
                                                   22
                                                        25
                                                             28
                                                                  31
                                                                       34
                                                                            37
                                                                                 40
                                                                                      43
                                                                                           46
                                                                                                49
                                                                                                     52
                                                                                                          55
                                                                                                               58
                                                                                                                    61
                                                                                                                         64
                                                                                                                              67
                                                                                                                                   70
                                                                                                                                        73
                                                                                                                                             76
                                                                                                                                                  79
                                                                                                                                                       82
                                                                                                                                                            85
                                                                                                                                                                 88
                                                                                                                                                                      91
                                                                                                                                                                           94
                                                                                                                                                                                97
            -10%




            -20%
                                                                                            Percentile

Notes: All data are from the March Current Population Survey. Each income measure is sorted by itself and is divided by the poverty line to
express changes in real terms and to adjust for differences in family size. Sample includes single mothers ages 18 to 54 living with their own
children only. Money income follows the Census definition, which includes all money income used in the official poverty rate.
                    Figure 3
                    Changes in Income, Expenditures, and Consumption at Each Percentile, 1993-1995 to 1997-2000, Single Mothers,
                    Consumer Expenditure Survey
             40%
                            After-Tax Money Income                                                                          Food Expenditures
                                                                                                                            After-Tax Money Income + Food Stamps
                                                                                                                            After-Tax Money Income
                            Money Income
                                                                                                                            Money Income
             30%                                                                                                            Consumption
                        After-Tax Money Income                                                                              Expenditures
                        + Food Stamps                                                                                       Money Income + Food Stamps


                          Money Income
             20%          + Food Stamps
                                                                                                                                                        Expenditures
  % Change




             10%


                                                                                   Consumption
                                                                                                                                 Food
              0%
                    1
                        4
                             7
                                 10
                                      13
                                           16
                                                19
                                                     22
                                                          25
                                                               28
                                                                    31
                                                                         34
                                                                              37
                                                                                    40
                                                                                         43
                                                                                              46
                                                                                                   49
                                                                                                        52
                                                                                                             55
                                                                                                                  58
                                                                                                                       61
                                                                                                                            64
                                                                                                                                 67
                                                                                                                                        70
                                                                                                                                             73
                                                                                                                                                  76
                                                                                                                                                       79
                                                                                                                                                            82
                                                                                                                                                                 85
                                                                                                                                                                      88
                                                                                                                                                                           91
                                                                                                                                                                                94
                                                                                                                                                                                     97
             -10%




             -20%
                                                                                              Percentile

Notes: All data are from the Consumer Expenditure Survey. Each outcome is sorted by itself, so, for example, households at low quantiles of food
are not necessarily the same households at low quantiles of expenditures. Each outcome is divided by the poverty line to express changes in real
terms and to adjust for differences in family size. The sample includes single mothers ages 18 to 54 living with their own children only. "Incomplete
income reporters" are excluded. See text and Appendix 1 for more details.
                       Figure 4
                       Changes in Income, Expenditures, and Consumption at Each Percentile, 1993-1995 to 1997-2000, All Families
                       Except Single Mothers, Consumer Expenditure Survey
            40%
                                                                                                                         Food Expenditures
                                                                                                                         After-Tax Money Income + Food Stamps
                                                                                                                         After-Tax Money Income
            30%                                                                                                          Money Income
                                                                                                                         Consumption
                                                                                                                         Expenditures
                                                                                                                         Money Income + Food Stamps
            20%
 % Change




            10%




             0%
                   1
                       4
                           7
                               10
                                    13
                                         16
                                              19
                                                   22
                                                        25
                                                             28
                                                                  31
                                                                       34
                                                                            37
                                                                                 40
                                                                                      43
                                                                                           46
                                                                                                49
                                                                                                     52
                                                                                                          55
                                                                                                               58
                                                                                                                    61
                                                                                                                         64
                                                                                                                              67
                                                                                                                                   70
                                                                                                                                        73
                                                                                                                                             76
                                                                                                                                                  79
                                                                                                                                                       82
                                                                                                                                                            85
                                                                                                                                                                 88
                                                                                                                                                                      91
                                                                                                                                                                           94
                                                                                                                                                                                97
            -10%




            -20%
                                                                                           Percentile

Notes: All data are from the Consumer Expenditure Survey. The sample includes all families with heads ages 18 to 62 except single mother
families. See Figure 3 for additional notes.
                        Figure 5
                        Changes in Income and Food Consumption at Each Percentile, 1993-1995 to 1997-2000, Single Mothers, Panel
                        Study of Income Dynamics
             40%
                                                                                               After-Tax Money Income                  Food Expenditures
                                                                                               After-Tax Money Income                  After-Tax Money Income + Food Stamps
                                                                                               + Food Stamps                           After-Tax Money Income
                                                                                                                                       Money Income
             30%
                                                                                               Money Income
                                                                                                                                       Money Income + Food Stamps
                                                                                                                                       Food + Housing


             20%
                                                     Money Income
                                                     + Food Stamps
  % Change




                                Food + Housing
             10%


                                                          Food

              0%
                    1
                        4
                            7
                                 10
                                      13
                                           16
                                                19
                                                     22
                                                          25
                                                                 28
                                                                      31
                                                                           34
                                                                                37
                                                                                     40
                                                                                          43
                                                                                               46
                                                                                                    49
                                                                                                         52
                                                                                                              55
                                                                                                                   58
                                                                                                                        61
                                                                                                                             64
                                                                                                                                  67
                                                                                                                                        70
                                                                                                                                             73
                                                                                                                                                  76
                                                                                                                                                       79
                                                                                                                                                            82
                                                                                                                                                                 85
                                                                                                                                                                      88
                                                                                                                                                                           91
                                                                                                                                                                                94
                                                                                                                                                                                     97
             -10%




             -20%
                                                                                               Percentile

Notes: All data are from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics Surveys from 1993 through 2001. Housing spending from the PSID includes rent, a
service flow from owned property, and the rental equivalent for non-owners that do not pay for housing. See text, notes to Figure 3, and Appendix
1 for more details.
                     Figure 6
                     Decomposition of Total Consumption Change into its Components by Consumption Decile,
                     1993-1995 to 1997-2000, Single Mothers, Consumer Expenditure Survey
               12%


               10%


               8%


               6%
    % Change




               4%


               2%


               0%
                         1           2            3           4           5            6           7          8            9             10
               -2%
                                                                                                                               Total Consumption
                                                                                                                               Food Expenditures
               -4%                                                                                                             Housing
                                                                                                                               Entertainment
               -6%                                                                                                             Transportation
                                                                              Decile                                           Other


Notes: The decomposition weights the percentage change in a given consumption category by its average share over the two periods. Any residual from this
decomposition is included in the “Other” category. Housing includes rent, a housing flow for homeowners, and other housing expenses. Entertainment
includes admission fees to movies, shows, etc. as well as expenditures on television, radio, and other entertainment equipment. Transportation includes a
service flow from owned vehicles as well as other transportation expenses.
Table 1
Employment and Welfare Receipt by Income and Consumption Deciles, 1993-2003, Single Mothers,
Consumer Expenditure Survey
             Fraction Receiving AFDC/TANF or Food
                                                                         Average Hours Worked per Year
                     Stamps in Previous Year
           1993-    1997-     2001-                              1993-     1997-     2001-
           1995     2000      2003      (2) - (1)   (3) - (1)    1995      2000      2003      (7)/(6)   (8)/(6)
             (1)     (2)       (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)       (7)       (8)        (9)      (10)
Income Deciles
  First    0.722     0.517     0.331     -0.205      -0.391       339.3     570.8     549.3     1.68      1.62
          (0.038)   (0.037)   (0.037)   (0.053)     (0.053)      (49.04)   (53.93)   (58.28)   (0.29)    (0.29)
  Second 0.854       0.699     0.511     -0.154      -0.343       252.3     597.0     715.1     2.37      2.83
          (0.033)   (0.035)   (0.039)   (0.048)     (0.051)      (42.04)   (61.85)   (65.28)   (0.46)    (0.54)
  Third    0.839     0.608     0.412     -0.231      -0.427       447.3     977.2    1097.5     2.18      2.45
          (0.031)   (0.037)   (0.041)   (0.048)     (0.051)      (73.49)   (77.91)   (79.00)   (0.40)    (0.44)
  Fourth   0.748     0.463     0.392     -0.285      -0.356       630.7    1382.1    1498.2     2.19      2.38
          (0.043)   (0.044)   (0.039)   (0.061)     (0.058)      (78.08)   (73.30)   (87.52)   (0.30)    (0.33)
  Fifth    0.595     0.311     0.266     -0.284      -0.330      1161.8    1638.6    1592.4     1.41      1.37
          (0.072)   (0.037)   (0.038)   (0.081)     (0.082)     (167.90)   (61.80)   (56.69)   (0.21)    (0.20)
  Sixth    0.244     0.147     0.149     -0.097      -0.095      1660.1    1819.8    1768.5     1.10      1.07
          (0.047)   (0.031)   (0.028)   (0.056)     (0.054)      (76.09)   (49.03)   (60.65)   (0.06)    (0.06)
  Seventh 0.147      0.072     0.065     -0.075      -0.083      1846.5    2007.6    1933.8     1.09      1.05
          (0.032)   (0.019)   (0.023)   (0.037)     (0.039)      (61.93)   (46.91)   (38.95)   (0.04)    (0.04)
  Eighth   0.049     0.042     0.037     -0.007      -0.011      2000.8    2069.4    1967.9     1.03      0.98
          (0.020)   (0.014)   (0.014)   (0.024)     (0.025)      (58.03)   (44.86)   (42.95)   (0.04)    (0.04)
  Ninth    0.024     0.025     0.005      0.001      -0.019      1993.7    2093.6    2067.0     1.05      1.04
          (0.010)   (0.010)   (0.005)   (0.014)     (0.011)      (59.79)   (36.10)   (42.63)   (0.04)    (0.04)
  Tenth    0.019     0.008     0.000     -0.011      -0.019      2131.9    2070.9    2111.1     0.97      0.99
          (0.011)   (0.007)   (0.000)   (0.013)     (0.011)      (62.32)   (50.39)   (49.87)   (0.04)    (0.04)
N          3,075     4,470     4,065                      3,075            4,470     4,065
Consumption Deciles
 First     0.926     0.755     0.531     -0.171   -0.395  247.9             558.3   747.8       2.25      3.02
          (0.018) (0.028) (0.038) (0.034) (0.042)        (50.46)           (55.00) (63.83)     (0.51)    (0.67)
 Second 0.901        0.662     0.481     -0.239   -0.419  480.4             913.1 1076.1        1.90      2.24
          (0.022) (0.030) (0.034) (0.037) (0.040)        (68.88)           (66.21) (62.64)     (0.31)    (0.35)
 Third     0.771     0.509     0.350     -0.262   -0.421  669.6            1186.5 1277.7        1.77      1.91
          (0.037) (0.037) (0.033) (0.052) (0.049)        (73.18)           (70.15) (58.81)     (0.22)    (0.23)
 Fourth    0.579     0.364     0.275     -0.215   -0.304  974.9            1451.5 1420.8        1.49      1.46
          (0.051) (0.035) (0.031) (0.062) (0.060)        (95.70)           (62.92) (55.80)     (0.16)    (0.15)
 Fifth     0.451     0.243     0.218     -0.209   -0.234 1227.4            1679.8 1607.4        1.37      1.31
          (0.041) (0.034) (0.027) (0.053) (0.049)        (77.87)           (55.05) (53.26)     (0.10)    (0.09)
 Sixth     0.261     0.173     0.155     -0.088   -0.106 1483.8            1784.4 1639.4        1.20      1.10
          (0.039) (0.024) (0.024) (0.046) (0.046)        (83.03)           (43.85) (55.81)     (0.07)    (0.07)
 Seventh 0.213       0.095     0.080     -0.118   -0.133 1550.5            1851.6 1802.3        1.19      1.16
          (0.045) (0.020) (0.020) (0.050) (0.049)        (96.09)           (45.80) (63.97)     (0.08)    (0.08)
 Eighth    0.091     0.044     0.047     -0.048   -0.044 1859.2            1858.3 1901.4        1.00      1.02
          (0.023) (0.014) (0.012) (0.027) (0.026)        (57.46)           (50.05) (46.35)     (0.04)    (0.04)
 Ninth     0.036     0.033     0.025     -0.003   -0.010 1922.9            2006.6 1851.8        1.04      0.96
          (0.011) (0.011) (0.011) (0.016) (0.016)        (51.75)           (50.86) (48.19)     (0.04)    (0.04)
 Tenth     0.012     0.015     0.004      0.003   -0.008 2043.5            1935.3 1973.7        0.95      0.97
          (0.007) (0.006) (0.003) (0.009) (0.007)        (65.97)           (52.08) (49.74)     (0.04)    (0.04)
N          3,075     4,470     4,065                      3,075             4,470   4,065
Notes: Income refers to after-tax money income plus Food Stamps.            The bootstrapped   standard errors in
parentheses are corrected for within family dependence.
Table 2
Changes in Mean Consumption and Income by Deciles of Consumption and Income, Single Mothers, Consumer
Expenditure Survey, 1993-2003
             By Consumption Decile           By Income Decile                Consumption - Income
            Consumption       Income     Consumption       Income     (1) - (2)       (3) - (4)       (1) - (4)
                  (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)         (5)             (6)             (7)
Panel A: Ratio of Mean in 1997-2000 to Mean in 1993-1995
Decile
 First           1.042        0.836          1.145          0.707      0.207           0.439           0.336
                (0.039)      (0.063)        (0.099)        (0.080)    (0.059)         (0.141)         (0.084)
 Second          1.093        1.029          1.038          0.969      0.063           0.069           0.124
                (0.033)      (0.074)        (0.069)        (0.042)    (0.075)         (0.081)         (0.040)
 Third           1.074        1.154          1.077          1.078     -0.080          -0.001          -0.004
                (0.034)      (0.107)        (0.057)        (0.041)    (0.103)         (0.052)         (0.034)
 Fourth          1.065        1.147          1.158          1.146     -0.083           0.012          -0.081
                (0.034)      (0.091)        (0.075)        (0.043)    (0.073)         (0.059)         (0.033)
 Fifth           1.050        1.127          1.167          1.147     -0.077           0.020          -0.097
                (0.032)      (0.101)        (0.058)        (0.058)    (0.095)         (0.057)         (0.042)
 Sixth           1.060        1.018          1.048          1.123      0.042          -0.075          -0.063
                (0.032)      (0.080)        (0.065)        (0.046)    (0.081)         (0.043)         (0.032)
 Seventh         1.078        1.120          1.035          1.124     -0.042          -0.088          -0.045
                (0.030)      (0.075)        (0.042)        (0.045)    (0.059)         (0.049)         (0.032)
 Eighth          1.095        1.151          1.078          1.092     -0.056          -0.014           0.004
                (0.032)      (0.113)        (0.042)        (0.047)    (0.107)         (0.044)         (0.034)
 Ninth           1.108        1.171          1.084          1.086     -0.062          -0.002           0.023
                (0.033)      (0.070)        (0.047)        (0.045)    (0.053)         (0.037)         (0.032)
 Tenth           1.102        1.227          1.075          1.234     -0.125          -0.159          -0.132
                (0.040)      (0.110)        (0.049)        (0.098)    (0.096)         (0.093)         (0.088)
Panel B: Ratio of Mean in 2001-2003 to Mean in 1993-1995
Decile
 First           1.008        0.954          1.000          0.752      0.054           0.248           0.255
                (0.042)      (0.075)        (0.059)        (0.064)    (0.069)         (0.095)         (0.076)
 Second          1.101        1.178          1.106          0.989     -0.077           0.116           0.111
                (0.036)      (0.081)        (0.074)        (0.045)    (0.084)         (0.081)         (0.047)
 Third           1.077        1.138          1.133          1.124     -0.061           0.009           -0.048
                (0.034)      (0.078)        (0.054)        (0.043)    (0.072)         (0.061)         (0.039)
 Fourth          1.071        1.175          1.142          1.187     -0.104          -0.045           -0.116
                (0.034)      (0.102)        (0.069)        (0.046)    (0.082)         (0.060)         (0.036)
 Fifth           1.040        1.130          1.068          1.182     -0.089          -0.114           -0.142
                (0.030)      (0.095)        (0.058)        (0.060)    (0.094)         (0.051)         (0.045)
 Sixth           1.026        0.947          1.033          1.164      0.079          -0.131           -0.138
                (0.029)      (0.077)        (0.060)        (0.047)    (0.077)         (0.048)         (0.033)
 Seventh         1.023        1.077          0.942          1.152     -0.054          -0.210           -0.129
                (0.026)      (0.074)        (0.038)        (0.046)    (0.059)         (0.047)         (0.033)
 Eighth          1.023        1.142          0.959          1.115     -0.120          -0.157           -0.092
                (0.028)      (0.063)        (0.042)        (0.048)    (0.054)         (0.044)         (0.035)
 Ninth           1.020        1.181          1.015          1.113     -0.161          -0.099           -0.093
                (0.030)      (0.071)        (0.042)        (0.045)    (0.058)         (0.035)         (0.033)
 Tenth           1.041        1.265          1.077          1.187     -0.223          -0.110           -0.145
                (0.041)      (0.097)        (0.055)        (0.076)    (0.070)         (0.066)         (0.057)
Notes: Income refers to after-tax money income plus Food Stamps. See Appendix 2 for   a description   of how the
bootstrapped standard errors reported in parentheses are calculated.
Table 3
Quantile Regressions for Changes in Consumption and Income, Single Mothers and Comparison Groups, Consumer
Expenditure Survey, 1993-2003
                                     Single Mothers Only                Single Women                Mothers
                              Consumption             Income       Consumption Income      Consumption Income
                              (1)       (2)        (3)      (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)           (8)
Quantile Regression:
5th Percentile
  (1997-00) - (1993-95)      0.056    0.047      -0.250 -0.190         0.104      -0.181       0.055        -0.387
                            (0.047) (0.044)     (0.088) (0.085)       (0.064)    (0.156)      (0.057)      (0.174)
  (2001-03) - (1993-95)      0.050    -0.037     -0.250 -0.188         0.114      -0.043       0.045        -0.601
                            (0.053) (0.046)     (0.104) (0.109)       (0.066)    (0.179)      (0.060)      (0.175)
10th Percentile
  (1997-00) - (1993-95)      0.086    0.066      -0.118 -0.079         0.118      -0.079       0.085        -0.188
                            (0.032) (0.031)     (0.060) (0.068)       (0.052)    (0.112)      (0.041)      (0.090)
  (2001-03) - (1993-95)      0.075    0.016      -0.084    0.002       0.151      0.090        0.084        -0.272
                            (0.035) (0.036)     (0.053) (0.069)       (0.052)    (0.107)      (0.046)      (0.090)
15th Percentile
  (1997-00) - (1993-95)      0.087    0.066      -0.018 -0.007         0.074      -0.003       0.079        -0.110
                            (0.030) (0.031)     (0.042) (0.054)       (0.041)    (0.067)      (0.036)      (0.080)
  (2001-03) - (1993-95)      0.097    0.040      -0.001 -0.001         0.096      0.095        0.108        -0.179
                            (0.032) (0.032)     (0.043) (0.054)       (0.045)    (0.075)      (0.038)      (0.086)
20th Percentile
  (1997-00) - (1993-95)      0.078    0.060      0.030     0.039       0.071      0.047        0.057        -0.081
                            (0.037) (0.027)     (0.047) (0.044)       (0.039)    (0.065)      (0.038)      (0.063)
  (2001-03) - (1993-95)      0.088    0.026      0.076     0.058       0.082      0.119        0.084        -0.152
                            (0.036) (0.027)     (0.053) (0.044)       (0.044)    (0.068)      (0.038)      (0.064)
25th Percentile
  (1997-00) - (1993-95)      0.074    0.050      0.079     0.040       0.030      0.026        0.045        -0.009
                            (0.031) (0.023)     (0.041) (0.042)       (0.030)    (0.056)      (0.032)      (0.068)
  (2001-03) - (1993-95)      0.075    0.024      0.129     0.078       0.062      0.098        0.064        -0.082
                            (0.034) (0.026)     (0.040) (0.043)       (0.033)    (0.063)      (0.033)      (0.060)
30th Percentile
  (1997-00) - (1993-95)      0.070    0.042      0.110     0.045       0.025      0.005        0.053        0.004
                            (0.030) (0.024)     (0.038) (0.043)       (0.030)    (0.052)      (0.032)      (0.056)
  (2001-03) - (1993-95)      0.068    0.017      0.148     0.053       0.063      0.091        0.065        -0.084
                            (0.033) (0.024)     (0.041) (0.043)       (0.035)    (0.055)      (0.032)      (0.057)
35th Percentile
  (1997-00) - (1993-95)      0.062    0.033      0.139     0.043       0.013      -0.003       0.035        -0.025
                            (0.036) (0.024)     (0.034) (0.037)       (0.029)    (0.045)      (0.028)      (0.046)
  (2001-03) - (1993-95)      0.071    0.019      0.175     0.037       0.051      0.078        0.049        -0.093
                            (0.038) (0.024)     (0.040) (0.037)       (0.029)    (0.055)      (0.029)      (0.046)
40th Percentile
  (1997-00) - (1993-95)      0.045    0.041      0.153     0.030       0.011      0.017        0.023        -0.012
                            (0.033) (0.020)     (0.039) (0.034)       (0.027)    (0.042)      (0.032)      (0.043)
  (2001-03) - (1993-95)      0.050    0.015      0.188     0.021       0.030      0.082        0.023        -0.091
                            (0.033) (0.021)     (0.037) (0.035)       (0.027)    (0.048)      (0.028)      (0.039)
45th Percentile
  (1997-00) - (1993-95)      0.050    0.036      0.146     0.021       0.008      0.017        0.024        -0.010
                            (0.033) (0.022)     (0.051) (0.032)       (0.029)    (0.043)      (0.030)      (0.045)
  (2001-03) - (1993-95)      0.042    0.006      0.166     0.023       0.022      0.080        0.025        -0.072
                            (0.027) (0.023)     (0.058) (0.032)       (0.029)    (0.044)      (0.029)      (0.044)
50th Percentile
  (1997-00) - (1993-95)      0.049    0.033      0.111     0.043       0.011      0.018        0.024        0.019
                            (0.027) (0.021)     (0.044) (0.028)       (0.026)    (0.047)      (0.028)      (0.041)
  (2001-03) - (1993-95)      0.024    0.000      0.144     0.052       0.015      0.062        0.021        -0.055
                            (0.026) (0.020)     (0.047) (0.031)       (0.028)    (0.046)      (0.028)      (0.043)
Controls Included             No       Yes         No       Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes
N                           11,610 11,610       11,610 11,610         26,368     26,368       26,368       26,368
Notes: Controls include a cubic in the age of the head, number of children less than 18, number of girls age 2-15, number of
boys age 2-15, education of the head, race, and region. For the models that include married mothers we also include the
number of earners in the family and the education of the spouse. Columns 1 through 4 report the coefficients on the 2nd
and 3rd period dummies in quantile regressions where the first period dummy is excluded. Columns 5 through 8 report the
difference between the coefficients on single mother*period interaction terms. All standard errors are bootstrapped and
corrected for within family dependence. See text for more details.
Table 4
Comparisons of Survey Reports of Welfare and Food Stamp Dollars to Administrative Aggregates, 1993-
2002, Consumer Expenditure Survey and Current Population Survey ($ Billions, Nominal)
                 AFDC/TANF Cash Transfers                                  Food Stamps
         CE                           CE/     CPS/        CE                              CE/    CPS/
        Survey    CPS      Admin     Admin    Admin      Survey     CPS      Admin       Admin   Admin
          (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)      (5)         (6)       (7)      (8)         (9)     (10)

1993    19.10     19.88     22.52    0.848     0.883      15.04    14.92      22.20      0.678   0.672
1994    17.36     19.25     22.65    0.766     0.850      14.77    15.26      22.80      0.648   0.669
1995    15.31     17.65     21.53    0.711     0.820      14.50    14.49      22.40      0.647   0.647
1996    11.85     15.43     19.76    0.600     0.781      13.10    14.11      22.00      0.595   0.641
1997    9.84      11.42     13.91    0.708     0.821      10.90    12.22      18.70      0.583   0.653
1998    8.02      9.61      13.74    0.584     0.699      8.90     10.76      16.50      0.539   0.652
1999    6.22      7.79      12.67    0.491     0.615      8.54     9.45       15.50      0.551   0.610
2000    5.16      6.91      10.92    0.473     0.633      8.25     8.71       14.90      0.554   0.585
2001    4.90      6.21      9.96     0.492     0.624      6.92     9.65       16.00      0.433   0.603
2002    4.47      5.95      9.61     0.465     0.620      7.77     11.16      18.70      0.415   0.597

Notes: Columns 1, 2, 6, and 7 report the aggregate amount of welfare and Food Stamps reported in the CE
Survey and the CPS using population weights. Reported transfer dollars are allocated to calendar years
based on the reference period for each survey. Administrative aggregates for welfare come from Roemer
(2000) for the years 1993-1996, and from TANF Financial Data, ACF, U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services for the years after 1996. Fiscal year data are converted to calendar year. Administrative
aggregates for Food Stamps are from National Income and Product Accounts, Government Social Benefits,
BEA, U.S. Department of Commerce.
Table 5
Mean and Shares of Income and Components by Income Decile, 1993-1995 and 1997-2000, Single Mothers, Consumer Expenditure Survey
           Pre-tax Money Income Plus       Welfare Income Plus Food
                                                                                   Earnings             Social Security and SSI          Other Income
                   Food Stamps                       Stamps
            1993-      1997-               1993-      1997-                 1993-   1997-              1993-    1997-              1993-    1997-
             1995      2000     (2)/(1)    1995        2000      (5)/(4)    1995     2000    (8)/(7)   1995      2000 (11)/(10)    1995      2000 (14)/(13)
               (1)       (2)      (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)       (7)      (8)      (9)     (10)      (11)      (12)    (13)      (14)     (15)
Means by Income Decile
 First       4,401     4,418    1.004      2,788      1,497      0.537      1,023    2,134   2.087      331       335      1.010    250       422     1.685
             (213)     (816)   (0.192)     (229)       (151)    (0.070)     (134)    (752)  (0.784)     (97)      (91)    (0.405)   (67)     (109)   (0.625)
 Second      8,025     7,878    0.982      5,581      3,455      0.619      1,379    2,717   1.970      415       979      2.360    565       701     1.240
             (275)     (337)   (0.054)     (359)       (286)    (0.065)     (258)    (327)  (0.438)    (123)     (155)    (0.791)  (121)     (135)   (0.357)
 Third       9,753    10,552    1.082      5,994      3,370      0.562      2,227    5,102   2.291      884     1,254      1.418    627       714     1.139
             (335)     (245)   (0.045)     (388)       (388)    (0.074)     (340)    (445)  (0.402)    (212)     (255)    (0.445)  (167)     (122)   (0.360)
 Fourth     11,834 13,557       1.146      5,996      1,795      0.299      3,583    8,567   2.391     1,159    1,495      1.290   1,053     1,624    1.541
             (299)     (451)   (0.048)     (425)       (207)    (0.040)     (541)    (636)  (0.402)    (216)     (269)    (0.334)  (271)     (318)   (0.498)
 Fifth      14,189 16,375       1.154      3,959      1,322      0.334      7,408   12,662   1.709     1,050    1,003      0.955   1,739     1,308    0.752
             (760)     (481)   (0.070)     (696)       (257)    (0.087)    (1313)    (757)  (0.320)    (247)     (237)    (0.318)  (378)     (207)   (0.202)
 Sixth      18,819 19,887       1.057      1,318        539      0.409     14,446 16,075     1.113     1,163    1,030      0.886   1,734     2,096    1.209
             (751)     (544)   (0.051)     (330)       (121)    (0.137)     (968)    (530)  (0.083)    (465)     (277)    (0.427)  (456)     (459)   (0.414)
 Seventh 22,063 25,153          1.140       620         251      0.406     17,895 21,415     1.197      663       477      0.720   2,782     2,736    0.984
             (996)     (842)   (0.064)     (178)        (94)    (0.191)    (1,203) (1038) (0.099)      (223)     (143)    (0.325)  (505)     (456)   (0.243)
 Eighth     28,294 30,427       1.075       169         173      1.027     23,927 26,466     1.106      939       615      0.655   3,110     3,089    0.993
             (986)     (899)   (0.049)      (88)        (74)    (0.695)    (1,003)   (905)  (0.060)    (261)     (208)    (0.287)  (533)     (395)   (0.212)
 Ninth      35,671 40,666       1.140        88         152      1.723     30,344 35,001     1.153      636       828      1.301   4,210     4,361    1.036
           (1,104) (1,395) (0.053)          (49)        (87)    (1.374)    (1,199) (1,291) (0.062)     (258)     (221)    (0.632)  (647)     (753)   (0.239)
 Tenth      60,070 73,204       1.219        57          45      0.782     48,439 51,029     1.053      863       938      1.086   9,363    12,526    1.338
           (2,954) (4,378) (0.094)          (34)        (38)    (0.809)    (2,940) (2,400) (0.081)     (265)     (332)    (0.509) (1,680) (2,044) (0.324)
            1993-      1997-               1993-      1997-                 1993-   1997-              1993-    1997-              1993-    1997-
             1995      2000     (2) - (1)  1995        2000      (5) - (4)  1995     2000    (8) - (7) 1995      2000 (11) - (10)  1995      2000 (14) - (13)
Shares by Income Decile
 First        1.00      1.00     0.00       0.63        0.34      -0.29      0.23     0.48     0.25     0.08      0.08      0.00    0.06      0.10     0.04
 Second       1.00      1.00     0.00       0.70        0.44      -0.26      0.17     0.34     0.17     0.05      0.12      0.07    0.07      0.09     0.02
 Third        1.00      1.00     0.00       0.61        0.32      -0.30      0.23     0.48     0.26     0.09      0.12      0.03    0.06      0.07     0.00
 Fourth       1.00      1.00     0.00       0.51        0.13      -0.37      0.30     0.63     0.33     0.10      0.11      0.01    0.09      0.12     0.03
 Fifth        1.00      1.00     0.00       0.28        0.08      -0.20      0.52     0.77     0.25     0.07      0.06     -0.01    0.12      0.08    -0.04
 Sixth        1.00      1.00     0.00       0.07        0.03      -0.04      0.77     0.81     0.04     0.06      0.05     -0.01    0.09      0.11     0.01
 Seventh      1.00      1.00     0.00       0.03        0.01      -0.02      0.81     0.85     0.04     0.03      0.02     -0.01    0.13      0.11    -0.02
 Eighth       1.00      1.00     0.00       0.01        0.01       0.00      0.85     0.87     0.02     0.03      0.02     -0.01    0.11      0.10    -0.01
 Ninth        1.00      1.00     0.00       0.00        0.00       0.00      0.85     0.86     0.01     0.02      0.02      0.00    0.12      0.11    -0.01
 Tenth        1.00      1.00     0.00       0.00        0.00       0.00      0.81     0.70    -0.11     0.01      0.01      0.00    0.16      0.17     0.02
N            3,075     4,470               3,075      4,470                 3,075    4,470             3,075    4,470              3,075     4,470
Notes: Dollar figures are expressed in year 2000 dollars. Income deciles are determined using after-tax money income plus Food Stamps. The bootstrapped
standard errors in parentheses are corrected for within family dependence.
Table 6
Changes in Underreporting-Adjusted Income between 1993-1995 and 1997-2000, Single
Mothers, Consumer Expenditure Survey
Panel A                   Ratio of Mean Income in 1997-2000 to Mean Income in 1993-1995
                          Reported After-Tax      Adjusted Income      Adjusted Income
                           Income Plus Food     (Transfers Allocated (Transfers Allocated
                                Stamps            by Expenditures)       by Income)
                                   (1)                   (2)                  (3)
Income Deciles
  First                          0.707                  0.884                  1.005
  Second                         0.969                  1.015                  1.015
  Third                          1.078                  1.118                  1.085
  Fourth                         1.146                  1.167                  1.153
  Fifth                          1.147                  1.141                  1.136
  Sixth                          1.123                  1.116                  1.106
  Seventh                        1.124                  1.113                  1.113
  Eighth                         1.092                  1.088                  1.086
  Ninth                          1.086                  1.080                  1.079
  Tenth                          1.234                  1.233                  1.232

                          Quantile Estimates for Change in Income between 1993-1995 and
Panel B                                               1997-2000
                          Reported After-Tax       Adjusted Income      Adjusted Income
                          Income Plus Food       (Transfers Allocated (Transfers Allocated
                               Stamps              by Expenditures)       by Income)
Percentiles
 Fifth                           -0.190                 -0.037                 0.007
 Tenth                           -0.079                  0.025                 0.046
 Fifteenth                       -0.007                  0.046                 0.047
 Twentieth                        0.039                  0.045                 0.047
 Twenty-fifth                     0.040                  0.066                 0.056
 Thirtieth                        0.045                  0.058                 0.050
 Thirty-fifth                     0.043                  0.052                 0.045
 Fortieth                         0.030                  0.049                 0.041
 Forty-fifth                      0.021                  0.045                 0.035
 Fiftieth                         0.043                  0.066                 0.056
Notes: Panel A: In each column, observations are sorted into deciles by reported after-tax
money income plus Food Stamps. Column 1 reports the ratios from Column 4 of Table 2.
Column 2 reports ratios for income adjusted by allocating welfare income to non-reporters
starting with those at the bottom of the expenditure distribution as described in Appendix 3.
Column 3 reports ratios for income adjusted by allocating welfare income first to those in the
bottom of the income distribution. Panel B: Column 1 reports the estimates for income with
controls from Column 4 of Table 3 (β2 from Equation 1). Columns 2 and 3 report the same
parameter when the adjusted income measures are used as the dependent variable.
Table 7
Shares of Consumption by Consumption Decile, 1993-1995 and 1997-2000, Single Mothers, Consumer Expenditure Survey
               Food at Home         Food Away from Home              Housing                Transportation              Entertainment                Child Care
           1993- 1997-              1993- 1997-              1993-    1997-            1993- 1997-                1993- 1997-                1993-    1997-
           1995 2000 (2) - (1)       1995 2000 (5) - (4)     1995     2000 (8) - (7)   1995 2000 (11) - (10)      1995 2000 (14) - (13)      1995     2000 (17) - (16)
            (1)     (2)    (3)        (4)   (5)     (6)       (7)      (8)    (9)       (10)    (11)     (12)      (13)     (14)    (15)      (16)     (17)     (18)
Deciles
 First     0.391   0.324   -0.067   0.024   0.022 -0.002     0.364    0.427 0.063      0.071   0.072    0.002     0.033   0.042     0.009    0.005    0.009    0.004
 Second    0.321   0.268   -0.053   0.024   0.026 0.002      0.420    0.460 0.040      0.078   0.102    0.024     0.041   0.038    -0.002    0.008    0.015    0.007
 Third     0.248   0.224   -0.024   0.024   0.030 0.007      0.495    0.468 -0.027     0.089   0.125    0.036     0.039   0.045     0.006    0.017    0.016    0.000
 Fourth    0.227   0.196   -0.031   0.026   0.033 0.008      0.508    0.473 -0.034     0.103   0.146    0.043     0.034   0.048     0.014    0.015    0.028    0.013
 Fifth     0.204   0.176   -0.028   0.032   0.035 0.003      0.484    0.478 -0.005     0.132   0.163    0.032     0.035   0.045     0.010    0.025    0.032    0.007
 Sixth     0.178   0.155   -0.024   0.031   0.037 0.006      0.477    0.480 0.003      0.151   0.182    0.031     0.045   0.048     0.003    0.027    0.030    0.003
 Seventh   0.161   0.144   -0.017   0.035   0.038 0.003      0.466    0.474 0.008      0.164   0.185    0.022     0.054   0.050    -0.003    0.022    0.035    0.013
 Eighth    0.157   0.129   -0.028   0.037   0.042 0.005      0.452    0.473 0.021      0.185   0.197    0.012     0.057   0.055    -0.003    0.038    0.031   -0.007
 Ninth     0.127   0.123   -0.004   0.037   0.042 0.005      0.464    0.465 0.001      0.187   0.196    0.009     0.060   0.061     0.001    0.039    0.032   -0.007
 Tenth     0.119   0.101   -0.018   0.050   0.044 -0.007     0.439    0.452 0.013      0.175   0.188    0.013     0.076   0.070    -0.006    0.033    0.025   -0.008
N          3,075   4,470            3,075   4,470            3,075    4,470            3,075   4,470              3,075   4,470              3,075    4,470
Notes: Housing includes rent, a housing flow for homeowners, and other housing expenses. Transportation includes a service flow from owned vehicles as well as other
transportation expenses. Entertainment includes admission fees to movies, shows, etc. as well as expenditures on television, radio, and other entertainment equipment.
Child Care includes spending on babysitting and child care services.
Table 8
Trends in the Share of Single Mothers in Public or Subsidized Housing, Homeownership, and Rent by Consumption Decile,
1993-2003, Single Mothers, Consumer Expenditure Survey
           1993-1995 1997-2000 2001-2003        (2) - (1)   (3) - (1)   1993-1995 1997-2000 2001-2003       (7) - (6)   (8) - (6)
              (1)       (2)       (3)              (4)         (5)         (6)       (7)       (8)             (9)        (10)
         Panel A: Share in Public or Subsidized Housing, All
         Single Mothers                                                 Panel B: Homeownership Rates, All Single Mothers
Consumption Deciles
 First      0.590     0.618        0.725       0.028      0.135           0.008       0.034       0.029       0.026      0.021
 Second     0.459     0.447        0.404      -0.012     -0.055           0.036       0.074       0.077       0.038      0.041
 Third      0.325     0.352        0.357       0.027      0.032           0.076       0.161       0.170       0.085      0.094
 Fourth     0.203     0.287        0.312       0.084      0.109           0.183       0.190       0.213       0.007      0.029
 Fifth      0.237     0.181        0.215      -0.056     -0.022           0.147       0.211       0.265       0.063      0.118
 Sixth      0.085     0.137        0.149       0.052      0.064           0.283       0.385       0.352       0.101      0.069
 Seventh    0.085     0.075        0.113      -0.010      0.029           0.384       0.451       0.451       0.067      0.066
 Eighth     0.036     0.071        0.050       0.035      0.014           0.461       0.570       0.546       0.109      0.084
 Ninth      0.047     0.043        0.060      -0.004      0.013           0.611       0.573       0.640      -0.039      0.029
 Tenth      0.012     0.020        0.042       0.008      0.030           0.722       0.779       0.728       0.057      0.006
N           3,075     4,470        4,065                                  3,075       4,470       4,065
           Panel C: Out of Pocket Rent, Non-Home Owning Single          Panel D: Out of Pocket Rent, Non-Home Owning Single
           Mothers in Public or Subsidized Housing                      Mothers Not in Public or Subsidized Housing
          1993-1995 1997-2000 2001-2003          (2)/(1)    (3)/(1)     1993-1995 1997-2000 2001-2003        (7)/(6)     (8)/(6)
             (1)       (2)       (3)               (4)        (5)          (6)       (7)       (8)             (9)        (10)
Consumption Deciles
 First      1,094     1,331     1,072            1.217       0.980        1,718       2,165       2,216      1.261       1.290
 Second     1,525     2,239     2,127            1.468       1.395        2,749       3,518       3,518      1.280       1.280
 Third      2,391     3,107     3,325            1.299       1.390        4,432       4,220       4,255      0.952       0.960
 Fourth     3,480     3,482     3,598            1.001       1.034        4,955       5,063       5,391      1.022       1.088
 Fifth      3,730     4,436     4,828            1.189       1.294        5,460       5,382       5,867      0.986       1.074
 Top Half   5,763     6,496     6,577            1.127       1.141        7,285       8,242       8,074      1.131       1.108
N            588       952       881                                      1,596       1,962       1,711
Notes: Panel A reports the fraction of all single mothers that report either living in public housing or receiving assistance from
the government for housing costs. Dollar figures are expressed in year 2000 dollars.
Table 9
Trends in Housing Characteristics by Consumption Decile, 1993-2003, Single Mothers, Consumer Expenditure Survey
                  1993-     1997-      2001-                           1993-     1997-    2001-
                  1995       2000      2003     (2) - (1) (3) - (1)    1995      2000     2003    (7) - (6) (8) - (6)
                   (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)       (7)      (8)       (9)        (10)
                Panel A: Number of Rooms                            Panel B: Number of Bedrooms
  First Decile    4.221     4.038      4.232     -0.184     0.011      2.177     2.007    2.144    -0.170     -0.033
                 (0.119)   (0.085)    (0.097)   (0.146)   (0.154)     (0.077)   (0.047)  (0.052)  (0.090)    (0.092)
  Second Decile 4.213       4.175      4.067     -0.038    -0.146      2.121     2.111    2.078    -0.010     -0.043
                 (0.084)   (0.071)    (0.085)   (0.110)   (0.120)     (0.045)   (0.049)  (0.045)  (0.067)    (0.064)
  Third Decile    4.369     4.471      4.542      0.103     0.173      2.113     2.187    2.244     0.074      0.131
                 (0.075)   (0.099)    (0.091)   (0.124)   (0.118)     (0.042)   (0.053)  (0.046)  (0.067)    (0.062)

 Fourth Decile  4.467     4.551     4.535        0.084      0.068      2.200      2.224      2.248     0.024     0.048
               (0.111)   (0.091)   (0.104)      (0.144)    (0.152)    (0.054)    (0.050)    (0.053)   (0.074)   (0.076)
 Fifth Decile   4.809     4.842     5.127        0.034      0.319      2.311      2.375      2.457     0.064     0.145
               (0.109)   (0.139)   (0.118)      (0.177)    (0.161)    (0.053)    (0.067)    (0.054)   (0.085)   (0.076)
 Top Half       5.715     5.850     5.974        0.135      0.258      2.695      2.833      2.832     0.138     0.137
               (0.085)   (0.072)   (0.071)      (0.111)    (0.111)    (0.040)    (0.040)    (0.036)   (0.057)   (0.054)
              Panel C: Number of Bathrooms                           Panel D: Air Conditioning
 First Decile   0.984     1.019     1.070        0.035      0.086      0.467      0.554      0.664     0.087     0.197
               (0.028)   (0.027)   (0.032)      (0.039)    (0.043)    (0.045)    (0.037)    (0.037)   (0.058)   (0.059)
 Second Decile 1.041      1.086     1.057        0.045      0.016      0.467      0.561      0.632     0.095     0.165
               (0.025)   (0.024)   (0.033)      (0.035)    (0.041)    (0.040)    (0.029)    (0.034)   (0.050)   (0.053)
 Third Decile   1.115     1.129     1.156        0.014      0.040      0.470      0.561      0.652     0.091     0.182
               (0.033)   (0.031)   (0.028)      (0.046)    (0.043)    (0.042)    (0.034)    (0.033)   (0.054)   (0.054)

 Fourth Decile  1.154     1.178        1.190     0.024      0.037      0.505      0.646     0.654      0.142     0.149
               (0.036)   (0.027)      (0.031)   (0.046)    (0.048)    (0.042)    (0.034)   (0.035)    (0.054)   (0.055)
 Fifth Decile   1.244     1.258        1.345     0.014      0.101      0.559      0.668     0.736      0.108     0.176
               (0.042)   (0.035)      (0.040)   (0.055)    (0.058)    (0.045)    (0.033)   (0.031)    (0.056)   (0.055)
 Top Half       1.564     1.654        1.700     0.091      0.136      0.663      0.727     0.793      0.064     0.130
               (0.033)   (0.028)      (0.025)   (0.043)    (0.042)    (0.021)    (0.016)   (0.015)    (0.026)   (0.026)
              Panel E: Central Air                                   Panel F: Dishwasher
 First Decile   0.239     0.285        0.399     0.046      0.160      0.150      0.121     0.194     -0.029     0.044
               (0.038)   (0.033)      (0.039)   (0.051)    (0.055)    (0.033)    (0.021)   (0.032)    (0.039)   (0.046)
 Second Decile 0.222      0.337        0.346     0.115      0.124      0.152      0.176     0.178      0.024     0.026
               (0.034)   (0.029)      (0.036)   (0.045)    (0.049)    (0.030)    (0.021)   (0.026)    (0.037)   (0.040)
 Third Decile   0.220     0.341        0.358     0.122      0.138      0.157      0.211     0.202      0.054     0.045
               (0.037)   (0.035)      (0.037)   (0.051)    (0.052)    (0.026)    (0.029)   (0.025)    (0.039)   (0.036)

 Fourth Decile    0.275      0.413     0.439      0.138     0.164       0.179       0.245    0.276      0.066     0.097
                 (0.039)    (0.030)   (0.033)   (0.049)    (0.051)     (0.029)     (0.030)  (0.031)   (0.042)    (0.043)
 Fifth Decile     0.329      0.450     0.505      0.121     0.176       0.237       0.268    0.392      0.031     0.155
                 (0.047)    (0.039)   (0.039)   (0.060)    (0.061)     (0.033)     (0.031)  (0.042)   (0.046)    (0.053)
 Top Half         0.476      0.534     0.573      0.059     0.098       0.500       0.586    0.602      0.085     0.101
                 (0.024)    (0.017)   (0.017)   (0.030)    (0.030)     (0.027)     (0.018)  (0.017)   (0.032)    (0.032)
               Panel G: Washing Machine                               Panel H: Dryer
 First Decile     0.352      0.409     0.473      0.058     0.121       0.210       0.250    0.361      0.040     0.150
                 (0.047)    (0.036)   (0.040)   (0.060)    (0.062)     (0.036)     (0.033)  (0.039)   (0.049)    (0.053)
 Second Decile 0.530         0.528     0.519     -0.002    -0.011       0.375       0.379    0.423      0.003     0.048
                 (0.042)    (0.033)   (0.032)   (0.053)    (0.053)     (0.042)     (0.031)  (0.033)   (0.052)    (0.053)
 Third Decile     0.547      0.542     0.570     -0.005     0.023       0.449       0.407    0.508     -0.042     0.059
                 (0.042)    (0.034)   (0.037)   (0.054)    (0.056)     (0.040)     (0.035)  (0.037)   (0.053)    (0.055)
 Fourth Decile    0.538      0.531     0.606     -0.007     0.068       0.476       0.447    0.541     -0.029     0.065
                 (0.042)    (0.032)   (0.035)   (0.053)    (0.055)     (0.042)     (0.033)  (0.037)   (0.053)    (0.056)
 Fifth Decile     0.604      0.625     0.695      0.021     0.090       0.479       0.563    0.633      0.083     0.153
                 (0.037)    (0.034)   (0.030)   (0.050)    (0.048)     (0.042)     (0.039)  (0.032)   (0.058)    (0.053)
 Top Half         0.765      0.786     0.809      0.021     0.044       0.715       0.744    0.775      0.029     0.060
                 (0.020)    (0.014)   (0.014)   (0.025)    (0.025)     (0.022)     (0.016)  (0.016)   (0.027)    (0.027)
Notes: Between 1 and 2 percent of the sample have missing values for the number of rooms, bedrooms, and bathrooms.
Otherwise, sample sizes are the same as those reported in Panel A of Table 8. All measures of rooms are equivalence scale
adjusted. Number of rooms excludes bathrooms. The bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses are corrected for within
Table 10
Trends in Housing Characteristics, 1993-2003, Single Mothers without a High School Degree, American Housing
Survey


                                                       1993-1995 1997-1999 2001-2003 (2) - (1)    (3) - (1)
                                                          (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)         (5)
Number of rooms                                          4.768     4.741     4.748     -0.027      -0.020
                                                        (0.043)   (0.049)   (0.047)   (0.065)     (0.064)
Number of bathrooms                                      1.124     1.147     1.155      0.023       0.031
                                                        (0.014)   (0.016)   (0.016)   (0.021)     (0.021)
Number of bedrooms                                       2.331     2.408     2.381      0.077       0.050
                                                        (0.028)   (0.031)   (0.029)   (0.041)     (0.040)
Unit has a working stove or range                        0.989     0.990     0.993      0.000       0.004
                                                        (0.003)   (0.004)   (0.003)   (0.005)     (0.004)
Unit has a working dishwasher                            0.140     0.153     0.187      0.013       0.047
                                                        (0.011)   (0.012)   (0.015)   (0.016)     (0.018)
Unit has working washer                                  0.520     0.526     0.576      0.006       0.056
                                                        (0.015)   (0.017)   (0.018)   (0.023)     (0.024)
Unit has working clothes dryer                           0.309     0.366     0.420      0.057       0.111
                                                        (0.014)   (0.017)   (0.018)   (0.022)     (0.023)
Unit has working garbage disposal                        0.198     0.175     0.250     -0.023       0.051
                                                        (0.012)   (0.013)   (0.016)   (0.018)     (0.020)
Unit has central air or room air                         0.549     0.650     0.739      0.101       0.190
                                                        (0.015)   (0.017)   (0.016)   (0.022)     (0.022)
All toilets not working at some point in last 3 months   0.110     0.091     0.070     -0.018      -0.040
                                                        (0.009)   (0.010)   (0.010)   (0.014)     (0.013)
Water leak from inside in last 12 months                 0.178     0.183     0.154      0.004      -0.024
                                                        (0.012)   (0.013)   (0.013)   (0.018)     (0.018)
Water leak from outside in last 12 months                0.150     0.118     0.127     -0.032      -0.022
                                                        (0.011)   (0.011)   (0.012)   (0.016)     (0.016)
N                                                        1086       833       718
Notes: Data are from the 1993-2003 waves of the American Housing Survey, which is administered biennially.
Table 11
The Value of a Representative Single Mother's Non-Market Time that Equates Utility
Before and After Welfare Reform
Panel A: 1993-1995 to 1997-2000
                       Consumption Deciles                                  Income Deciles
              Change in                                          Change in
                 Mean            Hours                             Mean          Hours
             Consumption        Change        ∆C/∆Hours         Consumption     Change     ∆C/∆Hours
                  (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)            (5)         (6)
  First          $ 374           310.43          $ 1.21           $ 2,171        231.49      $ 9.38
  Second        $ 1,028          432.63          $ 2.38            $ 701         344.67      $ 2.03
  Third         $ 1,025          516.84          $ 1.98           $ 1,104        529.93      $ 2.08
  Fourth        $ 1,267          476.66          $ 2.66           $ 2,562        751.32      $ 3.41
  Fifth         $ 1,126          452.46          $ 2.49           $ 3,080        476.77      $ 6.46
  Top Half      $ 3,061          115.26         $ 26.55           $ 2,099        85.67      $ 24.50
Panel B: 1993-1995 to 2001-2003
                       Consumption Deciles                                  Income Deciles
              Change in                                          Change in
                 Mean            Hours                             Mean          Hours
             Consumption        Change        ∆C/∆Hours         Consumption     Change     ∆C/∆Hours
                  (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)            (5)         (6)
  First          $ 227           499.86          $ 0.45            $ 428         206.08      $ 2.08
  Second        $ 1,204          595.63          $ 2.02           $ 1,791        431.04      $ 4.16
  Third         $ 1,249          608.10          $ 2.05           $ 1,994        638.28      $ 3.12
  Fourth        $ 1,539          445.93          $ 3.45           $ 2,506        938.67      $ 2.67
  Fifth         $ 1,214          379.98          $ 3.20           $ 1,702        478.76      $ 3.56
  Top Half      $ 1,585          61.75          $ 25.67            $ 978         43.06      $ 22.70
Notes: Column 1 reports the real change (year 2000 $) in mean consumption between two periods for
each decile in the top half of the consumption distribution. Column 4 reports the same measure for
each decile in the top half of the distribution of after-tax income plus Food Stamps. Changes in hours
are calculated using data from Table 1, Columns 6-8.
Table 12
Hours per Week Spent in Market and Non-Market Work Among Women, 1993 and 2003
                                  Single Mothers          Single Women without Children                 Married Mothers                Diff-in-Diff
                            1993      2003      (2) - (1)   1993     2003     (5) - (4)            1993      2003    (8) - (7)     (3) - (6) (3) - (9)
                             (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)      (5)        (6)                (7)       (8)       (9)          (10)       (11)
Total Market Work           24.457    27.454        2.997   33.815  33.493       -0.322            23.467    23.095     -0.372        3.319      3.369
                            (2.704)    (1.109)    (2.923)   (1.349)  (1.019)    (1.691)            (1.338) (0.580)     (1.458)      (3.377) (3.266)
   Direct Market Work       21.775    25.339        3.564   30.916  31.022        0.106            20.998    21.366      0.368        3.458      3.196
                            (2.448)    (1.034)    (2.657)   (1.246)  (0.959)    (1.573)            (1.200) (0.539)     (1.316)      (3.088) (2.965)
Total Non-Market Work       23.701    17.756       -5.945   15.898  15.178       -0.720            23.101    23.905      0.804       -5.225 -6.749
                            (1.806)    (0.610)    (1.907)   (0.732)  (0.495)    (0.883)            (0.805) (0.360)     (0.882)      (2.101) (2.101)
   Food Prep & Housework 13.665       11.384       -2.281    8.899    8.253      -0.646            15.520    16.104      0.583       -1.635 -2.864
                            (1.335)    (0.476)    (1.417)   (0.518)  (0.344)    (0.622)            (0.633) (0.306)     (0.703)      (1.548) (1.582)
   Shopping & Obtaining      9.272      5.780      -3.492    6.180    6.352       0.173             6.513     7.179      0.666       -3.664 -4.158
   Goods & Services         (1.152)    (0.323)    (1.197)   (0.469)  (0.345)    (0.582)            (0.462) (0.196)     (0.502)      (1.331) (1.298)
Total Non-Work Time          119.8      122.8       2.948    118.3    119.3       1.042             121.4     121.0     -0.432        1.906      3.380
                            (2.419)    (0.997)    (2.616)   (1.204)  (0.943)    (1.529)            (1.237) (0.507)     (1.336)      (3.030) (2.938)
   Leisure                   111.5      108.9      -2.664    113.0    113.6       0.654             112.7     107.2     -5.414       -3.318      2.750
                            (2.484)    (0.992)    (2.675)   (1.190)  (0.931)    (1.511)            (1.242) (0.505)     (1.341)      (3.072) (2.992)
   Child Care                5.189      9.434       4.246    1.781    0.799      -0.982             5.469    10.274      4.805        5.227 -0.559
                            (0.696)    (0.432)    (0.819)   (0.250)  (0.159)    (0.296)            (0.379) (0.234)     (0.446)      (0.871) (0.933)
   Education                 0.964      1.481       0.516    1.603    1.099      -0.504             1.427     0.661     -0.766        1.020      1.282
                            (0.639)    (0.292)    (0.702)   (0.344)  (0.203)    (0.400)            (0.332) (0.089)     (0.343)      (0.808) (0.782)
N                              128        772                  628    1,090                           540     2,586
Time use data come from the NTUS (1992-1994) and ATUS (2003). Samples include women between the ages of 18 and 65 inclusive who are not
retired and are not full-time students. The single mother sample includes those without any other adults present (also excludes single mothers living
with own children older than 17). Single women without children sample includes only those living alone. Total Market Work includes Direct Market
Work (time working in main job) plus other work related activities and travel time related to work. Total Non-Market Work includes food preparation,
both indoor and outdoor housework, shopping, and obtaining goods and services. Total Non-Work Time includes time spent in Leisure, Education,
and Child Care as well as other activities such as job search while unemployed. Leisure includes leisure time as well as time spent on eating,
sleeping, civic activities, religious activities, volunteering, pet care, gardening and personal care.
Table A1
The Fraction of All Women 18-54 in Different Family Types, Current Population Survey,
1994 - 2003.
        Single Mothers      All Single       Married With   No Children
         Living Alone       Mothers            Children       Under 18         Other
              (1)               (2)               (3)            (4)            (5)
1993         0.088            0.129             0.369           0.464          0.038
1994         0.086            0.132             0.369           0.460          0.040
1995         0.084            0.131             0.366           0.462          0.041
1996         0.084            0.131             0.359           0.470          0.041
1997         0.088            0.131             0.358           0.469          0.042
1998         0.078            0.127             0.357           0.475          0.041
1999         0.078            0.126             0.350           0.484          0.041
2000         0.075            0.123             0.350           0.485          0.043
2001         0.073            0.118             0.348           0.493          0.041
2002         0.085            0.123             0.348           0.485          0.044
2003         0.086            0.124             0.347           0.485          0.043

Notes: Data are from the March CPS. Years refer to time of survey. Column 1 is a subset
of Column 2. Column 2 includes female family heads with at least one own child under 18.
Column 3 refers to married women with at least one own child under 18. Column 4
includes all women living in families with no children of the reference person that are under
18. Column 5 includes childless women who are not a family head and who live in a family
with at least one child under 18. All estimates are weighted using individual level weights.
Table A2
Percentiles of Annual Consumption and Income, by Number of Children, 1993-2003, Single Mothers,
Consumer Expenditure Survey
                     Single Mothers with One     Single Mothers with Two      Single Mothers with Three
                               Child                      Children                  or More Children
                    1993-      1997-    2001-    1993-     1997-    2001-      1993-     1997-     2001-
                     1995      2000     2003     1995      2000      2003      1995      2000      2003
                      (1)       (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)
Consumption Percentiles
  5th Percentile    7,020      7,100    6,919    6,662     8,021     7,869     8,491     7,673     8,256
                     (312)     (306)    (242)    (397)     (228)     (302)     (425)     (224)     (534)
  10th Percentile 8,961        9,329    9,783    8,447    10,252     9,817     9,839     9,713    10,483
                     (338)     (259)    (406)    (179)     (186)     (329)     (306)     (356)     (291)
  20th Percentile 11,682 12,277 12,970          11,202 12,783 12,913          12,031 12,342 13,377
                     (415)     (305)    (414)    (355)     (301)     (334)     (285)     (282)     (411)
  30th Percentile 14,958 14,943 15,661          13,713 15,484 15,534          13,813 14,386 15,095
                     (430)     (396)    (343)    (313)     (303)     (380)     (388)     (262)     (183)
  40th Percentile 17,440 17,700 17,883          15,813 18,328 17,936          15,354 16,476 16,979
                     (446)     (323)    (302)    (327)     (357)     (339)     (380)     (289)     (325)
  50th Percentile 19,804 20,534 20,200          18,103 21,184 20,357          17,473 18,654 19,295
                     (295)     (453)    (367)    (383)     (404)     (397)     (436)     (389)     (432)
  60th Percentile 22,094 23,065 22,486          20,556 24,366 23,378          20,935 21,075 21,668
                     (522)     (335)    (293)    (545)     (526)     (562)     (801)     (426)     (468)
  70th Percentile 25,105 26,033 25,374          23,813 28,346 26,972          24,376 24,205 24,332
                     (488)     (382)    (309)    (528)     (525)     (500)     (778)     (623)     (483)
  80th Percentile 28,722 30,743 29,077          27,948 33,923 31,985          29,909 29,783 28,293
                     (517)     (520)    (505)    (787)     (661)     (739)     (770)    (1,091)    (772)
  90th Percentile 34,671 37,500 35,480          36,315 42,084 40,285          34,922 41,021 34,799
                     (770)     (850)    (726)    (933)     (734)   (1,240)    (1,539) (1,645) (1,012)
Income Percentiles
  5th Percentile    4,531      2,950    3,567    4,729     3,902     3,558     5,175     3,245     3,675
                     (430)     (448)    (380)    (441)     (360)     (687)     (381)     (542)     (676)
  10th Percentile 5,842        5,626    5,593    5,814     5,783     5,949     6,242     5,483     6,186
                     (280)     (338)    (513)    (340)     (482)     (512)     (359)     (343)     (443)
  20th Percentile 8,059        8,970    9,025    8,112     9,230     9,874     8,993     8,066     8,843
                     (391)     (422)    (515)    (315)     (424)     (379)     (456)     (338)     (368)
  30th Percentile 10,401 11,884 12,374           9,810    11,999 12,207       10,731 10,201 11,406
                     (858)     (502)    (599)    (457)     (535)     (554)     (372)     (456)     (515)
  40th Percentile 13,857 15,012 15,366          11,668 15,059 15,151          12,340 12,398 13,464
                     (678)     (608)    (569)    (498)     (619)     (687)     (523)     (514)     (738)
  50th Percentile 16,402 18,136 19,351          14,630 18,463 19,353          14,039 14,376 16,394
                     (700)     (732)    (897)    (869)     (796)     (833)     (481)     (506)     (754)
  60th Percentile 20,988 21,593 22,540          18,177 21,983 22,710          15,327 16,744 18,938
                   (1,177)     (664)   (1,080)   (977)     (713)     (651)     (707)     (765)     (617)
  70th Percentile 24,892 25,376 27,078          22,094 26,571 27,213          19,055 20,480 21,775
                   (1,005)     (812)    (937)    (921)    (1,269)    (916)    (1,357)    (932)     (936)
  80th Percentile 30,608 30,756 32,036          28,244 32,598 32,302          23,187 24,742 27,049
                   (1,199) (1,389) (1,259)      (1,781) (1,543) (1,624)       (1,708) (1,789) (1,410)
  90th Percentile 37,637 41,557 41,246          37,154 42,363 47,637          32,086 38,036 36,291
                   (1,607) (1,336) (1,813)      (2,516) (2,107) (2,076)       (2,704) (3,084) (2,403)
N                   1,131      1,740    1,547    1,246     1,632     1,536      698      1,098      982
Notes: Dollar figures are expressed in year 2000 dollars. The bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses
are corrected for within family dependence.
