NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INCENTIVES AND EFFORT IN THE PUBLIC SECTOR:
HAVE U.S. EDUCATION REFORMS INCREASED
TEACHERS’ WORK HOURS?
Christiana Stoddard
Peter Kuhn
Working Paper 11970
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11970
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2006

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Christiana Stoddard and Peter Kuhn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Incentives and Effort in the Public Sector: Have U.S. Education Reforms Increased Teachers’
Work Hours?
Christiana Stoddard and Peter Kuhn
NBER Working Paper No. 11970
January 2006
JEL No. I21, I28, J22, J44, J45
ABSTRACT

Beyond some contracted minimum, salaried workers' hours are largely chosen at the worker's
discretion and should respond to the strength of contract incentives. Accordingly, we consider the
response of teacher hours to accountability and school choice laws introduced in U.S. public schools
over the past two decades. Total weekly hours of full-time teachers have risen steadily since 1983
by about an hour, and after-school instructional hours have increased 34 percent since 1987. Average
hours and the rate of increase also vary widely across states. However, after accounting for a
common time trend in hours, we find no association between the introduction of accountability
legislation and the change in teacher hours. We conjecture that the weak link between effort and
compensation in most school reforms helps explain the lack of such an association.
Christiana Stoddard
Department of Economics and Agricultural
Economics
Montana State University
Boxeman, MT 59715
cstoddard@montana.edu
Peter Kuhn
Department of Economics
University of California
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER
pjkuhn@econ.ucsb.edu

1.

Introduction
Among salaried workers, the decision to supply weekly work hours beyond some nominally

contracted amount is generally left to the employee’s discretion. Thus, salaried workers’ weekly
hours play a role analogous to that of effort in principal-agent models: an increase in the strength
of performance incentives in the employment contract should raise the equilibrium level of hours
worked.
In recent years, partly in response to concerns that public schools and their teachers faced
inadequate incentives to improve student performance, states have passed a variety of
accountability and school choice laws designed to strengthen those incentives. These laws
include mandatory testing of all students in at least some grades with scores publicly reported by
school, sanctions for schools with low student performance, rewards for schools with high (or
improved) student performance, and charter school laws. States introduced these education
reforms asynchronously, thus providing a promising “natural experiment” for evaluating their
effects. The goal of this paper is to ascertain whether these laws increased the hours worked by
full-time public school teachers. Understanding the effects of reforms on teacher hours adds an
additional perspective to the burgeoning literature examining their effects on student
performance.1
Using data from the Current Population Survey (CPS) from 1983 to 1998, and the Schools
and Staffing Surveys (SASS, waves 1987 through 1999), we show the following. First, the usual
weekly hours worked by full-time teachers, as well as the extra after-school hours they reported
in the SASS, increased steadily over this period of expanding educational reform. Second, longterm increases in neither of these variables are well explained by changes in the composition of

1

See for example Ladd (1999), Grissmer et al. (2000), Gleww et al. (2003), Murnane and Levy (2001) on the
impact of accountability reforms; Hanushek et al. (2001) on the impact of charter schools.

2
the teacher work force across a variety of dimensions, such as age, gender, race and union status.
Third, while pooled regressions across years and states suggest positive effects of accountability
and choice reforms, the common time trends in hours and reforms drives these results. After
including either year fixed effects or state specific time trends, we find no connection between
the observed increase in teachers’ work hours and education reforms: hours increases were no
greater in states that adopted reforms than in states that did not.
Finally, to help interpret the above findings, we connect our state-level reform measures with
information on test scores from the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP).
While this may not be the ideal way to study the connection between reforms and student
performance, we find that several of the reforms studied are associated with improvements in
students’ test scores in our data. This suggests that the reforms may have increased the
efficiency via which teachers transform their work hours into students’ test performance.

2. Trends in Teacher Hours
Our analysis focuses on two distinct measures of teacher work hours, taken from different
data sets. One measure, taken from the Current Population Survey Outgoing Rotations, is the
total number of hours worked in a usual week at a respondent’s primary job. This includes both
hours spent in the workplace and at home, and (importantly) excludes any hours worked on other
jobs.2 Attractive features of the CPS are that it has annual data on total hours that is consistently
reported across the years in our sample3, it allows for comparisons with non-teachers, and since
1983 it has recorded whether or not an individual is covered by a union contract. A limitation is

2

Conveniently, the interviewing instructions explicitly refer to teachers as an example, and state that the hours they
spend grading and preparing lessons at home should be counted along with hours at school.
3
The particular hours question we use was not affected by the 1994 CPS redesign. See Kuhn and Lozano (2002).

3
small sample sizes in some states and years; for some of our analysis the CPS data is therefore
pooled over 4-year intervals.
A distinct indicator of teacher work hours is taken from the Schools and Staffing Survey
(SASS). The SASS is a survey of public and private school teachers, with detailed information
about personal and school characteristics.4 The survey was administered in 1987, 1990, 1993,
and 1999. Our analysis of SASS data focuses on the number of hours spent by teachers after
school without students preparing lessons, grading, and in other instructional activities. These
extra instructional hours seem more likely to be sensitive to incentives based on students’
academic performance than hours spent after school coaching or running the yearbook, or hours
that are determined by the length of the school day.5
To avoid conflating different levels of teacher effort with the mix of part and full time
teachers, our CPS sample is restricted to teachers employed 35 or more hours a week. It is also
restricted to salaried individuals aged 22-61. The SASS sample includes only teachers who
report a full time appointment. Both samples only include public elementary and secondary
school teachers. The CPS sample is also restricted to individuals with no self-employment
income, who were not in school, who have at least a bachelor’s degree, and to interviews in
September through May to avoid typical vacation months. Washington, DC is excluded from the
CPS sample because several of the sources for educational reform policies excluded it in their
reports.
Trends in teacher work hours are reported in the top row of Table 1 for the CPS and of
Table 2 for the SASS. In the CPS, pooling four adjacent sets of years (1983-86, 1987-90, 1991-

4

The probability a school is sampled in the SASS is proportional to the square root of the number of teachers in the
school. As a result, the SASS oversamples large schools. Sampling weights are however provided to generate
means for a nationally representative sample of teachers; these are used throughout this paper whenever means are
computed.
5
The wording of the required (in school) hours question in the SASS changed over time, making it a somewhat less
reliable indicator of trends in effort.

4
94, and 1995-98) yields a sample of between 9 and 11 thousand teachers in each of those four
periods. These data show a fairly steady increase from about 43 hours in the early 1980s to about
44 hours in the late 1990s. The SASS, which covers over 19,000 teachers in each of four
individual years (1987, 1990, 1993 and 1999) shows that extra instructional hours have risen
steadily from 7.18 hours in 1987 to 9.63 hours in 1999.6
Both surveys also show that the level and change in hours varied significantly across
states, suggesting a possible role for legislative effects.

Figure 1 plots the average number of

hours worked in the early 1980s in each state against the number of hours worked in the late
1990s as reported in the CPS. A solid line is drawn at 45 degrees: states along this line
experienced no change in mean teacher hours over this period. In the states with the highest
reported teacher hours in the late 1990s, full time teachers worked at least 5 hours per week
longer than in states with the lowest hours.7 Trends also varied: in four states hours rose by 2.5
or more while in 7 states teacher hours actually declined by half an hour or more.
One potential explanation for the trend in teacher hours is demographic changes in the
teaching workforce or changes in school characteristics. For example, if newly hired teachers
work longer hours and the share of newly hired teachers increased over this period, changes in
the share of new hires may explain some of the trend in hours. To assess the impact of
compositional changes, Tables 1 and 2 report average teacher characteristics for our CPS and
SASS samples respectively. According to Table 1, the population of teachers in later years was
older, included more female teachers, and a smaller proportion who taught in secondary schools.
There was little change in the share of teachers who are nonwhite. The fraction of teachers

6

As noted the wording of the question about hours spent in school has changed, making it difficult to compare total
hours across years, but it appears that most of the increase in total hours is due to an increase in hours spent after
school in instructional activities.
7
In each of the four SASS survey years, the correlation across states between CPS and SASS measures of total
teacher hours is between .7 and .8. Clearly, these differences across states in mean teacher hours reflect more than
just sampling error.

5
covered by a union contract eroded over this period, even though there have been few legal
changes to affect the status of unions since 1983.8 According to Table 2, despite the aging of the
teacher workforce, there was an increase in the share of newly hired teachers, leading to an
erosion of average teacher experience. At the same time there was a rise in the share of minority
students and in students receiving free lunches, and a decline in the pupil-teacher ratio.
Tables 3 and 4 report coefficients from teacher work hour regressions in each of the cross
sections described in Tables 1 and 2. Because the percent covered by union contracts is a
state/year level mean9, standard errors in these regressions are adjusted for possible dependence
of observations within each state/year cell following Moulton (1986). The CPS results indicate
that female teachers tend to work fewer total hours, particularly in the early periods, with no
statistically significant difference in the late 1990s. In the SASS, female teachers work about 1.7
hours more than male teachers in after-school instructional activities, something that remained
unchanged since 1987. Gender differences in after-school hours with students (e.g., coaching)
disappear by the later periods, leading to a convergence in total hours.
Both surveys also show that nonwhite teachers tend to work fewer hours, and that new
teachers work longer hours. In the SASS, teachers with three or less years of experience work
over an hour longer after school than more experienced teachers, and in the CPS younger
teachers (ages 22-25) tend to work longer hours than teachers in the middle of their careers,
although this effect is not statistically significant. In neither survey does holding an advanced
degree appear to affect hours. Secondary school teachers work longer total hours, but this
appears to be due to their extra work after school with students in activities like coaching or
directing the school play. Extra instructional hours are lower for secondary school teachers.
8

The only three substantive changes are the introduction of right to work laws in Idaho in 1986, Texas in 1993, and
Oklahoma in 2001.
9
We chose to use the statewide mean of union coverage rather than individual union coverage because of concerns
that the effects of union strength in a state were more likely to “spill over” to all public school teachers in the state.

6
The hours regressions in Tables 3 and 4 also include the percentage of teachers in the
respondent’s state and year who report that they are union members or are covered by a
collective bargaining agreement in the CPS survey. Unions may attempt to raise the number of
full time teachers relative to part time teachers, but at the same time may work to reduce the
hours of full time teachers. Schools with stronger teachers unions may have difficulty firing
teachers that exert less effort. Unions may also be associated with more free periods for
preparation10 or smaller classes, as Caroline Hoxby has argued (1996).
The percentage of teachers who are covered by a union agreement in a state is negatively
associated with work hours in the early periods of both surveys. However, in both surveys this
negative correlation evaporates by the end of the time period. In the CPS the negative
coefficient declines in magnitude and significance over time. In the SASS, the effect of
unionization is initially negative, but becomes monotonically larger and more positive in each
wave.11 Even though –as we show below—changes in union coverage cannot explain changes in
teacher hours over the last twenty years, this change in the union coefficient suggests that a
change in union policy towards teacher hours may have played a role. Possible reasons behind
such a policy change–in particular, certain forms of parental pressure that are not captured by our
school reform measures--are explored in Section 5 of this paper.12
The SASS results in Table 4 also indicate that school characteristics affect extra
instructional hours. Hours are lower for teachers in rural areas and towns than in cities and
suburbs. Hours also tend to be higher in schools with higher pupil teacher ratios. One of the
strongest predictors of extra instructional hours is the percentage of students who are eligible for
10

This mechanism seems particularly relevant to our SASS measure of hours, since time spent preparing during
school hours can substitute for time spent after school hours doing the same thing.
11
The effect of unions on total hours, as reported in the SASS, is more similar to the CPS results: unions
consistently have a negative effect on total hours, and this effect dissipates over time.

7
free lunches. An additional ten percent of students receiving free lunch is associated with a
reduction of 10 to 15 minutes of extra instructional hours each week. This means that teachers in
schools one standard deviation below the free-lunch mean (i.e. schools where 3 percent of
students receive free lunch) work nearly 40 hours more each year than teachers in schools one
standard deviation above the mean share receiving free lunch (50 percent of students receive free
lunch). The percentage of students who are minorities does not have an additional impact.
How much of the trend in hours can the compositional changes in teacher and school
demographics explain? The Oaxaca decomposition provides bounds for the potential effect of
characteristics, using the change in teachers’ average characteristics multiplied by either the
coefficient vector in the first period ( ( X 4 − X 1 ) βˆ1 ) or the final period ( ( X 4 − X 1 ) βˆ4 ).
Using means from Table 1 and regression coefficients from Table 3, Oaxaca decompositions on
the CPS data indicate that the change in teacher characteristics explains at most 4 percent of the
increase in hours over this entire period.13 In large part, this was because teacher characteristics
were relatively stable over this period. The decline in teacher unionization generates the largest
predicted increase in hours: had all else remained the same, the decline in unionization could
account for 12 percent of the actual rise in hours. However, changes in other characteristics
offset even this part of the decline. Similar trends are present in the SASS data, where the
change in teacher characteristics explains at most 3 percent of the observed hours increase.
Overall, therefore, changes in measured teacher and school characteristics do not appear to
explain much of the increase in teachers’ total hours or after-school hours.

12

In an earlier draft of this paper, we examined interaction effects between union coverage and various reform
measures. Overall, the change in the effect of unions on hours was not correlated with the adoption of education
reforms in a state.
13
Detailed results available on request.

8
3. Education Reform Policies
The rise in teacher hours raises the question of whether education reforms enacted during this
period have resulted in greater workloads for teachers. During this period, a number of reforms
were enacted. Four types of reforms seem especially likely to affect teachers’ hours:
standardized testing with scores publicly reported by school, laws imposing sanctions on schools
with low levels of student performance, laws mandating financial rewards for schools where
students perform at high levels, and charter school laws. Prior to 2001, these laws were set by
states. The federal “No Child Left Behind” Act of 2001 imposes similar accountability reforms
on all schools, requiring public test scores reports and school choice for students in persistently
“failing” schools.
The underlying premise of these accountability reforms seems to be that reporting,
rewarding, and penalizing schools based on results will promote greater effort on the part of
teachers and schools. As Education Week put it in their 1999 review of accountability plans,
“The assumption seems to be that if performance is the problem, what's missing is the will: Find
the right combination of carrots and sticks, and effort and achievement will follow.”14
Proponents of charter school laws also argue that competition from charter schools will
increase performance in regular schools as well. If school choice plans do induce competition in
the form of increased effort, hours should be one indicator. Charter schools also allow for nonunion contracts, and the reduction in the role of unions may also affect hours. Alternatively,
choice plans may simply allow parents to satisfy different preferences along other dimensions,
and hours might not be sensitive to these policies. Hoxby (2002) claims that teachers work
longer hours in areas with greater school choice.

14

http://www.edweek.com/sreports/qc99/ac/mc/mc-intro.htm

9
As noted, most of these reform measures were introduced during the period in which teacher
hours rose. Table 5 lists the number of states in each period with standardized test scores that are
reported by school, with a law imposing sanctions on schools with low levels of student
performance, with a law mandating financial rewards for high student performance, and with a
charter school law.15 The years these measures were introduced in each state are included in the
appendix, along with the sources for each.
The trend towards accountability laws is clearly evident in Table 5, with almost universal
testing in the late 90s. (Federal law in 1994 required some form of standardized testing.) By the
late 1990s, about half of all states went beyond simply reporting scores and could potentially
sanction schools with low student performance by taking over schools, reconstituting them or
withholding funds. About a third gave financial incentives to schools with high student
performance or large improvements. Closer inspection of individual state policies reveals a high
degree of diversity in statutes (e.g., states varied in the amount of financial rewards or in the
probability that sanctions were actually imposed). Charter school laws were also introduced in
the 1990s and quickly gained popularity. By 1998, 34 states had passed such laws. However,
most states did not have large proportions of students enrolled in charter schools by the end of
the sample period. All of these laws exhibit substantial variation across states, both in the law
and the way it is implemented. For example, states vary in the probability that a state would
takeover or reconstitute a sanctioned school; they vary in the proportion of student enrolled in

15

Information on accountability legislation was compiled using Lexis-Nexis searches for years prior to 1996,
corroborated with periodic reports from the Education Commission of the States and “Legislative Updates” reported
in Education Week. Education Week’s Quality Counts report accountability laws beginning in 1997. States are
coded as having sanctions if they penalize low performing schools, and are not coded as having sanctions if they
simply designate low performers or provide extra funds. Information on charter school laws is from the Center for
Education Reform. Details of all sources and dates are in the appendix. In a few states, a reform may be in place in
one year only to be removed and then reinstated later. This is often the case when a state changes tests, for example.
States are counted as having a reform for the entire period if the change is not permanent. This does not affect the
results.

10
charter schools; and states vary in how permissive or restrictive the charter schools laws are for
new starts. We explore some of this policy variation in our results below.

4.

Conceptual Framework

a. Teacher Hours and Teacher Rewards
In order for the education reforms studied in this paper to raise teachers’ work hours, they
must somehow tighten the connection between a teacher’s work hours and an outcome that
directly affects his/her utility.16 In most work environments, the natural outcomes to consider in
this context would be the level of pay and the chances of keeping one’s job. However, even after
most recent reforms, individual merit pay for teachers remains very rare, and job security among
public school teachers remains very high.17 Thus, it seems unlikely that these will be the main
channels via which reforms have affected effort to date.18 For this reason, the framework in
which we conceptualize the likely effects of education reforms on teacher hours focuses on two
outcomes that are assumed to directly affect teachers’ utility: the “quality” of the students with
whom they interact, and the physical environment of the classroom and school in which they
work. Under student quality, we include behavioral issues –for example the absence of
disruptive students (Lazear 2001)—as well as academic ability. Under physical resources, we
16

It is of course also possible that education reforms affect teacher hours in a more mechanical fashion, by raising
the length of the school day mandated by the school or district. Since teachers can always undo such mandates by
putting in fewer hours outside of class, our conceptual framework focuses on choices made voluntarily by teachers.
That said, in almost all cases, the reform policies discussed in this section may affect mandated hours in the same
way as they would affect individually chosen hours.
17
In most “sanctions”-based policies, under-performing schools can be put on probation, which in turn places them
at risk of closure or reconstitution. While Jacob (2002) reports that “teachers and administrators in [Chicago]
probation schools reported being extremely worried about their job security”, both closure and reconstitution remain
very rare events, and in any case do necessarily imply job loss: to the extent that unionized teachers in probation
schools have effective job protection, they would need to be reassigned to other (and likely better) schools. Our
empirical work examines the effect on hours of being in a state where schools or districts have been put under state
control or have been reconstituted.
18
To test the notion that fear of dismissal does not affect teachers, in some specifications (available on request) we
enter local unemployment rates and alternative salaries into the teacher hours regressions. They are never
significant.

11
include instructional materials, funding for “extras” such as class trips, extracurricular activities,
etc.
Specifically, let x indicate the quality of students an individual teacher interacts with
(both in and out of class); x directly enters a teacher’s utility function. Let x be determined by:
x = f(p, X)

(1)

where X is the mean student quality in the teacher’s school and p is a measure of the individual
teacher’s performance (fp measures the degree to which principals reward better teachers with
more pleasant teaching assignments). Let X be given by:
X = X(P)

(2)

where P is the school’s mean performance. This function summarizes the net flow of good
(especially pleasant-to-teach) students into better-performing schools. Assuming that both p and
P can be raised by raising teachers’ time inputs, combining (1) and (2) and differentiating yields
the following connection between individual teacher hours and the outcome (x) that they care
about:

dx
dp
dP
= fp
+ fX XP
dh
dh
dh

(3)

Denoting r as total physical resources enjoyed by an individual teacher, R as school-level
resources, assuming r = g(p, R) and R = R(P) yields the parallel relation:

dr
dp
dP
= gp
+ g R RP
.
dh
dh
dh

(4)

Because these are parallel, in what follows we focus our discussion on student-quality outcomes
(3) unless a policy affects resources (4) in a distinct manner.
According to (3) and (4), how are recent education reforms likely to change teachers’
work incentives? Consider first XP and RP. One of the stated objectives of charter school
legislation is to force public schools to compete for students. Thus, charter school legislation

12
may raise XP. “Sanctions” policies should also operate most directly on XP , because parents will
wish to avoid sanctioned schools, and sanctions sometimes explicitly include an option for
parents to send children to other schools. “Rewards” policies operate directly on RP, and should
raise teacher hours through (4) via a parallel mechanism.19
Next consider dp/dh, the sensitivity of a teacher’s measured performance to his/her work
hours. Clearly, simply by providing performance information to principals that was previously
unavailable, mandatory student testing directly raises dp/dh. dP/dh is affected for the same
reason at the district level. Since dp/dh and dP/dh multiply XP and RP in (3) and (4), this has the
further implication that student testing should raise the effectiveness of reforms that act on those
other terms. For example, having better, published indicators of school performance will
strengthen the migration of good students into better schools (XP) and hence the effects of both
charter and sanctions laws. Testing also makes it easier to identify better-performing schools,
thus strengthening the effects of “rewards” policies, RP . We shall look for these predicted
interaction effects in our empirical analysis. For example, we can ask whether the remaining
three reforms only work when testing is in place, or do an all-or-none specification where we
only expect an effect when all four reforms are in place. Finally, we note that, due to the wellknown 1/N problem affecting team incentives (e.g. Holmstrom 1982), dP/dh will be greater in
small schools than large ones.
Finally consider the terms fp and fx (and of course their counterparts gp and gx). Since
these are chosen by principals, none of them are directly affected by the education reforms
studied in this paper. However, to the extent that reforms tighten the connection between schoollevel performance and school-level student quality and resources (i.e. raise either XP or RP as
discussed above), one might expect fp and fx to rise endogenously in response to such reforms. In
19

Of course, sanctions may affect resources too. We exclude from our definition of sanctions states which respond

13
other words, to help their school adapt to a more competitive environment, principals may
choose to strengthen the incentives their teachers face. This reasoning applies to all reforms.
Where would we expect the endogenous changes in fp, fx, gp, and gx described above to be
strongest? The primary mechanisms via which principals can reward good teachers with better
students are (a) by assigning different classes within the school; (b) by requesting a bad teacher
be transferred out, or (c) by offering good outside teachers “plum” teaching assignments. Since
all of these processes will have the biggest impact on teacher utility in heterogeneous schools or
districts, we expect larger effects there. Since principals may have greater latitude to assign such
rewards and punishments where unions are weak, we also expect these adjustments to be larger
where union coverage is low. Non-tenured teachers who are at risk of losing their job are also
likely to be more sensitive to reforms.
In sum, according to the above framework, we expect the effects of all four reform types
on teachers’ work hours to be largest for non-tenured teachers, in schools and districts with
heterogeneous student quality, and where teacher unions are weak. In addition, we expect
positive interaction effects between the reforms. Naturally, we also expect the effect of each
reform to increase with measures of its strength and scope (e.g the penetration of charter
schools), and when enough time has elapsed for the law to be fully implemented and to impact
teacher behavior.
Finally, we note that, at least according to the rhetoric accompanying them, the school
reforms studied in this paper seem to be targeted especially at low-performing schools.20 Thus

to underperformance only by giving additional resources without imposing other sanctions.
20
Whether this is actually the case is not clear. For example, the availability of charter schools may
disproportionately benefit abler and more motivated students. To the extent that rewards target high performance
levels rather than improvements, rewards will disproportionately benefit schools that are already good. Even
sanctions, which explicitly target the worst-performing schools, may create the weakest incentives in the worst
schools because any teacher reallocation out of, say, a reconstituted school is likely to be into a better school.

14
we might expect to find larger effects of reforms on teacher hours in low-performing schools; we
test for such differences in our empirical work below.
b. “Leakages”
By assuming a connection (dp/dh) between teacher work hours and measured teacher
performance, the above analysis has provided some useful insights into how, and where, we
might expect recent education reforms to affect teacher work hours. But how would these
insights change if measured teacher performance can be changed by actions other than raising
total work hours? For example, teachers may raise their measured performance by reallocating a
fixed number of work hours towards activities that directly affect test scores (Jacob 2002).
Schools may change the distribution of teacher hours over the year (e.g. by starting classes in
mid-August) to better prepare students for standardized tests, without changing total teacher
hours. Teachers may raise their students’ measured performance simply by cheating, rather than
working longer hours (Jacob and Levitt 2003).
Relatedly, teachers may simply raise their effort rather than hours, thus adjusting on an
intensive rather than an extensive margin. Finally, it is possible that reforms simply induce
teachers to use a given amount of work time more efficiently. If any of the above factors are
important, education reforms could fail to raise teacher hours, even in situations where –
according to the above conceptual framework—this is most likely to occur. To distinguish these
scenarios (in which students’ measured performance improves without an increase in teacher
hours) from an alternative scenario in which existing reforms are simply too weak to have had
any detectable effect on teacher behavior, we briefly examine the correlation between reforms
and test scores in this paper as well. We find that reforms do appear to be correlated with higher
student test scores, suggesting that teachers may be responding to reforms on the intensive
margin.

15

5. Effect of Reform Policies on Teacher Hours
To assess the effects of state-level programs on teacher hours, Table 6 presents estimates
of various regression models that pool data from all years of our CPS data, from 1983 to 1998.
The regressions include all the control variables in Table 3 plus an indicator for the presence, in
that state and year, of one of the four following types of education reform: charter schools,
incentives, sanctions, and testing. Because many states introduced several reforms
simultaneously, separate regressions are run for each type of reform.21 States may have
experienced these policies as a comprehensive reform package, and accordingly Row 5 attempts
to estimate an overall effect of reform. This specification uses an indicator that assigns a value
of .25 to each individual reform, then sums these values. Thus the coefficient on this indicator
compares a state with all four reforms in place to one with none.22
Accountability reforms and charter schools laws are highly persistent, and teacher hours
within a state are also serially correlated over time. As Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan
(2004) show, this means that the standard errors in the regressions are likely to be understated in
a traditional OLS regression, leading researchers to be likely to incorrectly reject the null of no
effect of a law. To account for this serial correlation, the regressions reported in Tables 6 and 7
allow for an arbitrary autocorrelation process, clustering the standard errors by state rather than
allowing for state*year random effects. Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan (2004) show that this
method will lead to more accurate inferences about the effect of the laws.

21

Regressions including all three reform measures as separate variables tend to produce results that are even more
muted for each measure.
22
We have also conducted robustness tests, including using various subsets of the reforms, interactions among the
reforms, and including a reforms separately and testing their joint significance. In all cases, we find no effects after
controlling for year or time effects.

16
The first column of Table 6 shows estimates that do not control for state or year fixed
effects; they show generally positive coefficients. Only charter school laws are significant; the
charter school coefficient in column 1 indicates that the presence of charter school legislation in
a public school teacher’s state is associated with .59 more hours of work per week. However,
this could also reflect fixed, unobserved differences between states that have little to do with a
causal effect of school reform laws. Accordingly, the specification in column 2 includes state
fixed effects. Three of the four reforms (and the aggregate reform measure) are now positively
and significantly correlated with hours. However, these coefficients could reflect –at least in
part-- the common time trend in hours and the introduction of accountability laws. When year
fixed effects are added to the specification in column 3, there are no significant effects of any
kind of reform legislation on hours: the positive estimated effect of reforms appears to be an
artifact of a time trend that is common to all states, whether they implement reforms or not.
A remaining possibility is that the introduction of school reform legislation is correlated with
unobserved state-specific shocks to teacher hours that are not constant through time. For
example, states with deteriorating student achievement or teacher effort may be more likely to
enact educational reforms earlier. This could disguise a true, positive causal effect of reforms on
hours in our data. Alternatively, socially-conservative states may be most likely to pass school
reforms and also have the smallest rate of increase of women’s work hours over time. Since
teachers are disproportionately women, this, too, could induce a spurious negative correlation
between the introduction of education reforms and the increase in teacher work hours. In the
final column (number 4) of Table 6 we address this issue by replacing the 15 year effects by a set
of state-specific, quadratic time trends (100 variables in all). Again, none of the reforms has a
significantly positive effect, the point estimates fall even further, and are in most cases quite
close to zero.

17
While our point estimates in columns 3 and 4 of Table 6 are all relatively close to zero, and
in the case of testing are even negative, it is still legitimate to ask whether our estimates can
conclusively rule out a positive effect of reforms on teacher hours of substantial magnitude.
Previous results showed that total teacher hours increased by about one hour between 1983 and
1998, little of which is explained by changes in teachers’ observed characteristics. Between
1983 and 1998, the mean of the row-5 policy variable among teachers in our data increased from
.118 to .714. Thus, in order for the policy changes that occurred to explain the one-hour increase
in teacher hours that occurred, the coefficient in row 5 would need to be 1/(.714-.118), or 1.68.
This figure is clearly outside the 99 percent confidence interval of our preferred point estimates
in columns 3 and 4. In fact, our CPS estimates allow us to reject, with 99% confidence, a rise of
30 or more minutes per week due to all of the measured education reforms enacted between 1983
and 1998.
However, as noted above, the reforms may have larger impacts on specific groups of
teachers. The laws also exhibit substantial heterogeneity across states. The effects may also be
largest either after the law has been in place for a while (particularly for a policy like charter
schools), or alternatively it may only raise hours initially as teachers adapt to the new provisions.
The CPS data do not show any stronger effects on particular subgroups of teachers. A sampling
of these regressions are included in the Appendix Table A2, which reports the effects of the
reforms on younger teachers (less than 30 years old), non-white teachers, and non-unionized
teachers. When state and year fixed effects are included, the policies still show no significant
effect on hours.
Table 7 does show that the type of policy and timing may matter, particularly for charter
schools. We measure policy strength in several ways. The Center for Education Reform (CER)
reports the strength of state charter school laws based on a number of criteria and the number of

18
students enrolled in charter schools in each year.23 To measure the strength of sanction laws, we
create a more restrictive variable that indicated whether or not the state has taken over any
districts or has reconstituted any schools as of that year. We also examine the effect of the
number of years a law has been in place, and the effect of a law that has been in place for three
years or less. Table 7 shows that the percent of students enrolled in charters and the number of
years a charter law has been in place are associated with longer hours. In one specification, the
number of years incentive laws have been in place also raises hours. As noted, we have also
examined effects of interactions of the laws or subsets of the laws, but again find no effects.
(Results available on request.)
Table 8 reports results parallel to Table 6 using the SASS data set. Since only 4 years of
SASS data are available, column (4) uses only a linear time trend. Overall, the results are
similar, and if anything are less supportive of a positive effect of education reforms on teacher
hours. Again, several of the reforms have significantly positive effects when only state fixed
effects are included. However, these effects are almost entirely due to a common time trend in
hours and charter school legislation. In fact, five of the eight coefficients in the preferred
specifications of columns (3) and (4) are negative. The only law to appear to have any effect is
charter school laws, and this only when linear time trends are not included. Using row 5 to pose
the same question as in the previous table, we note that after-school hours rose by 2.5 over our
sample period. For the policy changes to explain all of this increase, a coefficient of 2.5/(.659.282), or 6.63 would be required. We can easily rule this out at a 99% confidence level in both
specifications. More importantly, our SASS estimates allow us to reject, with 99% confidence,
any scenario in which the measured education policy changes explained more than 12 minutes (8
percent) of the 2.5 hour increase in after-school teacher hours that took place over this period.
23

The include, for example, the number of schools permitted to open each year, the difficulty to charter a school,

19
We again explore the effect of these laws on subsets of teachers. We examine teachers in
schools with more than 50 percent of students who are racial or ethnic minorities, teachers in
urban schools, teachers with less than three years experience, and non-unionized teachers.
Appendix Table A3 shows that the only policy to have an effect is a strong sanction law. In
states where the state has taken over or reconstituted schools, inexperienced (and therefore
untenured) and non-unionized teachers raise their work hours. Other teachers with less threat of
job loss do not respond to any of the reforms.
Table 9 again explores the strength of the law and the effect of timing on SASS teachers.
The SASS also asks if there is a merit plan in individual districts, enabling us to test a “strong”
incentive law in addition to the strong charter and sanction laws. Here we find that charter law
strength is modestly associated with increased hours and merit pay plans are also associated with
increased hours when we use year fixed effects. Neither effect is significant after controlling for
linear time trends, but we note that both policies are relatively new and have a shorter period for
testing.
Finally, in Tables 6 through 9 it is worth noting that the coefficients of the other, “control”
variables –not reported but available on request-- behave much as in the pure cross-section
regressions of Tables 3 and 4. The pupil-teacher ratio is significantly positively related to
teacher hours in both estimates, with estimates clustering around .2 in the CPS and .03 in the
SASS. The effects of teachers’ and schools’ characteristics are similar to those reported in the
cross-sections.
A number of additional checks to ensure the robustness of the findings were conducted.
These include testing subsets of the reforms (excluding testing, coding states that have all three
of the other reforms, interacting incentives and sanctions with the testing law indicator, including

whether or not charters can hire non-unionized personnel, amount of base funding charter schools receive, etc.

20
all four reforms simultaneously, or including interactions between incentives and sanctions). We
also explored other subsets of teachers (female teachers only, male teachers only, teachers closer
to retirement age (>55), teachers in the bottom quintile of the hours distribution), and in no case
found noteworthy effects that differ from those presented. We also created a policy variable that
was the percentage of surrounding states with the reform. None of these additional
specifications yielded results substantially different from those reported. All of these results are
available on request.
As noted, most individuals appear twice in our CPS Monthly Outgoing Rotation Group
sample, with interviews that are one year apart. However, because the CPS does not identify
individuals, the standard errors cannot be corrected precisely to account for multiple
observations of each person. To place bounds on the possible importance of this issue, we took
the extreme approach of dropping all individuals who were being interviewed for the first time,
effectively halving the sample but ensuring that no person appeared more than once in our data.
Most of the coefficients were not changed dramatically, and standard errors were still low
enough to rule out effects of the legislation on hours similar to those ruled out in our discussion
of both Tables 6 and 7.

6. What Does Explain the Increase in Teacher Work Hours?
It is clear from our data that full-time public school teachers experienced a steady increase in
their work hours during the last two decades of the twentieth century. We have also argued, so
far, that neither changes in the observed characteristics of teachers, nor the education reform
policies enacted during this period, can account for this increase. Why then are teachers now
putting in more hours?

21
While it is not the goal of this paper to provide a final answer to this question, we provide
two pieces of evidence in this section that may shed some light on this issue. First, to put the
time trend in teachers’ work hours into context, Figure 2 plots mean teacher hours from our CPS
data against those of three alternative comparison groups: the average hours of workers who are
not teachers; the average hours of female nonteachers; and the average hours of nonteachers with
similar observed characteristics to teachers. In all these cases we restrict attention –as we did
among teachers-- to full-time workers (35 or more hours per week). Details of how the latter
series was constructed are provided in Appendix 2; essentially we construct a “basket” of
nonteachers with a similar age, sex, education, union, etc. mix to teachers, allowing that mix to
change over the years to mirror changes in the mix of the teacher population.
It is clear from Figure 2 that the increase in teacher hours during our sample period was
similar to that experienced by most other workers. In fact, relative to nonteachers, teachers’
hours increased more slowly, and certainly more slowly than the hours of nonteaching women.
However, in a comparison not included in Figure 2, other public sector workers appeared to have
even slower rates of increase. In sum, the recent increase in teacher work hours is not at all
exceptional when seen in the context of changes in work hours among comparable groups in the
labor market.24 The increase in teacher work hours over this period may therefore be driven by
the same unmeasured factors that led to a general, secular increase in hours. Factors such as the
increased ease of substituting market inputs for nonmarket inputs to home production come to
mind. Alternatively, increases in nonteacher hours may have been driven by changes in privatesector work incentives that were stronger or more effective than those associated with education
reform (see Kuhn and Lozano 2005 for recent evidence on this point). In this view, salaried
24

The discussion of hours changes relative to different groups of nonteachers raises the possibility of using them
more formally as a control group in a double- or triple-difference estimation strategy. We considered, then rejected
this approach on the grounds that teachers in other states (but with different reform provisions) seemed a more
natural control than private-sector workers, or even police or firemen, in one’s own state.

22
workers’ hours do respond to greater performance incentives; it is simply the case that, even with
reform, the education sector has lagged behind the private sector in the growth of performancerelated pay.
Because teachers are disproportionately women, it is also possible that the increase in teacher
hours is driven by secular changes in labor force commitment common to women specifically.
To explore this hypothesis more closely, we conducted a series of regressions of the long-term
change in teacher hours on long-term changes in the hours of various comparison groups across
the 50 states over this period. These are reported in Table 10, separately for male teachers
(columns 1-3) and female teachers (columns 4-6). To understand this table, note that column 1
regresses the change in the hours of male teachers on those of male nonteachers. The coefficient
is -.67, indicating a negative but statistically insignificant correlation. Hours changes of female
teachers are also negatively and insignficantly correlated with hours changes of male nonteachers
(column 4). In contrast, looking across states the secular change in the hours of both male and
female teachers is positively correlated with changes in female nonteachers’ hours (columns 2
and 5). The fact that this correlation also applies to male teachers rules out the simple hypothesis
that the increase in teacher hours is driven by changes in the labor force commitment of all
women.25
An example of a hypothesis that would be more consistent with the results in Table 10 would
be a “parental pressure” story. In such a hypothesis, mothers working longer hours would insist
on harder-working teachers, regardless of the teacher’s gender. For instance, the increase in
mother’s work hours may decrease the number of hours they spend in the home production of

25

Note that hours increased among both male and female teachers over our sample period. Disaggregating row 1 of
Table 1 by gender shows an increase in total hours of 0.55 hours for men, versus 1.13 hours for women.
Disaggregating row 1 of Table 2 yields essentially identical increases in after-school instructional hours of 2.3 for
both male and female teachers.

23
education, which in turn raises their demand for “school production” as a substitute.26 To
explore this hypothesis a little further, columns 3 and 6 restricts the comparison group of female
nonteachers to women between the ages of 35 and 50, when they are most likely to have school
aged children.27 The correlation between the hours of this group and those of both male and
female teachers is now positive and statistically significant.

6. Teacher Hours, State Reforms, and Student Test Scores
Our results indicate very muted effects of education reform on teacher work hours.
We have noted, however, that teachers may still be responding to laws in dimensions other than
hours of effort. Teachers may be teaching “smarter” instead of “harder,” adjusting behavior on
the intensive margin. Accountability laws accompanied by detailed state content standards may
also reduce lesson preparation time if the standards are highly prescriptive. Critics of
accountability reforms also argue that the link between student performance and teacher effort
may itself be weak. Some argue that teachers may simply “teach to the test” and omit more
challenging material. Additionally, accountability laws may only affect teachers on the critical
margins. Teachers whose school’s performance levels are close to the critical values that trigger
sanctions or incentives may alter their behavior, but teachers farther from the margins may have
no real incentive to change. Teachers may also reallocate their attention to focus on students
near critical thresholds, but not increase their effort overall. Jacob (2002) and Figlio and Getzler
(2002) provide evidence that suggests these types of responses. Thus, it may be that the very
structure of the reforms implemented to date makes a positive effect on total teacher effort
unlikely, without necessarily ruling out an effect on students’ test scores.

26

Flyer and Rosen (1997) present a similar argument in explaining the rise in the number of teachers per student.
In the 1990 Census, about 63 percent of women in this age group who work at least 35 hours per week have
children over the age of 5 living with them.

27

24
To explore this issue, we present some evidence on the relationship between our statelevel education reform measures and student performance based on the NAEP state assessments
of 4th grade math scores.28 While this is probably not the ideal data or design for a study of the
effects of education reform on student performance, it can shed additional light on potential
explanations for our findings. The results are shown in Table 11.
Table 11 shows the effect of a number of the policy measures on student 4th grade math
scores. We find that a number of the laws are important. Charter school laws are associated
with higher scores, and strong charter laws are particularly important. Incentives also appear to
increase measured student performance. Sanctions by themselves do not, but states that have
taken over districts and/or schools have higher performance. Of course, it is not clear from this
exercise if teachers have increased student performance in these policy states through some
mechanism other than hours or effort, or if other factors are important. For example, greater
reporting of succeeding or failing schools may also increase parental effort and involvement.
However, the results are also consistent with increased performance without requiring additional
teacher time.

7. Conclusion
The average weekly work hours of teachers have risen steadily since 1983, with an overall
increase of about an hour per week. The hours teachers spend after school without students
increased even more, rising about two and a half hours per week—a 34 percent increase.
Considering these trends in the light of the recent explosion of education reforms across U.S.
states, it is tempting to conjecture that greater “incentivization” in teachers’ employment

28

Means of the NAEP data are included in Appendix Table A4.

25
contracts induced by these reforms has, at least in part, induced America’s teachers to put in a
few extra hours, especially grading papers or preparing better lessons after school.
According to the results in this paper, succumbing to the above temptation would lead a
researcher astray. Once we adjust for a common time trend in teacher hours across all states, we
can detect no association between the adoption of any of four distinct types of reforms –charter
schools, incentives, sanctions, and testing—and changes in teacher work hours. Further, our
CPS estimates allow us to reject with 99 percent confidence a total effect of all the reforms
adopted between 1983 and 1998 on the teacher work week in excess of (plus) 30 minutes. In the
SASS data, we can say with 99 percent confidence that reforms account for less than 12 minutes
of the 2.5-hour increase in teachers’ mean after-school instructional hours.
We conjecture that the lack of an effect of education reforms on teacher hours may be due to
the weak connection between individual teacher effort and rewards that characterize most of the
reforms that have been implemented: when examined closely one would not necessarily expect
these reforms to have much of an effect on individual teachers. While reforms with more highpowered incentives might of course be more successful in increasing teacher effort, it is of
course also worth noting that high-powered incentives may have other disadvantages that would
need to be considered when adopting such policies.29
Finally, it is of course possible that U.S. education reforms have caused changes in teacher
behavior that are beneficial to students, or at least raise school performance indicators, without
affecting teachers’ work hours. Teachers could have intensified their work effort per hour
without increasing the number of hours worked, or –again without increasing total hours-- could
have changed the mix of activities during their day towards activities that are rewarded. Indeed,
we find some preliminary evidence that student test scores does appear to have increased in

29

See Jacob (2002), Figlio and Getxer (2002) Jacob and Levitt (2003) for examples.

26
states that adopted reforms despite the lack of an effect of reforms on hours. Understanding
exactly what this means for the quality of education experienced by students requires further
research on the precise ways in which teachers, students, and parents allocate their time, and on
how this is affected by school reform policies.

27
References

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo and Sendhil Mullainathan. (2004) “How Much Should We
Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1):249276.
Bond, Linda (1993) Surveying the Landscape of State Educational Assessment Programs.
Washington D.C.: Council for Educational Development and Research.
Center for Education Reform. (1998-2000). National Charter School Directory. Washington
D.C.: Center for Education Reform.
Council of Chief State School Officers (1994-2001) Annual Survey of State Student Assessment
Programs. Washington, D.C.: Council of Chief State School Officers.
Figlio, D. and M. Lucas. (2004) “What's in a Grade? School Report Cards and House Prices”.
American Economic Review 94(3): 591-604.
Figlio, David and Lawrence Getzer. (2002) “Accountability, Ability, and Disability: Gaming the
System.” NBER Working Paper No 9307.
Flyer, Frederick and Sherwin Rosen. (1997) “The New Economics of Teachers and Education.”
Journal of Labor Economics 15: S104-S139.
Glewwe, Paul Nauman Ilias, and Michel Kremer. (2003) “Teachers’ Incentives.” NBER
Working Paper w9671.
Grissmer, D., Flanagan, A., Kawata, J., and Williamson, S. (2000) Improving student
achievement: What state NAEP test scores tell us. Santa Monica, CA: RAND.
Hanushek, Eric, Steven Rivkin and John Kain (1998) “Teachers, Schools and Academic
Achievement.” Mimeo.
Hanushek, Rivkin and Kain (2001) “Does Public School Competition Affect Teacher Quality?”
in The Economics of School Choice, ed. Caroline Hoxby, University of Chicago Press,
forthcoming.
Holmstrom, Bengt. “Moral Hazard in Teams” Bell Journal of Economics 13 (Autumn 1982):
324–40.
Hoxby, Caroline. (1996) “How Teachers Unions Affect Education Production” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 111(3), 671-718.
Hoxby, Caroline. (2002) “Would School Choice Change the Teaching Profession?” Journal of
Human Resources 37(4), 846-891.

28
Jacob, Brian. (2002) "Accountability, Incentives and Behavior: The Impact of High-Stakes
Testing in the Chicago Public Schools." NBER Working Paper #8968.
Jacob, Brian and Levitt, Steven (2003) “Rotten Apples: An Investigation of the Prevalence and
Predictors of Teacher Cheating." Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(3): 843-77.
Kane, Thomas and Staiger, Douglas. (2002) “The Promise and Pitfalls of Using Imprecise
School Accountability Measures.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16(4), 91-114.
Kelley, Carolyn, Herbert Heneman III, and Anthony Milanowski. School Based Performance
Award Programs, Teacher Motivation, and School Performance: Findings from a Study of
Three Programs. CPRE Research Report Series RR-44. April 2000.
Kino, Mary, The State of Assessment Program: What are State Wide Assessment Programs
Doing? Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the National Council on Measurement in
Education (Boston, MA, April 17-19, 1990).
Kuhn, Peter and Fernando Lozano. “The Expanding Workweek? Understanding Trends in Long
Work Hours Among U.S. Men, 1979-2004”. NBER working paper no. 11895, December
2005.
Ladd, Helen. (1999) “The Dallas School Accountability and Incentive Program: An Evaluation
of its Impacts on Student Outcomes”, Economics of Education Review, 18(1) 1-16.
Lavy, Victor. (2002) “Evaluating the Effect of Teachers’ Group Performance Incentives on Pupil
Achievement”. Journal of Political Economy 110(6) (December): 1286-1317.
Lazear, Edward P. “Educational Production” Quarterly Journal of Economics. August 2001;
116(3): 777-803
Moulton, Brent. (1986) “Random Group effects and the Precision of Regression Estimates.”
Journal of Econometrics, 32(3): 385-97.
Murnane, R.J. and Levy, F. (2001) “Will standards based reforms improve the education of
students of color?” National Tax Journal, 54(2), 401-16.
US Department of Education (2001) Digest of Education Statistics. Washington, DC: National
Center for Education Statistics.
Todd Ziebarth (1999, 2001) Rewards and Sanctions for Schools and School Districts.
Washington, D.C.: Education Commission of the States.
Todd Ziebarth (2004) State Takeovers and Reconstitutions. Washington, D.C.: Education
Commission of the States.

29
Appendix 1: Education Reform Policies
Table 1A : Year Reform Measure Enacted
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia

Testing
1983
1989
1983
1991
1983
1996
1983
1983
1983
1983
1983
1984
1986
1986
1983
1996
1987
1985
1983
1996
1983
1996
1983
1995
1992
1983
1993
1983
1983
1983
1983
1990
1989
1986
1984
1991
1987
1983
1985
1983
1990
1990
1988
1983
1983

Incentives

Sanctions
1995

1983

1996

1997

1997
1985

1996
1985

1995
1987

Charter School
1995
1994
1995
1992
1993
1996
1995
1996
1993
1994
1998
1996
2001
1994

1990

1996

1984
1996
1990
1993
1993

1996

1997
1996
1996
1997

1988
1996
1996
1995
1989
1990
1996

1997
1984

1997
1984

1994

1992
1989

1997

1997
1997
1997

1995

1993
1993
1991
1997
1998

1997
1995
1996
1993
1998
1996
1997
1999
1999
1997
1995
1996

1995
1998
1998

30
Wisconsin
Wyoming

1989
1998

1993
1995

Indicates policy as of 1999. A date of 1983 indicates the policy was in place as of 1983.
Sources for date reform policy was enacted:
Charter school laws:
•

Center for Education Reform (www.edreform.com/charterschools/ ) lists year charter schools were
permitted for each state. CER’s National Charter School Directory reports and index for the strength of
the charter school law and the number of students enrolled in charter schools.

Incentives and Sanctions:
•
•
•
•

Todd Ziebarth, Rewards and Sanctions for Schools and School Districts, Education Commission of the
States, (1999 and 2001) and Education Commission of the States, Education Accountability Systems in 50
States, (1997) list statutes, public bills, and legislative acts for accountability laws.
Todd Ziebarth, State Takeovers and Reconstitutions, Education Commission of the States, (2004) lists
instances and dates when states or districts have taken over or reconstituted schools and/or districts.
The original date was for the law was taken from the legal history given in a Lexis-Nexis search for the
current code or act.
Laws that preceded currently enacted legislation were taken from the history of the law or when
unavailable from searches of monthly “Legislative Updates” in Education Week or from Education Week
Quality Counts (1997) descriptions of state accountability laws.

Testing:
•
•

Education Week , Quality Counts (1997-2001) lists states with criterion or norm referenced tests;
Council of Chief State School Officers, Annual Survey of State Student Assessment Programs, (19942001). This also reports if results are used to takeover or dissolve schools.

Historical information from
•

•

Kino, Mary, The State of Assessment Program: What are State Wide Assessment Programs Doing? Paper
presented at the Annual Meeting of the National Council on Measurement in Education (Boston, MA, April
17-19, 1990).
Bond, Linda, Surveying the Landscape of State Educational Assessment Programs, Council for Educational
Development and research, Washington D.C., 1993.

31
Appendix Table A2: Estimates of the Effect of Selected Education Reforms
for Specific Teacher Subgroups: CPS data

Age<30

Specification
Nonwhite

Non-unionized

-.107
(.558)

.119
(.837)

.913
(.723)

Incentives

.427
(.532)

-.244
(.625)

.129
(.657)

Sanctions

.246
(.366)

.204
(.430)

-.565
(.566)

Testing

.168
(.357)

-1.362
(.458)

.084
(.457)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Reform:
Charter

Number of
reforms/4
State and year
Fixed Effects

32
Appendix Table A3: Estimates of the Effect of Selected Education Reforms
for Specific Teacher Subgroups: SASS data

Specification
Urban
<3 yrs
Teaching
Experience

Non-unionized

Teaching in
a school
with >50%
minority
students
.1935
(.3467)

-.1309
(.3196)

.25002
(.4702)

-.2167
(.4006)

Incentives

-.5228
(.3370)

-.8793
(.5525)

-.7918*
(.4276)

-.2850
(.3979)

Sanctions

.1422
(.2824)

-.0799
(.3941)

.5548
(.3816)

.4264
(.3248)

Takeover

.2690
(.2779)

.1974
(.5146)

.9819**
(.3864)

1.0481**
(.4418)

Number of
reforms/4

-.7078
(.5189)

-1.4237
(.8797)

-.0693
(.7460)

-.1579
(.7469)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Reform:

Charter

State and year
Fixed Effects

Standard Errors in Parentheses. Clustered on state cells.
** significant at p=.05
* significant at p =.10
Each cell represents the results of a separate regression using the one policy measure indicated.
All regressions also include controls for total years of experience, indicators for secondary school teacher, 0-3 years
of experience, female, nonwhite, advanced degree, school in city, town/rural, percent students minority and
receiving free lunch, school pupil teacher ratio, state unionization level from CPS, and school enrollment.

33
Appendix A4 Average Individual Characteristics, Math NAEP
1992
2000
221.609
225.4056
Math score
(30.776)
(29.768)
.494
.494
Female
(.500)
(.499)
.647
.611
White
(.478)
(.487)
.080
.104
IEP
(.271)
(.306)
.030
.045
LEP
(.169)
(.208)
.048
Parents ed less than HS*
(.215)
.143
Parents ed HS*
(.350)
.084
Parents ed some college*
(.278)
.126
.126
Female teacher
(.331)
(.331)
.915
1.0
White teacher
(.279)
(0)
.086
.104
Teacher experience, 0-2 yrs
(.281)
(.305)
.123
.134
Teacher experience, 3-5 yrs
(.328)
(.341)
.381
.186
Teacher high certificate
(.486)
(.389)
.422
.433
Teacher MA plus
(.494)
(.495)
.245
.323
(.467)
City
(.430)
.236
.305
Urban fringe
(.424)
(.460)
.182
.178
Town
(.386)
(.382)
22.989
21.867
Num students in class
(5.612)
(5.583)
35.996
Teacher total hours*
(9.064)
7.680
Teacher preparation hours*
(5.878)
*Only available in 1992 wave.

34
Appendix 2: Derivation of Nonteacher Hours Series
This appendix describes the creation of the fourth comparison series to teacher hours
presented in Figure 2. This series estimates mean hours worked for a group of nonteachers with
observed characteristics to teachers in each year. We began by estimating the following
regression for all full-time employed persons (working 35 or more hours per week) who are not
teachers in the entire pooled 1983-1998 CPS data:
H iN = a N + bX iN + c N S iYi

(A1)

where H iN is the work hours of an individual nonteacher I; X includes indicators for ages 22-25
and 51-65, female, nonwhite, an advanced degree, and month of interview; and S iYi is a full set
of interactions between 49 state fixed effects and 15 year effects (799 year x state effects in all).
Then we used the estimated coefficients from this regression to calculate:
H iNT = a N + bX iT + c N S iYi

(A2)

H iNT is the predicted mean hours of nonteachers with the characteristics of teachers in teacher i’s
state and year. It is calculated using the nonteacher regression coefficients, the state x year
effects, monthly indicators, and teachers’ mean characterisitcs X iT , which gives the mean values
of the age, gender, nonwhite and education dummies for teachers in that year (but not that state).
To be clear, X iT takes 16 distinct values, one for each of the 16 years (1983-98) of data.

Note that the specification in (A1) and (A2) restricts the state-by-year effects to be the
independent of the level of observed characteristics, X. To relax this assumption we constructed
several alternative measures (some regression-based, some nonparametric) that allow hours
trends to be different for nonteachers with X’s more similar to teachers (e.g. a college-educated,
predominantly female population) than for other nonteachers. The results were very similar.

35
Table 1: Average Weighted Teacher Characteristics, CPS Sample
1983-86

1987-90

1991-94

1995-98

Weekly Work hours

42.88
(.065)

43.47
(.072)

43.83
(.078)

43.80
(.084)

Age 22-25

.053
(.002)

.051
(.002)

.054
(.002)

.051
(.003)

Age 51-65

.158
(.004)

.161
(.004)

.171
(.004)

.210
(.005)

Female

.664
(.005)

.684
(.005)

.709
(.005)

.719
(.005)

Nonwhite

.104
(.003)

.102
(.003)

.094
(.003

.107
(.004)

Teacher has Advanced
Degree*

.546
(.005)

.57
(.005)

.503
(.005)

.463
(.006)

Teaches in a
Secondary School

.484
(.005)

.459
(.005)

.43
(.005)

.413
(.005)

Covered by Union
Agreement

.790
(.004)

.775
(.005)

.759
(.005)

.751
(.005)

N

11,822

11,101

10,877

9,027

Standard Deviations in Parentheses. All means calculated using CPS individual weights.
* Prior to 1991, schooling is reported as number of years, so individuals with more than 4 years of college are
designated as having more than a BA. After 1991, the CPS records an individual’s highest degree, and this category
includes those with MA’s or higher.
Weekly Work hours refers to usual hours of work in main job; main job is the job with highest usual hours.

36
Table 2: Average Weighted Teacher Characteristics: SASS Sample
1987

1990

1993

1999

After school hours
without students

7.18
(.142)

8.28
(.188)

9.04
(.223)

9.63
(.262)

Total experience
(years)

15.24
(.332)

15.69
(.392)

15.80
(.395)

14.93
(.330)

New Teacher
(1-3 yrs experience)

.090
(.006)

.102
(.008)

.115
(.008)

.161
(.005)

Female

.675
(.013)

.685
(.014)

.696
(.012)

.748
(.011)

Nonwhite

.130
(.013)

.126
(.013)

.130
(.014)

.146
(.019)

Teacher has
Advanced degree

.470
(.024)

.448
(.027)

.465
(.028)

.446
(.028)

Teaches in a Secondary
School

.517
(.005)

.494
(.007)

.551
(.009)

.483
(.012)

Union Coverage*

.717
(.037)

.704
(.043)

.700
(.043)

.680
(.043)

City

.265
(.023)

.254
(.020)

.258
(.025)

.241
(.021)

Town/rural

.455
(.031)

.471
(.030)

.459
(.030)

.256
(.030)

Pupil-teacher ratio (schoolwide)

16.18
(.562)

16.05
(.602)

16.54
(.636)

15.45
(.543)

Share of students receiving free lunch
(schoolwide)

.276
(.012)

.307
(.015)

.322
(.014)

.360
(.018)

Share of minority students
(schoolwide)

.271
(.027)

.278
(.030)

.293
(.032)

.326
(.037)

K-12 Enrollment
(total for school)

790
(35.36)

771
(33.81)

798
(30.73)

810
(37.81)

N

25,506

30,116

28,436

19,415

Standard Errors in Parentheses. All means calculated using SASS-supplied teacher weights.
*The mean coverage rate of teachers in the individual’s state, taken from the CPS.

37

Table 3: Teacher Hours and Personal Characteristics: Cross-Section Regression
Coefficients, CPS Sample.
1983-86

1987-90

1991-94

1995-98

Age 22-25

.2602
(.2459)

.7634**
(.3648)

.0978
(.3978)

.6508
(.4288)

Age 50-65

.3422*
(.1678)

.5168**
(.1922)

.8877**
(.2373)

.6405**
(.2378)

Female

-.8760**
(.1841)

-.9388**
(.2732)

-.2268
(.2181)

-.2786
(.2169)

Nonwhite

-1.4162**
(.3357)

-2.2351**
(.2296)

-2.2489**
(.4927)

-2.6416**
(.4227)

Teacher has
Advanced degree

.1928
(.1814)

.0857
(.2837)

-.3678
(.2507)

-.1768
(.2886)

Teaches in a
Secondary School

.6188**
(.1504)

.4384**
(.1458)

.7521**
(.2312)

.3807
(.2422)

Share covered by
union agreement
(statewide)

-2.8995**
(1.1799)

-3.5384**
(1.1797)

-2.2878
(1.3052)

-1.2269
(1.1958)

.02

.02

.03

.02

11,822

11,101

10,877

9,027

R2
Number of
observations

Dependent Variable: Total Usual Weekly Hours at Main Job.
Robust Standard Errors in Parentheses.
All regressions include a full set of interview month and year dummies. Data from the June, July and August CPS
interviews were not used.

38
Table 4: Teacher Hours and Personal Characteristics: Cross-Section Regression
Coefficients, SASS Sample.
1987

1990

1993

1999

-.0021
(.0038)

.0179**
(.0066)

.0027
(.0081)

.0264**
(.0081)

New Teacher

1.2259**
(.2588)

1.2894**
(.2729)

1.6900**
(.2328)

1.3851**
(.2741)

Female

1.8008**
(.1031)

1.7619**
(.1234)

1.8830**
(.1029)

1.6633**
(.1232)

Nonwhite

-.5049**
(.2095)

-1.1220**
(.2078)

-1.0880**
(.2305)

-1.0476**
(.2480)

Teacher has
Advanced Degree

.1580
(.1174)

.0228
(.1589)

.2435
(.1487)

.1349
(.1984)

Teaches in a
Secondary School

-.2032
(.1473)

-.9105**
(.1763)

-1.0782**
(.1952)

-.9737**
(.2020)

% Covered by Union
(statewide)

-.0621
(.5041)

1.4697**
(.6052)

1.7876**
(.6832)

3.6171**
(.8566)

City

.1844
(.2036)

-.2003
(.1421)

-.3243
(.1989)

.2907
(.1976)

Town or rural

-.1628
(.1511)

-.4527**
(.1646)

-.5059**
(.1773)

-.7061**
(.1666)

Pupil-Teacher Ratio

.0945**
(.0284)

.0918**
(.0223)

.0961**
(.0388)

.0044
(.0281)

-1.8295**
(.2412)

-1.9537**
.3997

-1.8358**
(.4741)

-2.2290**
(.5906)

Share Minority
(schoolwide)

-.3633
(.2814)

.8429**
(.4031)

.6380
(.4655)

.6404
(.4667)

Enrollment/100

-.0195
(.0101)

-.0125
.0156

.0092
(.0164)

.0264
(.0162)

R2

.04

.05

.05

.06

N

25,506

30,116

28,436

19,415

Experience

Share of Students with
Free lunch (schoolwide)

Robust Standard Errors in Parentheses

39
Table 5: Number of States with Reform Policy

1983-86

1987-90

1991-94

1995-98

Test all students in at least one grade,
report results by school

28

37

42

48

Impose sanctions on schools with low
performance

4

9

12

27

Give monetary rewards to schools with
high performance

2

4

5

13

Charter schools permitted

0

0

11

34

40
Table 6: Estimates of the Effect of Selected Education Reforms on Total Teacher Hours:
CPS data.
Standard Errors in Parentheses. Clustered on state cells.

Specification
Pooled Cross
Sections

Adding State
Fixed Effects

Adding State
and Year Fixed
Effects

Adding State Effects,
plus State-specific
Quadratic Time
trends

Charter

.5946**
(.1915)

.5327**
(.1935)

.2406
(.2019)

.0947
(.2372)

Incentives

.5445
(.3850)

.3626*
(.2026)

.0864
(.1882)

.1858
(.1928)

Sanctions

.4528
(.4319)

.4354**
(.1814)

.0593
(.1913)

.2342
(.2002)

Testing

-.3558
(.3827)

.2090
(.2107)

-.1104
(.1645)

-.2174
(.1581)

Number of
reforms/4

.5978
(.4765)

.9345**
(.2164)

.1877
(.3168)

.1787
(.4872)

Reform:

Sample size for all regressions: 42,827
** significant at p=.05
* significant at p =.10
Each cell represents the results of a separate regression using the one policy measure indicated.
All regressions also include dummies for teachers aged 22-25 and 50-65, indicators for female, nonwhite, secondary
school teacher, advanced degree, state pupil teacher ratio, and month of interview.

41
Table 7: Effect of Strength and Timing of Laws on Total Teacher Hours: CPS data.

Reform:
Charter law strength
Percent students in charter
Within 3 years of charter law
passage
Number of years charter law
in effect

Specification
Includes State Effects, plus
State-specific Quadratic
Includes State and Year
Time trends
Fixed Effects
.006
.002
(.005)
(.007)
16.750*
20.625 *
(8.813)
(12.43)
.037
-.082
(.192)
(.239)
.108**
-.019
(.048)
(.100)
-.166
(.194)

-.035
(.196)

Within 3 years of sanction law
passage

-.296**
(.151)

-.252
(.161)

Number of years sanction law
in effect

.035*
(.020)

.178
(.171)

Within 3 years of incentive
law passage

.035
(.178)

-.085
(.220)

Number of years incentive
law in effect

.001
(.020)

.235**
(.074)

State has taken over
districts/schools

Standard Errors in Parentheses. Clustered on state cells.
Sample size for all regressions: 42,827
** significant at p=.05
* significant at p =.10
Each cell represents the results of a separate regression using the one policy measure indicated.
All regressions also include dummies for teachers aged 22-25 and 50-65, indicators for female, nonwhite, secondary
school teacher, advanced degree, state pupil teacher ratio, and month of interview.

42
Table 8: Estimates of the Effect of Selected Education Reforms on After-School Teacher
Hours: SASS data.
Specification
Adding
Adding
State and
State Fixed
Year Fixed
Effects
Effects

Adding State
Effects, plus
State-specific
Linear Time
trends

Reform:

Pooled
Cross
Sections

Charter

1.4979**
(.2429)

1.4205**
(.2322)

.3854*
(.2105)

-.4242
(.3663)

Incentives

.2287
(.2004)

.8223**
(.3311)

-.4132
(.3444)

-.1.334**
(.3880)

Sanctions

.6824**
(.2418)

1.4939**
(.2354)

.1916
(.2152)

.3064
(.2586)

Testing

.2914
(.2985)

.8082*
(.4530)

-.3219*
(.1870)

-.1348
(.4632)

1.7836**
(.3892)

2.5350**
(.4920)

-.0757
(.5106)

-.8664
(.5501)

Number of
reforms/4

Sample size for all regressions: 103,473
Standard Errors in Parentheses. Clustered on state cells.
Each cell represents the results of a separate regression using the one policy measure indicated.
All regressions also include controls for total years of experience, indicators for secondary school teacher, 0-3 years
of experience, female, nonwhite, advanced degree, school in city, town/rural, percent students minority and
receiving free lunch, school pupil teacher ratio, state unionization level from CPS, and school enrollment.

43
Table 9: Effect of Strength and Timing of Laws on Total Teacher Hours: SASS data.
Sample size for all regressions: 103,473

Reform:
Charter law strength

Specification
Adding State Effects, plus
Adding State and Year State-specific Linear Time
trends
Fixed Effects
.012*
-.009
(.006)
(.011)

Percent students in charter in state

10.323
(11.976)

7.167
(24.965)

Within 3 years of charter law passage

.345*
(.209)

.361
(.297)

Number of years charter law in effect

.014
(.052)
.340
(.295)

-.353**
(.047)
.072
(.498)

Within 3 years of sanction law passage

.231
(.205)

-.054
(.204)

Number of years sanction law in effect

-.060
(.034)
.220*
(.117)

-.321**
(.056)
.072
(.089)

Within 3 years of incentive law passage

.198
(.178)

-.454
(.326)

Number of years incentive law in effect

-.074
(.048)

-.455**
(.042)

State has taken over districts/schools

District has merit pay plan

Standard Errors in Parentheses. Clustered on state cells.
** significant at p=.05
* significant at p =.10
Each cell represents the results of a separate regression using the one policy measure indicated.
All regressions also include dummies for teachers aged 22-25 and 50-65, indicators for female, nonwhite, secondary
school teacher, advanced degree, state pupil teacher ratio, and month of interview.

44
Table 10: Long-Change Regressions Across 50 States: Estimated Effect of Changes in the
Mean Hours of Selected Comparison Groups on the Mean Hours of Full-Time Teachers.
Independent
Variable:
1983-1998 StateLevel Change in
Mean Hours of:

Male Nonteachers

Dependent Variable:

1983-1998 State-Level Change
in Mean Hours of Male
Teachers
(1)
(2)
(3)

1983-1998 State-Level Change
in Mean Hours of Female
Teachers
(4)
(5)
(6)

-.6728
(.4228)

-.1347
(.2675)

.5847
(.1523)

.6596
(.2650)

Female Nonteachers,
Age 35-50
R2

.7777
(.2316)

.6489
(.4055)

Female Nonteachers

.12

.12

.11

.01

.19

.23

Dependent variable is the change in mean hours of teachers from 1983-1985 period to 1995-1998 period.
Sample size for all regressions: 50
Standard Errors in Parentheses.
Each column represents the results of a separate regression.

45
Table 11: Estimates of the Effect of Selected Education Reforms on Student Test Scores

Charter law

4th Grade math NAEP scores
2.380*
(1.322)

Strength of charter law (no law=0)

.1023**
(.0374)

Percent students in charter schools in state

95.191
(84.347)

Incentive law

4.309**
(2.034)

Sanction law

2.527
(1.531)

State has taken over or reconstituted districts/schools

3.953**
(1.414)

Sample size for all regressions: 139,486
Standard Errors in Parentheses. Clustered on state cells.
** significant at p=.05
* significant at p =.10
Each row represents results from a separate regression
Regressions also include indicators for student characteristics (female, white, IEP, LEP), indicators for teacher
characteristics (female, white, teach 0-2 years, teacher 3-5 years, high certificate, MA plus), indicators for locale
(city, fringe, town), number of students in class, and state and year fixed effects.

46
Figure 1: Teacher Hours Across States in Early 1980’s and Late 1990’s
AK

Average Teacher Hours 1995-98

48

KS
WY

OR

MT

46

WI
MD

44

SC
PA

NV
FL
MS

NY

NJ

MN

NH

CO
MI HI
CA OH
IL
UT
ME
NC
WA
AL

ID

IN
TX
IA

SD
NB
VT

OK
ND
VA
NM
AR

MO

WV

42

AZ

CT

MA

GA
KY
TN
DE

LA

RI

40
40
Source: CPS Outgoing Rotations

42
44
Average Teacher Hours 1983-86

46

47
Figure 2: Trends in the Average Hours of Teachers and Other Comparison Groups
Nonteachers
Female nonteachers

Predicted NT Hours
Teachers

46

Average hours

45

44

43

42

83

85

Source: CPS Outgoing Rotations

87

89

91
Year

93

95

97

