                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE MEDIAN VOTER AND THE MEDIAN CONSUMER:
                   LOCAL PRIVATE GOODS AND RESIDENTIAL SORTING

                                             Joel Waldfogel

                                         Working Paper 11972
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11972


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2006




I thank Zell-Lurie Center at Wharton for financial support. Jon Moon and Andrew Ly provided excellent
research assistance. Joe Gyourko, Jeff Milyo, and Albert Saiz provided very helpful input. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2006 by Joel Waldfogel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Median Voter and the Median Consumer: Local Private Goods and Residential Sorting
Joel Waldfogel
NBER Working Paper No. 11972
January 2006
JEL No. L1, L8, R3

                                             ABSTRACT



When a product’s product provision entails fixed costs, it will be made available only if a sufficient
number of people want it. Some products are produced and consumed locally, so that provision
requires not only a large group favoring the product but a large number nearby. Just as one has an
incentive to sort into community whose median voter shares his preferences for local public goods,
product markets may provide an analogous incentive to sort into a community whose consumers tend
to share his preferences in private goods. Using zip code level data on chain restaurants and
restaurants overall, this paper documents how the mix of locally available restaurants responds to
the local mix of consumers, with three findings. First, based on survey data on chain restaurant
patronage, restaurant preferences differ substantially by race and education. Second, there is a strong
relationship between restaurants and population at the zip code level, suggesting that restaurants’
geographic markets are small. Finally, the mix of locally available chain restaurants is sensitive to
the zipcode demographic mix by race and by education. Hence, differentiated product markets
provide a benefit    proximity to preferred restaurants     to persons in geographic markets whose
customers tend to share their preferences.


Joel Waldfogel
Public Policy and Management
University of Pennsylvania, Wharton School
3100 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6372
and NBER
waldfogj@wharton.upenn.edu
         When fixed costs are large relative to market size and preferences differ across

individuals, then consumers get what they want only to the extent that others also want it.

This creates a benefit from participating as a customer in markets with others sharing

similar tastes to allow access to appealing products. Economists have long understood

this explicitly in the context of publicly provided goods, such as elementary schools or

police protection. Because local public goods are allocated through collective choice, the

median voter determines the amount of spending on, say, schools in each municipality.

Potential residents then choose among communities and select the one that best matches

their tastes. The resulting “Tiebout sorting” has people agglomerating into communities

with others sharing their preferences for local public goods.

         Of course, people consume vastly more commercial than publicly provided local

goods and services. 1 Research on residential sorting puts private consumption in the

background by assuming that private goods are equally available in all locales. Private

goods and services are implicitly assumed to be ubiquitously available, perhaps because

they are produced at constant returns, so that location choice does not affect access. Yet,

this is certainly not true. A potentially important factor overlooked in previous research

is the role of commercial markets for differentiated product in rewarding and perhaps

promoting the agglomeration of persons sharing similar preferences for private products. 2

When the provision of a product entails fixed costs, it will be made available only if a

sufficient number of people want it. When the product is difficult to trade across space –

a “local private good” – its provision requires not only a large number of people favoring

the product, but a large number nearby.

1
  Local property taxes totaled $264 billion in 2001, less than 4 percent as high as personal consumption
expenditures of $6.9 trillion (see ERP, 2004).
2
  For brevity I use the term “product” to describe both goods and services.


                                                     1
       If the provision of appealing commercial products depends on the distribution of

local tastes, then product markets can provide a rationale alongside local public goods for

sorting. Just as one has an incentive to sort into community whose median voter shares

his preferences local public goods, markets may provide an analogous incentive to sort

into a community whose median consumer shares his preferences in local private goods.

       Recent research documents that different groups (e.g. blacks and whites,

Hispanics and non-Hispanics) have starkly different preferences in a number of product

categories (Waldfogel, 2003, 2004; George and Waldfogel, 2003). For example, blacks

and whites have starkly different preferences in radio and television programming, as

well as newspaper content. Because these products have large fixed costs, whether a

metro area has, say, a black-targeted radio station requires the area to have a substantial

black population. This mechanism, termed a “preference externality,” increases the

welfare of blacks as media consumers as their metro areas have more blacks. Although

these products are local, media content has essentially zero transport costs within metro

areas, so preference externa lities operating through this product market operate

throughout MSAs, not only within neighborhoods.

       Few topics have received as much attention from social scientists as the causes

and consequences of residential segregation by race. US ghettoes formed as blacks

migrated out of southern agriculture and into northern US cities prior to 1950 and were

herded by white racism into particular neighborhoods. It appears that segregation is bad

for black economic and social outcomes (Massey & Denton, 1991; Cutler & Glaeser,

1997). Yet, segregation is eroding only slowly. The slow erosion of segregation is

somewhat surprising in light of both academic evidence and popular belief that urban life




                                              2
is inimical to health and success. Why would blacks choose to live in segregated

neighborhoods, despite the apparent harmful effects of this choice on health,

employment, single parenthood, and a host of other outcomes? No single factor is likely

to serve as a convincing explanation. Racism, housing prices, neighborhood

demographic composition all presumably still play a role, but local product markets may

also promote residential segregation.

       Since the diffusion of the Sears Catalogue in conjunction with mail delivery a

century ago, or the widespread adoption of the Internet more recently, the disadvantages

of residential isolation in access to “dry goods” has diminished. Even people who live far

from concentrations of population – or from persons sharing their tastes – still have

access to unlimited variety of books, CDs, clothing and other tradable items. And,

indeed, there is evidence that isolated persons make relatively more use of the Internet

and mail order channels to obtain such goods (Sinai and Waldfogel, 2004). For other,

“perishable” goods, including many raw and prepared foods, residential location affects

the ease – or feasibility – with which one can obtain items. The location of

manufacturing is largely decoupled from the locations of consumption (think of

automobiles, etc). For services, by contrast, this decoupling is more difficult. An

extreme example illustrates the point. Jewish law requires a minyan of 10 men to

conduct a religious service. Moreover, Orthodox Jews are not allowed to drive during the

Sabbath. As a result, observant Orthodox Jews must live walking distance from their

synagogue. In this instance, the market for religious services gives rise to agglomeration

of at least 10 male Orthodox Jews around each synagogue.




                                             3
       This paper asks whether preference externalities operate through the restaurant

market. This industry provides an auspicious context for study because restaurants

geographically couple production and consumption. Under two simple conditions, the

agglomeration of groups sharing food preferences will bring forth restaurants that appeal

to the respective groups. First, food preferences must differ substantially between

groups. Second, the fixed costs of operating restaurants must be sufficiently large that

restaurants appealing to each group only arise with sufficient local concentrations of

persons favoring a particular variety. Then neighborhoods with more members of a

particular group will have more restaurants catering to the group’s preferences.

       It is by no means obvious that these conditions hold for this industry. First,

restaurant fixed costs do not, on their face, appear very large. In the other industries

where preference externalities have been documented, fixed costs are quite large relative

to market size. The number of products per market provides a rough (implicit) measure

of fixed costs in relation to market size. Daily newspaper markets typically have one or

two products per market; radio markets have on average about 20 (across large US metro

areas). Restaurants, by contrast, are far more numerous. There are 500,000 restaurants in

the US, approximately 1 per 600 persons. A metro area of 1 million persons typically has

about 1,500 restaurants. The fixed cost of operating a restaurant is of a lower order of

magnitude. Yet, the market area of a restaurant may be much smaller than a metro area,

so the large number of restaurants per MSA does not imply that fixed costs are small

relevant to the size of the relevant market.

       This paper proceeds in four sections. Section 1 sketches a simple product

differentiation framework for thinking about preference externalities in this market and




                                               4
links the paper to the four literatures adjacent to this study. Section 2 describes the data

used in the study (Reference USA for chains, Zipcode Business Patterns for total

restaurants, Census 2000 for demographic data, Scarborough Research for data on

restaurant chain patronage by race). Section 3 presents results. First, we show how

restaurant preferences differ by race, Hispanic status, and education. Second, we explore

the size of the relevant market area for restaurants. We document that the relationship

between the number of restaurants in an area and market size, as measured by population,

is very similar at highly aggregated (3-digit zipcode and finely disaggregated (5-digit

zipcode) levels of geography. This suggests that restaurant markets are quite local.

Third, I find that the contour of locally available products relates strongly to the

distribution of local types by race, Hispanic status, and educatio n/income. While most

restaurants – and restaurants as a group – are less available in more heavily black,

Hispanic, or less educated areas, some categories of restaurants (those catering to

respective groups) are actually more available.    This indicates that product markets

bring forth what groups want to a greater extent as the groups agglomerate into relevant

market areas. To put this another way, differentiated product markets provide a benefit to

persons sorting into geographic markets whose custome rs tend to share their preferences.



   I. Background and Framework

   1. Background

       This research stands at the confluence of three literatures in industrial and urban

economics. First, this work is related to the literature on Tiebout (1956) sorting (Epple

and Sieg, 1999) based on publicly provided goods, or in some cases housing and




                                              5
neighborhood attributes (Bayer, et al, 2002). Second, this work is related to the specific

strand of the sorting literature on the causes (and consequences) of ghettoes (Massey and

Denton, 1993; Cutler and Glaeser, 1997; Cutler, Glaeser, and Vigdor, 1999). Third,

because of its focus on commercially rather than publicly provided goods, this work is

related to the industrial literature on entry that relates the number of available products to

market size (Bresnahan and Reiss, 1990, 1991; Berry, 1992). More recently, this

literature has begun to treat space explicitly (Seim, 2003). 3 Our focus on the differential

appeal of products to heterogeneous consumers recalls work on “preference externalities”

in media markets (Waldfogel, 2003, 2004; George and Waldfogel, 2003). Finally, this

work relates to research on urban quality of life (Gyourko and Tracy, 1991) and to more

recent research emphasizing the consumption benefits of agglo meration (Glaeser, Kolko,

and Saiz, 2001; Berry and Waldfogel, 2003).



    2. Framework

         The relationship between the agglomeration of like individuals and available

product variety results from joint process of a) individuals choosing where to live, and b)

firms choosing where to locate their outlets. Causality could easily run both ways.

Individuals might choose where to live, at least in part, based on the products available in

a neighborhood. And, at the same time, firms choose where to place their outlets based

on the patterns of agglomeration. 4


3
  The “central place theory” tradition in urban economics is similarly concerned with the location of
shopping establishments. Christaller (1966) is the classic reference; Eaton and Lipsey (1982) provides a
contemporary treatment of equilibria built up from maximizing behavior of consumers and firms.
4
         When viewed as a simultaneous move game – and starting from a blank slate – the entry-
residential location game can have multiple equilibria. To see this, suppose there are 2 each of two types of
people (P and B for pizza and burger lovers) and two locations (X and Y), each with room for 2 people.


                                                     6
        The history of black people in the US indicates that the entry and residential

location game was never played on a blank slate (see Massey & Denton, 1991; Cutler &

Glaeser, 1997). There is a well-documented history of discrimination and forced

segregation into particular neighborhoods that replaces the first player’s choice of a

location in the blank slate. Evidence seems to suggest that, perhaps until recently,

subsequent black players in this game were also compelled to choose particular

neighborhoods. Under that view, the degree of agglomeration of like types of the data is

exogenous, so that we can proceed to study its effect on patterns of entry. 5

        Taking the distribution of population as given, we can think about the entry

process using a framework in the spirit of Hotelling (1929). Within a market area,

suppose that restaurants are differentiated only by cuisine and that cuisine itself can be

represented along a single dimension. To fix ideas, one might think about this dimension

as the extent to which a restaurant is targeted to, say, blacks. Market areas differ in the

distribution of their consumers’ preferences (or most-preferred restaurant type). Suppose

that white consumers’ most preferred cuisine is distributed according to F( ), while black

consumers are described by G( ). Suppose – against fact but in favor of simplicity – that


Suppose that pizza and burger outlets require 2 customers each to be viable. Firms would rather be viable
than not exist. Finally, suppose that individuals only patronize restaurants in their location. They are
happier with their preferred cuisine than with non-consumption. And they would rather consume nothing
than the output of their non-preferred outlet.
         This game has two equilibria, both with agglomeration of like individuals:
    1) location X can have 2 P’s while Y has 2 B’s. In that case X gets a pizza restaurant and Y gets a
         burger restaurant.
    2) Location Y can have 2 P’s while X has 2 B’s. In that case Y gets a pizza restaurant and X gets a
         burger restaurant.
Both of these outcomes make the consumers and firms as happy as possible. The other possible outcome,
with 1 P and 1 B in each location results in no entry and no consumption.
         In this game, as soon as anyone has chosen a location, the equilibrium is assured. Suppose a P
moves to location Y. Now a B has no incentive to move to Y because he will be assured of no local burger
entry. Another P, however, is assured of pizza as long as he co-locates with the other P.
5
 If residential agglomeration is endogenous, the relationship between agglomeration of like individuals and
entry still allows statements about the product options experienced by agglomerating individuals.


                                                    7
each firm operates no more than one outlet in a market (to avoid multiproduct firm

concerns). Whether entry occurs – and where the firm(s) will locate - depends on how

consumers’ willingness to patronize restaurants varies with their distance from their ideal.

         Suppose that, because of fixed costs, each outlet requires 100 customers for

viability. If the market area has fewer than 100 persons, no entry will occur. If the area

has at least 100 persons, and people are willing to patronize any cuisine, then at least one

restaurant will enter. If travel costs (among cuisines, not space) matter and the market

can accommodate only one entrant, then it will locate where it can attract the most

patrons. If the distribution of most-preferred cuisine locations is single-peaked, the firm

will locate at the mode. The shape of the distribution of preferences determines the

nature of the product available to all consumers. This is the product market analogue to

what Mill (1978) termed the “tyranny of the majority” in collective choice. 6 If the

distribution of ideal cuisines were symmetric, the mode would be the median, and then

the sort of person who would be most happy in this market would share the preferences

of the median consumer.

         As the population grows beyond 200, a second restaurant is viable. If customers

have no “travel costs,” then the second restaurant’s location is indeterminate (given that

prices are being treated as fixed). If travel costs matter, i.e. consumers prefer to patronize

a restaurant nearer to their ideal, then firms’ location decisions grow sensitive to the

distribution of preferences. Moroever, the distribution of restaurant types available in the

market grows sensitive to the respective populations of blacks and whites.


6
  Friedman (1962) argues that reliance on markets avoids the tyranny of the majority, or that while the use
of political channels “tends to strain the social cohesion essential for a stable society,” the “widespread use
of the market reduces the strain on the social fabric by rendering conformity unnecessary.” (pp. 23-4)



                                                       8
       To say this more concretely, we need a way of characterizing entry equilibria. In

general, problems of this type are made difficult by two things. First, firms are usually

modeled as competing on price, given their entry position. A firm that can charge high

prices can subsist with a smaller market than a firm facing competitive pressure on

pricing. Second, characterizing equilibrium requires some assumption about

commitment. If a firm has entered at location x, will it necessarily stay there in the face

of competitive entry nearby?

       Given our goal – showing how the distribution of available restaurant types can

reflect the distribution of potential customers – we make the simplifying assumption that

prices are fixed. Chain ownership may provide a fig leaf of justification for this

assumption. Equilibrium occurs when no potential entrant wishes to enter and no

existing firm wis hes to exit. To make this concrete, we need a characterization of what a

firm, located at x, gets as its payoff. Suppose H( ) is the cumulative density of potential

customers. Suppose the nearest firms in product space are at y and z, where y < x < z.

Since customers patronze their nearest outlets, customers located between (y+x)/2 and

(x+z)/2 will patronize the firm at x: Their patronage is therefore: H((x+z)/2) -

H((x+y)/2). Suppose fixed costs are such that the minimum patronage for viability is K.

       What are the conditions for equilibrium? First, any firm, such as the firm at x

must be viable. That is, H((x+z)/2) - H((x+y)/2) > K. Second, there must not be any

space between y and z to allow another firm viability (assuming the firm at y, x, and z

remain where they are). These conditions simply dictate that outlets be neither too close

nor too far from one another in equilibrium. Of course, the relevant distance is not




                                              9
literally the distance but rather then number of customers they each garner. Regions of

product space with greater customer density will support more outlets in equilibrium.

       Now decompose H into its black and white components, F and G. Different

markets have different numbers of blacks and whites. Areas with more potential

customers – more population – will have more outlets. In areas with lots of blacks, in

particular, we expect a denser clustering in black-preferred regions of product space. In

areas with more black-targeted outlets, blacks have options closer to their products-space

ideal. In this more general context, a person need not share the median consumer’s

preferences to find an appealing product; however, there must be some concentration of

consumers with similar preferences to ensure a variety that is nearby in product space.

This is one version of what Spence (1976) terms the problem of “product selection.”

What is offered is what can attract a large base of customers.

       This setup suggests the three questions we will examine empirically below: 1) do

restaurant preferences differ across groups?; 2) how does the number of restaurants in a

locale vary with population, at various levels of geographic aggregation – by extension,

what is the de facto relevant market area?; and 3) is the mix of available products

sensitive to the mix of potential consumers in the population?



   II. Data

       The basic dataset we employ to document the relationship between the mix of

consumers and the available mix of restaurants is a 5-digit zipcode cross section with

information on the total number of restaurants, the number of establishments in each of

136 fast food and sit down chain restaurants, and demographic variables such as total




                                            10
population and the share of population that is black, Hispanic, college-educated, and low-

income (households with under $40,000 in annual income). We also aggregate the data

to the four and three digit zipcode levels for some analyses. (For brevity we will use the

term “zipcode” to describe 5-digit zipcodes). These data are drawn from three sources:

Zipcode Business Patterns 2000, the 2000 Census, and Reference USA. We restrict

attention to the nearly 15,000 zipcodes in metropolitan areas.

       The ZBP data reports the number of restaurants in each 5-digit zipcode in 2000.

We include all establishments in NAICS code 722, Food Services and Drinking Places

(see http://www.census.gov/epcd/ec97/def/722.HTM). The total number of restaurants in

the US in 1997 was 486,906, and these establishments had sales of $252 billion

nationally. Reference USA is a directory product that includes the address (including the

zipcode) of every business in the US, including the outlets of the 136 major restaurant

chains that we include in our sample. Collectively, these chains account for 107,500

metro area restaurants, or roughly one third of the 358,326 ZBP metro area restaurant

locations in the US.

       In addition, we have information from Scarborough Research on the whether each

of 180,000 persons, in 66 large US markets, has patronized each of the 136 chain

restaurants in the last 30 days. These data are drawn from surveys undertaken during

1999-2000. We know the respondents’ race, Hispanic status, and education, allowing us

to compare restaurant patronage patterns across these groups.

       We are able to classify the chain restaurants by cuisine. Based on review of the

chains’ self-descriptions and menus, we classify the chains into burger, pizza, Mexican,

chicken, and coffee/bagel restaurants. Most of the chains remain unclassified, however.




                                            11
Finally, using Consumer Reports 2003 restaurant survey, we can classify 52 of the

sitdown chains by price range, including “the average amount readers paid for their own

dinner and drinks, excluding tip” (<$10, $11-14, $15-19, $20-24, $25-29, $30+).

        The top panel of table 1a summarizes our total restaurant and population data at

various levels of geographic aggregation. The mean (median) population for our urban

zipcodes is 15,450 (9,965), while the mean (median) number of restaurants is 24.9 (12).

The mean black and Hispanic percentages are about 10, far above the medians of roughly

3. There is substantial variation across zipcodes in the demographic variables. For

example, by race the 90th percentile zipcode is nearly a third black; and by Hispanic

status, the 90th percentile zipcode is also nearly a third Hispanic. The mean and median

college-educated percentage (of persons over age 25) is about 17, while the 90th

percentile is nearly a third.

        The remaining panels of table 1a repeat the exercise of the top panel at higher

levels of geographic aggregation. There are 3960 metropolitan-area four-digit zipcode

areas. Four-digit zips have mean (median) population of roughly 58,000 (31,000) and a

mean (median) of 94 (41) restaurants. There are 684 three-digit zipcodes, and they have

mean (median) population of about 338,000 (204,000) and a mean (median) of 545 (335)

restaurants. Despite their greater geographic aggregation, the three and four-digit

zipcodes have as much variation in percent black, Hispanic, etc. as the 5-digit zips.

        Table 1b shows the number of restaurants in groups of sample chains, and their

tendency to be present, in 5, 4, and 3-digit zip code areas. For example, 64 percent of 5-

digit zipcodes have at least one location of one of the 136 sample chains. Over half of 5-

digit zips have one of the burger chains, while less than a third have a chicken chain, and




                                            12
just over a quarter have a Mexican chain. At higher levels of aggregation, the tendency

for each chain to be present rises. For example, 90 percent of 3-digit zips – areas

averaging roughly 1000 square miles – have at least one of the chicken chains present,

while only 31 percent of 5 digit zips – areas of 41 square miles – have at least one.



   III. Results

       Our discussion of results is divided into three areas. First, we present evidence on

how restaurant preferences differ across groups. Second, we discuss the relationship

between market size and restaurant entry overall, along with the related issue of market

size. Finally, we present evidence on the relationship the types of restaurants available

nearby and the local distribution of population by race, Hispanic status, and education

and income.

   1. Do Restaurant Preferences Differ across groups?

       Before turning to data on restaurant patronage patterns of particular groups, it is

useful to outline what information our question requires about preferences. We are

interested, for example, in whether blacks derive product market benefit from living

among blacks. For addressing whether members of a group benefit each other, it is

sufficient to document unconditional differences in preferences across group. Some part

of a difference in product choices across groups may be attributable to some other cause,

such as income. If we wanted to say why, for example, blacks benefit each other through

product markets, we would need to document not only that preferences differ across

groups but also that they differ because of race. We provide some such evidence below,




                                             13
but we note that our argument – that people may affect each other through product

markets – does not rely on causal differences in preferences.

            a. Race

        We have two means available to determine whether black and white food

preferences differ. First, we can appeal to historical accounts of the development of

African American cuisine in the American South. These sources describe slaves’

development of a cuisine based largely on ingredients that their white masters did not

deign to consume.

        One account:

        The fresh vegetables found in Africa were replaced by the throwaway foods from the plantation
        house… The slave diet began to evolve when slaves entered the plantation houses as cooks. With
        an array of new ingredients at their fingertips and a well-tuned African palate, the cooks would
        make delectable foods for their masters. Suddenly southern cooking took on new meaning. Fried
        chicken began to appear on the tables, sweet potatoes (which had replaced the African yam) sat
        next to the boiled white potato. 7

        The cuisines mentioned in these accounts fall under the categorie s of “Southern

cuisine,” as well as Creole and Cajun. Particular foods include fried chicken, various

shrimp recipes, catfish, hush puppies, crab cakes, cornbread muffins, and buttermilk

biscuits.

        Some of these foods feature prominently in the offerings of chain restaurants. In

particular, fried chicken is the featured offering of four major chains in our sample: KFC,

Church’s Fried Chicken, Bojangle’s, and Popeye’s Fried Chicken and Biscuits. Seafood

is the featured food at Long John Silver’s and Red Lobster. On the basis of the historical




        7
          From “A History of Soul Food,” http://www.foxhome.com/soulfood/htmls/soulfood.html
(Accessed 8/18/2004). See also the Kraft Foods “African American Flavor Center,” at
http://www.kraftfoods.com/esi.net/african_american/content.aspx?shortname=military&a=87



                                                  14
accounts, one might expect these restaurants to be disproportionately patronized by black

consumers.

         We can, of course, examine black and non-black consumers’ patterns of

restaurant patronage directly using the Scarborough data. For each of 136 restaurant

chains, these data indicate whether respondents patronized the restaurant in the 30 days

prior to the survey (surveys are filled out throughout the year between Fall 1999 and

Spring 2000).

         Tables 2 and 3 report the fraction of blacks and non-blacks patronizing each of the

major chains in the past 30 days, and the results support the impression one would have

from the historical accounts. 8 Blacks are far more likely than whites to patronize chains

offering Southern fare. Blacks are also somewhat more likely than whites to patronize

Rally’s and Checker’s burger chains.

         Some part of the difference between black and white patronage rates is

attributable to “constraints” such as restaurant availability and income levels rather than

“preferences” per se. While we do not know the location of blacks with the 66 metro

areas covered by Scarborough, we do know income, age, gender, etc. We can estimate

probits on, say, the tendency to patronize KFC on race as well as the other observables in

order to soak up the variation in patronage associated with location and income (as

distinct from preferences). When we do this, there remain substantial and statistically

significant race differences. After accounting for available observables – including MSA

fixed effects, gender, and dummies for 5-year age ranges - blacks are roughly 20

percentage points more likely (2 times as likely at KFC and 3 times as likely at Popeye’s)


8
 We include in the table only chains that respondents report patronizing in at least 20 of the 66 surveyed
markets.


                                                    15
to patronize the chicken chains than whites. On the basis of evidence in tables 2 and 3,

blacks and whites appear to have different preferences in prepared food. 9



             b. Hispanic Status

        While the term “Hispanic” covers a broad range of national backgrounds, nearly

60 percent of US Hispanics are of Mexican extraction. 10 One might therefore expect that

Mexican restaurants cater to Hispanic tastes, although casual observation suggests that

non-Hispanic consumers are major patrons of Mexican restaurants.

        Tables 2 and 3 show that the Hispanic tendency to patronize listed Mexican

restaurants is higher than the non-Hispanic tendency. For example, Hispanics have twice

the tendency of non-Hispanics to have visited El Pollo Loco or Rio Bravo Cantina in the

past 30 days, and a 20 percent higher tendency to visit Taco Bell and Don Pablo’s.

Hispanics also have elevated tendencies to visit a number of burger and pizza restaurants.

The results in tables 2 and 3 suggest that black and white restaurant preferences are more

different than Hispanic and non-Hispanic preferences.



             c. Income/Education

        The Scarborough data report income only for a subset but education for the entire

sample. Given the strong relationship between income and education, we examine

restaurant patronage by whether people have completed college. Three things emerge

from examination of tables 2 and 3. First, college educated persons patronize coffee and


9
  Note, however, that our argument does not require preferences to differ because of race. Rather, we are
simply classifying people into “blacks” and “whites” as two groups with different preferences.
10
   This information is available at http://www.census.gov/prod/2001pubs/c2kbr01-3.pdf (accessed
September 1, 2004).


                                                    16
bagel restaurants far more than their less educated counterparts (roughly double for

Bruegger’s Bagels, Einstein Bros. Bagels, Noah Bagel, and Starbuck’s Coffee). Second,

the college educated are also less likely to patronize chicken restaurants (see Church’s,

Lee’s Famous, KFC). Third, college educated persons are more likely to patronize more

expensive sitdown restaurants among the sitdown establishments that Consumer Reports

(2003) classifies by price range. College educated persons have roughly double the

tendency of less educated persons to patronize the two most expensive chains in the

sample, Houston’s and Ruth’s Chris. By contrast, the college educated are relatively less

likely to patronize Denny’s and IHOP.



    2. What is the relevant market?

        Restaurants’ products are generally consumed where they are produced, so

location matters more than with more easily tradable goods. It is not immediately

obvious what unit of geography corresponds to the market area for restaurants. At one

extreme, it seems unlikely that consumers patronize restaurants beyond their metropolitan

areas, or – similarly – their 3-digit zips.

        Different types of restaurants surely have different-sized market areas, however.

A “fancy” downtown restaurant patronized on special occasions presumably draws

customers from throughout a metro area. Fast food restaurants likely have smaller

market areas. Most markets have multiple McDonald’s restaurants, for example. Except

when traveling about their metro areas, residents are unlikely to travel beyond their

nearest McDonald’s to patronize a different McDonald’s. The relevant market size – and

the correct geographic unit of analysis – is different for different types of restaurants.




                                              17
Rather than attempt to resolve this question a priori, we will empirically explore the

appropriate level of geographic aggregation.

       If demand for geographic areas’ restaurants were drawn from within the

respective geographic areas, then we would expect a strong relationship between

geographic area demand (measured, say, by population) and geographic area entry (the

number of restaurant establishments operating, N). Indeed, a relationship between N and

population at some level of geographic aggregation indicates that supply for that area

serves demand at – or within – that level. We can draw some inferences about the

relevant geographic market by examining the relationship between N and population at

successively less aggr egated levels of geography (3, 4, and 5-digit zips)

       We begin with the relationship between market size (measured by population) and

the number of restaurant establishments operating (N). The first column of table 4

reports a regression of N on population at the 3-digit zip level across the 684 metro area

3-digit zips. A 3-digit zip with an additional 1000 persons has 1.51 more restaurants.

Three digit zips average about 1000 square miles of overall land and water area. If they

were circular, they would have mean radius of 15.1 miles. It seems likely that restaurants

in a 3-digit zip draw their customers from within the area.

       The remaining columns revisit the entry-population relationship at progressively

finer levels of geographic disaggregation. Column (2) shows that a 4-digit zip with an

additional 1000 persons has 1.55 more restaurants. Four-digit zips average 178 square

miles, with a (hypothetically circular) radius of 6.2 miles. The same entry-population

relationship that holds for areas comprising hundreds of square miles also holds for these

areas. Finally, column (3) shows a similarly strong – but slightly muted – relationship




                                             18
between entry and population at the 5-digit zip level. These areas have mean area of 47

miles, with an implied radius of 3 miles.

       Regardless of the level of geography analyzed, an additional 1000 persons raises

the number of restaurants in the area by between 1.4 and 1.6. One should note that this

relationship does not need to hold. Given consumers’ ability to travel, restaurants’

location could be decoupled from population. Yet, the relationship between market size

that holds for metro areas also holds for much narrower units of geography. While it

surely true that consumers travel outside their zipcodes to obtain restaurant food, it

appears that zipcodes’ exports and imports roughly balance each other. To say this

another way, the number of restaurants near a consumer is very sensitive to the number of

persons nearby. This suggests that zipcode level analysis will be appropriate.

       We can examine the relationship between restaurant availability and local and

distant population more directly by simply including both local (5-digit zip) and more

distant population terms in the regressions directly. In particular, we include a term for

the population of the remainder of the 4-digit zip, as well as a term for the remainder of

the 3-digit zip (see column 4 of table 4). Local 5-digit zip population has a slightly

smaller coefficient than in column (3) of table 4, and the population of the remainder of

the 4-digit zipcode has a significant but small coefficient (one fortieth of the immediate

zip coefficient). Population of the remainder of the 3-digit zip has a negative and

significant, but small, coefficient. The results indicate that the empirical measure of

demand relevant to restaurant entry in a 5-digit zipcode is overwhelmingly local (within

the immediate 5-digit zipcode).




                                             19
       Existing entry studies tend to choose industries to make the choice of geography

straightfo rward. For example, Bresnahan and Reiss examine small businesses (for

example, tire dealers and dentists) in small, geographically isolated markets. A typical

geographic area included in their studies had one or two firms. In markets the size of

those they include, customers would be willing to patronize a firm anywhere in the

market area, so all local population was relevant to the determination of market size.

Berry and Waldfogel (1999) study radio markets. Since radio signals travel costlessly

throughout metropolitan areas, the entire metro area is the obvious market to employ.

Mazzeo (2002) examines entry into the hotel market, and his observations are exits off

interstate highways, where except for the quality differentiation that is the focus of his

study, hotels at the same exit are clearly in the same market.

       Seim’s (2003) study has a slightly more complicated situation which bears more

comparison to ours. Seim studies the location of video rental outlets, and in order to

study spatial issues, she makes census tracts her unit of observation. Her tracts have an

average of 4400 persons and less than one video rental outlet, while the metropolitan

areas overall have an average of 74,000 persons and 19 establishments. Roughly

speaking, this suggests that an outlet needs nearly 4000 persons as potential customers.

Because the census tracts typically have too few to support a store, one must view

demand as deriving from both own-tract and nearby-tract population.

       Our context differs in two respects. First, the average amount of population per

restaurant across markets in our sample is under 1000. Our data are at the zipcode level,

and the median MSA zipcode in the sample has population of 10,000, far above the

average amount of population apparently needed to support a restaurant. Accordingly,




                                             20
the median zipcode has 12 restaurants. The density of restaurants makes it less clear that

population outside the immediate area will be an important determinant of restaurant

location.



   3. Population Mix and Product Availability: If You Come, they Will Build it

       Places with more people have more restaurants. But do all sorts of people bring

forth additional restaurants to a similar extent? Table 5 revisits the regressions in table 4,

replacing population wit h separate terms for black and non-black (“white”), Hispanic and

non-Hispanic, and college-educated and non-college-educated population. The

regressions clearly show that different population groups bear different relationships to

restaurant availability. Black, Hispanics, and those without college education have

smaller coefficients than non-blacks, non-Hispanics, and college educated persons,

respectively. For example, the more blacks, Hispanics, or non-college graduates there

are nearby, holding total population constant, the fewer restaurants nearby.

       On its face this result seems to suggest that the product market mechanism that is

the subject of this paper reinforces the other difficulties associated with residential

segregation. For example, in addition to all of the other pathologies experienced by

blacks in heavily black neighborhoods, individuals also face fewer product options in the

restaurant market.

       Our chain data allow us to observe the number of locations of each of 136 chains

in each zipcode. Thus we can ask how, for example, the number of McDonald’s

locations varies across zipcodes with local black and white population. Given what we

know about groups’ preferences over restaurant food, we can ask whether restaurant




                                              21
markets reinforce agglomeration of like types by asking whether there are more

restaurants that appeal to particular groups where those groups are more prevalent. What

would we see if this view were correct? Recalling tables 2 and 3, we have reason to

expect that educated consumers prefer high-price and coffee/bagel outlets, black

consumers prefer restaurants offering Southern fare, and (perhaps to a lesser extent)

Hispanics prefer Mexican food. We could analyze zipcode entry patterns for particular

chains preferred by a group by asking, for example, whether Starbucks outlets are more

likely to be available in zips with more college graduates.

       Studying entry one chain at a time ignores strategic interaction. Whether

McDonald’s wants to operate in a zipcode surely depends on whether a chain offering

close substitutes, say Burger King, also operates there. Hence, chain-by-chain entry

models mischaracterize the relationship between population and entry. As one

aggregates from the chain to the category, say from KFC to all fried chicken chains, then

if the category includes all relevant substitutes, the shortcomings of ignoring strategic

interactions will decline.

       With these issues in mind, Table 6 reports regressions of this sort a few major

chains (McDonald’, Burger King, Taco Bell, Dunkin Donuts) as well as three others

(KFC, Popeye’s, and Starbuck’s) preferred by different groups. The table includes

estimates from 21 separate equations relating a particular chain’s presence in a 5-digit zip

to, say, black and white population or, separately, Hispanic and non-Hispanic population,

or, finally, to college and non-college educated population. Probability derivatives from

probit models are reported in the table.




                                             22
       The results on chain entry reflect our data on preferences. While most black

coefficients are smaller than the white coefficients, the black KFC and Popeye’s

coefficients are larger. None of the chains in this table has an Hispanic coefficient that

exceeds its non-Hispanic coefficient. Except Starbucks, and to a less extent Dunkin

Donuts, all of the chains have smaller college than non-college coefficients. Indeed,

many coefficients are negative and significant: 5-digit zips with more college graduates,

holding the non-college graduate population constant, are less likely to have a

McDonald’s, a Burger King, or a Taco Bell present. In interpreting these coefficients it

is, again, important to recognize the one-at-a-time nature of the table 6 exercise. College

educated persons do not literally reduce the profitability of, say, a McDonalds outlet.

Rather, 5-digit zips with more college-educated persons attract other entry that makes

McDonald’s entry less likely.

       Aggregating particular chains into groups avoids some of the table 6 problems.

Table 7 asks how entry of particular types of restaurants varies across 5-digit zips with

black and white population. The first three columns are OLS regressions with the

numbers of sample chains, sample sitdown chains, and sample fast food chains as

dependent variables. Because the remaining columns are based on narrower categories,

we estimate them as probits (with probability derivatives reported in the table). As with

restaurants overall (see table 5), places with more whites have more sample chains,

especially in the sitdown category. Places with more whites also have higher

probabilities of sitdown restaurants in all three Consumer Reports price ranges (see

columns 3-6).




                                             23
         The sample chain cuisine breakdown, in columns (7) – (11), indicates that places

with more whites are more likely to have a pizza, Mexican, and especially a coffee/bagel

restaurant. Coefficients are nearly equal across race for the presence of a burger

restaurant. Finally, places with more blacks, holding total population constant, are more

likely to have a sample chicken chain present. Overall, 31 percent of sample zipcodes

have a sample chicken chain restaurant. By contrast, nearly 60 percent of the 811

zipcodes that are over half black have a sample chicken chain. 11

         Tables 8-10 repeat the exercise of table 7 by Hispanic status, college education,

and income (whether household income exceeds $40,000 per year). Patterns for

Hispanics are similar to those for blacks, except that the non-Hispanic coefficient exceeds

the Hispanic coefficient for all of the particular sample chain cuisines.

         In table 9 the non-college coefficient exceeds the college coefficient for all

restaurant categories, except for the two more expensive groups based on Consumer

Reports price classifications and the coffee/bagel chains. Overall, 28 percent of sample

zipcodes have a coffee/bagel chain. Over half of the 978 heavily educated (over 36

percent of adults college educated) have a coffee/bagel chain from the sample. 12 In table

10 the higher- income coefficient exceeds the lower- income coefficient for all restaurant

groups except sample chicken and burger chains.




11
   Similar patterns hold across four-digit zipcodes: 53 percent of sample four-digit zipcodes have a sample
chicken chain; 70 percent of the heavily black (over a third black) four-digit zipcodes have a sample
chicken chain.
12
   Similar patterns hold for four-digit zipcodes: 44 percent of sample four-digit zipcodes have a sample
coffee/bagel chain, while 71 percent of the heavily (over a third) college educated four-digit zipcodes have
a sample coffee/bagel chain.


                                                     24
       The results in tables 7-10 clearly show that the mix of restaurants available in a

zip code is sensitive to the mix of consumers. Places with more members of a group

preferring a particular cuisine are more likely to be served by a restaurant in that cuisine.



       IV. Conclusions and Implications

       What have we shown? We have documented that agglomeration of

demographically similar persons brings forth private products – in this case, restaurants –

preferred by the agglomerating group. Given the evidence we present on how

preferences vary by group, this suggests welfare benefits of like-agglomeration, provided

that people value proximity to their preferred restaurants.

       Residential location and sorting is a topic generally thought to be in the purview

of public and urban economics. The entire literature on Tiebout (1956) sorting is focused

on choice of jurisdiction based on the nature of government-provided goods. I do not

dispute the importance of these goods and services, but I argue here that goods provided

in private markets provide another important amenity for potential residents to consider

when choosing communities.

       The theoretical idea advanced in this research – that with substantial fixed costs

and heterogenous consumers, one’s welfare depends on the distribution of consumer

types – is straightforward, even uncontroversial. The only question has been whether the

mechanism is important or even detectable. The industries where it has been previously

documented are unusual in the size of their fixed costs. Yet, the restaurant industry, with

an establishment per 1000 people, has low fixed costs. What is remarkable here is that

the mechanism operates in an industry with low fixed costs.




                                             25
       Like local public goods, the private production of local private goods also entails

fixed costs, which makes their provision lumpy and sensitive to the distribution of

preferences. The median voter holds a celebrated place in economists’ thinking about

residential sorting and the provision of local public goods. For some sorts of goods –

restaurants may be a prime example – the median customer may be a useful metaphor.

       That agglomeration brings about a benefit to persons, in their capacity as

restaurant patrons, says nothing about whether this mechanism causes, or even

contributes to, the agglomeration of like individuals. And, indeed, it is hard to believe

that the pull of appealing restaurants weighs heavily against, say schools, parks, housing,

or public safety in neighborhood choice. Still, the fact that the availability of products

privately provided under conditions of increasing costs in some industry is at least

suggestive that this mechanism might operate in other industries as well. Retailing and

the provision of worship services come to mind as other venues where these mechanisms

might operate. The usual call for more research is warranted.




                                              26
       References

Bayer, Patrick, Robert McMillan, and Kim Reuben. “An Equilibrium Model of Sorting in
an Urban Housing Market.” Mimeo. Yale University. Oct. 2002.

Berry, Steven T. “Estimation of a Model of Entry in the Airline Industry.” Econometrica,
vol. 60, no. 4, July 1992, pp. 889-917.

Berry, Steven T; Waldfogel, Joel. “Free Entry and Social Inefficiency in Radio
Broadcasting.” Rand Journal of Economics. Vol. 30 (3). p 397-420. Autumn 1999a.

Berry, Steven T; Waldfogel, Joel. “Product Quality and Market Size.” NBER Working
paper 9675, May 2003.

Bresnahan, Timothy F; Reiss, Peter C. “Entry and Competition in Concentrated
Markets.” Journal of Political Economy. Vol. 99 (5). p 977-1009. October 1991.

Bresnahan, Timothy F; Reiss, Peter C. “Entry in Monopoly Markets.” The Review of
Economic Studies. Vol. 57 (4). p 531-53. October 1990.

Christaller, Walter. Central Places in Southern Germany. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall. 1966.

Consumer Reports. “Chain Restaurants: Best Meals. Best Deals.” Consumer Reports.
July 2003. pp. 18-23.

Council of Economic Advisers. Economic Report of the President, 2004.

Cutler, David M. and Edward L. Glaeser. “Are Ghettos Good or Bad?” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, vol. 112, no. 3, August 1997, pp. 827-72.

Cutler, David M, Edward L. Glaeser, and Jacob L. Vigdor. “The Rise and Decline of the
American Ghetto.” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 107, no. 3, June 1999, pp. 455-506.

Eaton, B. Curtis and Richard G. Lipsey. “An Economic Theory of Central Places.” The
Economic Journal, vol. 92, no. 365 (March 1982): 56-72.

Epple, Dennis and Holger Sieg. “Estimating Equilibrium Models of Local Jurisdictions.”
Journal of Political Economy, vol. 107, no. 4, August 1999, pp. 645-81.

Dixit, Avinash K; Stiglitz, Joseph E. “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product
Diversity.” American Economic Review. Vol. 67 (3). p 297-308. June 1977.

Friedman, Milton. Capitalism and Freedom. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1962




                                           27
George, Lisa and Joel Waldfogel. “Who Affects Whom in Daily Newspaper Markets?”
Journal of Political Economy, vol. 111, no. 4, August 2003, pp. 765-84.

Glaeser, Edward L. Jed Kolko, and Albert Saiz. “Consumer City.” Journal of Economic
Geography, vol. 1, no. 1, January 2001, pp. 27-50

Gyourko, Joseph and Joseph Tracy. “The Structure of Local Public Finance and the
Quality of Life.” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 99, no. 4, August 1991, pp. 774-806.

Hotelling, Harold. “Stability in Competition.” The Economic Journal, Vol. 39, No. 153.
(Mar., 1929), pp. 41-57.

Holmes, Thomas. “How Important Is Variety and Returns to Scale; What Can We Learn
from Local Demand?” Mimeo, University of Minnesota, December 1998.

Massey, Douglas S. and Nancy A. Denton. American apartheid : segregation and the
making of the underclass. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1993.

Mazzeo, Michael. “Product Choice and Oligopoly Market Structure.” RAND Journal of
Economics 33 (Summer 2002):1-22.

Mill, John Stuart. On Liberty. Indianapolis: Hacket Publishing Company, 1978.

Prescott, Edward C; Visscher, Michael. “Sequential Location among Firms with
Foresight.” The Bell Journal of Economics. Vol. 8 (2). p 378-93. Autumn. 1977.

Seim, Katja. “An Empirical Model of Firm Entry with Endogenous Product-Type
Choices.” Feb. 2004.
http://faculty-gsb.stanford.edu/seim/personal_page/Documents/entry_types.pdf

Sinai, Todd and Joel Waldfogel. “Geography and the Internet: Is the Internet a Substitute
or a Complement for Cities?” Journal of Urban Economics. 2004.

Spence, Michael. “Product Selection, Fixed Costs, and Monopolistic Competition.” The
Review of Economic Studies. Vol. 43 (2). p 217-35. June 1976.

Spence, Michael. “Product Differentiation and Welfare.” American Economic Review.
Vol. 66 (2). p 407-14. May 1976.

Sutton, John. Sunk costs and market structure: Price competition, advertising, and the
evolution of concentration.. Cambridge, Mass. and London: MIT Press. 1991.

Tiebout, Charles. “A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures.” The Journal of Political
Economy. V. 64(5) (Oct 1956) pp. 416-424.




                                           28
Waldfogel, Joel. “Preference Externalities: An Empirical Study of Who Benefits Whom
in Differentiated-Product Markets.” RAND Journal of Economics, vol. 34, no. 3, Autumn
2003, pp. 557-68.

Waldfogel, Joel. “Who Benefits Whom in Local Television Markets?” Brookings
Wharton Papers on Urban Economics, 2004.




                                         29
Table 1a: Population, Restaurants, and Demographic Mix, by Level of Geographic Aggregation

5-digit zips    mean     median    75th     90th      N
Restaurants     24.9       12       38       68     14954
population     15,450    9,965    24,269   37,919   14954
% black          9.5      2.1      9.4      28.8    14903
% Hispanic       9.8      2.7      8.8      27.5    14903
% college       17.7      15.9     24.0     32.3    14764
% inc > 40k     54.7      54.8     67.3     77.2    14716
Sq. miles       47.2      18.0     48.2    100.6    14931
radius          2.95      2.40     3.92     5.66    14931

4-digit zips    mean     median    75th    90th   N
Restaurants     94.1       41      127     256   3960
population     58,344    30,772   79,677 150,671 3960
% black          8.4      2.8      10.5    24.7  3945
% Hispanic       8.8      2.6      8.4     24.4  3945
% college       17.9      16.7     22.7    28.9  3931
% inc > 40k     54.8      54.4     64.6    73.0  3923
Sq. miles       177.8     99.5    194.6   329.1 3960
radius          6.23      5.63     7.87   10.23 3960

3-digit zips    mean     median    75th    90th      N
Restaurants     545.0      335     676    1259      684
population     337,800   204,100 421,200 782,900    684
% black          10.5      5.9     15.4    28.2     684
% Hispanic       9.7       3.9     10.9    27.3     684
% college        19.1      18.3    22.4    26.9     684
% inc > 40k      52.8      51.2    60.1    67.9     684
Sq. miles      1029.3     624.2 1224.0 2002.7       684
radius           15.1      14.1    19.7    25.2     684




                                                              30
Table 1b: Sample Chain Restaurants, by Cuisine and Level of Geographic Aggregation



                   5-digit zip              4-digit zip              3-digit zip
                    Number       Presence    Number       Presence    Number       Presence
Restaurants          24.93        87.95%      94.14        93.96%     545.05        98.98%
 Sample Chains       7.19         64.14%      27.15        80.28%     157.16        95.91%
  Fast Food          5.65         63.32%      21.35        79.65%     123.60        95.91%
  Sitdown            1.54         40.60%      5.80         63.23%      33.56        92.84%
    Chicken          0.54         31.12%      2.04         53.03%      11.79        89.77%
    Pizza            1.02         41.75%      3.88         64.17%      22.48        93.27%
    Burger           1.89         52.93%      7.15         72.22%      41.41        93.57%
    Mexican          0.39         26.09%      1.49         48.86%      8.62         86.70%
    Steak            0.16         10.81%      0.61         28.26%      3.52         73.25%
    Coffee,Bagel     0.57         27.54%      2.15         43.59%      12.46        73.25%

N                    14954        14954       3960         3960         684          684




                                                                                   31
Table 2: Tendency to Patronize Selected Fast Food Chain Restaurants
                                Visit in last 30
                                     days                 Visit in last 30 days            Visit in last 30 days
Cuisine
                                  non-                                                                                        markets
             chain               black   black black/non Non_Hisp Hispanic        hisp/non No College   College coll/nocoll   present
             Arbys               22.1%   18.5%    0.83    21.9%    20.4%            0.93     21.8%      21.3%      0.98         65
Chicken      Boston mkt          8.2%    9.6%     1.16     8.5%    9.1%             1.07     7.5%       10.2%      1.37         50
Coffee/bagel Brueggers           10.9%   11.7%    1.08    10.8%    10.7%            0.98     7.8%       16.2%      2.09          9
Burger       Burger King         44.2%   52.1%    1.18    44.2%    53.4%            1.21     46.7%      41.9%      0.90         66
             Captain D’s Seafood 14.9%   22.7%    1.52    16.4%    16.9%            1.03     18.0%      12.7%      0.71         17
Coffee/bagel Caribou Coffee      4.8%    4.4%     0.92     4.6%    4.1%             0.89     2.7%        7.6%      2.77          7
Burger       Checkers            9.7%    20.7%    2.14    10.9%    17.0%            1.56     12.1%       9.4%      0.77         10
Chicken      Chick-Fil-A         12.9%   14.7%    1.14    12.8%    14.4%            1.12     12.1%      15.0%      1.24         42
Chicken      Church’s Fried
             Chicken             4.9%    22.7%     4.64    6.8%        10.4%        1.54     8.4%       5.2%        0.62        39
Pizza        Cici’s Pizza        12.7%   12.2%     0.97    11.3%       18.1%        1.61     12.8%      11.5%       0.90         7
             Dairy Queen         16.3%   14.2%     0.87    16.2%       16.1%        1.00     14.5%      14.0%       0.97        60
Pizza        Dominos             11.8%   15.3%     1.30    11.5%       17.8%        1.55     12.6%      11.2%       0.89        66
Coffee/bagel Einstein            6.2%     4.9%     0.79    6.3%         5.3%        0.83     4.5%       9.2%        2.06        22
Mexican      El Pollo Loco       11.0%   12.3%     1.12    8.9%        17.7%        1.99     11.3%      10.5%       0.92         5
burger       Hardee’s            19.0%   18.6%     0.98    19.0%       18.0%        0.95     20.6%      15.4%       0.75        32
Chicken      KFC                 22.8%   38.9%     1.71    24.4%       26.7%        1.09     26.3%      21.5%       0.82        66
Burger       Krystal             19.0%   28.6%     1.51    20.5%       24.5%        1.20     22.7%      16.0%       0.70         6
Chicken      Lees Famous         11.8%   20.7%     1.75    12.8%       15.2%        1.19     14.1%      9.7%        0.69         6
Pizza        Lil Caesar          5.5%     7.6%     1.38    5.3%         8.7%        1.64     6.0%       4.8%        0.80        64
             Long John Silver    10.3%   14.2%     1.38    10.5%       11.9%        1.13     11.9%      8.1%        0.68        52
Burger       McDonalds           53.4%   60.1%     1.13    53.4%       61.1%        1.14     54.9%      52.8%       0.96        66
             Miami sub           7.8%    13.1%     1.68    8.6%        11.0%        1.28     8.7%       8.2%        0.94         5
Chicken      Mrs Winner’s        8.2%    20.1%     2.44    10.8%       11.1%        1.03     11.6%      9.5%        0.82         5
Coffee/bagel Noah bagel          6.5%     7.3%     1.11    7.1%         4.3%        0.60     4.9%       9.0%        1.82         3




                                                                          32
Pizza        Papa John      13.7%   13.9%   1.02   13.5%   16.3%   1.20   13.0%   15.0%   1.15   55
Pizza        Peter Piper    5.9%    10.1%   1.70   3.7%    14.4%   3.93   7.3%    3.7%    0.51    5
chicken      Popeye’s       10.4%   30.3%   2.93   13.1%   19.6%   1.50   14.6%   11.7%   0.80   20
             Quiznos        4.9%    4.4%    0.90   4.8%    4.8%    1.01   3.9%    6.1%    1.55    7
Burger       Rallys         11.0%   24.1%   2.20   12.7%   16.0%   1.26   14.0%   10.4%   0.74   18
Coffee/bagel Starbucks      7.5%    6.0%    0.81   7.4%    8.1%    1.10   5.5%    10.6%   1.94   59
             Subway         22.7%   24.5%   1.08   22.9%   24.9%   1.09   22.4%   24.3%   1.09   66
Mexican      Taco Bell      32.8%   35.1%   1.07   32.7%   38.8%   1.19   4.3%    5.6%    1.31   65
Burger       Wendys         32.0%   35.9%   1.12   32.4%   33.8%   1.04   32.2%   33.0%   1.02   66
Burger       White Castle   18.7%   35.1%   1.87   20.8%   21.4%   1.03   23.1%   16.0%   0.69    9




                                                             33
Table 3: Tendency to Patronize Selected Sit Down Chain Restaurants
                                         Visit in last 30 days           Visit in last 30 days       Visit in last 30 days
Consumer Cuisine
 Reports
price range         chain               non-black      black black/non Non-Hisp Hispanic hisp/non No College College coll/nocoll Markets
     2              Applebees            17.0%        17.1%     1.01    17.2%    16.0%     0.93     16.4%    18.7%      1.14       61
     3      Pizza   Bertucci’s            6.7%         4.9%     0.72     6.5%    6.9%      1.05     5.0%      8.7%      1.74        6
     3              Cheeseck Factory      7.5%         7.8%     1.04     8.2%    6.5%      0.80     6.1%     10.4%      1.68        4
     2              Chilis               10.4%         8.3%     0.80    10.1%    11.7%     1.15     8.9%     12.5%      1.40       49
                    Chuck E Cheese        3.8%         7.0%     1.84     3.8%    7.5%      1.99     5.1%      3.1%      0.62        5
    1               Denny’s              11.3%        12.9%     1.15    11.3%    13.3%     1.18     12.3%     9.8%      0.79       63
          Mexican   Don Pablo’s Mex.      6.0%         4.2%     0.69     5.8%    7.1%      1.22     4.8%      8.0%      1.68       11
          Steak     Golden Corral        14.5%        22.1%     1.53    15.3%    17.3%     1.13     16.8%    13.0%      0.77       14
    2               Hooters               4.5%         4.6%     1.02     4.2%    7.5%      1.79     4.3%      4.8%      1.11       10
    4               Houston               4.6%         7.1%     1.56     5.4%    5.8%      1.06     4.1%      7.9%      1.91        6
    1               IHOP                  9.0%        14.0%     1.55     9.6%    11.0%     1.14     9.8%      9.4%      0.96       33
    3     Steak     Lonestar              5.6%         5.1%     0.90     5.4%    5.8%      1.08     5.3%      5.6%      1.05       24
    3               Romano’s Macaroni     6.5%         4.8%     0.74     6.6%    5.9%      0.89     5.1%      8.3%      1.64       13
    2               Max & Erma            7.7%         7.8%     1.01     7.8%    6.7%      0.86     6.1%     11.3%      1.86        5
    3               Olive Garden         12.2%        10.9%     0.90    12.1%    10.8%     0.89     11.3%    13.5%      1.19       57
    3     Steak     Outback              10.0%         9.3%     0.93    10.1%    8.3%      0.82     9.3%     11.2%      1.21       57
                    Pappade               7.8%        14.5%     1.87     9.7%    5.6%      0.58     7.4%     11.6%      1.56        3
          Pizza     Pizza Hut            15.0%        18.1%     1.21    14.8%    19.8%     1.34     16.0%    14.5%      0.91       66
    2     Pizza     Pizzeria Uno          3.3%         4.1%     1.25     3.3%    4.7%      1.45     2.7%      4.2%      1.56        5
                    Quincys               8.0%        13.1%     1.63     8.9%    10.4%     1.17     10.1%     5.9%      0.59        5
    3               Red Lobster           9.6%        15.1%     1.58    10.3%    10.7%     1.04     10.4%    10.0%      0.96       66
                    Rio Bravo Cantina     6.7%         3.9%     0.58     5.9%    15.7%     2.67     5.2%      8.1%      1.56        3
    2               Ruby Tuesday          8.8%         8.1%     0.92     8.7%    8.5%      0.98     8.3%      9.6%      1.14       21
    6     Steak     Ruths Chris           2.1%         2.1%     0.98     2.2%    3.0%      1.40     1.5%      3.3%      2.20        6
                    Shells                3.5%         5.5%     1.57    12.0%    11.1%     0.93     13.0%     9.6%      0.74       19
                    Sweet Tomatoes        6.5%         3.7%     0.57     7.0%    4.0%      0.57     5.1%      8.3%      1.61        4
    3               TGI Fridays           8.1%        10.1%     1.24     8.4%    9.4%      1.11     7.5%     10.3%      1.36       46




                                                                       34
3   Tony Roma   4.0%   6.1%   1.51    4.4%   3.7%   0.83   4.0%   5.0%   1.27   10




                                     35
Table 4: Restaurants and Population at Various Levels of Geography

                                    (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)
                                3-digit zip     4-digit zip     5-digit zip    5-digit zip
Population (000)                  1.5053          1.5500          1.3869
                                (0.0307)**      (0.0171)**      (0.0125)**
5-digit zip pop (000)                                                             1.3334
                                                                               (0.0146)**
Rest of 4-digit zip pop (000)                                                     0.0297
                                                                               (0.0031)**
Rest of 3-digit zip pop (000)                                                    -0.0027
                                                                               (0.0005)**
Constant                          36.5925          3.7116           3.5030        3.3209
                                 (15.7039)*       (1.6138)*       (0.2787)**   (0.3144)**
Observations                         684            3960             14954        14954
R-squared                            0.78            0.68             0.45         0.45
Standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                  36
Table 5: Restaurant Entry and Population Composition, Various Levels of Geographic Aggregation
                                   (1)           (2)             (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)
                               5-digit zip   5-digit zip     5-digit zip   4-digit zip   4-digit zip   4-digit zip   3-digit zip   3-digit zip   3-digit zip
White Pop (000)                  1.5301                                      1.6656                                    1.5062
                               (0.0141)**                                  (0.0235)**                                (0.0429)**
Black Pop (000)                  0.6432                                      1.0949                                    1.5009
                               (0.0372)**                                  (0.0663)**                                (0.1443)**
Non Hispanic Pop (000)                         1.6885                                      1.8977                                    1.8842
                                             (0.0151)**                                  (0.0215)**                                (0.0372)**
Hisp. Pop (000)                                0.5819                                      0.5780                                    0.5784
                                             (0.0271)**                                  (0.0435)**                                (0.0684)**
College Educ’d Pop (000)                                       2.5800                                     4.1417                                    4.6446
                                                             (0.0830)**                                (0.1566)**                                (0.3074)**
Non-coll. (000)                                                1.6854                                     1.4644                                    1.2353
                                                             (0.0288)**                                (0.0481)**                                (0.0926)**
Constant                        3.0887          1.5824         1.7673        1.3379        -4.2379       -0.5201       36.5142     -20.7481        17.3144
                              (0.2753)**      (0.2752)**     (0.2535)**     (1.6382)     (1.5434)**     (1.3141)     (15.9129)*    (14.2306)      (10.3865)
Observations                     14954           14954          14931         3960          3960           3960          684          684            684
R-squared                         0.47            0.49           0.55         0.68           0.72          0.79          0.78         0.83           0.91
Standard errors   in   parentheses. * significant at 5%;   ** significant at 1%          .




                                                                               37
Table 6: Chain Presence and Group Population in 5-Digit Zip
                           white        black      Non-Hisp       Hisp        College     Non-Coll
McDonalds                  0.0252        0.0235      0.0337        0.0072      -0.0258       0.0525
                         (0.0004)**   (0.0011)**   (0.0005)**   (0.0007)**   (0.0025)**   (0.0010)**
Burger King                0.0159        0.0094      0.0183        0.0054      -0.0147       0.0289
                         (0.0003)**   (0.0006)**   (0.0003)**   (0.0005)**   (0.0016)**   (0.0006)**
Taco Bell                   0.013        0.0057      0.0148        0.0038      -0.0063       0.0211
                         (0.0002)**   (0.0006)**   (0.0003)**   (0.0004)**   (0.0013)**   (0.0005)**
KFC                        0.0126        0.0169      0.0161        0.0057      -0.0202       0.0275
                         (0.0002)**   (0.0007)**   (0.0003)**   (0.0004)**   (0.0014)**   (0.0006)**
Popeye's Fried Chicken     0.0023        0.0063      0.0035        0.0021       -0.003       0.0057
                         (0.0001)**   (0.0003)**   (0.0001)**   (0.0002)**   (0.0006)**   (0.0002)**
Starbucks                  0.0097       -0.0037      0.0099        0.0024       0.0553      -0.0005
                         (0.0002)**   (0.0007)**   (0.0002)**   (0.0004)**   (0.0016)**     -0.0004
Dunkin Donuts              0.0048        0.0042      0.0062        0.0004       0.0067       0.0064
                         (0.0002)**   (0.0004)**   (0.0002)**     -0.0003    (0.0009)**   (0.0003)**
N                           14954                     14931                     14931
Notes: Probit estimates where each row reflects three separate equations, one
with black and white (non-black) population, another with Hisp and non-Hisp, etc. Probability
derivatives reported. Population is measured in thousands.




                                                                   38
Table 7: Restaurant Targeting and Race Distribution
                    (1)          (2)          (3)        (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)           (11)
                # Sample      Sitdown     Fast Food     CR $         CR $$        CR $$$+       Chicken       Pizza        Burger      Mexican       Coffee,
                 Chains       Chains       Chains                                                                                                     bagel
White (000)      0.4624       0.1051       0.3573       0.0127       0.0083         0.0061       0.0177       0.0290       0.0302       0.0153       0.0152
               (0.0042)**   (0.0015)**   (0.0030)**   (0.0002)**   (0.0002)**     (0.0002)**   (0.0003)**   (0.0004)**   (0.0005)**   (0.0003)**   (0.0003)**
Black (000)      0.2220       0.0190       0.2031       0.0033       0.0007         0.0013       0.0340       0.0123       0.0285       0.0053       0.0026
               (0.0112)**   (0.0040)**   (0.0080)**   (0.0006)**    (0.0005)      (0.0004)**   (0.0011)**   (0.0009)**   (0.0014)**   (0.0006)**   (0.0007)**
Constant         0.5317       0.0861       0.4456
               (0.0828)**   (0.0296)**   (0.0593)**
Observations      14954        14954        14954       14954        14954          14954        14954        14954        14954        14954        14954
R-squared          0.47         0.25         0.52


Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Columns (1)-(3) are OLS regressions. Remaining
columns are probit estimates with probability derivatives reported.




                                                                             39
Table 8: Restaurant Targeting and Hispanic Status
                   (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)           (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)          (11)
                # Sample      Sitdown     Fast Food      CR $         CR $$      CR $$$+       Chicken       Pizza        Burger      Mexican      Coffee,
                 Chains       Chains       Chains                                                                                                   bagel
Non-Hisp Pop.    0.5323       0.1217       0.4106       0.0144       0.0100       0.0075       0.0236       0.0335       0.0423       0.0165       0.0169
(000)
                (0.0045)**   (0.0016)**   (0.0032)**   (0.0003)**   (0.0002)**   (0.0002)**   (0.0004)**   (0.0005)**   (0.0006)**   (0.0003)**   (0.0003)**
Hispanic           0.1336       0.0097      0.1239       0.0027       -0.0006      -0.0010      0.0089       0.0082       0.0076       0.0059       0.0036
                (0.0080)**   (0.0029)**   (0.0057)**   (0.0004)**    (0.0004)    (0.0004)**   (0.0005)**   (0.0007)**   (0.0007)**   (0.0004)**   (0.0005)**
Constant          -0.0480      -0.0682      0.0201
                 (0.0812)     (0.0296)*    (0.0579)
Observations       14954        14954        14954       14954        14954        14954        14954        14954        14954        14954        14954
R-squared           0.51         0.28         0.56


Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Columns (1)-(3) are OLS regressions. Remaining
columns are probit estimates with probability derivatives reported.




                                                                           40
Table 9: Restaurant Targeting and Education Distribution
                  (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)          (8)         (9)          (10)         (11)
               # Sample      Sitdown     Fast Food      CR $         CR $$        CR $$$+       Chicken       Pizza       Burger       Mexican      Coffee,
                Chains        Chains      Chains                                                                                                     bagel
College Pop.    0.2589        0.1159      0.1430       0.0038       0.0157         0.0157       -0.0251      0.0129       -0.0411      -0.0049      0.0784
(000)
               (0.0264)**   (0.0096)**   (0.0188)**   (0.0013)**   (0.0010)**     (0.0009)**   (0.0019)**   (0.0027)**   (0.0031)**   (0.0014)**   (0.0023)**
Non-coll.        0.6354       0.1228       0.5126       0.0177       0.0079         0.0048       0.0401       0.0423       0.0702       0.0237       0.0059
               (0.0092)**   (0.0033)**   (0.0065)**   (0.0005)**   (0.0004)**     (0.0003)**   (0.0008)**   (0.0009)**   (0.0012)**   (0.0006)**   (0.0006)**
Constant         0.3112       0.0347       0.2765
               (0.0806)**    (0.0294)    (0.0574)**
Observations     14931        14931        14931        14931        14931          14931        14931        14931        14931        14931        14931
R-squared          0.50         0.27         0.55


Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Columns (1)-(3) are OLS regressions. Remaining
columns are probit estimates with probability derivatives reported.




                                                                             41
Table 10: Restaurant Targeting and Income
                    (1)          (2)          (3)        (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)          (8)         (9)          (10)            (11)
                # Sample      Sitdown     Fast Food     CR $         CR $$        CR $$$+       Chicken       Pizza       Burger       Mexican       Coffee,
                 Chains        Chains       Chains                                                                                                     bagel
HH Inc > 40k     1.4859        0.3842       1.1017      0.0426       0.0355         0.0269       0.0396       0.1058       0.0907       0.0440        0.0885
               (0.0229)**   (0.0085)**   (0.0163)**   (0.0013)**   (0.0010)**     (0.0009)**   (0.0016)**   (0.0025)**   (0.0028)**   (0.0014)**   (0.0019)**
HH Inc < 40k     0.9828        0.1499       0.8328      0.0216       0.0055         0.0036       0.0777       0.0544       0.1107       0.0330       -0.0087
               (0.0262)**   (0.0097)**   (0.0186)**   (0.0014)**   (0.0011)**     (0.0009)**   (0.0021)**   (0.0025)**   (0.0035)**   (0.0015)**   (0.0017)**
Constant         0.0720       -0.0425       0.1145
                (0.0780)     (0.0289)     (0.0554)*
Observations      14931        14931        14931       14931        14931          14931        14931        14931        14931        14931        14931
R-squared          0.53         0.29         0.58


Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Columns (1)-(3) are OLS regressions. Remaining
columns are probit estimates with probability derivatives reported.




                                                                             42
