                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            CAPITAL CONTROLS: AN EVALUATION

                                            Nicolas Magud
                                          Carmen M. Reinhart

                                         Working Paper 11973
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11973


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2006




This paper was prepared for the NBER’s International Capital Flows Conference, Santa Barbara, California,
December 16-18, 2004. The authors want to thank conference participants and Vincent R. Reinhart and
Miguel A. Savastano for useful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Nicolas Magud and Carmen M. Reinhart. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Capital Controls: An Evaluation
Nicolas Magud and Carmen M. Reinhart
NBER Working Paper No. 11973
January 2006
JEL No. F21, F31

                                            ABSTRACT



The literature on capital controls has (at least) four very serious apples-to-oranges problems: (i)
There is not unified theoretical framework to analyze the macroeconomic consequences of controls;
(ii) there is significant heterogeneity across countries and time in the control measures implemented;
(iii) there are multiple definitions of what constitutes a “success” and (iv) the empirical studies lack
a common methodology – furthermore these are significantly “overweighted” by a couple of country
cases (Chile and Malaysia). In this paper, we attempt to address some of these shortcomings by:
being very explicit about what measures are construed as capital controls. Also, given that success
is measured so differently across studies, we sought to “standardize” the results of over 30 empirical
studies we summarize in this paper. The standardization was done by constructing two indices of
capital controls: Capital Controls Effectiveness Index (CCE Index), and Weighted Capital Control
Effectiveness Index (WCCE Index). The difference between them lies only in that the WCCE
controls for the differentiated degree of methodological rigor applied to draw conclusions in each
of the considered papers. Inasmuch as possible, we bring to bear the experiences of less well known
episodes than those of Chile and Malaysia.


Nicolas Magud                                          Carmen Reinhart
University of Oregon                                   University of Maryland
                                                       School of Public Affairs and Department of
                                                         Economics
                                                       4105 Van Munching Hall
                                                       College Park, MD 20742
                                                       and NBER
                                                       reinhart@econ.umd.edu
                                         I. INTRODUCTION


       The literature on capital controls has (at least) four very serious issues that make it

difficult, if not impossible, to compare across theoretical and empirical studies. We dub

these the apples-to-oranges problems and they include: (i) There is no unified theoretical

framework (say, as in the currency crisis literature) to analyze the macroeconomic

consequences of controls; (ii) there is significant heterogeneity across countries and time in

the capital control measures implemented; (iii) there are multiple definitions of what

constitutes a “success” (capital controls are a single policy instrument—but there are many

policy objectives); and (iv) the empirical studies lack a common methodology and are

furthermore significantly “overweighted” by the two poster children--Chile and Malaysia.

       Our goal in this paper is to find a common ground among the non-comparabilities in

the existing literature. Of course, there is usually a level of generality that is sufficiently

encompassing. After all, an apples-to-oranges problem can be solved by calling everything

fruit. Our goal is, as far as possible, to measures of capital controls on a uniform basis.

Once done, it should be easier to understand the cross-country and time-series experience.

       We attempt to address some of these apples-to-oranges shortcomings by being very

explicit about what measures are construed as capital controls. We not only document the

more drastic differences across countries/episodes and between controls on inflows and

outflows, but the more subtle differences in types of inflow or outflow controls. Also, given

that success is measured so differently across studies, we standardize (wherever possible)

the results of over 30 empirical studies summarized in this paper. Inasmuch as possible, we

bring to bear the experiences of episodes less well known than those of Chile and Malaysia.

       The standardization was done by constructing two indices of capital controls:

Indices of Capital Controls Effectiveness (CCE), and Weighted Capital Control

                                                2
Effectiveness (WCCE ). The difference between them lies only in that the WCCE controls

for the differentiated degree of methodological rigor applied to draw conclusions in each of

the considered papers.

       With these indexes, our results can be summarized briefly. Capital controls on

inflows seem to make monetary policy more independent, alter the composition of capital

flows, and reduce real exchange rate pressures (although the evidence there is more

controversial). Capital controls on inflows seem not to reduce the volume of net flows (and

hence, the current account balance). As to controls on outflows, there is Malaysia and there

is everybody else. In Malaysia, controls reduced outflows, and may have given room for

more independent monetary policy (the other poster child does not fare as well, in that our

results are not as conclusive as for the Chilean controls on inflows). Absent the Malaysian

experience, there is little systematic evidence of “success” in imposing controls, however,

defined.

       The paper proceeds as follows. The next section summarizes some of the key

reasons why capital controls—particularly capital controls on inflows—are either

considered or implemented. Controls, as we note help deal with what we dub as the “four

fears”. Section III focuses on the distinctions among types of capital controls—highlighting

that not all capital control measures are created equal and therefore can be simply lumped

together in a rough capital controls index. Section IV, examines the existing empirical

evidence by standardizing and sorting studies along a variety of criteria. Namely, we focus

on the following sorting strategy. First, we analyze separately cases where the study was

multi country or focused on a single case study; second, we distinguish the cases where the

controls were primarily designed to deal with inflows or outflows; third, we provide an ad

hoc (but uniform) criteria to rank the approach or econometric rigor applied in the study to


                                             3
test hypotheses about the effects of the controls; and last, we evaluate the outcomes

reported in the studies according to the definition of what constitutes a success. The last

section discusses some of the policy implications of our findings.



              II. THE RATIONALE FOR CAPITAL CONTROLS AND THE “FOUR FEARS”



       Anyone examining the literature on capital controls, which spans many decades and

all the regions around the globe, would be well advised to retain a sense of irony.

Repeatedly, policy makers have sought refuge in tax laws, supervisory restraint, and

regulation of financial transactions to cope with external forces that they deem to be

unacceptable.    Often they rationalized their actions on loftier grounds, sometimes so

effectively as to make it difficult to clearly identify episodes of controls on capital.

       But in all these episodes, four fears lurk beneath the surface.



   1. Fear of appreciation

   Being the darling of investors in global financial centers has the decided, albeit often

temporary, advantage of having ample access to funds at favorable cost. With the capital

inflow comes upward pressure on the exchange value of the currency, rendering domestic

manufacturers less competitive in global markets, and especially so relative to their close

competitors who are not so favored as an investment vehicle. A desire to stem such an

appreciation (which Calvo and Reinhart, 2002, refer to as “fear of floating”) is typically

manifest in the accumulation of foreign exchange reserves. Over time, though, sterilizing

such reserve accumulation (the topic of Reinhart and Reinhart, 1998) becomes more

difficult, and more direct intervention more appealing.


                                                4
   2. Fear of “hot money”

     For policy makers in developing countries, becoming the object of foreign investors’

attention is particularly troubling if such affection is viewed as fleeting. The sudden

injection of funds into a small market can cause an initial dislocation that is mirrored by the

strains associated with their sudden withdrawal. Such a distrust of “hot money” was behind

James Tobin’s initial proposal to throw sand in the wheels of international finance, an idea

that has been well received in at least some quarters. Simply put, a high-enough tax (if

effectively enforced) would dissuade the initial inflow and pre-empt the pain associated

with the inevitable outflow.



   3. Fear of large inflows

    Policy makers in emerging market economies do not universally distrust the providers

of foreign capital. Not all money is hot but even then, sometimes the sheer volume of

flows matters.   A large volume of capital inflows, particularly when it is sometimes

indiscriminate in the search for higher yields (in the manner documented by Calvo,

Leiderman and Reinhart, 1994), causes dislocations in the financial system. Foreing funds

can fuel asset price bubbles and encourage excess risk taking by cash-rich domestic

intermediaries. Again recourse to tax may seem to yield a large benefit.



   4. Fear of loss of monetary autonomy

    The interests of global investors and domestic policy makers need not always—or even

often—align. But a trinity is always at work that it is not possible to have a fixed (or highly

managed) exchange rate, monetary policy autonomy, and open capital markets (as


                                              5
discussed in Frankel, 2001). If there is some attraction to retaining some element of

monetary policy flexibility, something has to give up. However, in the presence of the

aforementioned fear of floating, giving up capital mobility may seem more attractive than

surrendering monetary policy autonomy.

       Whatever the reason inducing action, some form of capital control might seem as

controlling exchange rate pressures, stemming large inflows, and regaining an element of

monetary autonomy. Less fortunate are those policy makers who impose controls to reduce

capital flight, because investors seeking safety—most importantly including domestic

residents as well as foreigners—are seldom dissuaded by regulatory restraint.



       III.    CAPITAL CONTROLS? WHAT DO WE MEAN BY CAPITAL CONTROLS?

       In most of the empirical literature there are no distinctions between controls on

outflows and inflows—these exercises suffer from the same problems as the de jure IMF

classification of exchange rate arrangements. Even when a distinction is made between

inflows and outflows (as we do here), controls can and do range from the explicit to the
                                                   1
subtle and the market friendly to the coercive.

       Furthermore, when considering the impacts and effectiveness of capital controls one

cannot lump together the experiences of countries that have not substantially liberalized

(i.e., India and China) with countries that actually went down the path of financial and

capital account liberalization and decide at some point to reintroduce controls, as the latter




       1
          There is, of course, the important issue of temporary versus permanent policies
which is a distinction not addressed here owing to the fact that most empirical studies do
not focus on this issue. For a model and a discussion of the temporary versus permanent
issue see Reinhart and Smith (2002).

                                               6
have developed institutions and practices that are integrated in varying degrees to

international capital markets.

       Tables 1-2, which squarely focus on measures targeted to affect inflows in countries

which had already gone the route of capital account liberalization 2 indeed highlight the

heterogeneity in both subtlety and “market-friendliness” of capital control measures that

have been tried in Asia, Europe, and Latin America during booms (these involve controls

on capital inflows) as well as crashes (and attempts to curb capital outflows). These

measures not only differ in subtlety and other features but also in intensity. 3




2
  Hence, these cases involve the reintroduction of controls.
3
  For a measure that “quantifies” the intensity of these measures see Montiel and Reinhart
(1999).
                                               7
             Table1. Restrictions on Inflows and “Prudential Requirements:” Asia


            Country and date (in parentheses) denoting the first year of the surge in inflows


                                             Indonesia (1990)
March, 1991: Central Bank adopts measures to discourage offshore borrowing. Bank Indonesia begins to
scale down its swap operations by reducing individual banks' limits from 25 to 20 percent of capital. The
three-month swap premium was raised by 5 percentage points.
October, 1991: All state-related offshore commercial borrowing was made subject to prior approval by the
Government and annual ceilings were set for new commitments over the next five years.
November, 1991: Further measures are taken to discourage offshore borrowing. The limits on banks' net open
market foreign exchange positions were tightened by placing a separate limit on off-balance sheet positions.
Bank Indonesia also announced that future swap operations (except for "investment swaps" with maturities of
more than two years) would be undertaken only at the initiative of Bank Indonesia.

                                                 Malaysia (1989)
June 1, 1992: Limits on non-trade-related swap transactions were imposed on commercial banks.
January 17, 1994-August 1994: Banks were subject to a ceiling on their non-trade- or noninvestment-related
external liabilities.
January 24, 1994-August 1994: Residents were prohibited from selling short-term monetary instruments to
nonresidents.
February 2, 1994-August 1994: Commercial banks were required to place with Bank Negara the ringgit
funds of foreign banking institutions (Vostro accounts) held in non-interest bearing accounts. However, in the
January-May period these accounts were considered part of the eligible liabilities base for the calculation of
required reserves, resulting in a negative effective interest rate in Vostro balances.
February 23, 1994-August 1994: Commercial banks are not allowed to undertake non-trade related swap
and outright forward transactions on the bid side with foreign customers.

                                           Philippines (1992)
July, 1994: Bangko Central begins to discourage forward cover arrangements with non-resident financial
institutions.

                                               Thailand (1988)
Banks and finance companies net foreign exchange positions may not exceed 20 percent of capital.
Banks and finance companies net foreign liabilities may not exceed 20 percent of capital.
Residents are not allowed to hold foreign currency deposits except only for trade-related purposes.
April, 1990: Banks and finance companies net foreign exchange positions limit raised to 25 percent of
capital.
August 8, 1995: Reserve requirements, to be held in the form of non-interest bearing deposits at the Bank of
Thailand, on short-term non-resident baht accounts were raised from 2 percent to 7 percent. While reserve
requirements on domestic deposits are also 7 percent, up to 5 percent can be held in the form of interest-
bearing public bonds.
December 1995: The 7 percent reserve requirement is extended to finance companies short-term (less than
one year) promissory notes held by non-residents.
A variety of measures aimed at reducing foreign-financed lending were introduced.
April 19, 1996: Offshore borrowing with maturities of less than 1 year by commercial banks, BIBF offices,
finance companies and finance and security companies will be subject to a 7-percent minimum reserve
requirement in the form of a nonremunerated deposit with the Bank of Thailand. Loans for trade purposes
will be exempt.
Sources: Alfiler (1994), Bank Indonesia, Annual Report, various issues, Bank Negara, Annual Report,
various issues, and Bank of Thailand reports, various issues.




                                                      8
Table1. (continued) Restrictions on Inflows and Prudential Requirements: Eastern Europe
                                   and Latin America


             Country and date (in parentheses) denoting the first year of the surge in inflows


                                                 Brazil (1992)
October, 1994: A 1 percent tax on foreign investment in the stock market. Eliminated on March 10, 1995.
The tax on Brazilian companies issuing bonds overseas was raised from 3 percent to 7 percent of the total.
Eliminated on March 10, 1995.
The tax paid by foreigners on fixed interest investments in Brazil was raised from 5 percent to 9 percent.
Reduced back to 5 percent on March 10, 1995.
The Central Bank raised limits on the amount of dollars that can be bought on foreign exchange markets.

                                                   Chile (1990)
June, 1991: Nonrenumerated 20 percent reserve requirement to be deposited at the Central Bank for a period
of one year on liabilities in foreign currency for direct borrowing by firms.
The stamp tax of 1.2 percent a year (previously paid by domestic currency credits only) was applied to foreign
loans as well. This requirement applies to all credits during their first year, with the exception of trade loans.
May, 1992: The reserve requirement on liabilities in foreign currency for direct borrowing by firms is raised
to 30 percent. Hence, all foreign currency liabilities have a common reserve requirement.

                                                 Colombia (1991)
June, 1991: A 3 percent withholding tax on foreign exchange receipts from personal services rendered
abroad and other transfers, which could be claimed as credit against income tax liability.
February, 1992: Banco de la Republica increases its commission on its cash purchases of foreign exchange
from 1.5 percent to 5 percent.
June, 1992: Regulation of the entry of foreign currency as payment for services.
September, 1993: A nonrenumerated 47 percent reserve requirement to be deposited at the Central Bank on
liabilities in foreign currency for direct borrowing by firms. The reserve requirement is to be maintained for
the duration of the loan and applies to all loans with a maturity of 18 months or less, except for trade credit.
August, 1994: Nonrenumerated reserve requirement to be deposited at the Central Bank on liabilities in
foreign currency for direct borrowing by firms. The reserve requirement is to be maintained for the duration
of the loan and applies to all loans with a maturity of five years or less, except for trade credit with a maturity
of four months or less. The percentage of the requirement declines as the maturity lengthens; from
140 percent for funds that are 30 days or less to 42.8 percent for five year funds.
                                                 Colombia (2002)
December, 2004: Foreigners investing in domestic markets must now keep their money in the country for at
least one year.

                                             Czech Republic (1992)
April, 1995: The central bank introduced a fee of 0.25 percent on its foreign exchange transactions with
banks, with the aim of discouraging short-term speculative flows.
August 1, 1995: A limit on net short-term (less than one year) foreign borrowing by banks is introduced.
Each bank is to ensure that its net short-term liabilities to nonresidents, in all currencies, do not exceed the
smaller of 30 percent of claims on nonresidents or Kc 500 million.
Administrative approval procedures seek to slow down short-term borrowing by nonbanks.

                                                Mexico (1990)
April, 1992: A regulation that limited foreign currency liabilities of commercial banks to 10 percent of their
total loan portfolio was passed. Banks had to place 15 percent of these liabilities in highly liquid instruments.
 Sources: Banco Central de Chile, (1991 and 1992), Banco de la Republica, Colombia (1993 and 1994),
Banco de Mexico (1992), and Conselho Monetario Nacional, Brasil (1994 and 1995).




                                                         9
              Table 2. Restrictions on Outflows: Asia, Europe, and Latin America


      Country and date (in parentheses) denoting the first year of the surge in outflows (or crisis)

                              Argentina (crisis ending the Convertibility Plan, 2001)
December, 2001: The Corralito is established, limiting bank withdrawal limits and restrictions on dollar
transfers and loans. However, purchases through checks or credit cards available, and purchases of
government bonds. Dec.30: suspension of external payments (debt default). January 2002 there is a 40%
devaluation and a dual exchange rate regime is introduced (1.4 pesos per dollar for trade operations, while
floating regime for all other transactions. Later in the month, there is an. easing of bank withdrawals
restrictions followed by an asymmetric pesofication. Pesofication of dollar deposits at 1.4 pesos per dollar;
dollar debts pesofied at market exchange rate; unification of exchange rate regimes in a floating scheme; right
to withdraw wages and pension incomes in full; Corralon is imposed: freeze of bank term deposits. In
September of that year it is required that stocks should be traded in domestic currency regulation. Since the
latter is widely resisted, it was eased, but the new restriction significantly increased transactions costs. In
December 2002 the Corralito is rescinded.

                                   Brazil, (crisis ending the Real Plan, 1999)
March 1999: Government ordered local investment funds to increase their holdings of government bonds.
The central bank raised to 80 percent from 60 percent the minimum amount of sovereign debt that must be
held in the country foreign investment fund. This lowered the share that could be held in other countries’ debt.
                                          Malaysia (Asian crisis, 1997)
September, 1998:: Bank and foreign exchange controls limiting offshore swap operations, ban on short-
selling. 1998: repatriation of ringgit held offshore, and strict regulation on offshore operations and most
international operations in ringgit, export and import operations allowed in foreign currency only, 12-month
waiting period for non-residents to sell profits from Malaysian securities, approval required to invest abroad
(above certain limits). In December residents are allowed to grant loans to nonresidents to purchase
immovable property. In January, 1999 some derivative transactions for nonresidents are permitted. In
February there is a gradual ease on the 12-month waiting period and some repatriations funds exempted from
exit regulations. In March exports and imports trade ceilings are raised for operations with Thailand. In
September commercial banks allowed to enter into some short-term currency swaps with nonresident
stockbrokers. In March, 2000 funds from sale of securities purchased by nonresidents can be repatriated
without paying exit levy and in June administrative procedures to ease classification of securities as being free
from exit levy. September 30th: Some offshore banks are allowed to invest in ringgit assets. December 1st:
foreign-owned banks are allowed to increase domestic credit. In February 2001 the exit levy is abolished for
some operations. In May of that year the remaining exit levy is abolished. While in June all controls on
nonresidents’ futures and options are abolished. In July, resident financial institutions allowed to extend
ringgit loans to nonresidents investing in immovable property in Malaysia. In November 2002, resident banks
credit levels to finance nonresidents projects in Malaysia are raised. On December 3rd: foreign currency limit
for investment abroad by residents is abolished, and payments are liberalized to allow them to be in either
ringgit or foreign currency.
                                            Spain (ERM Crisis, 1992)
September, 1992: Bank of Spain suspends regular money market operations and introduces foreign exchange
controls. In October of that year the peseta is devalued and some of the controls a re lifted—in November the
remaining foreign exchange controls rescinded.
                                          Thailand (Asian crisis, 1997)
May, 1997: Bank of Thailand (BOT) introduces restrictions on capital account transactions. In June BOT
introduces additional measures to limit capital flows. Baht proceeds from sales of stocks required to be
converted at the onshore exchange rate. Additional controls are introduced and later in the month a two-tier
exchange rate is introduced. In September of that year, Additional controls on invisible and current account
transactions are introduced. In January 1998 it is required that proceeds on exports and invisible transactions
and current account transfers must be surrendered after 7 days (instead of 15 days). BOT ends two-tier
exchange rate regime.at the end of that month
Sources: Banco de España, Bank Negara, Annual Report, various issues, and Bank of Thailand reports,
various issues, Conselho Monetario Nacional, Brasil, (Dominguez and Tesar (2004).


                                                       10
               IV. THE EMPIRICAL LITERATURE: FINDING A COMMON GROUND

       This section aims to overcome (or at least take a step in that direction) two of the

apples-to-oranges problems we have identified in the capital controls literature. Namely,

we attempt to: (i) ascertain when and in what capacity capital controls were “successful” in

achieving the stated objectives of the authorities (this is not trivial, as what constitutes as a

success is defined very differently across studies) and; (ii) standardize (to some extent) the

very eclectic array of descriptive and empirical methodologies and approaches that have

characterized the empirical literature on capital controls. Lastly, we bring to bear evidence

on lesser well known episodes other than the “classics” (Chile’s controls on inflows starting

in 1990 and Malaysia’s 1998 controls on outflows).

       In what follows, we review more than 30 papers that study capital controls either on

inflows or outflows around the world. Some are country case studies and some describe

several individual country experiences, while others are multi-country studies that bunch

several cases together. As noted earlier, the papers measure “success” differently--thus, our

aim is to standardize methodology and results where possible so as to facilitate

comparisons. This will not only enable us to assess the effectiveness of alternative capital

controls events, but it will also permit us to evaluate some of the policy implications of

imposing controls on capital inflows and/or outflows under alternative scenarios.

1. Types of studies

       We proceed as follows. First, we cluster the papers into three broad groups: (i)

capital inflows (CI), (ii) capital outflows (CO); and (iii) multi-country (MC)—the latter

including the analysis of both capital inflows and/or capital outflow episodes. We collected

studies of capital controls for the following countries (the number of papers are shown in


                                                11
parenthesis): For CI, there are studies on: Brazil (6), Chile (11), Colombia (3), Czech

Republic (1), Malaysia (2), and Thailand (1). For CO, we obtained information for

Malaysia (5), Spain (3), and Thailand (2). For the MC group, we collected five papers,

covering a wide array of countries.4



2. Objective(s) of capital controls

        Given the multiple objectives that capital controls are expected to achieve, in each

paper we asked the following questions: Were capital controls able to

        (i)       Reduce the volume of capital flows?

        (ii)      Alter the composition of capital flows (towards longer maturity flows)?

        (iii)     Reduce real exchange rate pressures?

        (iv)      Allow for a more independent monetary policy?

        We asked these questions to each of the papers. As a first step to sort this

information, we constructed Tables 3, 4, and 5. Table 3 includes CI episodes, Table 4

displays CO episodes, and Table 5 focuses in MC studies. As can be seen on the tables,

possible answers are YES, NO, or a blank space. If the table reads YES in any cell, it

means that the paper finds that the corresponding objective of capital controls was

achieved. NO stands for the paper finding that there was not such effect as a result of the

capital controls. A blank space means that the paper does not address whether there was an

effect or not. Sometimes the answer is followed by (ST). This is there to inform that the

effects were only temporary, i.e. that an objective was achieved only in the Short Term.

Just to give an example, in Table 3, the paper by Laurens and Cardoso (1998) studying the

        4
            For example, one of the more comprehensive multi-country papers uses monthly data for the

period 1971-1998 for a panel of 26 countries.


                                                     12
case of the Chilean experience during the 1990’s, finds evidence that capital controls were

able to reduce the volume of capital flows only in the short term, that they were able to alter

the composition of these flows towards longer maturity flows, and they were not successful

in reducing pressures on the real exchange rate. They do not report results regarding the

effectiveness of capital controls in making monetary policy more independent.

       In a first pass to this information, by inspection, we can summarize the following

(see Table 6). We observe that in general, it looks like capital controls, as it emerges from

the results obtained in these papers, were successful in altering the composition of capital

flows towards longer maturities, and in making monetary policy more independent.

However, it looks that the papers are not very informative regarding the effectiveness of

capital controls in reducing the volume of capital flows and reducing real exchange rate

pressures.



3. Indices of capital control effectiveness

   But this is not informative enough, since it still lacks some rigor to evaluate the

effectiveness of capital controls episodes. In order to better understand this, we construct

two indices of capital controls effectiveness. We call them Capital Controls Effectiveness

Index (CCE Index), and Weighted Capital Controls Effectiveness Index (WCCE Index).

The only difference in computing them, is that the WCCE Index weighs the results

obtained in each paper by the degree of methodological rigor applied to draw conclusions –

more on this below.

       In both cases, following the information summarized in Tables 3-5, we arbitrarily

assigned the following values:




                                              13
If the answer is YES, the corresponding value is 1,

If the answer is NO, the value assigned is -1.

If the question is not addressed at all, it corresponds a value of 0.

       These values are designed to equally weigh the existence or not existence of effects

as a result of the imposition of capital controls, and to give no weight to questions not

addressed, so as not to distort the results in case any objective of capital controls is not

answered by the paper.

With these values at hand, for each country, we computed simple averages of these

numbers for each of the four questions asked to the papers. This gives, for example, a CCE

Index for volume reduction for each country, a CCE Index for real exchange rate pressures

reduction for each country, and so on and so forth. With this information we are able to

compare, for each objective, which country was more effective.

       We also used this information to compute some sort of aggregate index of capital

controls effectiveness, by averaging out the four CCE Indices for each country, and then

compare a global CCE Index among countries.

       However, as already mentioned, the methodology used to evaluate success is highly

heterogeneous. The latter is the consequence of how different papers evaluate capital

controls. Some papers are mainly descriptive, generating conclusions just by the

movements (or lack of thereof) in the time series of the main variables, lacking any

rigorous statistical or econometric analysis. Other papers do some statistical or econometric

methodology to evaluate capital controls events. Among them, the variance is still high

regarding the degree of rigor used to extract conclusions from the data.




                                                 14
       In order to control for these differences, we did another pass to the information in

the papers. We classify each study according to the degree of methodological rigor in,

LOW, INTERMEDIATE, and HIGH.

For this purpose, we consider a study to be LOW, INTERMEDIATE, and HIGH, according

to the following criteria:

Low: This includes studies that are mainly descriptive analysis of events and/or time series.

Intermediate: This groups papers that draw conclusions from a more formal evaluation of

events, still lacking any formal hypothesis testing. An example of this could be papers that

perform some time re-scaling to compare the effects of capital controls “before” and “after”

capital controls.

High: This includes only those studies that have highly developed econometric techniques,

with a well defined hypothesis testing.

       Table 7 (in the Appendix) summarizes the methodology used in each paper, as well

as the corresponding classification in Low, Intermediate, High, following the above

definitions.

In order to compute the WCCE Index, we assigned the following values:

Low: 0.1

Intermediate: 0.5

High: 1.

       With these values at hand, we compute the WCCE Index similarly to the CCE

Index, in order to compare, for each of the four objectives, which country has been more

effective in achieving them. We also compute an aggregate (per country) WCCE Index

This enables us to understand for which countries were capital controls more useful.

Furthermore, given these, we can, at least as a first approximation, find conditions under


                                             15
which capital controls tend to be effective. Once more, it is worth mentioning that these

exercises were done separately for the 3 clusters in which we separated the papers, namely

CI, CO, and MC.



4. Summary of results

       Summary results of CCE Index and WCCE Index are presented in Table 8 (Panels

A, B and C). From these indices, we can extract the following policy conclusions. Looking

at controls on inflows (Panel A) along with the preliminary results in Table 6, capital

controls were able to make monetary policy more independent, alter the composition of

capital flows towards longer maturities, and reduce real exchange rate pressures (although

the evidence on the latter is more controversial). Interestingly, the usual model economy for

these type of controls, Chile, stands out as achieving these goals quite comfortably, as the

WCCE Index shows. In this regard, initial conditions or characteristics such as the ones in

Chile in the early 1990’s, along with the continuing reforms during the 1990’s look like

necessary conditions for capital controls on inflows to be effective. On the other hand,

capital controls on inflows were not very effective in reducing the volume of net flows

(hence its impact on the current account balance).

       Looking in more detail, we see that Malaysia (1994) stands out as the best

performance in terms of reducing the volume of capital flows, Chile dominates regarding

the change in capital flows maturity, Thailand does it in respect to reducing real exchange

rate pressures, and Chile also dominates in regards to monetary policy independence.

Overall, as the average of the WCCE Index reflects, Chile emerges as the more successful

example of capital controls on inflows.




                                              16
       When focusing on capital controls on outflows (Panel B), the received wisdom is

that Malaysia (1997) is the example to follow. From our results, we can see that these types

of capital controls were effective in reducing capital outflows, and in making monetary

policy more independent. Yet, the results from WCCE Index are not as conclusive as the

Chilean controls on inflows.

       If we focus on the reduction in capital flows, Thailand and Spain dominate

Malaysia. Regarding the switch in capital flows towards more longer maturity no

conclusion can be extracted, whereas Spain emerges as the best in regard to real exchange

rate pressures reduction; on the other hand, Malaysia clearly dominates when dealing with

making monetary policy more independent. On the aggregate, Malaysia appears as the

more successful experience in terms of capital controls on outflows.

       Some further comments are in order. First, it could be argued that these indices are

not taking into account many other variables that might be affecting the effectiveness of

capital controls, especially the set of “other” reforms being put in place in each country

during each capital controls episode. That is true. However, this paper is reviewing and

assessing only the conclusion contained in previous papers, not the papers themselves. All

the reviewed papers draw conclusions from their information sets, and we just put them

together and try to extract the main message that these papers give as a group. Furthermore,

precisely because of these “omitted variables bias” type of problem is that our WCCE

Index becomes more relevant. For example, any structural reform carried on in parallel

with capital controls is not usually specifically reflected in the papers we review—in a

sense, for us this is similar to running a regression with missing data that you have to

control for. This is where the degree of methodological rigor becomes important. The more




                                              17
formal the analysis is, especially if including hypothesis testing, the more accurate the

information contained in it.

       Second, a similar reasoning applies to the endogeneity of capital controls. Some

could argue that we should control for it. Again, we rely on the conclusions obtained in

previous papers, thus giving more value to the results we obtain from WCCE Index. Also,

this is relevant for how controls on capital inflows affect capital outflows. Moreover, that is

why we cluster CI and CO separately in our analysis above.

       Third, it is worth mentioning that the papers we review are clearly not the only ones

dealing with capital controls. There are many papers that analyze the long-run effects of

capital controls, whereas we focus on the short-run only, as can be seen from the questions

we ask to the papers. For completeness, Table 9 lists some of the papers that study the

effects of capital controls on growth –we don’t go into further details since these papers are

out of our scope.

       Fourth, another interesting point is whether capital controls regimes are transitory or

permanent. Here, as the type of questions we focus on clearly reveals, we are interested

only in transitory events. This is why episodes such as the Chinese or Indian approach to

capital controls are not covered here –see the papers on these countries contained in this

volume for that purpose.

       Fifth, one interesting point to raise is related to the timing (and related endogeneity)

of capital controls: whether they are imposed in response to events – crises— or if they are

design in advance. Here, once more, we lack information because we rely only on what

papers conclude. It is worth mentioning though, that by inspection, it might appear like the

Malaysia (1997) episode could have been designed in advance, unlike most of the other

episodes, and especially unlike common wisdom about itself. This can be read from the


                                              18
chronologies described in Tables 1 and 2. In the case of Malaysia (1997), a big chunk of

controls were imposed on September 1st, 1997. Furthermore, the level of detail in them

seems suggests that this was not decided and designed just in response to the crises.

       Sixth, some times, temporary capital controls events become permanent. This could

be because of time consistency problems, or just because of the current response to future

changes: rational expectations calls for incorporating in your current decision the fact that

in a pre-specified time period capital controls will be levied. Furthermore, even if a country

imposed capital controls, and did levy them at the pre-established date, this might work as a

signal that capital controls might be imposed in the future if needed. However, this says

nothing about this being either good or bad –many things will influence the latter,

especially its effectiveness, as well as its effects on property rights. Anyway, imposing

capital controls once, establishes some kind of precedent regarding a country’s position

towards capital mobility, despite its costs and benefits. This is another dimension in which

temporary capital controls might become “permanent”.




                                              19
                  Table 3. The Famous Chilean Case and Other Lesser Deities:
                         Summary of Key Findings on “Effectiveness”


                                           Did controls on inflows

                                            Reduce the          Alter the       Reduce real    Make monetary
          Study                Sample       volume of         composition of   exchange rate    policy more
                                            net capital          flows           pressures      independent
                                             inflows

                                                   Brazil
  Cardoso & Goldfajn                         Yes (ST)           Yes (ST)
         (1998)
   Edison & Reinhart            1994                                                No               No
Reinhart & Smith (1998)                      Yes (ST)           Yes (ST)
 Ariyoshi, Habermeier,
 Laurens, Okter-Robe,        1993-1997          No                 No               No            Yes (ST)
 Canales-Kriljenko &
    Kirilenko (2000)

                                                      Chile
  De Gregorio, Edwards         1988:I-          Yes             Yes (ST)         Yes (ST)         Yes (ST)
    &Valdés (2000)             1998:II
    Edwards (1999)a                                                Yes              No            Yes (ST)
    Edwards (1999)b            1991:6-          No                 Yes              No              Yes
                               1998:9
  Edwards & Rigobon            1991:1-                                             Yes
         (2004)                1999:9
Hernández & Schmidt-                         Yes (ST)           Yes (ST)            No               Yes
     Hebbel (1999)
   Labán, Larraín &          1985-1994          No                 Yes
   Chumacero (1997)
    Labán & Larraín
         (1998)
  Laurens & Cardoso                          Yes (ST)              Yes              No
         (1998)
 Le Fort & Budnevich         1990-1994          No                                 Yes               Yes
         (1997)                                                   Yes
Reinhart & Smith (1998)                      Yes (ST)           Yes (ST)
 Valdés-Prieto & Soto        1987-1995
         (1995)                                 No                 Yes              No               No
 Ariyoshi, Habermeier,       1991-1998
 Laurens, Okter-Robe,                           No                 No               No               Yes
 Canales-Kriljenko &
    Kirilenko (2000)



Notes: A blank entry refers to the cases where the study in question did not analyze that particular
relationship. An (ST) refers to cases where only short-term effects were detected.
1
  Note that there are several studies on Malaysia’s 1998 capital controls targeting outflows. Here, we are
referring to the controls on capital inflows introduced in January 1994.




                                                       20
           Table 3 (continued). The Famous Chilean Case and Other Lesser Deities:
                        Summary of Key Findings on “Effectiveness”


                                           Did controls on inflows

                                            Reduce the        Alter the        Reduce real     Make monetary
          Study                Sample       volume of       composition of    exchange rate     policy more
                                            net capital        flows            pressures       independent
                                             inflows

                                                 Colombia
 Le Fort & Budnevich         1990-1995       Yes (ST)            Yes               Yes               Yes
         (1997)
Reinhart & Smith (1998)                         No                No
 Ariyoshi, Habermeier,
 Laurens, Okter-Robe,        1993-1998          No                No               No                Yes
 Canales-Kriljenko &
   Kirilenko (2000)

                                               Czech Republic
Reinhart & Smith (1998)                         No          Yes (ST)

                                              Malaysia (1989) 1
Reinhart & Smith (1998)                        Yes              Yes

                                               Malaysia (1994)
  Ariyoshi, Habermeier,
  Laurens, Okter-Robe,          1994            Yes              Yes            Yes (ST)             Yes
  Canales-Kriljenko &
    Kirilenko (2000)

                                                  Thailand
  Ariyoshi, Habermeier,
  Laurens, Okter-Robe,       1995-1997          Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
  Canales-Kriljenko &
    Kirilenko (2000)


Notes: A blank entry refers to the cases where the study in question did not analyze that particular
relationship. An (ST) refers to cases where only short-term effects were detected.
1
  Note that there are several studies on Malaysia’s 1998 capital controls targeting outflows. Here, we are
referring to the controls on capital inflows introduced in January 1994.




                                                      21
                  Table 4. The Famous Malaysian Case and Other Lesser Deities:
                           Summary of Key Findings on “Effectiveness”


                                            Did controls on outflows:

                                             Reduce the          Alter the        Reduce real      Make monetary
                                            volume of net      composition of    exchange rate      policy more
          Study                Episode         capital            flows            pressures        independent
                                              outflows

                                                    Malaysia
     Tamirisia (2004)          1991:1-                                                No                 Yes
                               2002:12
   Dornbusch (2001)                                                                   No
Edison & Reinhart (2000)                                                              Yes                Yes
Kaplan & Rodrik (2002)        1992-1996                                                                  Yes
 Ariyoshi, Habermeier,
 Laurens, Okter-Robe,         1998-2000          Yes                                  Yes                Yes
  Canales-Kriljenko &
    Kirilenko (2000)

                                                       Spain
     Jose Vinals(1992)          1992              No
    Edison & Reinhart         1995-1999                                               No                 No
Ariyoshi, Habermeier,
Laurens, Okter-Robe,             1992            Yes                               Yes (ST)              Yes
Canales-Kriljenko &
Kirilenko (2000)

                                                    Thailand
Edison & Reinhart (2000)                                                              No                 No
Ariyoshi, Habermeier,
Laurens, Okter-Robe,          1997-1998          Yes                                  Yes              Yes (ST)
Canales-Kriljenko &
Kirilenko (2000)

Notes: A blank entry refers to the cases where the study in question did not analyze that particular
relationship. An (ST) refers to cases where only short-term effects were detected.




                                                       22
                            Table 5. The “Others” – Multicountry Studies
                            Summary of Key Findings on “Effectiveness”


                                             Did controls on inflows:

  Study                 Sample                 Reduce the        Alter the        Reduce real     Make monetary
                                             volume of net     composition       exchange rate     policy more
                                             capital inflows    of flows           pressures       independent

Montiel &        Indonesia, Malaysia,             No             Yes (ST)                              No
Reinhart        Philippines, Sri Lanka,
 (1999)          Thailand, Argentina,
               Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
              Costa Rica, Mexico, Czech
                Republic, Egypt, Kenya
               and Uganda (1990-1996)

 Reinhart      Brazil, Chile, Colombia,        Yes (ST)          Yes (ST)
 & Smith      Czech Republic, Malaysia,
  (1998)               Mexico,
               Thailand, Indonesia, and
                      Philippines

Kaplan &            Korea, Thailand,                                                                   Yes
 Rodrik           Indonesia, Malaysia
 (2002)         (monthly and quarterly
              data for 1992-1996 -before
              crisis- and from crisis time
                   and 1 year ahead)

Edison &       Spain (1991-1993), and                                                 No               No
Reinhart        1995-1999 for Brazil,
 (1999)        Malaysia, and Thailand.
              Control group: Philippines
               and South Korea (daily
                        data)

Miniane &         Australia, Austria,                                              Yes (ST)            No
 Rogers        Belgium, Canada, Chile,
 (2004)          Colombia, Denmark,
              Finland, France, Germany,
              Greece, India, Italy, Japan,
              Korea, Malaysia, Mexico,
              The Netherlands, Norway,
              The Philippines, Portugal,
                 South Africa, Spain,
                Sweden, Turkey, UK.
              (monthly data for 1971:1-
                       1998:12)

Notes: A blank entry refers to the cases where the study in question did not analyze that particular
relationship. An (ST) refers to cases where only short-term effects were detected.




                                                       23
              Table 6. Summary of Results By Country and Multi-country Studies


                                          Did controls on inflows:
                                              Reduce the                                          Make
                                               volume of        Alter the     Reduce real        monetary
                  Study                        net capital    composition    exchange rate     policy more
                                                inflows        of flows        pressures       independent

            Complete Sample                     Unclear           Yes           Unclear             Yes

           Control on Inflows
                 Brazil                         Unclear         Unclear           No              Unclear
                 Chile                          Unclear          Yes           Unclear**           Yes
               Colombia                         Unclear         Unclear         Unclear            Yes
            Czech Republic                       No              Yes
            Malaysia (1989)                      Yes             Yes
            Malaysia (1994)                      Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes
               Thailand                          Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes

          Control on Outflows
            Malaysia (1998)                                                     Unclear            Yes
                 Spain                          Unclear                         Unclear           Unclear
               Thailand                          Yes                             Yes               Yes

          Multi-country studies                   Yes             Yes             Yes               No



Note: Yes stands for yes, it worked; No for no, it did not work; Unclear for mixed results; and blanks for
results not reported.




                                                        24
                                Table 7. Capital Inflows: The Indices

                       Reduce
                          the                                      Make
                      volume of   Alter the     Reduce real      Monetary
                          net   composition of exchange rate      Policy      Country
 Country      Index     capital    flows         pressures      Independent   Average
                       inflows                                       .

             CCE         0.00         0.00              -0.67      0.00          0
  Brazil
             WCCE        0.35         0.35             -0.275     -0.225       0.05

             CCE        -0.09         0.64              -0.27      0.45        0.18
   Chile
             WCCE       0.03          0.67              -0.27      0.29        0.18

             CCE        -0.33        -0.33              0.00       0.67        0.00
 Colombia
             WCCE       -0.17        -0.17              0.00       0.07        -0.07

  Czech      CCE        -1.00         1.00              0.00       0.00        0.00
 Republic    WCCE       -0.50         0.10              0.00       0.00        -0.10

             CCE         1.00         1.00              0.50       0.50        0.75
 Malaysia
             WCCE        0.30         0.30              0.05       0.05        0.18

 Thailand    CCE         1.00         1.00              1.00       1.00        1.00
             WCCE        0.10         0.10              0.10       0.10        0.10


Sources: Appendix Table 1 and sources cited therein.

                                Table 8.Capital Outflows: The Indices

                       Reduce
                          the                                      Make
                      volume of   Alter the     Reduce real      Monetary
                          net   composition of exchange rate       Policy     Country
 Country      Index     capital    flows         pressures      Independent   Average
                       inflows

             CCE         0.20         0.00              0.00       0.80        0.25
 Malaysia
             WCCE        0.02         0.00              0.00       0.62        0.16

             CCE         0.50         0.00              0.50       0.50        0.38
   Spain
             WCCE        0.05         0.00              0.20       0.20        0.11

             CCE         0.50         0.00               0.00      0.00        0.13
 Thailand
             WCCE        0.05         0.00              -0.50      -0.50       -0.24


Sources: Appendix Table 2 and sources cited therein.



                                                       25
                         Table 9. Multi-Country Studies: The Indices

                              Reduce the     Alter the     Reduce real    Make monetary
                             volume of net composition of exchange rate    policy more
               Index             capital      flows         pressures      independent
                                inflows

              CCE                0.00             0.40        0.00            -0.40
              WCCE               -0.10            0.30        0.00            -0.40



       Sources: Appendix Table 3 and sources cited therein.




                                           V. CONCLUSIONS

             In sum, capital controls on inflows seem to: make monetary policy more

    independent; alter the composition of capital flows; reduce real exchange rate pressures

    (although the evidence is more controversial). 5 Capital controls on inflows, however,

    seem not to reduce the volume of net flows (and hence, the current account balance)

       As to controls on capital outflows, there is Malaysia…and there is everybody else.

    In Malaysia, controls reduce outflows, and may give room for more independent

    monetary policy. 6 There is little evidence of “success” in other countries attempting to

    control outflows, either in terms of altering the volume or regaining monetary policy

    independence. These findings are in line with those of an earlier literature focused on

    capital flight (as in Mathieson and Rojas Suarez, 1996) and dual or parallel exchange

    markets (an in Kuigel and Lizondo, 1997).

    While their effectiveness varies across time, countries, and types of measures used,

limiting private external borrowing in the “good times” plays an important prudential role


5
 According to the WCCI, Chile stands out in achieving these goals.
6
 Yet, the results for Malaysia based on the WCCI are not as conclusive as for the Chilean
controls on inflows.

                                                  26
because more often than not countries that are “debt intolerant”. Indeed, often the critical

problem in good times is that countries borrow too much! 7

          While our study has made the case for the need to distinguish between measures

primarily designed to discourage inflows versus curbing outflows, it would be worthwhile

for future research to attempt to ascertain whether there are also important differences in

achieving “success” between measures that are more market friendly (as in the Chilean

reserve requirements) versus those that are based on more blunt quantitative restrictions.

Furthermore, in this study, owing to the nature of most of the empirical work reviewed

here, (which treats the control measures as single episodes) it would be interesting for

policy purposes to examine differences between short run and long run impacts of the

measures, so as to ascertain how quickly do control measures lose their effectiveness.

          As long as capital flows to emerging markets remain volatile and potentially

disruptive, the discussion of capital controls in academic and policy circles will remain

alive and hence there is a real need, to evaluate their effectiveness, however defined. As

noted earlier it is an old discussion. Tobin’s seminal paper dates back to the early 1970s.

Furthermore capital controls have been used historically to deal with the fickle capital flow

cycle dating back at least two hundred years. Indeed, not unlike in past inflow episodes, at

the time of this writing countries like Colombia or Argentina have either implemented

controls of capital inflows or are contemplating doing so.

.




    7
        See Reinhart, Rogoff, and Savastano (2003) for details.



                                               27
                                       References

Ariyoshi, Akira, Karl Habermeier, Bernard Laurens, Inci Okter-Robe, Jorge Canales-
       Kriljenko, and Anderi Kirilenko, “Capital Controls: Country Experiences with Their
       Use and Liberalization”, International Monetary Fund Occasional Paper 190, 2000.

Guillermo A. Calvo, Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen M. Reinhart, “The Capital Inflows
       Problem: Concepts and Issues,” Contemporary Economic Policy, Vol. XII No. 3,
       July 1994, 54-66.

Guillermo A. Calvo and and Carmen M. Reinhart, “Fear of Floating,” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, Vol. CXVII No. 2, May 2002, 379-408.

Chanda, Areendam, “The Influence of Capital Controls on Long Run Growth: Where and
      How Much?” Mimeograph, North Carolina State University, September 2003.

De Gregorio, José, Sebastian Edwards, and Rodrigo Valdés, “Controls on Capital Inflows:
      Do They Work?” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 3 No. 1, 2000, 59-83.

Desai, Mihir, Fritz Foley, and James Hanes, “Capital Controls, Liberalizations, and Foreign
       Direct Investment”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 10337,
       March 2004.

Dornbusch, Rudi, “Malaysia: Was It Different?” National Bureau of Economic Research
      Working Paper 8325, June 2001.

Edwards, Sebastian, “How Effective Are Controls on Capital Inflows? An Evaluation of
      Chile’s Experience,” Mimeograph, UCLA, June 1999.

Edwards, Sebastian, “How Effective are Capital Controls?” Journal of Economic
      Perspectives Vol. 13 No.4, Fall 1999, 65-84.

Edwards, Sebastian and Roberto Rigobon, “Capital Controls, Managed Exchange Rates,
      and External Vulnerability,” Mimeograph, UCLA, February 2004.

Forbes, Kristen, “One Cost of the Chilean Capital Controls: Increased Financial Constraints
       for Smaller Trade Firms”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
       9777, June 2003.

Edison, Hali and Carmen Reinhart, “Stopping Hot Money: On the Use of Capital Controls
       during Financial Crises”, Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 66 No. 2
       December 2001, 533-553.

Edison, Hali, Michael Klein, Licca Ricci, and Torsten Slok, “Capital Account
       Liberalization and Economic Performance: Survey and Synthesis”, International
       Monetary Fund Working Paper 02/120, July 2002

Johnson, Simon, and Todd Mitton, “ Cronyism and Capital Controls: The Case of
      Malaysia,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2003.

                                            28
Johnston, Barry. and Natalia Tamirisia, “Why do Countries Use Capital Controls?”,
       International Monetary Fund Working Paper 98/181, December 1998.

DeKaplan, Ethan and Dani Rodrik, “Did the Malaysian Capital Controls Work?” in S.
      Edwards and J. Frankel, eds., Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets,
      (Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the NBER, 2002).

Labán, Raul M., and Felipe Larraín, “What determines Capital Inflows? An Empirical
       Analysis for Chile,” Faculty Research Working Paper Series R97-09, JFK School of
       Government, Harvard University, April 1997.

Labán, Raul M., and Felipe Larraín, “The Return of Private Capital to Chile in the 1990s:
       Causes, Effects, and Policy Reactions,” Faculty Research Working Paper Series
       R98-02, JFK School of Government, Harvard University, January 1998.

Le Fort, Guillermo and Carlos Budnevich, “Capital Account Regulations and
       Macroeconomic Policy: Two Latin Experiences,” Mimeograph, Banco Central de
       Chile, March 1996.

Miniane, Jacques and John Rogers, “Capital Controls and the International Transmission
      of U.S. Money Shocks,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, mimeograph,
      June 2004.

Montiel, Peter and Carmen M. Reinhart (1999), “Do Capital Controls and Macroeconomic
      Policies Influence the Volume and Composition of Capital Flows? Evidence from
      the 1990’s,” Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 18 No. 4, August,
      619-635.

NitithanPrapas, Isriya, Sunil Rongala, and Thomas D. Willett, “The Role of Capital
       Controls and Currency Regimes in the Asian Crisis, Mimeograph School of Politics
       and Economics Claremint Graduate University, August 2002.

Reinhart, Carmen and Vincent R. Reinhart “Some Lessons for Policy Makers Who Deal
      with the Mixed Blessing of Capital Inflows,” in Miles Kahler, ed. Capital Flows
      and Financial Crises, Council on Foreign Relations Book (Ithaca, NY: Cornell
      University Press, 1998), 93-127.

Reinhart, Carmen and Todd Smith (1998), “Too Much of a Good Thing: The
      Macroeconomic Effects of Taxing Capital Inflows,” in Reuven Glick, ed. Managing
      Capital Flows and Exchange Rates: Perspectives from the Pacific Basin,
      (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), 436-464.

Reinhart, Carmen and Todd Smith, “Temporary Controls on Capital Inflows”, Journal of
      International Economics, Vol. 57 No. 2, December 2002, 327-351.

Tamirisia, Natalia, “Do Macroeconomic Effects of Capital Controls Vary by Their Type?
       Evidence from Malaysia”, International Monetary Fund Working Paper 04/3,
       January 2004.

                                            29
Tamirisia, Natalia, “The Malaysian Batik of Capital Controls,” International Monetary
       Fund, mimeograph 2004.

Ulan, Michael K. “Is a Chilean-Style Tax on Sort-Term Capital Inflows Stabilizing?”
       Open Economies Review, Vol. 11.

Valdés-Prieto, Salvador, and Marcelo Soto, “New Selective Capital Controls in Chile: Are
       They Effective? Mimeograph, Universidad Católica de Chile, September 1995.




                                           30
                                                           Appendix Table 1
                                    Capital Inflows: Methodology and Degree of Methodological Rigor


      Study          Sample                                                    Methodology                                                     Econometric
                                                                                                                                                  Rigor

                                                                            Brazil
Cardoso & Goldfajn   1988:1-    OLS controlling for heteroscedasticity and serial correlation, IV, and VAR They control for endogeneity           High
      (1998)         1995:12    of capital controls (government’s reaction function)
Edison & Reinhart     1995-     Test for equality of moments and changes in persistence between capital controls and no controls,                 High
      (1999)          2001      principal components analysis; block exogeneity tests (VAR) for causality; GARCH for the effects of
                                controls on volatility; and Wald tests for structural brakes over a rolling window
 Reinhart & Smith     1994-     Event comparison through time- rescaling (labeling the implementation of controls as period “t”, and            Medium
      (1998)          1996      analyzing the evolution of the series in “t-1”, and through “t+2”. Detailed chronological description of the
                                various measures applied in each economy
     Ariyoshi,                  Extensive descriptive and comparative country-studies analysis of time-series in each episode, dividing           Low
   Habermeier,        1993-     facts according to controls on capital inflows (limiting short-term flows), control on capital outflows
 Laurens, Okter-      1997      (financial crises), extensive exchange controls (financial crises), long standing controls and their
 Robe, Canales-                 liberalization, rapid liberalization
   Kriljenko &
 Kirilenko (2000)
                                                                             Chile
  De Gregorio,       1988:I-    IV and VAR. With these, hey address simultaneity problems, exogenous upward trend in capital flow,                High
Edwards &Valdés      1998:II    bias due to measurement error because of loopholes in controls. They consider two alternative measures
     (2000)                     of expected devaluations: (i)effective rate of depreciation; and (ii) one step ahead forecast from a rolling
                                ARMA. They consider two alternative measures of flows: (i) short tem flows to GDP; and (ii) total flows
                                to GDP.
 Edwards (1999)a     1994:10-   GARCH for changes in the short term central bank nominal interest rate, and changes in the log of the             High
                      1999:1    stock market index, using daily data. Descriptive analysis of the effects of capital controls on the
                                composition of capital inflows, and domestic interest rates and monetary policy independence.
 Edwards (1999)b     1991:6-    Descriptive analysis of the composition of capital flows during capital controls times. VAR on the effects        High
                     1998:9     of capital controls on the real exchange rate. GARCH for changes in the short term central bank nominal
                                interest rate, and changes in the log of the stock market index.
Edwards & Rigobon    1991:1-    Using stochastic calculus, they compute the shadow exchange rate and its bands. GARCH (effect of                  High
     (2004)          1999:9     capital controls on propagation of external shocks. Estimate a mean and a variance equation.




                                                                             31
                                           Appendix Table 1 (continued)
                         Capital Inflows: Methodology and Degree of Methodological Rigor


     Study          Sample                                                   Methodology                                                     Econometric
                                                                                                                                                Rigor

                                                                  Chile (continued)



  Hernández &        1989-    Least squares estimation, controlling for spurious correlation, endogeniety of the RHS regressors,                High
 Schmidt-Hebbel     1998:II   heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation. Co-integration analysis and error-correction model. TSLS
     (1999)           and     estimation also included
                    1998:7-
                    1999:6
Labán, Larraín &     1985-    Estimation of a special case of non-linear models in which a particular variable may adopt a certain law of       High
Chumacero (1997)     1994     motion conditional on an observation passed a threshold (special case of Markov Switching Regime
                              Models, with the threshold replacing the transition matrix). They run a full sample parsimonious
                              regression for each series, to determine variables to include in the threshold process; for given choice of
                              threshold variable, they estimated the model and got the p-value associated with a null of a unique stable
                              representation; if the latter is rejected in favor of threshold process chose the threshold variable that
                              minimizes the sum of squares of residuals; and reduce the threshold model to a parsimonious
                              representation.
 Labán & Larraín     1985-    Descriptive analysis of events, describing the context for implementing capital controls and the main             Low
     (1998)          1996     macroeconomic effects.
Laurens & Cardoso   1985:I-   Linear and Cubic approximations of net inflows as primarily of interest rate differentials.                       High
     (1998)         1994:IV

   Le Fort &         1990-    Descriptive analysis of events, describing the context for implementing capital controls and the main             Low
   Budnevich         1994     macroeconomic.
     (1997)
Reinhart & Smith     1990-    Event comparison through time- rescaling (labeling the implementation of controls as period “t”, and            Medium
     (1998)          1994     analyzing the evolution of the series in “t-1”, and through “t+2”. Detailed chronological description of the
                              various measures applied in each economy




                                                                           32
                                                          Appendix Table 1 (continued)
                                        Capital Inflows: Methodology and Degree of Methodological Rigor


     Study         Sample                                                  Methodology                                                      Econometric
                                                                                                                                               Rigor
                                                                Chile (concluded)

Valdés-Prieto &    1987-    Error-correction representation (that is efficient) with a two-step procedure: (i) OLS estimation of the real      High
     Soto          1995     exchange rate on a set of explanatory variables to contrast the estimated residuals; and (ii) use these
    (1995)                  residuals to estimate by OLS an error correction equation measuring the deviation of the dependent
                            variable from its long term equilibrium level (given by (i)). They checked for several endogeneity and
                            simultaneity biases. They also looked at the effect of controls on short term credit

                                                                     Colombia
   Le Fort &       1990-    Descriptive analysis of events, describing the context for implementing capital controls and the main             Low
   Budnevich       1995     macroeconomic.
     (1997)
Reinhart & Smith            Event comparison through time- rescaling (labeling the implementation of controls as period “t”, and            Medium
     (1998)                 analyzing the evolution of the series in “t-1”, and through “t+2”. Detailed chronological description of
                            the various measures applied in each economy
    Ariyoshi,               Extensive descriptive and comparative country-studies analysis of time-series in each episode,                    Low
  Habermeier,      1993-    dividing facts according to controls on capital inflows (limiting short-term flows), control on capital
Laurens, Okter-    1998     outflows (financial crises), extensive exchange controls (financial crises), long standing controls and
Robe, Canales-              their liberalization, rapid liberalization
  Kriljenko &
Kirilenko (2000)

                                                                  Czech Republic
Reinhart & Smith   1994-    Event comparison through time- rescaling (labeling the implementation of controls as period “t”, and            Medium
     (1998)        1997     analyzing the evolution of the series in “t-1”, and through “t+2”. Detailed chronological description of
                            the various measures applied in each economy

                                                                  Malaysia (1989)
Reinhart & Smith   1993-    Event comparison through time- rescaling (labeling the implementation of controls as period “t”, and            Medium
     (1998)        1996     analyzing the evolution of the series in “t-1”, and through “t+2”. Detailed chronological description of
                            the various measures applied in each economy




                                                                         33
                                                     Appendix Table 1 (concluded)
                                   Capital Inflows: Methodology and Degree of Methodological Rigor


     Study         Sample                                                     Methodology                                                  Econometric
                                                                                                                                              Rigor


                                                                       Malaysia (1994)
    Ariyoshi,                  Extensive descriptive and comparative country-studies analysis of time-series in each episode,                Low
  Habermeier,       1994       dividing facts according to controls on capital inflows (limiting short-term flows), control on capital
Laurens, Okter-                outflows (financial crises), extensive exchange controls (financial crises), long standing controls and
Robe, Canales-                 their liberalization, rapid liberalization
  Kriljenko &
Kirilenko (2000)

                                                                          Thailand
    Ariyoshi,                    Extensive descriptive and comparative country-studies analysis of time-series in each episode,              Low
  Habermeier,      1995-1997     dividing facts according to controls on capital inflows (limiting short-term flows), control on capital
Laurens, Okter-                  outflows (financial crises), extensive exchange controls (financial crises), long standing controls
Robe, Canales-                   and their liberalization, rapid liberalization
  Kriljenko &
Kirilenko (2000)




                                                                            34
                                                        Appendix Table 2
                                Capital Outflows: Methodology and Degree of Methodological Rigor


     Study          Sample                                                 Methodology                                                    Econometric Rigor


                                                                         Malaysia
Tamirisia (2004)    1991:1-   Error-correction model. Series on net foreign portfolio assets are by foreign portfolio assets to isolate         High
                    2002:12   country-specific effects
Dornbusch (2001)              Descriptive analysis of different variables                                                                       Low
Edison & Reinhart             Test for equality of moments and changes in persistence between capital controls and no controls,                 High
     (2000)                   principal components analysis; block exogeneity tests (VAR) for causality; GARCH for the effects
                              of controls on volatility; and Wald tests for structural brakes over a rolling window
Kaplan & Rodrik      1992-    Shifted difference in differences to separate the counterfactual of capital controls versus IMF-based-            High
    (2002)           1996     program recovery. This methodology enables the authors to re-schedule the episodes in terms of the
                              timing of the crises (shifted). The difference in differences allows them to capture the comparison
                              effect of the recovery with capital controls vis a vis with a successful IMF program, controlling for
                              exogenous and country-specific effects (static and dynamics)
    Ariyoshi,                 Extensive descriptive and comparative country-studies analysis of time-series in each episode,                    Low
  Habermeier,        1998-    dividing facts according to controls on capital inflows (limiting short-term flows), control on capital
Laurens, Okter-      2000     outflows (financial crises), extensive exchange controls (financial crises), long standing controls and
Robe, Canales-                their liberalization, rapid liberalization
  Kriljenko &
Kirilenko (2000)


                                                                        Spain
Jose Viñals(1992)    1992     Descriptive analysis of economic policy measures and its effect on various macroeconomic variables                Low
Edison & Reinhart    1991-    Test for equality of moments and changes in persistence between capital controls and no controls,                 High
     (1999)          1993     principal components analysis; block exogeneity tests (VAR) for causality; GARCH for the effects
                              of controls on volatility; and Wald tests for structural brakes over a rolling window




                                                                          35
                                                  Appendix Table 2 (continued)
                               Capital Outflows: Methodology and Degree of Methodological Rigor


     Study          Sample                                               Methodology                                                   Econometric Rigor


    Ariyoshi,                Extensive descriptive and comparative country-studies analysis of time-series in each episode,                  Low
  Habermeier,       1992     dividing facts according to controls on capital inflows (limiting short-term flows), control on capital
Laurens, Okter-              outflows (financial crises), extensive exchange controls (financial crises), long standing controls and
Robe, Canales-               their liberalization, rapid liberalization
  Kriljenko &
Kirilenko (2000)

                                                                        Thailand
Edison & Reinhart   1995-    Test for equality of moments and changes in persistence between capital controls and no controls,               High
     (2000)         1999     principal components analysis; block exogeneity tests (VAR) for causality; GARCH for the effects
                             of controls on volatility; and Wald tests for structural brakes over a rolling window
    Ariyoshi,                Extensive descriptive and comparative country-studies analysis of time-series in each episode,                  Low
  Habermeier,       1997-    dividing facts according to controls on capital inflows (limiting short-term flows), control on capital
Laurens, Okter-     1998     outflows (financial crises), extensive exchange controls (financial crises), long standing controls and
Robe, Canales-               their liberalization, rapid liberalization
  Kriljenko &
Kirilenko (2000)




                                                                        36
                                                            Appendix Table 3
                                 Multi-country Studies: Methodology and Degree of Methodological Rigor


      Study           Sample                                                 Methodology                                                  Econometric Rigor

Montiel & Reinhart   1990-1996   They construct indices to measure incidence and intensity of capital account restrictions. Estimation          High
     (1999)                      of fix-effect panel regressions to explain volume and composition of capital flows. Results are
                                 checked for robustness by IV estimations. Covers Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Sri Lanka,
                                 Thailand, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Mexico, Czech Republic, Egypt, Kenya
                                 and Uganda

Reinhart & Smith     1990-1997   Event comparison through time- rescaling (labeling the implementation of controls as period “t”, and       Intermediate
     (1998)                      analyzing the evolution of the series in “t-1”, and through “t+2”. Detailed chronological description
                                 of the various measures applied in each economy. Covers Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Czech Republic,
                                 Malaysia, Mexico, Thailand, Indonesia, and Philippines.

 Kaplan & Rodrik     1992-1996   Shifted difference in differences to separate the counterfactual of capital controls versus IMF-based-
     (2002)                      program recovery. This methodology enables the authors to re-schedule the episodes in terms of the
                                 timing of the crises (shifted). The difference in differences allows them to capture the comparison
                                 effect of the recovery with capital controls vis a vis with a successful IMF program, controlling for
                                 exogenous and country-specific effects (static and dynamics). Covers Korea, Thailand, Indonesia,
                                 Malaysia (monthly and quarterly data for 1992-1996 -before crisis- and from crisis time and 1 year
                                 ahead)

Edison & Reinhart    1991-1999   Test for equality of moments and changes in persistence between capital controls and no controls,              High
     (1999)                      principal components analysis; block exogeneity tests (VAR) for causality; GARCH for the effects of
                                 controls on volatility; and Wald tests for structural brakes over a rolling window. Covers Spain
                                 (1991-1993), and 1995-1999 for Brazil, Malaysia, and Thailand. Control group: Philippines and
                                 South Korea




                                                                             37
                                                  Appendix Table 3 (concluded)
                             Multi-country Studies: Methodology and Degree of Methodological Rigor


     Study         Sample                                                Methodology                                              Econometric Rigor

Miniane & Rogers   1971:1-   Panel VAR and individual country VAR of commodity prices, US industrial production , US                    High
     (2004)        1998:12   consumers prices, foreign industrial production, foreign interest rates, US Fed Funds Rate, non-
                             borrowed reserves to reserves ratio and nominal exchange rate in response to a 25 basis points
                             increase in the Fed Funds Rate. For the country level VAR they regress each country separately,
                             compute the cumulative exchange rate and interest rate responses, and finally regress country–
                             specific responses on the values of capital control index, exchange rate regime, degree of
                             dollarization, and trade integration. Covers Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
                             Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, India, Italy, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, The
                             Netherlands, Norway, The Philippines, Portugal, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, UK




                                                                        38
