NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LIFECYCLE ASSET ALLOCATION STRATEGIES
AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF 401(K)
RETIREMENT WEALTH
James Poterba
Joshua Rauh
Steven Venti
David Wise
Working Paper 11974
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11974
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2006

We are grateful to Tonja Bowen for outstanding research assistance, to John Campbell, to Luis Viceira, and
Robert Willis for helpful comments, to Morningstar for providing us with mutual fund data, and to the
National Institute on Aging (grants P01 AG05842 and P30 AG12810) for research support. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
©2006 by James Poterba, Joshua Rauh, Steven Venti and David Wise. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Lifecycle Asset Allocation Strategies and the Distribution of 401(k) Retirement Wealth
James Poterba, Joshua Rauh, Steven Venti and David Wise
NBER Working Paper No. 11974
January 2006
JEL No. J14, J32, G11, G23, H24
ABSTRACT
This paper examines how different asset allocation strategies over the course of a worker's career
affect the distribution of retirement wealth and the expected utility of wealth at retirement. It
considers both rules that allocate a constant portfolio fraction to various assets at all ages, as well
as "lifecycle" rules that vary the mix of portfolio assets as the worker ages. The analysis simulates
retirement wealth using asset returns that are drawn from the historical return distribution. The
results suggest that the distribution of retirement wealth associated with typical lifecycle investment
strategies is similar to that from age-invariant asset allocation strategies that set the equity share of
the portfolio equal to the average equity share in the lifecycle strategies. There is substantial variation
across workers with different characteristics in the expected utility from following different asset
allocation strategies. The expected utility associated with different 401(k) asset allocation strategies,
and the ranking of these strategies, is very sensitive to three parameters: the expected return on
corporate stock, the worker's relative risk aversion, and the amount of non-401(k) wealth that the
worker will have available at retirement. At modest levels of risk aversion, or in the presence of
substantial non-401(k) wealth at retirement, the historical pattern of stock and bond returns implies
that the expected utility of an all-stock investment allocation rule is greater than that from any of the
more conservative strategies. Higher risk aversion or lower expected returns on stocks raise the
expected utility of following lifecycle strategies or other strategies that reduce equity exposure
throughout the lifetime.
James Poterba
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-350
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
poterba@mit.edu

Joshua Rauh
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jrauh@gsb.uchicago.edu

David Wise
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138-5398
and Harvard University
dwise72037@aol.com

Steven Venti
Department of Economics
6106 Rockefeller Center
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
steven.f.venti@dartmouth.edu

1
The growing importance of defined contribution pension arrangements, such as 401(k) plans,
is shifting the responsibility for managing retirement assets from the professional money managers
who oversee defined benefit plan investments to individual participants in defined contribution plans.
Retirement savers face the challenge of deciding how to allocate their retirement portfolios across
broad asset classes and across many different financial products. Asset allocation decisions have
important consequences for retirement wealth accumulation. Some policy analysts have voiced
concerns that individual participants in defined contribution plans may not fully understand the risks
associated with various investment options, and that they may consequently be exposed to greater
risks of retirement income shortfall in defined contribution plans than in defined benefit plans.
Quantifying the risk associated with defined contribution pension plans, and examining how
individual choices affect this risk, is an active topic of research. Samwick and Skinner (2004)
compare the risks associated with defined benefit and defined contribution plans for workers with a set
of stylized wage and employment trajectories. Many other studies have examined the risk of different
investment strategies in the context of lifetime saving programs that resemble defined contribution
plans. Campbell and Viceira (2002) and Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout (2005) explore the optimal
asset allocation between stocks and bonds for lifecycle savers. Shiller (2005) tabulates the distribution
of possible terminal wealth values when investors follow age-dependent asset allocation rules in a
saving program that he models on a defined contribution Social Security system. Poterba, Rauh,
Venti, and Wise (2005), hereafter PRVW (2005), examine how different portfolio allocation strategies
over the lifecycle affect retirement wealth.
Previous findings about the level of retirement wealth associated with defined contribution
saving programs, and about the risk of such wealth, are very sensitive to assumptions about the
expected return on corporate stock. Stocks have offered substantially higher average returns than
bonds over the eighty year sample that is often used to calibrate the return distributions. PRVW
(2005) find that this has an important effect on the distribution of retirement wealth for alternative
asset allocation rules. Greater exposure to stocks leads to a higher average retirement account balance.

2
For a risk neutral retirement saver facing the historical return distribution, and choosing a fraction
between zero and one hundred percent of her portfolio to allocate to stocks, this suggests that
allocating the entire portfolio to stocks is optimal. As the risk aversion of a retirement saver increases,
the optimal share of the retirement portfolio that is held in stocks declines.
Many commentators have raised questions about whether defined contribution plan
participants are informed enough to make decisions about asset allocation and other dimensions of
their retirement saving plan. Some plan sponsors have begun to offer participants investment options
that permit them to avoid investment decision-making. One such innovation in the financial services
marketplace is the “lifecycle fund” that automatically varies the share of the saver’s portfolio that is
held in stocks and in bonds as a function of the saver’s age or years until retirement. These funds are
one of the most rapidly growing financial products of the last decade. They offer investors the
opportunity to exploit time-varying investment rules, typically reducing equity exposure as retirement
approaches, without the need to make active investment management choices. In this paper, we
consider the effect of such lifecycle investment strategies on the distribution of retirement wealth.
This paper extends previous research in two directions. First, we consider both the
distribution of retirement assets and the expected utility of reaching retirement with a given asset
stock. In contrast, a number of earlier studies focus only on the distribution of account balances,
which does not capture the potential cost of an investment strategy with a high mean retirement
balance but a small probability of a very poor outcome. We parameterize a utility-of-retirement
wealth function as a power function of retirement wealth, and recognize that wealth held outside the
saver’s defined contribution plan can have an important effect on utility at retirement. Second, we use
actual Social Security earnings histories to model household contribution flows to defined contribution
plans. Several earlier studies have used simple stochastic processes to model labor income flows, or
have assumed that labor income follows a stylized path over the lifecycle. Our results better capture
the wide degree of heterogeneity in household earnings experiences.

3
The paper is divided into five sections. The first summarizes theoretical research on the
optimal pattern of age-related asset allocation. It then describes the lifecycle funds that have become
increasingly popular in the retirement plan market. Section two describes the algorithm that we use to
simulate the distribution of retirement plan assets under different asset allocation rules during the
accumulation period. This discussion draws heavily on PRVW (2005). Section three describes our
strategy for calibrating the simulation model, for selecting the sample of households for analysis, and
for assigning distributions of returns to each of the assets in our study. The fourth section presents the
various lifecycle asset allocation rules that we consider, including some that involve age-independent
asset allocation rules. It then reports our central findings about the distribution of retirement account
balances under these different rules as well as the expected lifetime utility at retirement under various
rules. There is a brief conclusion.

1. Optimal Age-Dependent Asset Allocation Rules and the Rise of Lifecycle Funds
Financial economists have a long tradition of studying how a rational, risk-averse, long-lived
consumer would choose to allocate her portfolio between risky and riskless assets at different ages.
Samuelson (1969), one of the first formal analyses, challenges the conventional wisdom that an
investor with a long horizon should invest a larger fraction of her portfolio in risky assets because she
has an opportunity to average returns over a longer period. This result is related to the earlier, more
general observation by Samuelson (1963) that taking repeated identical uncorrelated risks augments
the risk of the final outcome, rather than reducing it. In the context of the lifecycle portfolio selection
problem, when returns on the risky asset are serially uncorrelated and there is no labor income, a
rational investor should hold the same fraction of her portfolio in risky assets at all ages. This
analytical result runs counter to the suggestion of many financial advisors, who suggest that investors
reduce their equity exposure as they approach retirement. Merton (1969) derives similar results in the
context of a lifetime dynamic optimization framework.

4
Perhaps in part because this result is inconsistent with much financial practice, subsequent
research has tried to uncover reasons why an investor might choose to reduce her equity exposure as
she ages. Bodie, Merton, and Samuelson (1988) argue that younger investors have greater flexibility
in their subsequent labor supply decisions, and that they should consequently be more tolerant of risk.
They suggest that younger investors may rationally choose to hold a higher fraction of their portfolio
in stock than older investors. Gollier (2001) and Gollier and Zeckhauser (2002) derive the conditions
under which the option to rebalance a portfolio in the future affects portfolio choice. Their results
suggest that under specific assumptions about the structure of utility functions, the optimal portfolio
share devoted to equity will decline with age. Campbell et al. (2001), and Campbell and Viceira
(2002) develop numerical solutions to dynamic models which can be used to study optimal portfolio
structure over the lifecycle if shocks to labor income follow specific stochastic processes and investors
have power utility. Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout (2005) solve such a model in the presence of nontradable labor income and borrowing constraints. They find that a lifecycle investment strategy that
reduces the household’s equity exposure as it ages may be optimal depending on the shape of the labor
income profile.
The empirical evidence on age-specific patterns in household asset allocation suggests at best
weak reductions in equity exposure as households age. Gomes and Michaelides (2005) survey recent
research on the correspondence between theoretical models of lifecycle asset allocation and empirical
evidence on actual investment patterns. Ameriks and Zeldes (2004) and Poterba and Samwick (2001)
present empirical evidence on how portfolio shares for stocks, bonds, and other assets vary over the
lifecycle. The general conclusion is that equity shares decline very little at older ages, although
Ameriks and Zeldes (2004) find some evidence that some households cash out their equity holdings
when they reach retirement or annuitize their accumulated holdings in defined contribution accounts.
To cater to the perceived desire of investors to reduce their equity exposure as they age, and to
help investors overcome the problems of inertia in retirement asset allocation that are documented by
Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988), several financial institutions have created lifecycle funds. These

5
funds are usually designed for an investor with a target retirement date. Lifecycle funds were
available from Fidelity Investments as early as 1988, and there were at least 250 target-year lifecycle
funds in the mutual fund marketplace in 2005. Several major mutual fund families now offer a
sequence of different funds targeted to investors with different retirement dates. In some cases the
lifecycle fund is a “fund of funds” that invests in a mix of other mutual funds, while in other cases the
fund manager holds a specific pool of assets and alters the asset mix as the fund ages.
Figure 1 shows the rapid growth in lifecycle fund assets during the last eleven years. The
figure indicates that lifecycle funds held $5.5 billion in March 2000, and that their assets had grown to
$47.1 billion by 2005. Many of these funds are offered in 401(k) plans. Marquez (2005) reports that
Hewitt Associates estimates that 38% of all 401(k) plans offer lifecycle funds. At a time when
Clements (2005) reports that the proliferation of investment options 401(k) plans has come under fire,
lifecycle funds offer a way to combine both stock and fixed income options into a single fund, and to
offer investors a time-varying asset allocation mix. Lifecycle funds are sometimes suggested as a
natural choice for the default investment option in automatic enrollment 401(k) programs.
The lifecycle funds offered at different fund families follow different age-phased asset
allocation rules. Table 1 reports summary information on the lifecycle funds offered at leading mutual
fund companies, which we define as the set of mutual fund companies tracked by Morningstar. The
table shows the average mix of stocks and bonds currently held by funds targeting different retirement
years. None of the funds publish the specific asset allocation rule that they will follow going forward
as retirement dates draw nearer, but many fund prospectuses indicate the mix of various asset
categories that will be held for an investor at specific ages. We have interpolated between ages, when
necessary, to estimate the asset mix at a standardized set of ages.
The table also shows the net asset holdings and weighted average expense ratios of funds with
different retirement years. The expenses paid by investors in these funds, which typically range
between 60 and 80 basis points per year, are substantially larger than what could be paid if an investor
selected mutual funds from a company offering no-load index funds with low expense ratios and then

6
rebalanced among them over time. For example, equity index funds, government bond index funds
and money market mutual funds can be obtained from Fidelity or Vanguard with no load fees and
expense ratios of 10 to 20 basis points. However, if investors find it difficult to conduct such
rebalancing on their own, or suffer from psychological biases that would lead them to neglect planned
rebalancing, they might be willing to pay the additional expenses associated with target-year lifecycle
funds in which the rebalancing happens automatically. A careful analysis of the expenses associated
with lifecycle funds and of the services provided by these funds lies beyond the current study.

2. Modeling Retirement Wealth Accumulation in Self-Directed Retirement Plans
To analyze the distribution of 401(k) wealth at retirement that is induced by different asset
allocation strategies, we need to model the path of plan contributions over an individual’s working life
and to combine these contributions with information on the potential returns to holding 401(k) assets
in different investment vehicles. Rather than using information on household earnings patterns to
estimate a stochastic model for the earnings process, and then using that model to simulate earnings
paths for our analysis, we draw actual lifetime earnings histories from a large sample of households
and carry out simulations by combining the contribution paths for various earnings histories with
simulated patterns of asset returns. We focus our analysis on married couples because they are
financially more homogeneous than non-married individuals, some of whom never married and others
of whom have lost a spouse. About seventy percent of the individuals reaching retirement age are in
married couples.
We assume that nine percent of the household’s earnings are contributed to a defined
contribution plan each year. We further assume that the couple begins to participate in a 401(k) plan
when the husband is 28, and that they contribute in every year in which the household has Social
Security earnings until the husband is 63. Households do not make contributions when they are
unemployed or when both members of the couple are retired or otherwise not in the labor force. We

7
assume that both members of the household retire when the husband is 63 if they have not done so
already, and that they do not contribute to a retirement plan after that age.
To formalize our calculations, we denote a household by subscript i, and denote their 401(k)
contribution at age a by Ci(a) = .09*Ei(a) for Ei(a) the household’s Social Security covered earnings at
age a. The restriction to covered earnings is an important limitation that we discuss further below.
We express this contribution in year 2000 dollars. To find the 401(k) balance for the couple at age 63
(a = 63), we need to cumulate contributions over the course of the working life, with appropriate
allowance for asset returns. Let Ri(a) denote the return earned on 401(k) assets that were held at the
beginning of the year when the husband in couple i attained age a . The value of the couple’s 401(k)
assets when the husband is 63 is then given by:
(1)

Wi (63) =

35
t =0

t

∏ [1 + R (63 − j )] C (63 − t )
j =0

i

i

Ri(a) depends on the year-specific returns on stocks and bonds, and on the mix of stocks and bonds
that the household owned when the husband was a years old. If the couple holds an all-stock portfolio,
then Ri(a) = Rstock(a). If the couple holds all bonds, Ri(a) = Rbond(a). A mixture of the two is of course
possible. If the couple invests in a lifecycle mutual fund, the asset return at age a will be Rlifecycle(a),
which corresponds to the return on the mix of bonds and stocks that will be held by the lifecycle fund
on behalf of an investor of age a.
We use simulation methods to estimate the distribution of Wi(63), averaged over the
households in our sample, for various asset allocation strategies. By comparing the distributions of
retirement plan assets under each of these strategies, we can learn how these strategies affect
retirement resources. The distribution of outcomes is of substantial interest, but it does not capture the
household’s valuation of different levels of retirement resources. In particular, while it can provide
information on the potential frequency of low wealth outcomes, it does not provide a metric for
comparing these outcomes with more favorable retirement wealth values.

8
To allow for differential valuation of wealth in different states of nature, we evaluate the
wealth in the 401(k) account using a utility-of-terminal wealth approach. We assume that all
households have identical preferences over wealth at retirement. We drop the household subscript i,
and assume that the utility of wealth is described by a constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) utility
function

U (W ) =

(2)

W 1−α
1−α

where α is the household’s coefficient of relative risk aversion. The utility of household wealth at
retirement is likely to depend on both 401(k) and non-401(k) wealth, so we modify (2) to recognize
this wealth:

(3)

U (W401( k ) , Wnon − 401( k )

(W
)=

401( k )

+ Wnon −401( k ) )

1−α

1−α

Since the effect of a change in 401(k) wealth on household utility is sensitive to the household’s other
wealth holdings, we consider other assets on the household balance sheet in our empirical analysis.
For a given household, each return history, denoted by h, generates a level of 401(k) wealth at
age 63, W401(k),h, and a corresponding utility level, U h , where

(4)

Uh

(W
=

401( k ), h

+ Wnon − 401( k )
1−α

)

1−α

We evaluate the expected utility of each portfolio strategy by the probability-weighted average of the
utility outcomes associated with that strategy. These utility levels can be compared directly for a
given degree of risk tolerance, and they can be translated into certainty equivalent wealth levels (Z) by
asking what certain wealth level would provide a utility level equal to the expected utility of the

9
retirement wealth distribution. The certainty equivalent of an all-equity portfolio, for example,
denoted by the subscript SP500, is given by:
1

Z SP 500 = [ EU SP 500 (1 − α ) ]1−α − Wnon −401( k )

(5)

When a household has non-401(k) wealth, the certainty equivalent of the 401(k) wealth is the amount
of 401(k) wealth that is needed, in addition to the non-401(k) wealth, to achieve a given utility level.
We treat non-401(k) wealth as nonstochastic throughout our analysis.
Our approach to computing DC plan balances at retirement resembles a strategy developed in
Samwick and Skinner (2004). Part of their empirical analysis considers the pension benefits that a
sample of workers would earn under several stylized defined benefit and defined contribution plans. It
considers the benefits experience of a sample of actual workers, with actual earnings histories, under
each plan. It does not, however, explore the sensitivity of retirement wealth to alternative investment
strategies.
Our approach exploits the rich cross-sectional variation in household earnings trajectories.
We use a large sample of Health and Retirement Survey (HRS) households to compute contribution
paths for a 401(k) plan, and we then randomly assign return histories to these contribution paths. The
result is a distribution of retirement balances for each household in the HRS sample. We combine the
wealth outcomes by aggregating households into three broad educational categories to report our
findings, but each entry in the table below represents an average over the outcomes for many
individuals. Our strategy can be thought of as drawing an HRS household at age 27 and giving it two
independent draws: first a wage trajectory, which could be the actual wage trajectory for any of our
sample households who have a particular education level, and then a lifetime vector of asset returns,
which could be any of 200,000 draws. The return trajectory will determine the household’s retirement
wealth, conditional on the contribution flow.

10
One of the most important shortcomings of our analysis is our restriction to top-coded Social
Security earnings records, rather than actual earnings histories. The real value of the taxable
maximum earnings level for Social Security has varied over time, and so has the dispersion of
earnings, so the fraction of earnings that are not captured on Social Security records varies from year
to year. Higher income workers have a higher likelihood of contributing to 401(k) plans, and they
tend to contribute a higher share of earnings when they contribute, so the top-coding constraint is
likely to bias our findings toward understating defined contribution plan accumulations. This is likely
to be a particularly important concern when we present results for college-educated households, whose
members’ earnings are more likely to exceed the Social Security maximum than are the earnings from
households with lower levels of education. There are several potential strategies for addressing topcoding problems such as those in the Social Security earnings records, and we hope to pursue them in
future research.

3. Calibration of 401(k) Wealth Simulations
We select a subsample of married HRS households for analysis, construct their earnings
trajectories, and measure their non-401(k) wealth at retirement. We then simulate retirement wealth
based on these households’ Social Security earnings records. Our sample of households is larger than
that in PRVW (2005). We include all HRS couples headed by men aged 63-72 in 2000 for which
Social Security earnings histories are available. Table 2 shows the effects of conditioning the sample
on married couples in this age range. There are 3,833 HRS households with Social Security earnings
histories. The restriction to couples eliminates approximately 44 percent of that sample, and the age
restriction removes an additional 19 percent, leaving a sample of 1,400 households. The age
restriction removes couples with heads between the ages of 59 and 62. Including this group would
involve forecasting earnings beyond the time period of the data.
Our data restrictions make our sub-sample different from the HRS universe. This can be seen
by comparing household earnings trajectories for the full HRS sample and our subsample, which we

11
do in Figures 2 through 4. Figure 2 shows earnings histories for all of the households in the HRS with
earnings records. Figure 3 shows earnings histories for couples in which the husband is aged 59-72,
which represents essentially all couples in the HRS. Figure 3 shows earnings histories for our primary
sample of 1,400 married households headed by men aged 63-72. In each figure, the sample is divided
by educational attainment of the husband. Husbands are generally the primary earners in HRS
households.
Two findings emerge from these figures. First, since we are focusing on couples, the total
level of household earnings is higher than in the broad HRS universe for all educational levels.
Second, the premium for the primary earner’s education is smaller at all age ranges, but particularly in
the early part of the earners’ lifetime, in our sample relative to the entire HRS population. This
reduction in the education premium is primarily a function of our restriction to couples. Since the
education levels of members of a married couple are not perfectly correlated, by focusing on couples
we pool, to some extent, individuals with different levels of educational attainment.
We consider our sample households as reaching retirement age when the husband is 63 or 64
years old, and we need to determine non-401(k) wealth at this age. Our procedure for doing this varies
according to the household’s age. First, we consider wealth measurement for the nearly three-quarters
of the sample with a household head who was either 63 or 64 in 1996, 1998 or 2000. For these
households, a breakdown of non-pension wealth is available on a consistent basis in HRS waves 3, 4,
and 5. We scale all household non-401(k) asset values to the 2000 base year, so that for each
household we have an estimate of what their non-401(k) wealth would have been had they turned age
63-64 in the year 2000. We implement this scaling by replacing the nominal returns on asset holdings
for the two years prior to the year in which the head of household was 63 or 64, i.e. 1994-1995 for the
1996 households and 1996-1997 for the 1998 households, with nominal returns on assets in 1998 and
1999. We focus on returns in three broad categories of non-annuitized wealth: financial wealth,
housing equity, and other wealth. Returns on housing equity are approximated by the growth rate of
the Commerce Department’s constant quality house price index. Financial wealth, both within and

12
outside of retirement accounts, is assumed to grow at a composite rate based on the national average
allocation of tax-deferred financial assets between stocks, bonds, and deposits, as reported in the 2001
Survey of Consumer Finances. Other household wealth, which consists largely of jewelry and
vehicles, is assumed to grow with the overall price level, as measured by the CPI.
Second, we consider wealth measurement for the one-quarter of the sample that reached the
ages of 63 or 64 prior to 1996. We do not use the earlier waves of the HRS because the wealth
questionnaire for waves 1 and 2 was different from that for later waves. Wealth values for these HRS
households are imputed for each asset class based on the median measured asset growth for
households between the ages of 63 and 65, or 63 and 67, in the same educational category in later
waves of the HRS.
To estimate defined benefit (DB) and defined contribution (DC) pension wealth for HRS
households we use HRS pension wealth imputations, version 1.0, March 2005. This new research
component of the HRS allows for more precise estimation of pension wealth than was previously
possible, since it estimates imputed defined contribution wealth at all ages. For defined benefit wealth
at age 63-64 we use the imputed present discounted value of pension wealth assuming retirement at
age 62 and gross up by one year at the intermediate-scenario Social Security Administration rate of
3%. For Social Security wealth (SSW) we follow the procedure from PRVW (2005), using cohort
mortality tables and the Social Security Administration’s intermediate-cost scenario discount rates to
calculate the present discounted value of the current or projected Social Security benefits when the
husband is age 63-64. We normalize the value of the wife’s Social Security to be the value when the
husband is aged 63-64, assuming that Social Security payments start for the wife at age 62 if they have
not started already. The present value of Social Security is determined as a joint survivor annuity.
Table 3 presents summary statistics on our estimates of household balance sheets normalized
to age 63-64. We report seven categories of wealth: the present discounted value (PDV) of Social
Security payments, the PDV of defined benefit pensions, the PDV of other annuities, the current value
of retirement accounts, the value of all other financial wealth net of debt, housing equity net of debt,

13
and all other wealth. The top panel in Table 3 shows medians while the bottom panel shows means.
The restriction to couples clearly raises the mean and median of the distribution. The restriction to
households in the age range 63-72, with full earnings histories to age 63, lowers the wealth distribution
somewhat by removing a group that has not yet begun to spend down their assets. The final sample of
couples aged 63-72 has median wealth of $536,800 and mean wealth of $783,400. The median highschool educated household has 44 percent more total wealth than the median household with less than
a high-school education, and the median college educated household has 61 percent more total wealth
than the median high-school educated household. The differences in means are even more dramatic.
Table 3 also shows the distribution of several wealth aggregates. One such aggregate is
annuitized wealth, which is defined as the sum of the present discounted values of Social Security,
defined benefit pensions, and other annuities. We also present the sum of annuitized wealth and all
other financial wealth, as well as aggregates reflecting all wealth and all wealth excluding retirement
account assets. When we calibrate our simulations with households’ non-401(k) wealth, we focus on
two wealth components: annuitized wealth and all wealth excluding retirement account assets. We do
not include retirement account assets in the calibration of non-401(k) wealth, since these emerge from
our simulation. By using the observed values of these wealth components from the HRS, and treating
them as non-random when we evaluate the expected utility of 401(k) retirement balances, we are
implicitly assuming that changes in 401(k) wealth values do not affect other components of wealth.
We hope to eventually extend our analysis to allow for correlation between the returns on assets in
401(k) accounts and the returns on other household assets.
Table 4 disaggregates the household balance sheet aggregates by education level. The table
underscores the substantial differences across households both within education categories and across
such categories. The difference at most percentiles between the wealth of a household that did not
complete high school and one that completed college is a factor of two. These differences are of the
same magnitude as the differences between the 20th and 60th percentiles of the distribution for a given
education level. The 80th percentile of the distribution for all three education levels that we consider

14
has wealth holdings that are at close to three times as great as those of households in the 20th percentile
for the same education level.
One difficult problem in constructing the non-401(k) wealth measure that enters equation (5)
concerns the role of housing equity. Venti and Wise (2001) and other studies suggest that retired
households do not typically draw down their housing wealth to finance non-housing consumption.
This implies that we should consider only financial resources as a source of wealth to support
retirement spending, a strategy that could be justified by assuming that the utility from housing
consumption is additively separable from all other consumption in the household’s utility function,
and that owner occupied housing generates only housing consumption. The difficulty with this
approach is that it is possible that households view their housing equity as a reserve asset that can be
tapped to support other consumption in the event of financial difficulty. In this case, housing equity
should be combined with financial assets in calculating the household’s assets outside defined
contribution plans. To allow for this possibility, we present results in which we consider housing as
well as other financial assets as the household’s non-401(k) wealth at retirement. We treat the non401(k) components of the household balance sheet at retirement as non-stochastic, and use whatever
value we calculate for the household in all of the simulations with various 401(k) balances.
We assume that the three primary assets that households may hold in their 401(k) accounts are
corporate stock, nominal long-term government bonds, and inflation-indexed long-term bonds (TIPS).
Calibrating the returns on these investment alternatives is a critical step in our simulation algorithm.
We assume that 401(k) investors hold corporate stocks through portfolios of large capitalization U.S.
stocks. We do not address the possibility of poorly diversified portfolios, for example with
concentrated holdings in a single stock, as described in Munnell and Sunden (2004) and Poterba
(2003). We assume that the distribution of returns on each of these asset classes is given by Ibbotson
Associates’ (2003) empirical distribution of returns during the 1926 to 2002 period. Large
capitalization U.S. equities have an annual average real return of 9.0 percent and a standard deviation

15
of 20.7 percent, whereas long-term U.S. government bonds have an annual average real return of 3.2
percent and a standard deviation of 10.0 percent.
We assume that TIPS offer a certain real return of 2 percent per year, approximately the
current TIPS yield. Index bonds deliver a net-of-inflation certain return only if the investor holds the
bonds to maturity, and selling the bonds before maturity exposes the investors to asset price risk. We
nevertheless treat these bonds as riskless long-term investment vehicles. In our simulations, when we
draw returns from the stock and bond return distributions for a given iteration, we draw returns for the
same year from both distributions. This preserves the historical contemporary correlation structure
between stock and bond returns in our simulations.
Several analysts suggest that recent historical equity returns may correspond to a particularly
favorable time period, and that these returns should not be extrapolated to the future. The academic
literature on the equity premium puzzle, summarized for example in Mehra and Prescott (2002), raises
the possibility that ex post returns exceeded ex ante expected returns over this period. To allow for
such a possibility, we perform some simulations in which the distribution of returns from which we
draw is the actual distribution except that equity returns are reduced by 300 basis points in each year.
Comparing these simulations with those in our baseline indicate the sensitivity of our findings to the
future pattern of equity returns.
For each iteration of our simulation algorithm, we draw a sequence of 35 real stock and bond
returns from the empirical return distribution. The draws are done with replacement and we assume
that there is no serial correlation in returns. We then use this return sequence to calculate the real
value of each household’s retirement account balance at age 63 under the different asset allocation
strategies. For each of the 1,400 households in our sample, we simulate their 401(k) balance at age 63
200,000 times. We then summarize these 200,000 outcomes either with a distribution of wealth values
at retirement, or by calculating the expected utility associated with this distribution of outcomes. We
found in PRVW (2005) that roughly this number of iterations was needed to obtain robust findings,
particularly at lower percentiles of the retirement wealth distribution.

16

4. Discussion of Results
We simulate nine different asset allocation strategies for the household’s 401(k) account. The
first three involve investing in only one asset: (i) a portfolio that is fully invested in TIPS; (ii) a
portfolio that is fully invested in long-term government bonds, and (iii) a portfolio that is fully
invested in corporate stock. The next two portfolios are “heuristic portfolios” that use simple rules for
lifecycle asset allocation. Portfolio (iv) holds (110 – age of household head) percent of the portfolio in
stock, with the remaining balance in TIPS. Portfolio (v) is similar to (iv) except that nominal
government bonds replace TIPS for the component of the portfolio that is not held in equity. Both of
these portfolios are rebalanced at the end of each period. The next two are lifecycle portfolios
consisting of stocks and TIPS, and stocks and government bonds, respectively. The equity weight for
each of these funds is computed based on the average of the age-specific allocations in the lifecycle
funds at Fidelity, Vanguard, T. Rowe Price, TIAA-CREF, Principal, Barclays, and Wells Fargo. The
lifecycle funds from these fund families are weighted equally in this calculation, and the resulting
equity allocation is similar to that in Table 1. Portfolio (vi) invests the lifecycle fund average in
equities and the balance in TIPS, while fund (vii) holds equities and nominal government bonds in the
lifecycle mix. The next strategy that we consider, portfolio (viii), holds an age-independent mix of
stocks and nominal government bonds. The equity share for this fund is 53 percent, which is the
lifetime weighted average stock allocation in the lifecycle funds, where the weight assigned to the
equity allocation in each year equals the household’s 401(k) wealth at the beginning of that year,
divided by the sum of beginning-of-year 401(k) wealth in all years.
The final investment strategy we consider, strategy (ix), is the “No Lose” strategy that
Feldstein (2005) proposes in his analysis of individual account Social Security reforms. At each age,
we calculate the share of the household’s 401(k) contribution that would have to be invested in TIPS
to guarantee at least the contributed amount in nominal terms at retirement age. The required TIPS
investment is (1+RTIPS)–(63-a), where 63-a is the number of years to retirement. This strategy is

17
fundamentally different from the other lifecycle strategies because it does not involve portfolio
rebalancing at each age. Instead, the equity share of the portfolio depends on the historical pattern of
TIPS yields, which in turn determine the amount available for stock investment in past years, and on
the historical returns on equity assets.
4.1 The Distribution of Retirement Wealth
Table 5 shows the distribution of 401(k) balances in thousands of year 2000 dollars averaged
across the 1400 households in our sample. There are two vertical panels in the table. In the left-most
panel, the simulations use the historical distribution of returns. The panel on the right reduces equity
returns by 300 basis points. Households are stratified by education group within each panel. The
table reports the mean wealth at retirement for each strategy, as well as four points in the distribution
of returns. Since our interest is the comparison of wealth outcomes across different strategies, most
of our discussion below focuses on a single education group, namely households headed by someone
with a high school degree but not a college degree. The relative ranking of different strategies is
similar for other education groups.
The first row of Table 5 provides a point of reference for all of the subsequent calculations. It
shows the certain wealth at retirement associated with strategy (i), holding only TIPS. For those with
a high school degree and/or some college, this leads to a retirement balance of $162,600. The next
panels show the results from strategy (ii), holding on nominal government bonds, and strategy (iii),
holding only corporate stocks. Both of these strategies, as well as all of the subsequent strategies that
we consider, involve risk so we report information on the distribution of outcomes.
The second panel shows that holding only government bonds leads to a higher average
retirement wealth, $192,700, than holding TIPS. The average wealth at retirement is nearly twenty
percent greater than the value with TIPS, but the median wealth of $175,000 is less than ten percent
above the TIPS outcome. Moreover, there are many outcomes with retirement wealth values below
the TIPS case. The tenth percentile outcome is $106,300, and the first percentile is $36,300.

18
When the 401(k) is invested in corporate stock, the average retirement balance is much higher
than that with either TIPS or nominal government bonds: $812,000. This value is roughly four times
greater than the outcome with nominal government bonds. Because the mean return on stocks is so
much higher than that on either nominal or inflation-indexed bonds, even the low outcomes are often
above the mean outcomes with bonds. The 10th percentile retirement wealth value with the all-stocks
portfolio exceeds the average outcome with a nominal government bond portfolio. The first percentile
outcome, however, $12,800, is below the correspondingly low outcomes for the nominal bonds
strategy.
The next two portfolios we consider, (iv) and (v), are “heuristic” lifecycle investment
strategies with a mix of stocks and TIPS, or stocks and long-term nominal government bonds. In both
cases the average value of retirement wealth falls between the value with an all-stock investment and
that with an all-bond portfolio. When the nominal government bond share of the portfolio is (Age +
10) percent, the average value of retirement wealth using historical equity returns is $303,600 for a
household with a high school education. The proportional dispersion in the retirement wealth value is
smaller than that for an all equity portfolio, and greater than that for the bond portfolio. The difference
between the 90th percentile and the 10th percentile retirement wealth value with an all-stock strategy is
1.88 times the mean value, and the corresponding measure for the all-bond portfolio is 1.01. With the
nominal bond-stock heuristic lifecycle portfolio, the 90-10 spread is 1.16 times the mean outcome.
The results for the heuristic portfolio that includes stocks and TIPS are broadly similar, although the
ratio of the 90-10 spread to the mean retirement wealth in this case is 0.90. The first percentile
outcomes with the two heuristic lifecycle portfolios are $54,300 and $38,000 respectively. Both are
larger than first percentile outcomes with either the all-stock or all-bond portfolios.
The next two portfolios that we consider, (vi) and (vii), are the lifecycle portfolios that
correspond to the average of the portfolios from various mutual fund complexes. While the agespecific equity allocation is somewhat different from the foregoing heuristic portfolios, the distribution
of 401(k) wealth at retirement is similar. In particular, the mean value of retirement wealth is

19
$405,300 when we combine TIPS and stocks, and $438,200 when we combine nominal long-term
government bonds and stocks. The difference is due to TIPS offering a lower real yield than the
historical average real return on nominal bonds during our sample period. The first percentile
outcome when we combine TIPS with stocks is higher than that for either of the heuristic strategies,
reflecting greater weight on the bond investment in this case than for those strategies.
The next portfolio strategy, (viii), is the age-invariant strategy that holds an equity share equal
to the weighted average equity share in the lifecycle funds across the whole life cycle. That share is
53 percent. One of the issues that our simulations can address is how the risk and retirement wealth of
this strategy compare with the corresponding measures from the lifecycle portfolios. The mean wealth
from this age-invariant allocation is very similar to that from the lifecycle portfolios: $404,900. The
risk as measured by the 90-10 spread relative to the mean is also very similar. The very low
realizations from the lifecycle strategies are somewhat higher than the very low realizations from the
fixed allocation, with first percentile outcomes of $35,900 for strategy (viii) compared with $64,300
and $48,800 for the two lifecycle strategies. Through most of the distribution, however, it seems that
the two strategies yield similar results.
The similarity of the retirement wealth distributions from the lifecycle portfolios, and from
strategies that allocate a constant portfolio share to equities, is one of the central findings of our
analysis. This result calls for further work to evaluate the extent to which lifecycle strategies offer
unique opportunities for risk reduction relative to simpler strategies that allocate a constant fraction of
portfolio assets to equities at all ages.
The last strategy we consider is the Feldstein (2005) “no lose” plan. This strategy offers a
mean return that is broadly similar to the mean returns on the lifecycle strategies. The mean
retirement wealth for a high school educated household is $420,300, which is between the mean
wealth values with a lifecycle fund that holds TIPS and one that holds nominal government bonds.
The important difference between this strategy and the lifecycle strategies and the all-stocks and allnominal bonds strategies is found in the lower tail of the wealth outcomes. Because the “no lose”

20
strategy holds TIPS, the first percentile wealth value is $113,800, compared with values between
$38,000 and $64,300 in the actual and heuristic lifecycle strategies.
The assumption that the equity return is drawn from its historical distribution is important for
the absolute level of retirement wealth under most of the strategies that we consider, and also for the
magnitude of the differences across strategies. The fourth, fifth, and sixth columns in Table 5 present
results assuming that equity returns are reduced by 300 basis points. The all-stock strategy is the one
that is most affected by this change. The average wealth at retirement for this strategy falls from
$812,000 to $404,800. The tenth percentile wealth value drops from $179,900 to $94,300 in this case,
and the first percentile value drops to $7,300 from $12,800. This very low outcome emphasizes the
risk associated with holding stocks: a very small chance of a very poor outcome. The average
retirement wealth values for the various heuristic and empirical lifecycle funds decline when we
reduce the value of the mean equity return. The mean wealth value for the “no lose” strategy falls
relative to the lifecycle strategies, because the no-lose strategy has relatively more equity exposure
than any of the lifecycle plans.
The distribution of retirement balances shown in Table 5 is conceptually similar to the
distribution reported in Shiller’s (2005) analysis of personal accounts Social Security reform, although
there are differences in the simulation procedure that affect the results. The most important difference
is that Shiller (2005) uses data on stock and bond returns from a longer time period than we consider.
This means he assumes a distribution of equity returns with a lower mean value than the one that we
consider. Our results when the average return on stocks is set at 300 basis points below the historical
mean in our sample are closer to those in Shiller (2005) than our results that assume that returns are
drawn from the actual return distribution for 1926-2002.
4.2 Expected Utility of Retirement Wealth
Results like those in Table 5 do not provide any information on the household utility
associated with a particular retirement wealth outcome. To address this issue, we now evaluate the

21
expected utility associated with various wealth outcomes from our simulation runs, using the
procedure described in (5) above.
Table 6 shows the expected utility generated by the distribution of retirement resources for
each portfolio strategy using a certainty equivalent wealth measure to value the potential outcomes of
the different portfolio strategies. In this table we assume that the 401(k) balance is the household’s
only wealth. The values in the first horizontal panel in Table 6 are based on linear utility ( =0) and
thus are the expected values of each investment choice. These results are identical to the average
household retirement wealth calculations in Table 5, since a risk-neutral household cares only about
the expected value of retirement wealth. In this case the higher mean wealth of the all-stock strategy
implies that it is the most preferred investment strategy. This is true both with the actual historical
distribution of stock returns and with the distribution that reduces the mean return by 300 basis points.
It is also true for all education groups.
The next horizontal panel in Table 6 presents results for households whose utility of
retirement wealth is logarithmic. This level of risk aversion reduces the certainty equivalent value of
the all-stock portfolio strategy relative to other strategies, but this strategy continues to generate the
highest expected utility for all education groups. This outcome obtains when the expected stock return
is set equal to its historical average, and when it is reduced by 300 basis points. The empirical
lifecycle fund that combines stocks with nominal government bonds generates the highest expected
utility among the four lifecycle fund strategies, and the two empirical lifecycle strategies, (vi) and
(vii), yield expected utilities substantially greater than either of the heuristic lifecycle funds. The
expected utility of the fixed proportions strategy continues to be close to the expected utility of the two
empirical lifecycle strategies, although it now falls below both of the lifecycle strategies. This result is
sensitive to the assumed rate of return on stocks; the fixed proportion strategy (viii) dominates the two
empirical lifecycle strategies when equity returns are reduced by 300 basis points.
The third and fourth horizontal panels in Table 6 consider households with relative risk
aversion coefficients of two and four, respectively. As risk aversion rises the lifecycle portfolios

22
become more attractive relative to the all-stocks portfolio, and the “no lose” portfolio also becomes
more attractive. This is illustrated most clearly by considering the bottom panel in Table 6. The high
volatility of stock returns, and the associated risk of a low retirement wealth outcome, reduces
expected utility in this case relative to the earlier, less risk-averse cases. The certainty equivalent of
the all-stock strategy is now $181,500, which is still greater than the all-bond base ($140,500) but the
disparity is far smaller than at lower risk aversion values. The various lifecycle allocation strategies
dominate the all-stock strategy with a relative risk aversion of four. The certainty equivalent of the
four heuristic and empirical lifecycle strategies now range from $215,500 to $256,900. The empirical
lifecycle strategies generate higher expected utility than either of the heuristic strategies, and they also
generate higher expected utility than the strategy that holds the lifetime average equity share that
corresponds to these strategies, but does so at all ages. With relative risk aversion of four, the “no
lose” plan also generates a higher expected utility than the all-stock strategy.
Three additional features of the results with a relative risk aversion of four warrant comment.
First, when the average return on stocks is reduced by 300 basis points, the certainty equivalent of the
all-stock strategy declines sharply, while the corresponding values for the lifecycle funds and the nolose strategy do not decline as much. Feldstein’s (2005) “no lose” strategy is the preferred strategy in
this setting, with the empirical lifecycle strategy blending stocks and TIPS taking the second rank.
Second, the “no lose” strategy becomes more attractive as the level of risk aversion increases.
With a risk aversion of two, the “no-lose” plan yields an expected utility that falls below either of the
empirical lifecycle allocation strategies, either with historical equity returns or with reduced average
returns. In the case with relative risk aversion of four, the certainty equivalent of the “no lose” plan is
roughly equal to the nominal bonds and stocks lifecycle strategy, and somewhat below that of the
stocks-TIPS lifecycle strategy, when equity returns have their historical values. When equity returns
are reduced by 300 basis points, the certainty equivalent of the no-lose plan exceeds that of either of
the lifecycle strategies.

23
Third, the expected utility associated with either heuristic lifecycle funds or empirical lifecycle
funds rises relative to the expected utility of an all-stock investment strategy as risk aversion increases.
For a relative risk aversion of one, the certainty equivalent of an empirical lifecycle strategy that holds
stocks and government bonds is roughly two-thirds of the certainty equivalent of an all-stock strategy,
and it is roughly twice the certainty equivalent of an all-bond strategy. For a relative risk aversion of
four, however, the empirical lifecycle strategy’s certainty equivalent is about one third greater than
that of an all-stock portfolio, and sixty percent greater than an all-bond portfolio. These findings
suggest that the relative attraction of lifecycle funds and other asset allocation strategies is likely to be
highly dependent upon household circumstances.
Table 6 considers the certainty equivalent of different investment strategies when retirement
wealth from a 401(k) plan is the only source of utility at retirement. By assuming that the household is
solely dependent on 401(k) wealth, these calculations exaggerate the level of retirement income risk
faced by the household. Holding constant the household’s relative risk coefficient, when the
household has other sources of wealth, it will behave as though it was less risk averse.
Tables 7 and 8 present results with two alternative assumptions about non-401(k) wealth at
retirement. The results in Table 7 set non-401(k) wealth equal to other financial wealth in the HRS,
while those in Table 8 set non-401(k) wealth equal to all other wealth, adding together both financial
wealth and housing wealth. The households in both cases are less averse to holding high fractions of
their wealth in stocks. For a relative risk aversion of two, for example, the certainty equivalent value
of contributing to a 401(k) that is invested in the empirical lifecycle fund with stocks and TIPS is
$320,400 when households have no wealth at retirement other than their retirement wealth. This value
can be found in Table 6. When other financial wealth is combined with retirement account wealth in
determining the utility of retirement wealth, the certainty equivalent of the same strategy rises to
$353,000. With housing equity added to the total, the certainty equivalent rises to $366,100. In each
case these values represent the certainty equivalent of just the 401(k) account balance. This is the
amount in addition to other wealth that would be needed to generate the expected utility associated

24
with the uncertain retirement wealth distribution. The average value of retirement wealth associated
with this strategy is $405,300, so the reduction in certainty equivalent value associated with the risk of
unfavorable outcomes is smaller as non-401(k) wealth rises.
Allowing for non-retirement account wealth raises the attraction of stocks relative to other
financial investments. In both Tables 7 and 8, for all the risk aversion parameters that we consider, the
expected utility of holding an all-stock portfolio is greater than that from holding any of the other
portfolios that we consider. These results underscore the importance of recognizing and calibrating
non-401(k) wealth as part of the valuation process.

5. Conclusions
This paper presents evidence on the distribution of balances in 401(k)-type retirement saving
accounts under various assumptions about the asset allocation strategies that investors choose. In
addition to a range of age-invariant strategies, such as an all-bond and an all-stock strategy, we
consider several different “lifecycle funds” that automatically alter the investor’s mix of assets as he or
she ages. These funds offer investors a higher portfolio allocation to stocks at the beginning of a
working career than as they approach retirement. We also consider a “no lose” allocation strategy for
retirement saving, in which households purchase enough riskless bonds at each age to ensure that they
will have no less than their nominal contribution when they reach retirement age, and then invest the
balance in corporate stock. This strategy combines a riskless floor for retirement income with some
upside investment potential.
Our results suggest several conclusions about the effect of investment strategy on retirement
wealth. First, the distribution of retirement wealth associated with typical lifecycle investment
strategies is similar to that from age-invariant asset allocation strategies that set the equity share of the
portfolio equal to the average equity share in the lifecycle strategies. Second, the expected utility
associated with different 401(k) asset allocation strategies, and the ranking of these strategies, is very
sensitive to three parameters: the expected return on corporate stock, the relative risk aversion of the

25
investing household, and the amount of non-401(k) wealth that the household will have available at
retirement. At modest levels of risk aversion, or when the household has access to substantial non401(k) wealth at retirement, the historical pattern of stock and bond returns implies that the expected
utility of an all-stock investment allocation rule is greater than that from any of the more conservative
strategies. When we reduce the expected return on stocks by 300 basis points relative to historical
values, however, other strategies dominate the all-equity allocation for investors with high levels of
relative risk aversion. The “no lose” plan yields an expected utility of wealth at retirement that is
comparable to several of the lifecycle plans, but both the expected value of wealth and the expected
utility level are slightly lower than the values associated with the lifecycle strategies that we consider.
Our analysis of lifecycle funds suggests a number of issues that may warrant future research.
First, it is possible that lifecycle funds should be different for single individuals and for married
couples. The focus in these funds so far has been on accumulating wealth for retirement, and the
conceptual justification for age-phased equity exposure would be age-related variation in household
risk aversion. Single individuals may have fewer opportunities to respond to an adverse economic
shock than married couples, so their tolerance of equity market risk in their retirement accounts may
be different from that for married couples.
Second, we have focused on only a limited set of outcome measures associated with different
asset allocation strategies. While we consider various percentiles of the retirement wealth distribution,
as well as the mean value of wealth at retirement, and the expected utility associated with this wealth
value, other metrics may also deserve consideration. One possibility is the risk of shortfall associated
with one strategy relative to another. The Feldstein (2005) “no lose” strategy eliminates the shortfall
risk associated with a defined contribution investment strategy relative to investing all contributions to
a defined contribution plan in a zero-yield cash account. Shortfall risk measures could be computed
for a range of other strategies.
Third, our analysis has not reduced participant returns in 401(k) plans for the expense ratios
associated with asset management. Actual returns are reduced by these fees, and a potentially

26
important issue in the comparison of lifecycle funds and other investment vehicles is the differential in
fees across these investment options. We are currently exploring the effect of introducing investment
management fees to a simulation algorithm like that developed here.
Finally, our analysis has considered several stylized lifecycle funds, but it has not tried to
determine the optimal age-related allocation between stocks and bonds for households like the ones we
examine. Several previous studies, including Campbell and Viceira (2002), Campbell, Cocco, Gomes,
and Maenhout (2001), and Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout (2005), have evaluated optimal lifecycle
portfolios under stylized assumptions about labor market risk and the distribution of financial market
returns. It would be useful to compare the expected utility from the optimal lifecycle fund with the
expected utility either from existing lifecycle funds or from age-invariant asset allocation rules.

27

References
Ameriks, John, and Stephen Zeldes, 2004, “Do Household Portfolio Shares Vary with Age?,” mimeo,
Columbia University Graduate School of Business.
Bodie, Zvi, Robert C. Merton, and William Samuelson, 1991, “Labor Supply Flexibility and Portfolio
Choice in a Lifecycle Model,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 16, 427-449.
Campbell, John Y. and Luis M. Viceira, 2002, Strategic Asset Allocation: Portfolio Choices for Long
Term Investors (New York: Oxford University Press).
Campbell, John Y., Joao Cocco, Francisco Gomes, and Pascal Maenhout, 2001, “Investing Retirement
Wealth: A Life-Cycle Model,” in John Y. Campbell and Martin Feldstein (eds), Risk Aspects
of Investment-Based Social Security Reform (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Clements, Jonathan, 2005, “Plan Paralysis: Why a Wealth of Choices in 401(k)s May Not Make
Investors Rich,” Wall Street Journal May 4, page C1.
Cocco, Joao, Francisco Gomes, and Pascal Maenhout, 2005, “Consumption and Portfolio Choice over
the Life Cycle,” Review of Financial Studies, 18(2), 491-533.
Gomes, Francisco and Alexander Michaelides, 2005, “Optimal Life Cycle Asset Allocation:
Understanding the Empirical Evidence,” Journal of Finance 60, 869-904.
Feldstein, Martin, 2005, “Reducing the Risk of Investment-Based Social Security Reform,” NBER
Working Paper 11084.
Gollier, Christian, 2001, The Economics of Risk and Time (Cambridge: MIT Press).
Gollier, Christian and Richard J. Zeckhauser, 2002, “Horizon Length and Portfolio Risk,” Journal of
Risk and Uncertainty 24, 195-212.
Ibbotson Associates, 2003, Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and Inflation: 2003 Yearbook: Market Results for
1926-2002. (Chicago: Ibbotson Associates).
Marquez, Jessica, 2005, “Lifecycle Funds Can Help Companies Mitigate Risk and Boost Employee
Savings,” Workforce Management, April, 65-67.

28
Mehra, Rajneesh and Edward Prescott, 2002, “The Equity Premium Puzzle in Retrospect,” in G.
Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. Stulz, eds., Handbook of Economics of Finance
(Amsterdam: North Holland).
Merton, Robert C., 1969, “Lifetime Portfolio Selection under Uncertainty: The Continuous Time
Case,” Review of Economics and Statistics 51, 247-257.
Munnell, Alicia and Annika Sunden, 2004, Coming Up Short: The Challenge of 401(k) Plans
(Washington: Brookings Institution).
Poterba, James, 2003, “Employer Stock and 401(k) Plans,” American Economic Review 93 (May),
398-404.
Poterba, James, Joshua Rauh, Steven Venti and David Wise, 2005, “Utility Evaluation of Risk in
Retirement Savings Accounts,” in David Wise (ed), Analyses in the Economics of Aging,
Volume 10, University of Chicago Press.
Poterba, James, and Andrew Samwick, 2001, “Household Portfolio Allocations Over the Lifecycle,”
in S. Ogura, T. Tachibanaki, and D. Wise, ed., Aging Issues in the U.S. and Japan (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press), 65-103.
Samuelson, Paul, 1963, “Risk and Uncertainty: the Fallacy of the Law of Large Numbers,” Scientia
98, 108-113.
Samuelson, Paul, 1969, “Lifetime Portfolio Selection by Dynamic Stochastic Programming,” Review
of Economics and Statistics 51, 239-246.
Samuelson, Paul, 1989, “The Judgement of Economic Science on Rational Portfolio Management:
Indexing, Timing, and Long-Horizon Effects,” Journal of Portfolio Management, Fall, 3-12.

Samuelson, William, and Richard J. Zeckhauser, 1988, “Status Quo Bias in Decision
Making,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 1, 7-59.
Samwick, Andrew, and Jonathan Skinner, 2004, “How Will 401(k) Plans Affect Retirement Income?,”
American Economic Review 94, 329-343.

29
Shiller, Robert, 2005, “The Life Cycle Personal Accounts Proposal for Social Security: A Review,”
NBER Working Paper 11300.
Venti, Steven F. and David A. Wise, 2001, “Aging and Housing Equity: Another Look,” in David A.
Wise (ed.) Analyses in the Economics of Aging, Volume 9, University of Chicago Press.

30
Table 1: Target-Year Lifecycle Mutual Fund Characteristics, March 2005

Retirement
Year

Years to
Retirement

Net
Assets
($ billion)

2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
2035
2040

0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

4.1
11.2
2.9
14.5
1.9
8.3
0.6
3.3

Weighted
Average
Expense
Ratio

Number
of Fund
Families

Number
of Funds

0.6%
0.8%
0.6%
0.8%
0.6%
0.8%
0.8%
0.8%

10
13
8
13
8
12
6
11

40
45
22
45
22
39
15
38

2005Q1 Weighted Average
Asset Allocation
Stocks
Bonds
Cash
30.0%
42.0%
28.0%
49.4%
35.4%
15.3%
58.2%
35.7%
6.1%
69.7%
24.6%
5.7%
79.2%
17.2%
3.6%
81.7%
13.8%
4.5%
85.2%
10.4%
4.4%
88.0%
8.4%
3.5%

Funds used in this analysis consist of all mutual funds categorized by Morningstar as retirement or lifecycle
funds which also have a target-year rebalancing feature. Net assets for these funds as of 3/31/2005 were
collected from fund reports and from Morningstar.com. The number of funds differs from the number of fund
families for a given retirement year because funds have multiple classes of shares and “number of funds” counts
each share class as a separate fund. The weighted average expense ratio is the average expense ratio including
sub-fund expenses weighted by fund net asset value. Asset allocations are also averaged with fund net asset
value weighting. One fund family also offers funds with retirement years 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2045, and
2050. The information on these funds is not used in constructing this table.

Table 2: Sample Composition, HRS Households
Households Couples
59-72,
All
59-72, with
with SS
SS
Households,
Head 59-72
Earnings
Earnings
Household Head Education Less Than High School
Survey Households
1579
1086
540
Population Counterpart
3769.3
2653.4
1324.2
Household Head High School Education and/or Some College
Survey Households
2793
1954
1076
Population Counterpart
7669.2
5453.6
3013.2
Household Head at least College Degree
Survey Households
1132
793
526
Population Counterpart
3411.6
2390.6
1611.8
Total
Survey Households
5504
3833
2142
Population Counterpart
14850.1
10497.6
5949.2

Couples
63-72,
with SS
Earnings
374
938.3
689
1949.3
337
1013.6
1400
3901.1

Source: Authors’ tabulations based on the 2000 wave of the HRS and the social security earnings histories
available for a sub-sample of HRS respondents. Population counterparts are calculated using the household
weights provided in the HRS.

31
Table 3: Summary Statistics on Household Balance Sheet at Age 63/64, HRS Households

Househ
old
Head
59-72

All HRS Households
Househol
d Head
Couples
59-72 and
59-72,
with SS
with SS
Earnings
Earnings

Couples
63-72,
with SS
Earnings

HRS Couples with Husband Aged 63-72
Less
High
Than
School
College
High
and/or
and/or
School
Some
PostAll
Degree
College
graduate

Medians
Social Security
176.1
167.2
258.0
262.5 262.5
247.4
260.9
285.5
DB pension
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Other Annuity
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Retirement
Accounts
15.0
15.0
35.7
22.7
22.7
0.0
20.4
81.7
IRA
8.1
8.4
22.0
12.0
12.0
0.0
11.5
49.6
DC pension
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Other Financial
Wealth
34.6
35.2
69.6
58.0
58.0
6.4
55.7
170.5
Housing Equity
76.2
72.0
90.9
92.6
92.6
60.2
90.9
125.0
Other Wealth
11.5
11.0
17.7
18.1
18.1
11.0
20.0
21.9
SS + DB +
Annuity
204.6
203.5
280.3
276.9 276.9
250.5
277.2
301.8
Total Excluding
Retirement
Accounts
399.9
397.3
526.7
489.4 489.4
360.3
484.0
749.7
Total
439.1
435.6
587.5
536.8 536.8
370.1
531.1
856.3
Means
Social Security
179.9
181.9
235.9
246.5 246.5
229.1
243.6
268.1
DB pension
62.4
63.1
85.2
47.7
47.7
33.9
44.4
66.6
Other Annuity
4.9
5.0
5.2
5.0
5.0
0.8
7.3
4.6
Retirement
Accounts
107.8
113.2
154.7
136.4 136.4
36.8
83.1
330.9
IRA
73.2
72.8
95.2
77.3
77.3
29.4
67.4
140.6
DC pension
32.4
37.0
55.7
59.0
59.0
7.4
15.7
190.3
Other Financial
Wealth
177.4
179.3
223.1
199.7 199.7
69.6
138.7
437.3
Housing Equity
113.2
103.1
125.3
115.3 115.3
78.7
106.6
165.7
Other Wealth
26.2
26.5
32.8
33.0
33.0
19.2
30.1
51.3
SS + DB +
Annuity
247.2
250.0
326.3
299.2 299.2
263.8
295.3
339.3
Total Excluding
Retirement
Accounts
587.3
583.8
727.3
647.0 647.0
431.3
570.6
993.6
Total
694.2
695.8
881.5
783.4 783.4
468.1
653.7
1324.5
Sample Size
Number of
Households
5504
3833
2142
1400
1400
374
689
337
Weighted Size
('
000s)
14850
10498
5949
3901
3901
938
1949
1013
Source: Authors’ tabulations based on the 2000 HRS. All entries are normalized to calendar year 2000. To
estimate DB and DC pension wealth for HRS households we use the pension wealth imputations from the HRS
(March 2005 version). Other financial wealth includes stocks, equity mutual funds, bonds, fixed income mutual
funds, checking and saving accounts, money market mutual funds and certificates of deposit held outside of
retirement accounts. Social security wealth is calculated as in PRVW (2005).

32
Table 4: Distribution of Household Balance Sheet for HRS Couples with Husbands
Aged 63-72, Normalized to Age 63/64 in Year 2000
All
Less Than High School College and/or
Net Worth Concept
Education High School and/or Some Postgraduate
Levels
Degree
College
20th percentile
SS + DB + Annuity
189.8
169.4
198.8
204.6
Total Excluding Retirement
292.2
216.8
312.2
387.8
Accounts
Total
302.0
220.9
315.1
448.1
40th percentile
SS + DB + Annuity
257.0
230.7
257.3
281.2
Total Excluding Retirement
419.1
314.1
423.6
607.8
Accounts
Total
450.1
323.2
450.4
707.9
60th percentile
SS + DB + Annuity
295.6
265.7
296.1
338.0
Total Excluding Retirement
575.3
413.6
549.8
878.6
Accounts
Total
637.4
441.3
622.1
1051.1
80th percentile
SS + DB + Annuity
362.8
313.7
354.3
449.3
Total Excluding Retirement
830.4
575.4
745.2
1229.6
Accounts
Total
994.5
644.1
866.4
1598.6
Source: Authors’ tabulations from the 2000 HRS. DB pension wealth was calculated from the pension wealth
imputations from the HRS (March 2005 version). Social security and annuity wealth were computed as in
PRVW (2005).

33
Table 5: Simulated Distribution of 401(k) Balances at Retirement ($2000)
Empirical Stock Returns
Empirical Returns Reduced 300 Basis Points
Investment
Less Than High School
College
Less Than
High School
College
Strategy/
High School and/or Some
and/or
High School and/or Some
and/or
Degree
College
Postgraduate
Percentile
Degree
College
Postgraduate
100% TIPS
137.6
162.6
174.4
137.6
100% Government Bonds
1
31.0
36.3
41.3
31.0
10
90.1
106.3
115.5
90.1
50
148.0
175.0
187.2
148.0
90
253.2
300.2
316.2
253.2
Mean
162.9
192.7
205.2
162.9
100% Stocks
1
11.1
12.8
14.5
6.4
10
151.4
179.9
190.1
79.9
50
460.5
549.8
564.9
234.8
90
1420.6
1704.9
1710.3
705.0
Mean
677.7
812.0
821.8
339.9
(110 - Age)% Stocks, (Age + 10)% TIPS
1
46.4
54.3
59.2
35.9
10
150.5
178.1
189.2
115.9
50
240.5
285.2
300.0
185.2
90
380.9
452.3
471.7
293.3
Mean
256.0
303.6
318.7
197.1
(110 - Age)% Stocks, (Age +10)% Bonds
1
32.2
38.0
42.1
25.2
10
138.7
164.1
175.0
107.0
50
253.7
301.0
316.1
195.1
90
466.4
554.6
574.2
357.7
Mean
284.2
337.4
352.6
218.4
Empirical Lifecycle, Stocks and TIPS
1
55.1
64.3
72.0
40.5
10
164.0
194.6
206.4
114.7
50
299.8
357.2
369.9
204.4
90
561.8
672.6
682.6
373.8
Mean
339.5
405.3
416.8
229.5
Empirical Lifecycle, Stocks and Bonds
1
31.9
37.3
41.9
23.6
10
155.2
184.2
195.1
108.3
50
311.6
371.3
384.3
212.1
90
642.7
769.4
779.9
427.8
Mean
367.0
438.2
449.7
247.5
Equivalent Fixed Proportion Stocks (53% baseline, 61.5% with reduced returns)
1
30.8
35.9
40.1
18.8
10
150.5
178.4
189.2
104.3
50
294.7
350.6
364.9
215.5
90
582.9
695.5
711.7
450.2
Mean
340.0
404.9
418.6
254.5
Feldstein (2005) “No Lose” Plan
1
96.6
113.8
124.3
95.3
10
143.8
170.4
181.8
117.9
50
260.4
310.7
320.6
172.7
90
645.5
777.0
775.6
352.6
Mean
350.6
420.3
426.8
214.8
Source: Authors’ tabulations of simulation results. See text for further details.

162.6

174.4

36.3
106.3
175.0
300.2
192.7

41.3
115.5
187.2
316.2
205.2

7.3
94.3
278.8
841.1
404.8

8.5
102.4
293.5
860.4
418.6

41.9
137.0
219.3
347.7
233.5

46.2
146.9
232.8
365.6
247.2

29.6
126.4
231.2
424.7
258.9

33.1
136.1
244.9
443.3
272.8

47.1
135.5
242.4
445.6
272.7

53.4
146.4
255.5
459.2
285.1

27.6
128.0
251.7
509.7
294.3

31.5
138.1
265.1
524.6
307.0

21.8
123.2
255.7
535.9
302.4

25.0
132.7
269.5
553.6
316.0

112.2
139.2
204.8
421.3
255.6

122.7
150.7
216.6
430.1
266.2

34
Table 6: Certainty Equivalent Wealth ($2000) For Different Asset Allocation Rules and Different Expected
Stock Returns, No Other Wealth
Empirical Stock Returns, Reduced
300 Basis Points
Empirical Stock Returns
HS
HS and/or College or Less Than and/or
College or
Less Than Some
PostHS
Some
PostRisk Aversion/Investment Strategy
HS Degree College
graduate
Degree
College
graduate
=0
100% TIPS
100% Government Bonds
100% Stocks
(110 - Age)% Stocks, (Age+10)% TIPS
(110 - Age)% Stocks, (Age+10)% Bonds
Empirical Lifecycle, Stocks and TIPS
Empirical Lifecycle, Stocks and Bonds
Equivalent Fixed Proportion Stocks
“No Lose” Plan

137.6
162.9
677.7
256.0
284.2
339.6
367.0
340.0
350.6

162.6
192.7
812.0
303.6
337.4
405.3
438.2
404.9
420.3

174.4
205.2
821.8
318.7
352.6
416.8
449.7
418.6
426.8

339.9
197.1
218.4
229.5
247.5
254.5
214.8

404.8
233.5
258.9
272.7
294.3
302.4
255.6

418.6
247.2
272.8
285.2
307.0
316.0
266.2

=1
100% TIPS
100% Government Bonds
100% Stocks
(110 - Age)% Stocks, (Age+10)% TIPS
(110 - Age)% Stocks, (Age+10)% Bonds
Empirical Lifecycle, Stocks and TIPS
Empirical Lifecycle, Stocks and Bonds
Equivalent Fixed Proportion Stocks
“No Lose” Plan

137.6
149.7
461.8
239.8
253.9
301.9
313.9
295.4
285.1

162.6
177.1
551.4
284.3
301.3
359.7
374.0
351.4
340.4

174.4
189.4
567.1
299.2
316.5
372.7
387.3
365.8
351.0

235.8
184.7
195.4
205.8
213.8
216.0
190.1

279.9
218.6
231.4
244.2
253.7
256.2
225.6

294.8
232.1
245.2
257.4
267.2
270.1
237.7

=2
100% TIPS
100% Government Bonds
100% Stocks
(110 - Age)% Stocks, (Age+10)% TIPS
(110 - Age)% Stocks, (Age+10)% Bonds
Empirical Lifecycle, Stocks and TIPS
Empirical Lifecycle, Stocks and Bonds
Equivalent Fixed Proportion Stocks
“No Lose” Plan

137.6
138.2
316.5
224.5
227.1
269.3
269.7
257.1
245.2

162.6
163.3
376.5
266.1
269.2
320.4
320.8
305.4
291.9

174.4
175.5
394.1
280.6
284.2
334.5
335.2
320.3
304.6

164.9
172.9
174.9
185.2
185.5
183.7
174.5

194.9
204.6
207.0
219.5
219.7
217.5
206.8

209.3
217.8
220.5
233.1
233.6
231.3
219.6

83.5
151.3
140.6
151.5
141.8
133.9
156.2

97.6
178.9
166.0
179.0
167.4
157.9
184.7

108.8
191.4
178.8
193.0
181.2
171.0
197.9

=4
100% TIPS
137.6
162.6
174.4
100% Government Bonds
119.1
140.5
152.3
100% Stocks
154.0
181.5
197.0
(110 - Age)% Stocks, (Age+10)% TIPS
196.4
232.6
246.6
(110 - Age)% Stocks, (Age+10)% Bonds
182.2
215.5
229.9
Empirical Lifecycle, Stocks and TIPS
216.6
256.9
272.3
Empirical Lifecycle, Stocks and Bonds
202.3
239.8
255.1
Equivalent Fixed Proportion Stocks
196.0
232.1
247.0
“No Lose” Plan
201.7
239.3
253.4
Source: Authors’ tabulations from simulation analysis. See text for further discussion.

35
Table 7: Certainty Equivalent Wealth ($2000) For Different Asset Allocation Rules and Different Expected
Stock Returns, Other Wealth Equal to Other Financial Wealth in HRS
Empirical Stock Returns, Reduced
300 Basis Points
Empirical Stock Returns
HS and/or College or Less Than HS and/or College or
Less Than Some
PostHS
Some
PostRisk Aversion/Investment Strategy
HS Degree College
graduate
Degree
College
graduate
=0
100% TIPS
100% Government Bonds
100% Stocks
(110 - Age)% Stocks, (Age+10)% TIPS
(110 - Age)% Stocks, (Age+10)% Bonds
Empirical Lifecycle, Stocks and TIPS
Empirical Lifecycle, Stocks and Bonds
Equivalent Fixed Proportion Stocks
“No Lose” Plan

137.6
162.9
677.7
256.0
284.2
339.6
367.0
340.0
350.6

162.6
192.7
812.0
303.6
337.4
405.3
438.2
404.9
420.3

174.4
205.2
821.8
318.7
352.6
416.8
449.7
418.6
426.8

339.9
197.1
218.4
229.5
247.5
254.5
214.8

404.8
233.5
258.9
272.7
294.3
302.4
255.6

418.6
247.2
272.8
285.2
307.0
316.0
266.2

=1
100% TIPS
100% Government Bonds
100% Stocks
(110 - Age)% Stocks, (Age+10)% TIPS
(110 - Age)% Stocks, (Age+10)% Bonds
Empirical Lifecycle, Stocks and TIPS
Empirical Lifecycle, Stocks and Bonds
Equivalent Fixed Proportion Stocks
“No Lose” Plan

137.6
156.9
518.1
247.2
266.9
316.4
333.4
312.8
306.1

162.6
185.5
618.4
293.1
316.6
377.1
397.4
371.9
365.6

174.4
198.1
636.5
308.3
332.4
390.2
411.1
387.0
376.2

275.6
191.1
206.6
217.0
229.1
233.4
200.3

326.9
226.2
244.7
257.5
271.8
276.8
237.8

343.3
240.0
258.9
270.7
285.6
291.2
249.7

=2
100% TIPS
100% Government Bonds
100% Stocks
(110 - Age)% Stocks, (Age+10)% TIPS
(110 - Age)% Stocks, (Age+10)% Bonds
Empirical Lifecycle, Stocks and TIPS
Empirical Lifecycle, Stocks and Bonds
Equivalent Fixed Proportion Stocks
“No Lose” Plan

137.6
151.7
416.5
239.1
252.0
296.7
306.2
290.0
277.0

162.6
179.1
495.4
283.3
298.5
353.0
364.2
344.3
330.0

174.4
191.8
517.1
298.6
314.6
367.4
379.4
360.3
342.8

233.1
185.6
196.3
206.2
213.8
216.0
190.0

275.6
219.5
232.2
244.3
253.3
255.7
225.3

292.9
233.3
246.6
258.1
267.6
270.6
238.0

=4
100% TIPS
100% Government Bonds
100% Stocks
(110 - Age)% Stocks, (Age+10)% TIPS
(110 - Age)% Stocks, (Age+10)% Bonds
Empirical Lifecycle, Stocks and TIPS
Empirical Lifecycle, Stocks and Bonds
Equivalent Fixed Proportion Stocks
“No Lose” Plan

137.6
142.6
301.2
224.5
227.2
265.0
264.8
254.1
241.1

162.6
168.2
356.3
265.6
268.7
314.5
314.0
300.9
286.4

174.4
180.9
379.2
281.1
285.1
330.6
330.8
317.8
301.2

181.5
175.5
179.1
188.4
189.9
189.2
176.1

213.6
207.3
211.4
222.7
224.4
223.3
208.5

230.6
221.1
226.0
237.2
239.4
238.6
221.9

36
Table 8: Certainty Equivalent Wealth ($2000) For Different Asset Allocation Rules and Different Expected
Stock Returns, Other Wealth Equal to All HRS Non-Retirement Plan Wealth
Empirical Stock Returns, Reduced
300 Basis Points
Empirical Stock Returns
Less Than HS and/or College or Less Than HS and/or College or
HS
Some
PostHS
Some
PostRisk Aversion/Investment Strategy
Degree
College
graduate
Degree
College
graduate
=0
100% TIPS
100% Government Bonds
100% Stocks
(110 - Age)% Stocks, (Age+10)% TIPS
(110 - Age)% Stocks, (Age+10)% Bonds
Empirical Lifecycle, Stocks and TIPS
Empirical Lifecycle, Stocks and Bonds
Equivalent Fixed Proportion Stocks
“No Lose” Plan

137.8
163.0
677.8
256.1
284.3
339.7
367.1
340.1
350.7

164.9
194.9
812.3
305.5
339.2
406.9
439.7
406.4
421.8

178.0
208.6
817.5
321.4
355.1
418.7
451.4
420.6
428.4

340.0
197.3
218.5
229.7
247.7
254.7
214.9

406.3
235.6
260.9
274.7
296.2
304.3
257.6

418.9
250.4
275.8
288.0
309.7
318.7
269.1

=1
100% TIPS
100% Government Bonds
100% Stocks
(110 - Age)% Stocks, (Age+10)% TIPS
(110 - Age)% Stocks, (Age+10)% Bonds
Empirical Lifecycle, Stocks and TIPS
Empirical Lifecycle, Stocks and Bonds
Equivalent Fixed Proportion Stocks
“No Lose” Plan

137.8
158.3
534.1
248.9
269.9
320.1
338.4
317.0
311.9

164.9
189.9
647.6
297.7
323.5
385.0
407.6
380.9
377.4

178.0
204.4
677.0
314.9
341.9
400.9
425.0
399.4
392.4

284.5
192.5
208.9
219.4
232.4
237.1
202.7

344.3
230.4
250.5
263.5
279.4
285.0
244.0

366.8
246.0
267.1
278.9
296.0
302.7
258.2

=2
100% TIPS
100% Government Bonds
100% Stocks
(110 - Age)% Stocks, (Age+10)% TIPS
(110 - Age)% Stocks, (Age+10)% Bonds
Empirical Lifecycle, Stocks and TIPS
Empirical Lifecycle, Stocks and Bonds
Equivalent Fixed Proportion Stocks
“No Lose” Plan

137.8
154.0
441.7
242.2
257.3
303.2
314.8
297.5
285.7

164.9
185.3
541.3
290.4
309.7
366.1
381.1
359.2
347.3

178.0
200.5
583.5
308.7
330.2
385.3
402.8
381.0
367.0

247.0
188.0
200.4
210.4
219.5
222.5
193.8

302.1
225.6
241.3
253.6
265.2
268.9
233.9

330.1
241.9
259.3
270.8
284.1
289.0
249.9

=4
100% TIPS
100% Government Bonds
100% Stocks
(110 - Age)% Stocks, (Age+10)% TIPS
(110 - Age)% Stocks, (Age+10)% Bonds
Empirical Lifecycle, Stocks and TIPS
Empirical Lifecycle, Stocks and Bonds
Equivalent Fixed Proportion Stocks
“No Lose” Plan

137.8
146.6
333.7
230.1
236.3
275.7
278.5
266.4
252.3

164.9
177.3
415.8
277.2
286.4
335.3
340.1
324.4
308.3

178.0
193.7
468.1
297.4
310.1
359.3
367.5
350.9
332.9

199.9
179.8
186.0
195.4
199.0
199.4
181.3

248.2
216.8
225.6
237.1
242.5
243.4
219.6

281.0
234.3
245.7
256.9
264.6
266.4
237.7

37

Figure 1: Aggregate Net Assets of Target-Year Lifecycle Funds, March 1994-March 2005
50

$ billions

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

20
05

20
04

20
03

20
02

20
01

20
00

19
99

19
98

19
97

19
96

19
95

19
94

0

This figure shows quarterly net assets of all mutual funds categorized by Morningstar as retirement or lifecycle funds which
also have a target-year rebalancing feature. As of March 2005, the $47.1 billion represents assets in the following families:
Barclays Global Investors LifePath, Fidelity Freedom Funds, Fidelity Advisor Freedom, Intrust Bank NestEgg, MassMutual
Select Destination Retire, Principal Investors Lifetime, Putnam Retirement Ready, Scudder Target, State Farm Lifepath,
TIAA-CREF Institutional Lifecycle, T. Rowe Price Retirement, Vanguard Target Retirement, Vantagepoint Milestone, and
Wells Fargo Outlook. Net assets for lifecycle funds were assembled from fund reports and data provided by Morningstar.

38
Figure 2: Median Household Wage Income in the HRS
70000

60000

Less than High School
High School and/or Some College
College and/or Postgraduate

50000

40000

30000

20000

10000

70

68

66

64

62

60

58

56

54

52

50

48

46

44

42

40

38

36

34

32

30

28

26

24

22

20

18

0
Age

Source: Authors'calculations from social security earnings histories of HRS respondents.

Figure 3: Median Household Wage Income in the HRS for Couples with Male Aged 59-72
70000
Less than High School
High School and/or Some College
College and/or Postgraduate

60000

50000

40000

30000

20000

10000

Age

Source: Authors'calculations from social security earnings histories of HRS respondents.

70

68

66

64

62

60

58

56

54

52

50

48

46

44

42

40

38

36

34

32

30

28

26

24

22

20

18

0

39

Figure 4: Median Household Wage Income in the HRS for Couples with Male Aged 63-72
70000

60000

Less than High School
High School and/or Some College
College and/or Postgraduate

50000

40000

30000

20000

10000

Age

Source: Authors'calculations from social security earnings histories of HRS respondents.

70

68

66

64

62

60

58

56

54

52

50

48

44

46

42

40

38

36

34

32

30

28

26

24

22

20

18

0

