NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PEOPLE PEOPLE:
SOCIAL CAPITAL AND THE LABOR-MARKET OUTCOMES
OF UNDERREPRESENTED GROUPS
Lex Borghans
Bas ter Weel
Bruce A. Weinberg
Working Paper 11985
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11985
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2006
We wish to thank conference and seminar participants at Brown University, De Nederlandsche Bank,
the 2004 EALE in Lisbon, IZA, LSE, Maastricht University, the NBER Summer Institute, Notre
Dame University, Ohio State University, the 2004 SOLE in San Antonio, Yale, and the 2006 AEA
Meetings. We are also grateful for comments from David Autor, George Borjas, Charles Brown,
Betrand Candelon, William Dupor, Richard Freeman, Roland Fryer, Ed Glaeser, John Ham,
Masanori Hashimoto, Larry Katz, Hajime Miyazaki, Franz Palm, James Peck, Bas Straathof, and
Thomas Tenerelli. Vasilos Kosteas provided excellent research assistance. Ter Well acknowledges
financial support from the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research and Weinberg
acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation. We are grateful to Francis Green for
access to the BSS data, to Alexandra Spitz for help with the BIBB/IAB data, to Arnaud Dupuy for
sharing his software to compute breaks, and to David Autor and Michael Handel for sharing the
consistent series of occupation classifications for the United States. Part of this work was done
while Borghans and Ter Weel were visiting the Department of Economics at Ohio State University
and while Weinberg was visiting MERIT and ROA at Maastricht University. We are grateful for
their hospitality and support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Lex Borghans, Bas ter Weel, and Bruce A. Weinberg. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

People People: Social Capital and the Labor-Market Outcomes of Underrepresented Groups
Lex Borghans, Bas ter Weel, and Bruce A. Weinberg
NBER Working Paper No. 11985
January 2006
JEL No. J16, J21, J24, J31
ABSTRACT
Despite indications that people skills are important for understanding individual labor-market
outcomes and have become more important over the last decades, there is little analysis by
economists. This paper shows that people skills are important determinants of labor-market
outcomes, including occupations and wages. We show that technological and organizational changes
have increased the importance of people skills in the workplace. We particularly focus on how the
increased importance of people skills has affected the labor-market outcomes of under represented
groups. We show that the acceleration rate of increase in the importance of people skills between
the late 1970s and early 1990s can help explain why women’s wages increased more rapidly while
the wages of blacks grew more slowly over these years relative to earlier years.
Lex Borghans
Research Centre for Education and the Labour Market
Maastricht University
P.O. Box 616
6200MD Maastricht
The Netherlands
l.borghans@roa.unimaas.nl
Bas ter Weel
Department of Economics and MERIT
Maastricht University
P.O. Box 616
6200MD Maastricht
The Netherlands
b.terweel@merit.unimaas.nl
Bruce A. Weinberg
Department of Economics
Ohio State University
410 Arps Hall
1945 North High Street
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
weinberg.27@osu.edu

I. Introduction
It has been widely documented that in the United States gender wage gap shrank rapidly
from the late 1970s to the early 1990s after holding steady for years, while the black-white wage
gap closed more slowly during this period after shrinking for years. A variety of explanations
have been provided for these trend breaks but there are no unified explanations and some of the
explanations for one phenomenon deepen the puzzle for the other.1 This paper shows that an
acceleration in the rate at which interpersonal or “people” tasks are becoming more important
provides a unified explanation for these trend breaks. While psychologists have pointed to gender
differences in interpersonal styles and a long-standing literature discusses impediments to crossracial interactions in the labor market, to the best of our knowledge, we are the first to link the
increased importance of people tasks to trends in the labor markets of underrepresented groups.
The importance of people skills has long been recognized in the popular literature2 and is
increasingly being recognized in psychology (see Gardner [1983], Sternberg [1984], and
Goleman [1996]) and has begun entering economics through work on social capital (Coleman
[1990], Becker and Murphy [2000], and Glaeser, Laibson, and Sacerdote [2002]), non-cognitive
traits (Heckman and Rubinstein [2001] and Heckman, Stixrud and Urzua [2005]) and behavioral
approaches (Bowles, Gintis, and Osborne [2001]). Moreover, the shift in employment from
manufacturing to services and the diffusion of computer technology and innovative workplace
organizations are likely to have increased the demand for “people people”. Despite this interest,
people skills have received little attention in the economics literature.
We provide a simple, early model of the role of people skills in the labor market. In our
model, individuals vary in their stock of people skills and jobs differ in the importance of people
tasks. People with more people skills have higher marginal products in jobs with more people
tasks and are assigned to them. Using individual-level longitudinal data form the United States
and Britain, we show that people who were more sociable when they were young are more likely
to be in jobs where people tasks are more important and that the returns to their people skills are

1

For instance Blau and Kahn [1997] show that the increase in skill prices proposed by Juhn, Murphy, and Pierce
[1991] as an explanation for the slowing progress of blacks works against the closing of the gender gap.
2
The massive market for material on How to Win Friends and Influence People, as Dale Carnegie’s [Carnegie 1936]
classic book is titled, indicates that people tasks are widely believed to be important. Carnegie’s work has sold over
15 million copies and, almost 70 years after it was first published, is ranked 209th of all books on Amazon.com (on
November 30, 2005).

1

greater in these jobs. While not directly related to the labor markets of underrepresented groups,
these results both demonstrate the widespread influence of people skills and provide some
validation for our measures of people tasks.
After this general analysis of people skills, we apply our model to understand the labormarket outcomes of underrepresented groups. Psychologists have argued that women place more
weight on the effects of their actions on others [Gilligan 2001] and women report being better in
performing people tasks. It is also likely that racial, ethnic, linguistic, and cultural differences
interfere with the performance of people tasks, either because members of such minority groups
are less able to interact with members of the majority group or because of prejudice on the part of
customers and co-workers (see Becker [1971] and Holzer and Ihlanfeldt [1998]). Supporting
these hypotheses, in both cross-sectional and panel data, we find that the relative employment of
women is higher in occupations in which people tasks are more important in Britain, Germany
and the United States. The reverse is true for racial, ethnic, cultural, and linguistic minorities in
the United States.
Testing for structural breaks, we show that the importance of people tasks increased
particularly rapidly between the late 1970s and the early 1990s. Data for Britain, Germany and
the United States show that this trend is linked to the increased use of computers and innovative
work practices. In both levels and changes, people tasks are more important in occupations with
greater computer use, in which team work is more important, and in firms which have recently
gone through organizational changes. Combined, with our estimates of the effect of people tasks
on the employment of underrepresented groups, we show that the rapid increase in the
importance of people tasks over this time period helps explain the increase in women’s wages
relative to men and the stagnation in wages of black workers relative to white workers.3
Our empirical work falls into the emerging literature on “soft skills”. The returns to
beauty found by Hamermesh and Biddle [1994] and Möbius and Rosenblat [2005],
Machiavellianism (Turner and Martinez [1977]), personality (Osborne [1999]), self-esteem
(Goldsmith, Veum and Darity [1997]) and to height among youths by Persico, Postlewaite, and

3

The coding of Hispanics changes over time, and Borjas [1982] has argued that Hispanics are a heterogeneous
group. The wages of Hispanic workers decline markedly starting in the late 1970s, while their employment
increases. Given these changes, estimates of demand shifts toward Hispanics are highly sensitive to assumptions
about elasticities. See also Borjas [1995] for an analysis of the labor-market developments of immigrants in the
1980s.

2

Silverman [2004] support our result of positive labor-market returns to people characteristics, but
beauty is only one aspect of interpersonal styles. In addition, Machin et al. [2001] find positive
but rather small labor-market returns to sociability variables in Britain, but do not consider the
assignment of people with different attitudes to different jobs. For men in the U.S., Kuhn and
Weinberger [2005] find positive returns to being a leader in high school, especially in managerial
jobs. We look at a broader set of implications than this paper to explain labor-market success.
Glaeser et al. [2000] and Glaeser, Laibson and Sacerdote [2002] present suggestive evidence that
workers with better people skills tend to be employed in jobs in which social interactions occur
more frequently. Finally, Glaeser, Sacerdote and Scheinkman [1996] develop an index of social
interactions and find that social interactions are important in explaining individual choices in
committing different types of crime and schooling choice.
This paper proceeds as follows. Section II outlines trends in the wages, employment, and
demand for women and blacks and reviews different explanations from the literature to explain
these trends. Section III presents our model of how people skills influence labor-market
outcomes. Section IV presents the data sources we use. Section V presents general evidence for
our model. Section VI studies the effects of people tasks on the demand for women and blacks
and shows that trends in the importance of people skills can help explain trends in the gender and
racial wage gaps. Section VII concludes.
II. Trends in the Labor-Market Outcomes for Women and Blacks
This section discusses trends in the labor-market outcomes of women and blacks in the
United States (see Altonji and Blank [1999] for a review). Figures I and II show the evolution of
the male-female and the black-white wage gaps and the proportion of the workforce that is
female and black in the United States from 1963 to 2002, using data from the March Current
Population Surveys (CPS) (see Appendix A2 for details). It has been well documented that
women’s wages show little growth until the late 1970s, at which point they begin rising rapidly
until the mid-1990s. At the same time, women’s share of employment increased steadily from
1964 to 2003, with a slight deceleration in the 1990s.4 Besides increased labor supply and levels

4

Mulligan and Rubinstein [2004] offer an alternative view on the evolution of the gender wage gap. They argue that
within-gender wage inequality has changed the composition of the group of women in the labor market and show
that, accounting for a growing selection bias over time, the closing of the gender wage gap could be overestimated.
Their estimates can, however, not be reconciled with the developments of the importance of people tasks in the labor
market and, at the same time, the movements in the racial wage gap.

3

of education there are a number of developments, which can be connected to this development.5
Goldin [2004a] shows that changes in the labor-market outcomes for women were rooted in the
growth of a wide variety of white-collar jobs, combined with the greater ability of women to hold
certain professional jobs. This latter fact is consistent with findings of an increased share of
women at the top of the job hierarchy (Bertrand and Hallock [2001] and Goldin [2004b]). The
use of the birth-control pill by young women has delayed marriage and motherhood, which
opened opportunities for women to progress in the labor market and earn higher wages than
before (Goldin and Katz [2002] and Bailey [2006]). In addition, the computerization of the labor
market has taken away some of the (physical) disadvantages women had in a non-computerized
labor market (Weinberg [2000]). Finally, Black and Brainerd [2004] argue that globalization has
increased competition through trade, which has contributed to the relative improvement in female
wages in concentrated relative to competitive industries.
From the mid-1990s on however, women’s wages are again flat, a development so far
unexplained. A recent contribution by Blau and Kahn [2004], using the Michigan PSID,
attributes the slowing in the convergence of the gender wage gap to changes in labor-force
selectivity, unobserved female characteristics and discrimination, but also to less favorable
supply and demand shifts. A number of studies have explained the remaining gender wage gap
from gender differences in occupations. For example, Bayard et al. [2003] find that a sizable
fraction of the gender wage gap can be attributed to segregation of women into lower-paying
occupations, industries, establishments, and occupations within establishments. Blau and Kahn
[1997] find for the 1980s in an analysis of shifts in the composition of supply and demand that
demand changes favored lower educated women over men but do not consider the stagnation in

5

Mincer and Polachek [1974] analyze the division of labor in the family using the 1967 National Longitudinal
Survey of Work Experience (NLS). They find that differences in labor-market experience, due to interruptions in job
careers and the associated loss of skills, can account in large part for the gender wage gap in the 1960s and early
1970s. An early study on female labor supply decisions is Heckman [1974] who estimates the effect of child-care
programs on women’s labor supply. He finds significant increases in female labor supply and career continuity (see
also Meyer and Sullivan [2004]). More recently, Greenwood and Guner [2004] argue that technological progress in
the household sector since the late 1940s has reduced the need for labor at home, which increased female labor
supply and labor-market opportunities. Juhn and Murphy [1997] investigate whether married women have increased
their labor supply in the recent decades to compensate for slowed earnings growth of their husbands and do find no
significant increases. Their estimates suggest that the wage effect dominates the cross husband-wife effect for
changes in male and female labor supply. A wealth of studies on female labor supply increases identified the
increased level of education of women as a major source. In addition, the more labor-market relevant college majors
taken by women and their increased enrollment in professional schools are likely to play a major role as well
(Goldin [1990], Blau and Ferber [1992], and Brown and Corcoran [1997]).

4

the gender wage gap afterwards. Blau and Kahn [1997] and Black and Juhn [2000] investigate
the labor-market outcomes for high-educated women in the 1980s and 1990s and find that despite
the increase in supply, college-educated women entered high-wage professional occupations in
response to the recent increase in skill demand. Goldin [2002] also finds a diminishing effect of
the importance of gender in employment across occupations, but these studies are not able to
explain the break in the gender wage gap since the mid-1990s.6 Two recent papers (Xenogiani
[2002] and Fortin [2004]) seek to relate women’s labor-market outcomes to people skills,
although neither considers racial differences in outcomes.
By contrast, Figure I shows that the racial wage gap closes by 20 percentage points
between 1964 and the late 1970s, which is often attributed to the Civil Rights Act of 1964,7 but is
essentially flat from then until 2003. The employment of blacks fluctuated moderately over the
period, increasing somewhat during the 1980s and by more in later years as shown in Figure II.8
Juhn, Murphy and Pierce [1991], Bound and Freeman [1992], and Smith [1993] all analyze the
stagnation in wages in great detail.9 Using information from the CPS, Bound and Freeman [1992]
look at the relative labor-market position of young black men. Their findings suggest that
increases in the racial wage gap seem to originate from different sources than the overall trend

6

A number of recent studies have linked changes in the gender wage gap to changes in male wage inequality (e.g.,
Juhn and Kim [1999], Fortin and Lemieux [2000], and Welch [2000]).
7
For example, Freeman [1973], Smith and Welch [1977; 1984], Brown [1984], Card and Krueger [1993], and
Collins [2001] address the timing of the improvements in black workers’ relative earnings. Using a variety of
research strategies and data sources, they all find evidence consistent with a break in labor-market variables, such as
relative employment and wages, in favor of blacks. The improvement in relative school quality in segregated states
in the first half of the 20th century is also seen as a source of falling racial wage gaps since the 1960s. For example,
Donohue, Heckman and Todd [2002] address the racial wage gap in the period 1910-1960 and find considerable
convergence in wages for cohorts born since the late 1930s, which they attribute to increases in schooling quality in
the Southern States. Card and Krueger’s [1992] findings are consistent with improvements in the relative quality of
black schools in the first half of the 20th century. Their estimates suggest that improved quality of schooling is able
to explain about 20 percent of the narrowing of the racial wage gap in the period 1960-1980.
8
There are a number of papers that have studied selection bias in estimating black-white wage gaps. Using U.S.
Census data Chandra [2000] reports that labor-market participation among prime-aged black men was considerably
lower than the labor-market participation of white men in the period 1940-1990. Neal [2004] measures the blackwhite wage gap among women using a variety of U.S. data sources and finds that different reasons for nonparticipation between black women (often single mothers) and white women (often receiving support from a highearning spouse) have led to a downward bias in the measured black-white wage gap. A recent paper by Chandra
[2003] is concerned with the efficacy of the Civil Rights Act and the development of the racial wage gap in the
period thereafter (see also Heckman, Lyons and Todd [2000]). His estimates suggest that selection bias plays a
considerable role in understanding racial wage gaps (Donohue and Heckman [1991] provide a review of the effects
of the Civil Rights Act on racial differences in the U.S. labor market).
9
See e.g., Smith and Welch [1989], Jaynes [1990] and Heckman and Donohue [1991] for overviews of the labormarket position of blacks in the United States.

5

towards increasing wage inequality since the early 1980s. In particular, they attribute the
worsening of black labor-market prospects to a variety of sources, which are different for
different educational and geographical groups. Among the most prominent sources are the
decreased emphasis on affirmative action during the Reagan administration, the decline of inner
cities, the shift from manufacturing to services, the decline in union density, and the fall in real
minimum wages, which hit young black workers hardest. Cutler and Glaeser [1997] add to this
that the increased segregation of blacks worsens their economic and schooling performance,
particularly if they live in central cities.10 Juhn, Murphy and Pierce [1991], and Smith [1993]
attribute the slowdown in the closing of the racial wage gap to slowing education gains, the sharp
rise in returns to education in favor of white prime-aged workers, and falling wages at the bottom
end of the labor market which hurt low-educated black men severely.11
As indicated, these simple patterns of wages and employment of underrepresented groups
are known in the literature and a variety of explanations have been provided for them, but we are
not aware of a unified explanation. Unlike most research, which has focused on changes in
wages, we focus on the change in labor demand for women and blacks. To estimate trends in the
demand for women and blacks, we assume a constant elasticity of substitution (CES) aggregate
production function and impute the demand series in employment terms as
(1)

⎛w
D = ln⎜⎜ G
⎝ w~ G

⎛e
⎞
⎟⎟ + ε ln⎜⎜ G
⎝ e~ G
⎠

⎞
⎟⎟ ,
⎠

where wG ( eG ) and w~G ( e~G ) denote the wages (employment) of people in group G or other
groups ~G. We apply elasticities of substitution of 1, 1.75, and 2.5.12 The imputed demand series

10

Cutler, Glaeser and Vigdor [1999] find that over the 20th century segregation between blacks and whites has
varied over time. They find evidence that the mechanism sustaining segregation has changed from excluding blacks
from neighborhoods (mid-century) to decentralized racism, where whites pay more than blacks to live in
predominantly white areas (1990s).
11
See also Juhn [1992]. Neal and Johnson [1996] suggest that racial discrepancies in basic skills due to differences
in education and family background are also important factors in explaining the slowdown in the convergence of the
racial wage gap. Card and Lemieux [1994] find mixed results for the return to skill. Among females the racial wage
gap widened in the early 1980s. For men wage gap declined between 1979 and 1985, which is inconsistent with the
rise in the return for skills.
12
We motivate our use of these values for the elasticities of substitution as follows. Weinberg [2000] estimates an
elasticity of substitution between men and women of 2.4. We have estimated the elasticity of the demand for blacks
using panel data on the nine Census divisions from 1963 to 2002, by regressing the log employment of blacks
relative to non-blacks on the log wage of blacks relative to whites and division and time fixed effects. This
regression yields an estimate for the elasticity of substitution of 1.027 with a standard error of .093.

6

for women is shown in Figure III: It is relatively flat until the late 1970s, rises rapidly until 1992
and then flattens out again. Figure IV for blacks shows a substantial increase until the late 1970s
and a more gradual increase thereafter. There is some indication of acceleration in the demand
for black workers in the 1990s. In both cases, the size of the imputed demand shift increases with
the elasticity assumed in the years when wages for women and blacks were increasing because
higher elasticities place more weight on wage changes.
Panel A of Table I provides estimates of structural breaks in the series based on Bai
[1997]. We reject the hypothesis of less than two breaks in the demand series for women at all
elasticities. Bootstrapped confidence intervals indicate that the demand shift toward women
accelerated between 1975 and 1977 (depending on the assumed elasticity) and decelerated in
1992. Taking into account the 95 percent confidence intervals for these break years, the breaks
are estimated to be between 1973 and 1978, and 1991 and 1993. The confidence interval for the
first break becomes smaller when the assumed elasticity is higher.
The demand shift toward blacks decelerated after 1977 or 1978. For elasticities up to 1.75
we find a second break in 1997, with the confidence interval for the year of the break ranging
from 1993 to the end of the period.13 When the elasticity equals 2.5 the demand series becomes
unstable. We find a second break year in 1983, but when testing for more breaks, other
significant breaks can be found too.
Figure V provides some evidence on the increase in the importance of people tasks in the
labor market from 1971 to 2002. The estimates are averages of tasks in three-digit occupations
from the 1977 Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT), which are weighted by the fraction of
the workforce in each occupation (Appendix A1 provides details about the definition of people
tasks). Thus, these figures give the trend in the importance of people tasks arising from shifts
between three-digit occupations. Insofar as much of the shift in the importance of people skills
occurs within occupation categories, this figure understates the full increase in the importance of
people tasks. It is possible to compare within and between-occupation changes using data from
Germany. In those data, we estimate that 95 percent of the increase in the importance of people
skills arises within occupations. Cross-region regressions of within-occupation changes in people
tasks on between occupation changes yield a point estimate of 2.579 (standard error 1.234).

13

To guarantee a consistent estimation, break years in the first and last 5 years of the time series are excluded.

7

Taking these estimates as indications of the relationship between within and between occupation
changes, the total increase in the importance of people tasks is likely to be at least 3.6 times
between-change and potentially much larger. While caution is required in inferring the exact
timing or magnitude of the increased importance of people skills, these patterns suggest that the
importance of people tasks affects the labor markets of women and blacks, links we test directly
below.
To provide some indication of types of jobs in which people tasks are important, Table
A3 lists the 25 largest three-digit occupations in the United States and Table A4 lists the 10
largest two-digit occupations in Germany sorted by the importance of people tasks. Despite the
differences between the countries and the differences in the classifications, in both countries
people tasks are particularly important for nurses, teachers, sales workers, and secretaries. People
tasks are relatively unimportant for machine operators and truck drivers. Overall, there are high
and low skilled occupations at both ends of the distribution of people tasks. Table A5 lists the 10
occupations with the largest increases and decreases in the importance of people skills in the
Germany between 1979 and 1991. Most, but not all, of the occupations with increases are the
ones in which people skills were originally important. The ones with declines are those in which
people tasks were not important. Thus, there is some accentuation in the variations in the
importance of people skills.
Looking for breaks in the three series simultaneously (following Bai, Lumsdaine and
Stock [1998]) we find breaks in 1977 and 1992.14 Panel B of Table I provides estimates of the
breaks in the series based on these break years.15 The estimates indicate that if women’s relative
wages had remained constant over the period, firms would have increased their relative
employment of women by between .9 percent and 2.8 percent more per year between 1977 and
1992 than in the years before 1977 and by 2.4 percent to 4.3 percent more per year than in the
years after 1992. The deceleration in the shift in demand toward blacks would lead their relative
employment to increase by 1.0 to 3.5 percent less per year after 1977 if their wages had remained
constant over the entire period. After 1992 the demand increases by between 1.0 and 1.2 percent
per year. Consistent with these findings, the indicator of people skills accelerates in 1977 and

14

These estimates are based on elasticities of substitution of 1.75.
Estimates based on break years one or two years before or after 1977 and 1993 provide similar findings, which
shows the robustness of the results.

15

8

decelerates in 1992. We further investigate this link using micro data after providing a simple
model of people skills in the labor market.
III. A Simple Theory
This section presents a simple model to illustrate the labor market effects of people skills
and provides some context for our empirical work. Workers’ utility depends on their
consumption, c, which equals their wage, and the importance of people tasks on their job, x,
according to
u (c, x ) = ln (c ) + θx .

We allow the importance of people tasks on a person’s job to affect his utility under the
assumption that people may derive (dis-) utility if θ > 0 ( θ < 0 ) from jobs where people tasks
are more important.16 Workers also are endowed with a level of people skills, a, which has a
cumulative density of Fa (a ) and a probability density f a (a ) .
Firms each hire one worker and are characterized by the importance of people tasks. The
cumulative density and probability density of people tasks across firms are given by Fx ( x ) and
f x ( x ) respectively. Firms’ revenue (or net revenue excluding the cost of the worker) is given by
R( x, a ) . We assume that workers with more people skills raise revenue (or lower costs other than

their wage by, for instance, negotiating better deals or being more pleasant to interact with) and
that this effect is greater on jobs where people tasks are more important, so that R xa ( x, a ) > 0 .
Firms’ profits are given by

π ( x, a ) = R ( x, a ) − w( x, a ) ,
where wages are allowed to depend on the importance of people tasks at the firm and the
worker’s people skills.
In equilibrium the workers with the most people skills will be employed at the firms
where people tasks are most important. We test this implication by seeing if people with more

16

While we ignore the possibility for simplicity that in a more general formulation the marginal utility of people
tasks might be higher for people with more people skills.

9

people skills take jobs where people tasks are more important. The equilibrium assignment of
firms to workers is x * (a ) = (Fx )

−1

(Fa (a )) and the assignment of workers to firms is

( ) (x ) = (F ) (F (x )) . Below we relate a person’s sociability as a youth to the

a * (x ) ≡ x *

−1

−1

a

x

importance of people tasks on his adult job(s). We anticipate a positive relationship between the
two.
In equilibrium, a worker with people skills a must be indifferent to changes in x in the
neighborhood of x * (a ) , implying that

(
(

)
)

w x * (a ), a
∂U
=0 ⇒ a *
= −θ .
∂x
w x (a ), a
Thus, if people tasks are (un-) desirable for a worker with a given level of people skills, jobs
where people skills are more important will pay lower (higher) wages.
Similarly a firm where the importance of people tasks is x must be indifferent to changes
in a in the neighborhood of a * ( x ) , implying that

(

)

∂π x, a * ( x )
= 0 ⇒ wa x , a * ( x ) = R a x , a * ( x ) > 0 .
∂a

(

)

(

)

For any given firm, wages are higher for workers with more people skills because they generate
more (net) revenue.
We explore our model’s wage implications by regressing an individual’s log wages on the
importance of people tasks on his job and the interaction between people tasks and measures of
the person’s sociability as a youth. Controlling for ability, we expect the interaction to be positive
because people skills are more valuable in jobs where people tasks are more important.
The preceding results give the effect of changes in either people skills or people tasks on
wages holding the other constant. The relationship between people skills and wages in the
equilibrium assignment is

10

(

)

(

)

(

)

(

)

(

) (

dw *
dx
x (a ), a = wa x * (a ), a + wx x * (a ), a
da
da
.
f a (a )
*
*
= wa x (a ), a + wx x (a ), a
f x x * (a )

)

On the one hand people with more people skills earn more because they generate higher (net)
revenue, as given by the first term. On the other hand, people with more people skills take jobs
where people tasks are more important and these jobs may pay less all else equal, which is
reflected in the second term. As indicated by the second equality, looking any place in the
distribution of jobs and workers that are assigned in equilibrium, an increase in the density of
jobs with a particular level of people tasks relative to people with the appropriate level of people
skills leads jobs to span more workers and generates a more positive relationship between wages
and people skills.
We estimate how the increased importance of people tasks has affected the wages of
underrepresented groups. Becker [1971] argues that when groups have a (net) preference for
interacting with members of their own group, segregation can eliminate wage gaps. We
hypothesize that occupations where people tasks are becoming more important will experience
increased sorting to match workers with other workers or customers, although our data do not
permit us to test this hypothesis. Our empirical analysis involves estimating how the level or
change in the importance of people tasks in an occupation is related to the employment of
underrepresented groups. Implicit in our estimates for racial, ethnic, and linguistic minorities is
the assumption that the potential for segregation is limited.17
Technological change is likely to affect the importance of people tasks. On the one hand,
new technologies may lead people to work on their own. On the other hand, they may place more
emphasis on the aspects of jobs, such as people tasks, that cannot be automated effectively. New
technologies may also shift production to more complicated processes that involve more group
work. We estimate the effect of new technologies and work practices on the importance of people

17

Our results for women assume that women are more effective at people tasks regardless of the gender of the
person with whom they are interacting.

11

tasks.
IV. Empirical Implementation
IV.A. Data Sources
Our analysis requires measures of the importance of tasks performed in occupations and
how these tasks change over time. As our main U.S. source we draw on information from the
Fourth [1977] Edition and the Revised Fourth [1991] Edition of the U.S. Department of Labor’s

Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT).18 Examiners from the U.S. Department of Labor used a
unified framework to assess 12,000 occupations along 44 objective and more subjective
dimensions.19
We append DOT occupation characteristics to the Current Population Survey (CPS)
March files to get a picture of the trends over a longer period, in this case 1971-2002, as shown in
Figure V. Our main source of information is drawn form the Fourth [1977] Edition of the DOT
because it contains more detailed information on job tasks than the Revised Fourth [1991]
edition.
We also append the DOT to estimates of the demographic composition of occupations
estimated from the 1980 and 1990 U.S. Censuses to investigate the effect of people skills on the
employment shares of underrepresented groups. Details about the construction of the variables
and the merging of databases can be found in the Data Appendix, particularly Sections A1 and
A2.
To complement these analyses we draw on a number of other databases. First, for our
U.S. analysis we use the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth of 1979 (NLSY79), which
contains information on youth sociability. We investigate whether people who are more sociable
when young are employed in occupations where people tasks are more important as adults using
the DOT task measures.
We use the First [1997] and Second [2001] British Skills Survey (BSS) of the ESRC

18

The DOT has been updated four times since its first edition in 1939 [1949, 1965, 1977, and 1991]. However, the
structure has not changed significantly during these revisions. The most recent revision has let to the Occupational
Information Network (O*NET) a more up-to-date source of information, but impossible to append to earlier
editions.
19
See the Handbook for Analyzing Jobs [U.S. Department of Labor 1972]. Other researchers have been using the
DOT to analyze changing job requirements [Rumberger 1981], to address and compare different ways of skill
measurement [Spenner 1990] or for the distinction between routine and non-routine job tasks in association with
computerization [Autor, Levy and Murnane 2003].

12

Centre on Skills, Knowledge and Organisational Performance (SKOPE) at Oxford to obtain
information about job tasks in Britain. The BSS assesses the importance of 36 job activities and
key skills, including people tasks, at two points in time for all jobs.20 The BSS characterizes job
requirements on a five-point scale, giving a more nuanced picture than the binary information in
the DOT.21
We draw information from the 1970 British Cohort Study (BCS) to address personality
traits and social behavior. The BCS follows people born in the week of April 5, 1970. We apply
information about sociability and personality at age 16 and relate this information to labor-market
outcomes at age 30 in 2000. To compare current job tasks with sociability at younger ages we
append information on the tasks performed in three-digit occupations estimated in the BSS to the
BCS. Table A2 in the Data Appendix shows the definitions of the sociability variables in the
BCS and the NLSY.
Finally, we use German data collected by the Bundesinstitut für Berufsbildung (BIBB) in
Berlin and Institut für Arbeitsmarkt- und Berufsforschung der Bundesanstalt für Arbeit (IAB) in
Nürnberg. This BIBB/IAB database is representative for the German population and contains
worker surveys in 1979, 1985, 1991 and 1998, with information about a worker’s job tasks. For
consistency we only use West-German workers.22 An advantage of the BIBB/IAB is that it
contains four waves of data on job tasks over a relatively long period of time.
IV.B. People Tasks
To identify variables that best measure people tasks, we aggregated DOT job task
information to a relevant subset using the definitions of job tasks provided in the 1977
questionnaire. To estimate the importance of people tasks we selected three variables from the
DOT temperaments that measure adaptability requirements of workers in specific job-worker
situations. These are (i) adaptability to situations involving the interpretation of feelings, ideas or
facts in terms of personal viewpoint, (ii) adaptability to influencing people in their opinions,
attitudes or judgments about ideas or things, and (iii) adaptability to dealing with people beyond

20

Ashton et al. [1998] provide a detailed overview of the design and present basic analyses of the BSS. Felstead,
Gallie and Green [2002] provide an overview of the second BSS.
21
A potential limitation of the BSS variables could be that since respondents have to rate their own occupation, the
implicit scales they use could differ from person to person. There is evidence that self-assessment provides
satisfactory results, however. Spenner [1990] presents evidence that there is a high correlation between self-reported
job requirements and measures obtained from controlled experiments and expert evaluation, such as the DOT.

13

giving and receiving instructions. The DOT provides a binary indicator of the presence or
absence of a given temperament. We also include two variables from DOT interest factors to
signify interests, tastes and preferences for certain kinds of activities that are entailed in job
performance. These are (i) a preference for activities involving business contact with people, and
(ii) a preference for working for the presumed good of people. The interests take on 3 values, –1,
0, or 1. We use the sum of these variables normalized by their standard deviations.23
For the BSS we measure the importance of people tasks by aggregating variables
measuring the importance of dealing with people; working with a team of people; instructing,
training or teaching people; making speeches or presentations; persuading or influencing others;
selling a product; counseling, advising or caring for customers or clients; and listening carefully
to colleagues. We selected three variables that are comparable to the DOT’s general educational
development (GED): reading, writing, and math. We also constructed job tasks on the
occupational importance of planning job activities, knowledge about the organization and
products, problem solving, noticing problems and (procedural) faults, and physical skills and
work.
The BIBB/IAB contains binary indicators of job tasks. We measure people tasks as the
weighted sum of teaching or training; negotiating, lobbying, coordinating and organizing; serving
others; helping others; selling, buying, advising customers and advertising; and entertaining or
presenting. To obtain a consistent series over time, we aggregated this information at the twodigit occupational level. Table A1 in the Data Appendix offers the definitions of people tasks in
our three data sources.
V. Empirical Results
V.A. Youth Sociability and Adult Occupations
We begin by relating people’s sociability as youths to the tasks that are important in their
adult occupations. These results play two roles. First, they will validate our measures of the of
importance people tasks in that there is no reason to expect a positive relationship between
sociability and the importance of people tasks if our people tasks measures do not capture
interpersonal interactions on jobs (or if sociability is not related to the ability to perform these

22

See Spitz [2004] for a detailed description of these data.
Autor, Levy and Murnane [2003] apply percentile measures of the DOT scores rather than “raw” DOT scores.
Results are similar when we do so.

23

14

tasks). They also show that variations in people skills affect labor-market outcomes. How
sociability as a youth is related to the importance of other tasks will depend on whether people
skills complement other skills and whether people with good people skills are also endowed with
more of other skills. If they do, people with stronger people skills tend to be in jobs where other
tasks are more important.
We present two sets of estimates, the first are from the National Longitudinal Survey of
Youth of 1979 (NLSY79). The 1984 wave of the NLSY79 contains data on the number of social
clubs respondents participated in during high school. The 1985 survey contains data on
contemporaneous sociability (when the respondents were 20-28 years old) and sociability at age
six. Exploiting the panel aspect of the data, we regress the 1977 DOT scores for the respondents’
occupations in all years on their responses to these questions (see Appendix A3 for details). Our
models include random effects for respondents and dummy variables for calendar years.
Table II reports the estimates. The first rows show a large positive effect of the three
measures of the respondents’ sociability on the importance of people tasks in their occupations.
The later rows report the effect of the sociability variables on the importance of other skills.
These models show that those who were more sociable when young are in occupations where
cognitive tasks are more important. The figures in brackets give the portion of a standard
deviation in the task variables that can be explained by a one standard deviation change in
sociability. The relationship between sociability and cognitive tasks is much smaller than the
relationship between sociability and people tasks, suggesting that sociability is particularly
important in occupations where people tasks are important.
We perform a similar analysis using the BCS and BSS. Table III reports the regression
results for the United Kingdom. The age 16 round of the BCS conducted in 1986 includes a
variety of behavioral measures of sociability, including the frequency with which the respondents
spent time with friends during the school year and during holidays; the frequency with which
time is spent with friends during leisure time (as opposed to non-social leisure activity), and
number of friends. The survey also asks the extent to which respondents describe themselves as
outgoing. To obtain measures of the importance of tasks, we assigned to each three-digit
occupation the mean of the importance of the tasks for that three-digit occupation calculated from
the 2001 BSS (see Appendix A4 for details).
The first row of Table III shows that all of the indicators of social behavior are positively
15

related to the importance of people tasks. The remaining rows report the relationship between the
youth sociability measures and the importance of other tasks. With the exception of planning
activities, which has an interactive component, there are no systematic relationships.
The finding that youth sociability is strongly related to the importance of people tasks in
peoples’ subsequent occupations provides validation for our measures of the importance of
people tasks. It also shows that the importance of people tasks and the ability to perform those
tasks are important determinants of occupation choice.
V.B. Youth Sociability and Adult Wages
The wage effects of people skills are expected to vary across jobs. To address wage
effects we relate wages in adulthood to the importance of people tasks in occupations and an
interaction between the importance of people tasks and youth sociability using the NLSY79. An
interaction between the importance of people tasks and sociability will provide further validation
for our measures of the importance of people tasks. Our model is

y it = PTASKS itO γ + SOCIABILITYi * PTASKS itO β + TASKS itOθ + X it φ + ω t + vi + η itO + ε it .
Here, yit denotes the individual i’s log wage at time t; PTASKS itO denotes the importance of
people tasks in i’s occupation at time t (from the 1977 DOT); and SOCIABILITYi denotes i’s
sociability when young. The first parameter of interest is γ , which gives the direct relationship
between people tasks and wages. This relationship will be negative if the jobs in which people
skills are important are more desirable jobs (or if people jobs pay lower wages for some other
reason, such as efficiency wages). Also of interest is β , the effect of the importance of people
tasks on the sociability premium. We expect β > 0 , so that sociability is more beneficial in jobs

where people tasks are important. In addition, the model includes measures of the importance of
other tasks in i’s occupation at t ( TASKS itO ); time varying individual characteristics (a quadratic
in experience and education, given by X it ); and time dummy variables ( ω t ).
An obvious concern with these estimates is sorting of individuals into jobs on the basis of
unobserved skills. To account for fixed individual differences in wages that may be correlated
with our measures of people skills and people tasks, we include individual fixed effects ( vi ).
Given these fixed effects the estimates are identified as individuals who are more or less sociable

16

move across jobs. Given that the data contain many observations for the same occupation, we
include occupation random effects (η itO ) as well as a classical error, ε it .
Table IV reports the results. The estimates in first row show that occupations in which
people tasks are more important pay lower wages. A one standard deviation increase in the
importance of people tasks is associated with five percent lower wages. The second row shows
that youth sociability is particularly beneficial in jobs where people skills are important. With
individual fixed effects, the direct effect of sociability is unidentified. In models without
individual fixed effects, a one standard deviation increase in sociability at age six, for instance,
raises adult wages by one percent. Given the estimates in Table IV, a one standard deviation
increase in the importance of people tasks comes close to doubling this effect.
Results for the United Kingdom, using 1970 BCS merged with the 2001 BSS, are
reported in the bottom panel of Table IV. Because we only have cross-sectional data on labormarket outcomes in the BCS, the individual fixed effects, vi , must be dropped from the model,
and the time effects, ω t , are incorporated in the intercept. The estimate for social behavior during
school term and holidays are insignificant, but the other three sets of estimates reported in
columns (3-5) suggest that a one standard deviation increase in the importance of people tasks is
associated with four to nine percent lower wages. The estimates in the second row show that
sociability at age 16 pays more in jobs demanding people skills.
V.C. Technological Change and the Importance of People Tasks

Computers have changed the content of many jobs [e.g., Autor, Levy and Murnane 2003,
Borghans and ter Weel 2004, and Spitz 2006] and firms have adjusted their organizational
structures to make the most of computer technology, emphasizing teams and quality circles as
well as skill [Caroli and Van Reenen 2001, Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson and Hitt 2002, and
Ichniowski and Shaw 2003]. These changes require workers to communicate and work with
others more effectively. In addition, computer technology substitutes for routine cognitive tasks,
further increasing the importance of people skills, which are hard to computerize.
We estimate the effect of technological change and innovative work practices by relating
the importance of people skills in occupations to the share of workers in that occupation using
computers and to the share of workers working in teams and who are a part of quality circles.
Data on computer use is available for Britain, Germany, and the United States. Data on teamwork
17

and quality circles are only available for Britain (see Appendix A6 for details).
The top panel of Table V shows results for Britain, where the importance of people skills,
computer use, and the extent of teamwork and quality circles are all estimated at the three-digit
occupation level from the BSS. Columns (1)-(8) report cross-sectional estimates. These estimates
(and those below) include controls for the gender and educational composition of the industries.
Columns (9)-(12) use the two cross-sections to estimate changes, to account for differences in
occupations, which may be correlated with technological and organizational change and with the
importance of people tasks. When technological and organizational changes are included
separately, all are found to have a significant positive relationship with the importance of people
skills. Given the positive correlation between the three variables, estimates that include all three
together yield lower coefficients, but the computer use and teamwork variables remain large and
statistically significant. Panel estimates are moderately lower than cross-sectional estimates, but
technological and organizational changes remain significant determinants of the importance of
people tasks.
The middle panel reports results for Germany. We relate the importance of people tasks to
computer use in two-digit occupations (variables for organizational change are not available).
Columns (1) and (5) report cross-sectional estimates for the first and last years of the BIBB/IAB,
1979 and 1998. Column (9) pools data for all years and includes occupation and year fixed
effects. We find a positive relationship between computer use and the importance of people
skills. The panel estimates are noticeably smaller than the cross sectional estimates, but remain
positive and significant.
The bottom panel of Table V reports estimates for the United States. Computer use is
estimated from the 1984 and 1993 Supplements to the October CPS. The importance of people
tasks in occupations is from the 1977 and 1991 DOT. Cross-sectional estimates of the
relationship between 1984 computer use and the importance of people skills in the 1977 DOT in
an occupation (reported in Column (1)) and between computer use in 1993 and 1991 DOT scores
(reported in Column (5)) are large and statistically significant. Changes in DOT scores within
occupations most likely understate true changes [National Academy of Sciences 1981], so it is
unclear whether the weaker difference estimates reported in Column (9) indicate that the crosssectional estimates are biased upward or if the differences model suffers from attenuation bias.
Overall, our estimates suggest that technological and organizational changes are associated with
18

an increased emphasis on people skills.
VI. People Skills and Underrepresented Groups

This section studies the effect of people tasks in an occupation on the employment by
gender, race, ethnicity, immigrant status, and English ability in that occupation. We study the
effect of people tasks on the employment share of women in Britain, Germany, and the United
States. We focus on the United States when looking at race, ethnicity, immigrant status, and
language.
VI.A. Gender

Women are underrepresented in many occupations, as reviewed in Section II. Women
report being more effective in people tasks than men (Borghans, ter Weel, and Weinberg [2005])
and they report being members of more clubs in high school,24 which is consistent with
Gilligan’s [2001] work on gender differences. Experimental studies also find that women are
more likely to cooperate than men in playing prisoner’s dilemmas (Frank, Gilovich and Regan
[1993] and Ortmann and Tichy [1999]; Andreoni and Vesterlund [2001] find that women are
more generous when it is costly). We therefore expect women to be more likely to enter jobs
where people tasks are more important.
We regress women’s relative employment in an occupation, defined as the log of
women’s employment relative to men’s employment, on job tasks and covariates for the
experience and education distribution of the occupation. Estimates based on this measure of
relative employment are directly comparable to estimates of the change in labor demand.
Table VI reports results for Britain. Data on women’s relative employment and the
importance of tasks are constructed from the 1997 and 2001 BSS. The first two columns report
the means and standard deviations of the task variables. Cross-section estimates for 1997
(column 3) and 2001 (column 4) show that occupations where people skills are more important
have higher relative employment of women. Women report that people tasks are more important
on their jobs than men, so exogenous changes in women’s employment will bias our estimates of
the effect of people skills up. To account for this effect, we instrument for the change in the
importance of all of the task variables by the change in the task variables among men. In addition
to the point estimates, the table reports in brackets the effect of the increased importance of the

24

Estimates from the NLSY79 show that after controlling for observed characteristics, women report being in .40

19

various tasks between 1997 and 2001 on women’s relative employment. To control for
unobserved differences in women’s employment that may correlate with the task variables, the
last column reports results for the change in women’s relative employment on the change in the
task variables between 1997 and 2001. While many of the task variables become insignificant in
this change regression, the importance of people tasks remains positive and statistically
significant. The increased importance of people tasks over the four years from 1997 to 2001 is
estimated to have raised women’s relative employment by 10.3 percent. The bottom panel of the
table shows that the demand for women increased by between 9.2 percent and 13.1 percent
depending on the elasticity of substitution, so people skills are an important factor in the increase
in demand for women.
Table VII reports analogous results for Germany. Data on women’s relative employment
and the importance of tasks are constructed from the 1979, 1985, 1992, and 1998 BIBB/IAB.
Panel A reports the means and standard deviations of all tasks. Panel B reports regression
estimates. In both random effects and fixed effects models, increases in the importance of people
tasks are found to increase women’s relative employment, with the choice of estimation method
having little impact on the coefficient. The last set of results instrument for the change in the
importance of all of the task variables by the change in the task variables among men. Given that
we instrument for changes, the estimates are not statistically significant, but they are virtually
identical to those estimated without the instrument. The increase in the importance of people
tasks over this period in Germany would have raised the demand for women by 28 percent,
roughly half of the estimated increase in demand over this time period shown in the bottom panel
of the table.
Table VIII reports results for the United States. Data on women’s relative employment
are constructed from the 1980 and 1990 Census Public Use Micro Samples. Data on the
importance of tasks are drawn from the 1977 and 1991 DOT. Cross-sectional estimates for
women’s relative employment in 1980 on the importance of tasks as measured in the 1977 DOT
indicate that occupations where people tasks are most important have higher relative employment
of women.25 The predicted effect of a one standard deviation change in the importance of people

more clubs than men (standard error of .03).
25
Estimates in both levels and differences for that instrument for the task variables using the task variables
constructed for white men here and for the other groups described below are similar, but slightly lower than those

20

tasks is .506, one quarter of a standard deviation in women’s relative employment across
occupations. The DOT was revised in 1991, but as indicated, many of the variables used in our
analysis were not updated. The next columns report regressions of changes in women’s relative
employment from 1980 to 1990 on changes in the DOT scores. While caution is required in
interpreting these results, given the limitations of the 1991 DOT, it is noteworthy that the
importance of people tasks is found to increase women’s relative employment.
To provide a sense of the magnitudes of the effects, we estimate how acceleration in the
importance of people tasks after 1977 and the deceleration after 1992 accelerated and then
decelerated the demand shift toward women. These estimates equal the estimated effect of people
tasks on women multiplied by the acceleration in 1977 and deceleration in 1992 in the
importance of people tasks. Unfortunately, we only have reliable estimates of trends in the
importance of people tasks arising from shifts between occupations. Analysis of the German data
indicates that the total shift is likely to be between 3.6 and 20 times the between-occupation shift.
As shown in the bottom panel of the table, when between occupation changes are assumed to
account for 28 percent (=1/3.6) of the total change, the acceleration in the importance of people
tasks implies an annual acceleration of between .5 and .9 percent in the demand for women after
1977 and a roughly similar annual deceleration after 1995. These estimates are large relative to
the estimated annual acceleration in demand for women after 1977 of .9, 1.8, or 2.8 percent
(based on elasticities of 1, 1.75, and 2.5, respectively) and annual deceleration after 1992 of 2.4,
3.4, or 4.3 percent.
VI.B. Race and Ethnicity

Racial and ethnic minorities may be less effective in people tasks with members of a
majority culture or members of the majority culture may prefer not to interact with minorities.
We test these hypotheses by estimating how the relative employment of racial and ethnic
minorities in an occupation is affected by the importance of people tasks in that occupation. As
with women, our measure of relative employment is the natural logarithm of the employment of a
group relative to the employment of all other groups. We use data from the United States because
racial and ethnic differences are more salient in the United States and because the Census Public
Use Micro Samples are considerably larger than the other data sets, which is particularly

estimated without instrumenting for the tasks.

21

important when constructing the employment of small groups in three-digit occupations.
Columns (3) and (4) of Table VIII report estimates for the relative employment of blacks.
The importance of people tasks is a major determinant of the share of an occupation that is black.
Estimates based on changes between 1980 and 1990 exceed estimates for the 1980 cross section,
although the difference is not statistically significant. A one standard deviation increase in the
importance of people skills lowers the percentage black workers by 21 percent, compared to a
standard deviation in black relative employment of 79 percent.
The bottom panel of the table reports the deceleration in the demand for blacks after 1977
and the acceleration after 1992 based on the acceleration and deceleration in the increase in the
importance of people tasks. Assuming that 28 percent of the increase in people tasks arises from
shifts between occupations implies an annual deceleration in the demand for blacks of between .3
and .5 percent after 1977 and a slightly smaller acceleration after 1992. Again, these are a
substantial portion of the estimated annual deceleration in demand for blacks of 1, 2.2, or 3.5
percent after 1977 and acceleration of between 1 and 1.2 percent after 1992 (based on elasticities
of 1, 1.75, and 2.5 respectively).
The top panel of Table IX repeats the estimates for blacks and reports analogous
estimates for the other race category (American Indians, Asians, Pacific Islander’s, etc.) in
column (2) and for Hispanics in (3). Occupations that place more weight on people tasks have
lower employment shares for members of other racial groups, although there is no difference for
Hispanics.
Wilson [1997] argues that employers and customers have particularly negative reactions
to black men. We have tested this hypothesis by regressing the relative employment of black men
on the task measures. As reported in the bottom panel of Table IX, occupations where people
tasks are more important have markedly lower employment of black men relative to other groups.
A one standard deviation increase in the importance of people tasks lowers the relative
employment of black men by 47 percent. Estimates for Hispanic men and other race men are
comparable to those for black men. Thus, we find large negative effects of people tasks on the
employment of men from underrepresented groups, although this effect is not limited to black
men.
VI.C. Immigrant Status and Language

People with poor language skills will be at a comparative disadvantage in occupations
22

that emphasize people tasks, especially if poor language skills are associated with less familiarity
with a majority culture. The U.S. Census asks whether respondents “sometimes or always speak a
language other than English at home” (Bureau of the Census [1993], B-24). The estimates
presented in Column (1) of Table X show that the importance of people tasks raises the relative
employment of people who do not speak a language other than English at home even after
controlling for the importance of language, which has the expected sign. A one standard
deviation increase in the importance of people tasks raises the relative employment of people
who do not speak a language other than English at home by 11.4 percent, one quarter of a
standard deviation.
People who report speaking a language other than English at home were asked about their
ability to speak English. Column (2) reports the results of an analysis that takes as a dependent
variable the natural logarithm of the employment of people who speak a language other than
English at home whose English speaking ability is very good (the highest category) relative to
those whose English is not as good. The estimates show that a one standard deviation increase in
the importance of people tasks raises the relative employment of people whose English is very
good by 17.4 percent, a quarter of a standard deviation.26
Column (3) reports estimates from an analysis that takes the relative employment of
foreign-born workers (those born outside of the United States or its territories) in an occupation
as the dependent variable. A one standard deviation increase in the importance of people tasks
lowers the relative employment of immigrants by 8.4 percent, 15 percent of a standard deviation.
Taken together, these estimates suggest that increases in the importance of people tasks in
an occupation affect the employment of underrepresented groups in that occupation. As people
tasks become more important the relative employment of women and people with good English
skills increases, but that of racial and ethnic minorities and immigrants declines. The effects of
people tasks on these variables are generally much larger and statistically stronger than the
effects of other tasks and skills, which are often only of minor importance.
VII. Conclusion

Despite informal arguments that people skills are important for understanding individual

26

This result is related to the results from the Census in Lazear [1999]. He has shown that the likelihood that an
immigrant speaks English is inversely related to the proportion of the local population that speaks their native
language. In addition, he argues that these people suffer welfare losses.

23

outcomes and are becoming more important, economists have done little to analyze their
economic consequences. This paper provides a first step in this direction, developing a unified
model to understand the labor-market consequences of people skills and demonstrating the
relationship between people skills and labor-market outcomes.
We test our model’s implications using a range of data sources from the United States,
Britain, and Germany and find that sociability at young ages is positively correlated with the
importance of people tasks in a worker’s adult occupation. We also find that computerization and
modern forms of work organization complement the importance of people tasks. With respect to
labor-market outcomes of underrepresented groups our results suggest that occupations in which
people tasks are more important employ more women relative to men, but fewer racial, ethnic,
and linguistic minorities and fewer immigrants.
Finally, our results shed new light on changes in the labor-market outcomes of
underrepresented groups in the United States over the last four decades. We have shown that the
large increase in the importance of people tasks at work from the late 1970s to the early 1990s
helps to explain the rapid decline in the gender wage gap over this period. Similarly, the slowing
convergence of the gender wage gap since the mid-1990s, seems to be consistent with a
slowdown in the growth rate of the importance of people tasks. Our estimates are also consistent
with the opposite trends in the black-white wage gap.

24

Data Appendix
A.1. Constructing Job Task Measures Over Time
Our main source of information on job tasks in the United States is the Fourth [1977]
version of the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT). We merge information on job tasks from
the DOT into the March CPS and 1980 and 1990 Censuses. Since the occupation classification in
the DOT is much more detailed than the U.S. Census classification employed in the CPS, we
aggregated scores in the April 1971 CPS data set to the classification used in the CPS. To do this
we use the CPS April 1971 data – constructed by the Committee on Occupational Classification
and Analysis of the National Academy of Science [1981] – in which all occupations are classified
according to the Census 1970 and the DOT classification.
The occupation classification in the CPS is changed every ten years based on new
classifications used in the U.S. Census. To bridge these changes we used a common classification
for the 1960s and 1970s as developed by Autor, Levy and Murnane [2003] based on information
from Priebe, Heinkel and Greene [1972]. Differences between the occupational classifications
used in the 1970s and the 1980s in the CPS are too large to develop a sensible crosswalk. For that
reason we matched our data with the so-called Treiman file. This file contains 122,141
observations from the 1980 Census that are dual coded with both the occupational classification
for the CPS in the 1970s and the 1980s and aggregated the occupational scores separately for the
1980 classification. Based on a joint classification for the CPS in the 1980s and the 1990s
developed by Autor, Katz and Krueger [1998] we put the CPS classification for both decades into
one framework. Subsequently, we append the DOT information to the CPS.
To investigate changes in the scores for the occupations between the Fourth version from
1977 and the 1991 Fourth Revised Edition, we matched occupation characteristics from the
Revised Edition from the data set of the U.S. Department of Labor, U.S. Employment Service,
and the North Carolina Occupational Analysis Field Center [1994], using the conversion tables of
code and title changes from the Fourth to Revised Fourth Edition Dictionary of Occupational
Titles. Table A1 lists the specific variables used to measure the importance of people tasks in the
DOT and in the other datasets described below.
A.2. Current Population Surveys
We use all observations for workers, aged 18-64, to measure the importance of people
tasks in the labor force, and took a sub-sample of full-time, full-year workers to calculate wages
by gender, skill and occupation similar to the procedure followed by Katz and Murphy [1992].
To measure supply we weighted all observations by hours worked times weeks worked. For the
years in the CPS for which the number of weeks worked are not known, we assumed that part
year workers worked 50 percent of the year. People who worked full-time were assumed to work
40 hours per week. Wage results are based on full-time, full-year workers only. Top-coded wages
have been multiplied by 1.4. We estimated wage equations for each year in the sample separately,
including dummy variables for sex, race (black, other), a quartic in potential experience, dummy
variables for individual levels schooling, and state dummy variables. The relative wage series for
women and blacks reported are the estimated parameters for these groups in each year.
A.3. NLSY and Census
We use data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth of 1979 (NLSY79) to
estimate the effect of people skills on marriage, fertility, and labor-market outcomes. The 1984
wave of the NLSY79 contains data on the number of social clubs respondents participated in
during high school. The 1985 survey contains data on sociability at age 6 and as an adult, when
the respondents were 20-28 years old. Table A2 lists the specific variables we used to measure

25

sociability in the NLSY79 and in the other datasets discussed below. We estimate the relationship
between these sociability variables and the tasks in adult occupations by assigning respondents
the 1977 DOT scores associated with the three-digit occupation they hold. We also estimate the
relationship between sociability and wages using the hourly rates of pay, which were converted
to 1982-1990 dollars. Respondents with hourly rates of pay beneath $1 per hour or above $100
per hour were deleted from the sample. We exploit the panel aspects of the NLYS79 by using
data for all years for which wages are reported. The NLSY79 is attractive because it contains a
wealth of information about individuals, including parents’ education, the respondents’ score on
the Armed Forces Qualifying Test, and characteristics of the household in which the respondent
was raised.
We use the five percent Public Use Micro Samples of the 1980 and 1990 Census to
estimate the share of workers in each three-digit occupation who are black; other race (American
Indians, Asians, Pacific Islander’s, etc.); from a Hispanic background; who speak a language
other than English at home; whose English is very good (the highest category) conditional on
speaking a language other than English at home; and who were born outside of the United States
and its territories. The sample was restricted to people who held a job at the time of the survey
between 18 and 65, who were not enrolled in school. All observations with imputed values for
any variable used in the analysis were deleted. Individuals were weighted using the person
weight. These measures of the demographic composition of each occupation were then merged to
measures of task importance from the 1977 DOT.
A.4. BSS and BCS
The First [1997] and Second [2001] British Skills Surveys (BSS) are two cross-sections
of a representative sample of the British population. The ESRC Centre on Skills, Knowledge and
Organisational Performance (SKOPE) initiated the first edition of the BSS in 1997 aimed at
“investigating the skills used at work in Britain … [and] to collect data from individual jobholders on a rich array of variables characterizing British jobs. The intention is that the survey
generates a more valid and detailed picture of skills than is normally available from examining
individuals’ qualifications or their occupations” [Ashton et al. 1998, 5]. The most innovative
feature of the data is that it is derived from a combination of job analysis principles and
procedures with the conventional techniques of a representative survey. The second BSS is an
update of the first and its structure was little altered. A sample of 2,467 jobholders was
interviewed face-to-face for the 1997 survey. The 2001 survey includes 4,470 workers. The
interviewers assess the importance of 36 job activities and key skills, including problem solving,
noticing mistakes, mathematical ability, reading and writing, physical skills, the ability to plan
activities, knowledge about products and the workplace and people tasks. We construct nine job
task categories out of these detailed job tasks (see e.g., Table A1 in Section A.7).
The 1970 Birth Cohort Study (BCS) is similar to the earlier National Child Development
Study (NCDS) and began as the British Birth Survey, which includes over 17,000 babies born in
Britain in the week 5-11 April 1970.27 Four major follow up surveys in 1975, 1980, 1986, and
1996 monitor the health, education, social and economic circumstances of the surviving cohort
members. We focus on the sociability questions asked in 1986 when the cohort members were 16
years old. The latest major survey was held in 2000 and reviews the members’ labor-market
status at the age of 30. We selected those cohort members that were in paid work and not self

27

We use the BCS instead of the earlier NCDS because the NCDS does not contain measures of sociability.

26

employed in 2000.The average (standard deviation) gross hourly wage is GB₤ 7.43 (9.25) in
1997 and increases to GB₤ 9.75 (10.95) in 2001.
For some of the empirical analysis we have aggregated the individual data into three-digit
1990 U.K. Standard Occupational Classification (SOC90) codes, of which there are 371.28 We
use all observations for non-self employed workers. For the BSS we selected workers aged 2060.
In the analysis carried out in Section V.A we appended the 2001 BSS to the 2000 BCS,
acknowledging the one-year difference between the two surveys. To do so, we assigned the mean
importance of the nine job tasks by occupation from the BSS to each individual cohort member in
the BCS working in that occupation. We then estimated the effects of sociability at age 16 on the
importance of job tasks. We also estimated the returns to sociability by using log hourly wages
from the 2000 BCS. Using log hourly wages from the BSS, adjusted for age, yields qualitatively
similar results. Table A2 presents the definitions and some descriptive statistics of our constructs
of sociability.
A.5. BIBB/IAB
The data collected by the Bundesinstitut für Berufsbildung (BIBB) in Berlin and Institut
für Arbeitsmarkt- und Berufsforschung der Bundesanstalt für Arbeit (IAB) in Nürnberg are
representative surveys of the German workforce. This BIBB/IAB database contains four crosssectional worker surveys conducted in 1979, 1985, 1991 and 1998. The surveys contain standard
demographic and labor-market variables and rich information about workers’ jobs, job attributes,
the tools used in these jobs, the skills necessary to perform a job, and how these skills were
obtained. The sampling frame for the survey is the employed German population age 16 to 65.
Each survey has about 30,000 respondents. We use the largest sample possible, only removing
workers from former East Germany included in the survey since 1991, and the self-employed and
unemployed. The questions in the three surveys are similar but not exactly comparable.
To compare occupations across the surveys, we aggregated the data into consistent
occupations at the two-digit level. Because of changes in the German occupational classification
it is impossible to match the data at a more disaggregated level. All four waves are categorized
according to the 1988 German occupational classification, which yields 83 occupations in all four
years.
A.6. Computerization, Organizational Change and Teamwork
Data on computer use at work in the United States is in the School Enrollment
Supplements to the 1984, 1989, 1993, and 1997 October CPS. Individual computer use is
calculated as the fraction of currently employed workers who answered yes to the question, “Do
you use a computer directly at work?” The survey defines a computer as a desktop terminal or PC
with keyboard and monitor and does not include an electronic cash register or a hand-held datadevice. 60,396, 58,401, 59,710, and 52,753 observations were used to calculate these frequencies
in 1984, 1989, 1993, and 1997, respectively. Since our DOT variables reflect the period 19771991, we only use the 1984 and 1993 surveys. When we substitute the 1984-1997 change in
computer use the results are qualitatively similar but of a slightly higher magnitude. From this

28

For Britain samples of the Standard Occupational Classification 1990 (SOC90) are available. The SOC90 was
published to replace both the Classification of Occupations 1980 (CO80) and the Classification of Occupations and
Dictionary of Occupational Titles (CODOT). The SOC90 includes nine major groups divided into 22 sub-major
groups of occupations. These 22 groups can be divided into 371 unit groups, which we define as occupations. These
unit groups are the aggregate results of over 26,000 job titles.

27

constructed variable computer use in the United States increases from 26.1 percent in 1984 to
54.0 percent in 1997.
For Germany the questions on computer use differ slightly between 1979 and the later
waves. For the 1979 survey we combine answers to two questions. The first asked about the use
of “computers, terminals, or monitors,” the second inquired about word processors. In the later
surveys there are six categories – computers on shop floors, office computers, PCs, terminals,
word processors, and CAD systems – which we combine into one dummy variable. Using this
procedure, computer use in Germany increases from 5.6 percent in 1979 to 53.7 percent in1998.
To compute computer use in Britain we use responses to “How important is using a
computer or computerized equipment in your job?” in the two waves of the BSS. If the answer is
essential, very important, or slightly important computer use is equal to one. If the answer is does
not apply, computer use is equal to zero. This yields computer use in Britain equal to 69.2
percent in 1997 and 78.1 percent in 2001. When we use the more gradual scale instead of a
dummy variable, the regression results remain similar in qualitative terms, although the
significance drops somewhat. The information about the organization of work in teams is taken
from the question “How important is working in a team of workers?” We use the five possible
answer categories as the independent variable in the regression analysis. Finally, organizational
change is measured by the extent to which new organizational practices, such as quality circles,
have been introduced in recent years.

28

References
Akerlof, George A., and Rachel E. Kranton, “Identity and Economics of Organizations,”
Working Paper, Berkeley, 2003.

Altonji, Joseph G. and Rebeccca M. Blank, “Race and Gender in the Labor Market,” in
Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3C, Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds. (New
York and Oxford: Elsevier Science, North Holland), 3143-3259.
Andreoni, James and Lise Vesterlund, “Whis is the Fairer Sex? Gender Differences in Altruism,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVI (2001), 293-312.
Arrow, Kenneth I., “Gifts and Exchanges,” Philosophy and Public Affairs, I (1972), 343-362.
Ashton, David, Bryn Davies, Alan Felstead and Francis Green, “Work Skills in Britain,” SKOPE
Monograph No. 1, University of Oxford, 1998.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz and Alan B. Krueger, “Computing Inequality: Have
Computers Changed the Labor Market?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXII (1998),
1169-1214.
Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane, “The Skill Content of Recent
Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
CXVIII (2003), 1279-1333.
Babcock, Linda, and Sara Laschever, Women Don’t Ask: Negotiations and the Gender Divide
(Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, 2003).
Bai, Jushan, “Estimation of a Change Point in Multiple Regression Models,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, LIX (1997), 551-563.
Bai, Jushan, Robin L. Lumsdaine, and James H. Stock, “Testing for and Dating Common Breaks
in Multivariate Time Series,” Review of Economics Studies, LXIV (1998), 395-432
Bailey, Martha J., “More Power to the Pill: The Effect of Contraceptive Freedom on Women’s
Labor Supply,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXXI (2006), February.
Bayard, Kimberly, Judith Hellerstein, David Neumark, and Kenneth R. Troske, “New Evidence
on Sex Segregation and Sex Differences in Wages from Matched Employer-Employee
Data,” Journal of Labor Economics, XXI (2003), 887-922.
Becker, Gary S., The Economics of Discrimination, (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press,
1971).
Becker, Gary S., and Kevin M. Murphy, Social Economics: Market Behavior in a Social
Environment (Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press, 2000).
Bertrand, Marianne, and Kevin F. Hallock, “The Gender Gap in Top Corporate Jobs,” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, LV (2001), 3-21.
Black, Sandra E., and Elizabeth Brainerd, “Importing Equality? The Impact of Globalization on
Gender Discrimination,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, LVII (2004), 540-559.
Black, Sandra E., and Chinui Juhn, “The Rise of Female Professionals: Are Women Responding
to Skill Demand?” American Economic Review, XC (2000), 450-455.
Blau, Francine D., and Andrea H. Ferber, The Economics of Women, Men, and Work (Englewood
29

Cliffs NJ: Prentice Hall, 1992).
Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn, “Swimming Upstream: Trends in the Gender Wage
Differential in the 1980s,” Journal of Labor Economics, XV (1997), 1-42.
Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn, “The U.S. Gender Pay Gap in the 1990s: Slowing
Convergence,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 10853, 2004.
Borghans, Lex, and Bas ter Weel, “What Happens When Agent T Gets a Computer? The Labor
Market Impact of Cost Efficient Computer Adoption,” Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization, LIV (2004), 137-151.
Borghans, Lex, Bas ter Weel, and Bruce A. Weinberg, “The Labor-Market Effectiveness of
Interpersonal Interactions: Evidence from Britain and Germany,” Working Paper,
Maastricht University and Ohio State University, October 2005.
Borjas, George, “The Earnings of Male Hispanic Immigrants in the United States,” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, XXXV (1982), 343-353.
Borjas, George, “Assimilaton and Changes in Cohort Quality Revisited: What Happened to
Immigrant Earnings in the 1980s?” Journal of Labor Economics, XIII (1995), 201-245.
Bound, John, and Richard B. Freeman, “What Went Wrong? The Erosion of Relative Earnings
and Employment Among Young Black Men in the 1980s,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, CVII (1992), 201-232.
Bowles, Samuel, Herbert Gintis, and Melissa Osborne, “The Determinants of Earnings: A
Behavioral Approach,” Journal of Economic Literature, XXXIX (2001), 1137-1176.
Bresnahan, Timothy F., Erik Brynjolfsson, and Lorin M. Hitt, “Information Technology,
Workplace Organization, and the Demand for Skilled Labor: Firm-Level Evidence,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVII (2002), 339-376.
Brown, Charles, “Black-White Earnings Ratios Since the Civil Rights Act of 1964: The
Importance of Labor Market Dropouts,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, IXC (1984), 3144.
Brown, Charles, and Mary Corcoran, “Sex-Based Differences in School Content and the
Male/Female Wage Gap,” Journal of Labor Economics, XV (1997), 431-465.
Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger, “School Quality and Black-White Relative Earnings: A Direct
Assessment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CVII (1992), 151-200.
Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger, “Trends in Relative Black-White Earnings Revisited,”
American Economic Review, LXXXIII (1993), 85-91.
Card, David and Thomas Lemieux, “Changing Wage Structure and Black-White Differentials
Among Men and Women: A Longitudinal Analysis,” American Economic Review,
LXXXIV (1994), 29-33.
Carnegie, Dale, How to Win Friends and Influence People (New York NY: Simon and Schuster,
1936).
Caroli, Eve, and John Van Reenen, “Skill-Biased Organizational Change? Evidence from a Panel
of British and French Establishments,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVI (2001),
30

1449-1492.
Chandra, Amitabh, “Labor Market Dropouts and the Racial Wage Gap,” American Economic
Review, XC (2000), 333-338.
Chandra, Amitabh, “Is the Convergence in the Racial Wage Gap Illusory?” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 9476, 2003.
Cherniss, Cary, and Daniel Goleman, The Emotionally Intelligent Workplace (San Francisco CA:
Jossey-Bass, 2001).
Coleman, James S., Foundations of Social Theory (Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press,
1990).
Collins, William J., “The Labor Market Impact of State-Level Anti-Discrimination Laws, 19401960,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 8310, 2001.
Committee on Occupational Classification and Analysis of the National Academy of Science,
Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT): Part I - Current Population Survey, April 1971,
Augmented with DOT Characteristics and Part II - Fourth Edition Dictionary of DOT
Scores for 1970 Census Categories (1981), distributed by the ICPSR.
Costa, Dora L., and Matthew E. Kahn, “Cowards and Heroes: Group Loyalty in the American
Civil War,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVIII (2003), 519-548.
Cutler, David M., and Edward L. Glaeser, “Are Ghettos Good or Bad?” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, CXII (1997), 827-872.
Cutler, David M., Edward L. Glaeser, and Jacob L. Vigdor, “The Rise and Decline of the
American Ghetto,” Journal of Political Economy, CVII (1999), 455-506.
DiPasquale, Denise, and Edward L. Glaeser, “Incentives and Social Capital: Are Homeowners
Better Citizens?” Journal of Urban Economics, XLV (1999), 354-384.
Donohue, John J., and James J. Heckman, “Continuous versus Episodic Change: The Impact of
Affirmative Action and Civil Rights Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks,” Journal of
Economic Literature, XXIX (1991), 1603-1644.
Donohue, John J., James J. Heckman, and Petra E. Todd, “The Schooling of Southern Blacks:
The Roles of Legal Activism and Private Philanthropy, 1910-1960,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, CXVII (2002), 225-268.
Felstead, Alan, Francis Green, and Duncan Gallie, “Work Skills in Britain 1986-2001,”
Nottingham, DfES Publications, May 2002.
Ferreira, Daniel, “Group Loyalty and Incentive Pay,” Working Paper, University of Chicago,
2002.
Fortin, Nicole. M., “Greed, Altruism, and the Gender Wage Gap,” Working Paper, University of
British Columbia, 2004.
Freeman, Richard B., “Changes in the Labor Market for Black Americans,” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, II (1973), 67-120.
Gardner, Howard, Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple Intelligences (New York, NY: Basic
Books, 1983).
31

Gilligan, Carol, In A Different Voice: Psychological Theory and Women’s Development
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2001).
Glaeser, Edward L., David Laibson, and Bruce Sacerdote, “An Economic Approach to Social
Capital,” Economic Journal, CXII (2002), F437-F458.
Glaeser, Edward L., David Laibson, José A. Scheinkman, and Christine L. Soutter, “Measuring
Trust,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXV (2000), 811-846.
Glaeser, Edward L., Bruce Sacerdote, and José A. Scheinkman, “Crime and Social Interactions,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXI (1996), 507-548.
Goldin, Claudia, Understanding the Gender Gap (New York, NY: Oxford University Press,
1990).
Goldin, Claudia, “The Rising (and then Declining) Significance of Gender,” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 8915, 2002.
Goldin, Claudia, “The Long Road to the Fast Track: Career and Family,” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 10331, 2004a.
Goldin, Claudia, “From the Valley to the Summit: The Quiet Revolution that Transformed
Women’s Work,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 10335,
2004b.
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz, “The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and
Women’s Career and Marriage Decisions,” Journal of Political Economy, CX (2002), 730770.
Goldsmith, Arthur H., Jonathan R. Veum and William Darity Jr., “The Impact of Psychological
and Human Capital on Wages,” Economic Inquiry, XXXV (1997), 815-829.
Goleman, Daniel, Emotional Intelligence: Why It Can Matter More Than IQ (London:
Bloomsbury, 1996).
Greenwood, Jeremy, and Nezih Guner, “Marriage and Divorce since World War II: Analyzing
the Role of Technological Progress on the Formation of Households,” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 10772, 2004.
Hamermesh, Daniel S., and Jeff E. Biddle, “Beauty and the Labor Market,” American Economic
Review, LXXXIV (1994), 1174-1194.
Heckman, James J., “Effects of Child-Care Programs on Women’s Work Effort,” Journal of
Political Economy, LXXXII (1974), S136-S163.
Heckman, James J., Thomas M. Lyons, and Petra E. Todd, “Understanding Black-White Wage
Differentials, 1960-1990,” American Economic Review, XC (2000), 344-349.
Heckman, James J. and Yona Rubinstein, “The Importance of Noncognitive Skills: Lessons from
the GED Test Program,” American Economic Review, XCI (2001), 145-149.
Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua, “The Effects of Cognitive and NonCognitive Skills on Labor and Behavioral Outcomes,” Working paper, University of
Chicago, 2005.
Hoff, Karla and Arijt Sen (2003). “A Simple Theory of the Extended Family System and Market
32

Barriers to the Poor,” in Poverty Traps, Samuel Bowles, Steven N. Durlauf and Karla Hoff,
eds. (New York and Santa Fe: Russell Sage Foundation and Santa Fe Institute).
Holmstrom, Bengt R., “Moral Hazard in Teams,” Bell Journal of Economics, XIII (1982), 324340.
Holzer, Harry J. and Keith R. Ihlanfeldt, “Customer Discrimination and Employment Outcomes
for Minority Workers,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXIII (1998), 835-868.
Ichniowski, Casey, and Kathryn Shaw, “Beyond Incentive Pay: Insiders’ Estimates of the Value
of Complementary Human Resource Management Practices,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, XVII (2003), 155-180.
Jaynes, Gerald D., “The Labor Market Status of Black Americans: 1939-1985,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, IV (1990), 9-24.
Juhn, Chinhui, “Decline in Male Labor Market Participation: The Role of Declining Market
Opportunities,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CVII (1992), 79-121.
Juhn, Chinhui, and Dae Il Kim, “The Effects of Rising Female Labor Supply on Male Wages,”
Journal of Labor Economics, XVII (1999), 23-48.
Juhn, Chinhui, and Kevin M. Murphy, “Wage Inequality and Family Labor Supply,” Journal of
Labor Economics, XV (1997), 72-97.
Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M. Murphy, and Brooks Pierce, “Accounting for the Slowdown in BlackWhite Wage Convergence,” in Workers and Their Wages: Changing Patterns in the United
States, M. Kosters, ed. (Washington DC: American Enterprise Institute Press), 1991, 107143.
Kandel, Eugene, and Edward P. Lazear, “Peer Pressure and Partnerships,” Journal of Political
Economy, C (1992), 801-817.
Katz, Lawrence F., and Kevin M. Murphy, “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and
Demand Factors,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CVII (1992), 35-78.
Knack, Stephen, and Philip Keefer, “Does Social Capital Have an Economic Pay-Off? A CrossCountry Investigation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXII (1997), 1251-1288.
Kuhn, Peter, and Catherine Weinberger, “Leadership Skills and Wages,” Journal of Labor
Economics, XXIII (2005), 395-436.
Lazear, Edward P., “Culture and Language,” Journal of Political Economy, CVII (1999), S95S126.
Levin, Doron P., “What BMW Sees in South Carolina,” New York Times, Section 3, p. 5 (April
11, 1999).
Machin, Stephen, Steven McIntosh, Anna Vignoles, and Tarja Viitanen, “Basic Skills, Soft Skills
and Labour Market Outcomes: Secondary Analysis of the National Child Development
Study,” Research Report No. 250, DfEE Research Centre, London, 2001.
Marvel, Mary K., and Howard P. Marvel, “The Ratio of Beef Cubes to Onion (6:1) in Hungarian
Goulash and Public Sector Contracting: Market-Like or Market-Lite?” Policy Currents, XII
(2003), 2-4
33

Meyer, Bruce D., and James Sullivan, “The Effects of Welfare and Tax Reform: The Material
Well-Being of Single Mothers in the 1980s and 1990s,” Journal of Public Economics,
LXXXVIII (2004), 1387-1420.
Mincer, Jacob, and Solomon Polachek, “Family Investment in Human Capital: Earnings of
Women,” Journal of Political Economy, LXXXII (1974), S76-S108.
Möbius, Markus M., and Tanya S. Rosenblat, “Why Beauty Matters,” American Economic
Review, 2005, forthcoming.
Montgomery, Edward, and William Wascher, “Cross-Industry Differences in Race and Gender
Wage Differentials,” Industrial Relations, XXVI (1987), 284-290.
Mulligan, Casey B., and Yona Rubinstein, “The Closing Gender Gap as a Roy Model Illusion,”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 10892, 2004.
National Academy of Sciences, Committee on Occupational Classification and Analysis, “Fourth
Edition Dictionary of DOT Scores for 1970 Census Categories,” ICPSR Document No.
7845, Ann Arbor, MI, 1981.
Neal, Derek, “The Measured Black-White Wage Gap Among Women Is Too Small,” Journal of
Political Economy, CXII (2004), S1-S28.
Neal, Derek, and William R. Johnson, “The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-White Wage
Differences,” Journal of Political Economy, CIV (1996), 869-895.
Osborne, Melissa, “Personality and Labor Market Success,” Working paper, University of
Massachusetts, 1999.
Persico, Nicola, Andrew Postlewaite, and Dan Silverman, “The Effect of Adolescent Experience
on Labor Market Outcomes: The Case of Height,” Journal of Political Economy, CXII
(2004), 1019-1053.
Priebe, John A., Joan Heinkel, and Stanley Greene, “1970 Occupation and Industry
Classifications in Terms of their 1960 Occupation an Industry Elements,” Census Bureau
Technical Paper No. 26, 1972.
Putnam, Robert D., Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy (Princeton NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1993).
Rotemberg, Julio J., “Human Relations in the Workplace,” Journal of Political Economy, CII
(1994), 684-717.
Rumberger, Russell W., “The Changing Skill Requirements of Jobs in the U.S. Economy,”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, XXXIV (1981), 578-590.
Smith, James P., “Affirmative Action and the Racial Wage Gap,” American Economic Review,
LXXXIII (1993), 79-84.
Smith, James P., and Finis R. Welch, “Black-White Earnings and Employment: 1960-1970,”
American Economic Review, LIVII (1977), 323-338.
Smith, James P., and Finis R. Welch, “Affirmative Action and Labor Markets,” Journal of Labor
Economics, II (1984), 269-301.
Smith, James P., and Finis R. Welch, “Black Economic Progress After Myrdal,” Journal of
34

Economic Literature, XXVI (1989), 519-564.
Spenner, Kenneth I., “Skill: Meaning, Methods and Measures,” Work and Occupations, XVII
(1990), 399-421.
Spitz, Alexandra, “Technical Change, Job Tasks and Rising Educational Demands: Looking
Outside the Wage Structure,” Journal of Labor Economics, forthcoming 2006.
Sternberg, Robert J, “Toward a Triarchic Theory of Human Intelligence,” The Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, VII (1984), 269-315.
Turner, Charles F. and Daniel C. Martinez, “Socioeconomic Attainment and the Machiavellian
Personality,” Sociometry, XL (1977), 325-336.
U.S. Department of Labor, Manpower Administration, Handbook for Analyzing Jobs
(Washington, DC, 1972).
U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration, Dictionary of
Occupational Titles: Fourth Edition (Washington, DC, 1977).
U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration, Dictionary of
Occupational Titles: Revised Fourth Edition (Washington, DC, 1991).
U.S. Department of Labor, U.S. Employment Service, and the North Carolina Occupational
Analysis Field Center, Dictionary of Occupational Titles: Revised Fourth Edition, 1991
(1994), distributed by the ICPSR.
Weinberg, Bruce A., “Computer Use and the Demand for Female Workers,” Industrial and
Labor Relations Review, LIII (2000), 290-308.
Welch, Finis R., “Growth in Women’s Relative Wages and in Inequality Among Men: One
Phenomenon or Two?” American Economic Review, XC (2000), 444-449.
Wilson, William J., When Work Disappears: The World of the New Urban Poor (New York, NY:
Alfred Knopf, 1997).
Xenogiani, Theodora, “Demand for Women and Workplace Organization Changes. The Role of
the Demand for Skills,” Working Paper LSE, 2002.

35

Figure I. Earnings of Women and Blacks, 1963-2002

0.250

Women
Blacks

0.200
0.150
0.100
0.050

2001

1999

1997

1995

1993

1991

1989

1987

1985

1983

1981

1979

1977

1975

1973

1971

1969

1967

1965

-0.050

1963

0.000

-0.100
-0.150
-0.200
-0.250
Note: Monthly earnings of women and blacks, working full-time, full year, from the CPS March supplements, regression adjusted for educational levels,
experience (fourth order polynomial) and states (1976=0).

36

Figure II. Employment of Women and Blacks, 1963-2002

0.450

0.140

Women (left axis)
Blacks (right axis)

0.430

0.130

0.410

0.120

0.390
0.110
0.370
0.100

0.350

0.090

0.330

2001

1999

1997

1995

1993

1991

1989

1987

1985

1983

1981

1979

1977

1975

1973

1971

1969

1967

1965

0.080
1963

0.310

Note: Employment of women and blacks, weighted by their hours of work and weeks worked, from the CPS March supplements.

37

Figure III. CES Demand Indices for Women, 1963-2002

0.800

E=1.00
E=1.75
E=2.50

0.600

0.400

0.200

2001

1999

1997

1995

1993

1991

1989

1987

1985

1983

1981

1979

1977

1975

1973

1971

1969

1967

1965

1963

0.000

-0.200

-0.400
Note: Demand for women, based on demand = ln(fraction women/(1- fraction women)) + σ ln(wage), weighted by their hours of work and weeks worked, from
the CPS March supplements (1976=0), for σ=1, σ=2.5, and σ=4.

38

Figure IV. CES Demand Indices for Blacks, 1963-2002

0.600

E=1.00
E=1.75
E=2.50

0.400
0.200

2001

1999

1997

1995

1993

1991

1989

1987

1985

1983

1981

1979

1977

1975

1973

1971

1969

1967

1965

-0.200

1963

0.000

-0.400
-0.600
-0.800
Note: Demand for blacks, based on demand = ln(fraction blacks/(1- fraction blacks)) + σ ln(wage), weighted by their hours of work and weeks worked, from the
CPS March supplements (1976=0), for σ=1, σ=2.5, and σ=4.

39

Figure V. Importance of People Tasks, 1970-2002

1.30
1.25
1.20
1.15
1.10
1.05
1.00
0.95

2002

2000

1998

1996

1994

1992

1990

1988

1986

1984

1982

1980

1978

1976

1974

1972

1970

0.90

Note: Figure V is constructed using 1977 DOT task measures by occupation paired to employment data from the CPS 1971-2003. All series are weighted by the
size of the occupation. See the Data Appendix for the definition of the DOT task measures (1970=1).

40

Table I
Analysis of Breaks in Imputed Demand for Women and Blacks and in the Importance of People Tasks

Elasticity

1st Break

1
1.75
2.5

1975
1976
1977

1
1.75
2.5

1978
1977
1978
1981

Panel A: Estimation of the Break Years
Confidence
Confidence
Interval
2nd Break
Interval
χ2-Test
Women
(1973, 1978)
1992
(1991, 1993)
227.26
(1975, 1977)
1992
(1991, 1993)
219.60
(1976, 1978)
1992
(1991, 1993)
177.49
Blacks
(1972, 1989)
1997
(1993, -)
12.27
(1973, 1981)
1997
(1983, -)
43.03
(1969, 1979)
1983
(1967, 1996)
88.23
People Tasks
(1977, 1986)
1994
(1987, -)
14.94

P-Value

Panel B: Size of the Breaks Taking 1977 and
1992 as Break Years
1977
1992
Change
St. Error
Change
St. Error

0.00
0.00
0.00

0.009
0.018
0.028

(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.002)

-0.024
-0.034
-0.043

(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.002)

0.00
0.00
0.00

-0.010
-0.023
-0.035

(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)

0.012
0.011
0.010

(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.004)

0.00

0.011

(0.002)

-0.009

(0.003)

Note: Panel A reports years of breaks with five percent lower and upper bounds and tests for statistical significance of breaks when break years are estimated.
Panel B provides estimates of the break coefficients when 1977 and 1992 are taken as break years, which are the years that are estimated to be the break years
when breaks are estimated simultaneously for the three series.

41

Table II
The Relationship Between Sociability and the Importance of Job Tasks in Current Occupation in the United States
(Dependent Variables: Importance of Job Tasks)
Dependent Variable
People Tasks
Reasoning
Math
Language
Strength
Physical Tasks
Specific Training

St.Dev. of
Dep. Variable
(1)
2.329
0.898
1.003
1.116
0.687
0.289
1.594

Sociability at Age Six
(2)
0.114
0.019
0.009
0.026
-0.006
-0.001
0.037

(3)
(0.026)
(0.008)
(0.009)
(0.010)
(0.008)
(0.003)
(0.015)

(4)
[0.045]
[0.019]
[0.008]
[0.022]
[0.008]
[0.002]
[0.021]

Sociability in Early Adulthood
(5)
0.196
0.023
0.016
0.034
-0.023
-0.011
0.050

(6)
(0.035)
(0.011)
(0.013)
(0.013)
(0.010)
(0.004)
(0.020)

(7)
[0.056]
[0.017]
[0.011]
[0.020]
[0.022]
[0.025]
[0.021]

Clubs
(8)
0.050
0.029
0.020
0.034
-0.006
-0.003
0.045

(9)
(0.022)
(0.007)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.006)
(0.003)
(0.012)

(10)
[0.025]
[0.038]
[0.023]
[0.036]
[0.010]
[0.013]
[0.033]

Note: All data taken from the NLSY79, except for the task measures in the current occupation. These are three-digit occupational averages merged from the 1977
Dictionary of Occupational Titles. All regressions are estimated by GLS and control for gender, education, a quadratic in experience, race, Hispanic background,
the score on the Armed Forces Qualifying Test, mother’s and father’s education, and 3 year averages of family size and household income as a child. Standard
errors are reported in parentheses. The predicted effects, reported in brackets, give the share of a standard deviation in the dependent variable explained by a one
standard deviation change in the sociability variables. The definitions of the variables are provided in the Data Appendix in Table A1 and A2. All estimates based
on 44,036 observations.

42

Table III
The Relationship Between Sociability at Age 16 and the Importance of Job Tasks in Current Occupation at Age 30 in Britain
(Dependent Variables: Importance of Job Tasks)
St.Dev. of Dep.
Variable

Social Behavior
During School Term

People Tasks

(1)
0.492

Math

0.596

Reading

0.484

Writing

0.590

Physical Strength
and Stamina
Problem Solving

0.833

Noticing Mistakes

0.311

Planning of
Activities
Knowledge of the
Organization
n

0.484

(2)
0.005 (0.001)
[0.047]
-0.000 (0.002)
[0.001]
-0.001 (0.001)
[0.010]
0.001 (0.001)
[0.008]
0.002 (0.002)
[0.011]
-0.001 (0.001)
[0.009]
-0.001 (0.001)
[0.015]
0.003 (0.001)
[0.029]
-0.000 (0.001)
[0.001]
3,749

Importance of Job
Tasks in Current Job

0.502

0.412

Behavioral Indicators at Age 16
Social Behavior
Social Behavior
Log of the Number
During Holidays
During Leisure
of Friends
Time
(3)
(4)
(5)
0.005 (0.001)
0.006 (0.002)
0.021 (0.012)
[0.003]
[0.043]
[0.002]
0.001 (0.002)
-0.005 (0.002)
-0.016 (0.018)
[0.001]
[0.030]
[0.001]
0.001 (0.001)
0.001 (0.001)
-0.014 (0.011)
[0.001]
[0.007]
[0.001]
0.002 (0.001)
0.003 (0.002)
-0.006 (0.013)
[0.001]
[0.018]
[0.001]
-0.001 (0.002)
0.004 (0.003)
0.052 (0.021)
[0.001]
[0.017]
[0.006]
0.001 (0.001)
0.000 (0.002)
0.005 (0.012)
[0.001]
[0.000]
[0.000]
-0.000 (0.001)
-0.001 (0.001)
-0.007 (0.008)
[0.000]
[0.011]
[0.000]
0.005 (0.001)
0.005 (0.002)
0.024 (0.012)
[0.003]
[0.036]
[0.002]
0.001 (0.001)
-0.001 (0.001)
-0.025 (0.010)
[0.000]
[0.009]
[0.002]
3,464
3,267
3,915

Self Description of
Character: Outgoing
(6)
0.017 (0.004)
[0.422]
0.001 (0.005)
[0.021]
0.002 (0.003)
[0.025]
0.006 (0.004)
[0.042]
-0.001 (0.006)
[0.088]
-0.003 (0.003)
[0.024]
-0.003 (0.002)
[0.118]
0.011 (0.003)
[0.076]
-0.001 (0.003)
[0.327]
3,566

Note: All data taken from the British Cohort Study, except for the task measures in the current occupation. These are occupational averages merged from the
British Skills Survey 2001. All regressions are OLS and control for gender, being married and level of education. The predicted effects, in squared brackets, give
the share of a standard deviation in the dependent variable explained by a one standard deviation change in the sociability variables. The definitions of the
variables are provided in the Data Appendix in Table A1 and A2.

43

Table IV
The Relationship Between Sociability and Log Wages in the United States and the United Kingdom
(Dependent Variable: Log Wages)
United States
People Tasks
People Tasks * Sociability
n

United Kingdom

Social Behavior
During School Term

Social Behavior
During Holidays

(1)
People Tasks
People Tasks * Sociability
n

-0.013
0.004

(0.011)
(0.003)
3,749

Sociability at Age Six
(1)
-0.021
(0.003)
0.003
(0.001)
38,305

Sociability in Early
Adulthood
(2)
-0.020
(0.005)
0.002
(0.002)
38,305

Clubs in High
School
(3)
-0.018
(0.002)
0.002
(0.001)
38,305

Social Behavior
During Leisure Time

Log of the Number
of Friends

Self Description
of Character:
Outgoing
(5)
-0.021
(0.010)
0.003
(0.001)
3,566

(2)
-0.019
0.005

(0.010)
(0.003)
3,464

(3)
-0.010
0.004

(0.004)
(0.002)
3,267

(4)
-0.013
0.005

(0.005)
(0.001)
3,915

Note: United States: All data taken from the NLSY79, except for the task measures in the current occupation. These are occupational averages merged from the
1977 Dictionary of Occupational Titles. All regressions are estimated by including individual dummy variables, year dummy variables, education, a quadratic in
experience and occupation random effects. United Kingdom: All data are taken from the BCS, except for the people tasks data, which are from the BSS. All
regressions are estimated by including education, a gender dummy, a quadratic in experience, all other tasks from the BSS used in the analysis reported in Table
III and occupation random effects. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The definitions of the variables are provided in the Data Appendix in Table A1
and A2.

44

Table V
Computerization, Teamwork and Organizational Change Correlated to (Changes in) People Tasks
in Britain, Germany and the United States
(Dependent Variable: (Change in) People Tasks)

Britain
Computer Use

(1)
1997
0.895
(0.111)

Team Working

Cross-Section
(2)
(3)

0.445
(0.051)

Organizational Change
R2
n

Germany
Computer Use
R2
n

United States
Computer Use
R2
n

0.306
294

0.325
294

0.476
(0.171)
0.171
294

(4)
0.664
(0.113)
0.363
(0.055)
-0.243
(0.162)
0.385
294

Cross-Section
(6)
(7)

(5)
2001
0.772
(0.081)

0.464
(0.047)
0.408
324

0.459
324

1.215
(0.129)
0.448
324

(8)
0.398
(0.181)
0.273
(0.051)
0.694
(0.136)
0.540
324

Changes
(9)
(10)
(11)
Change 1997-2001
0.674
(0.135)
0.311
(0.042)
0.248
(0.099)
0.178
0.178
0.025
264
264
264

1979
0.528
(0.126)
0.085
87

1998
0.501
(0.138)
0.185
84

Change 1979-1998
0.119
(0.020)
0.932
338

1984
0.429
(0.111)
0.089
431

1993
0.600
(0.080)
0.238
421

Change 1984-1993
0.150
(0.126)
0.008
391

(12)
0.474
(0.131)
0.264
(0.044)
0.111
(0.092)
0.220
264

Note: All regressions are OLS and weighted by occupation size, except for the changes in Germany. These are estimated using a panel regression with time fixed
effects and occupation fixed effects. All regressions include unreported covariates to control for education and gender. The inclusion of these covariates does not
change the estimation results. The coefficients show the impact on the importance of people tasks. The regression results on the changes between 1997 and 2001
also use the changes in the independent variables. For Britain the data are taken from the 1997 and 2001 waves of the BSS. For Germany the Data come from the
BIBB/IAB Database in 1979 and 1998. For the United States the people tasks data are taken from the 1977 and 1991 DOT and the information about
computerization is taken from the 1984 and 1993 October Supplements to the Current Population Surveys. The data are merged using the same occupational
classifications as constructed by Autor, Levy and Murnane [2003]. See the Data Appendix for the exact construction of the variables.

45

Table VI
Effect of Skills on Female Employment in Britain, 1997-2001
A. Means and Standard Deviations
1997
2001
(1)
(2)
People Tasks
3.468 (0.933) 3.545 (0.875)
1.100
Math
2.753 (1.291) 3.130 (1.108) -0.177
Reading
3.688 (1.019) 3.752 (0.996)
0.626
Writing
3.304 (1.064) 3.374 (1.066)
0.449
Physical Tasks
2.807 (1.213) 2.893 (1.197) -0.083
Problem Solving
3.578 (1.133) 3.683 (1.000) -0.577
Noticing Mistakes
4.211 (0.822) 4.260 (0.740) -0.382
Planning
3.587 (1.004) 3.701 (0.943) -1.116
Knowledge of Organization 3.506 (0.872) 3.673 (0.828)
0.246
R2
0.240
n
2,463
4,470
Share of Female Workers
0.472 (0.499) 0.479 (0.500)
Change in the Share of Female Workers
Log Wage Change
Demand Shift, Elasticity of Substitution = 1
Demand Shift, Elasticity of Substitution = 1.75
Demand Shift, Elasticity of Substitution = 2.5

1997
(3)
(0.276)
(0.130)
(0.348)
(0.284)
(0.120)
(0.299)
(0.410)
(0.319)
(0.329)

[0.085]
[-0.067]
[0.040]
[0.031]
[-0.007]
[-0.061]
[-0.019]
[-0.127]
[0.041]

B. Regression Estimates
2001
(4)
1.232 (0.247) [0.095]
0.167 (0.185) [0.063]
0.575 (0.529) [0.037]
0.079 (0.471) [0.006]
0.072 (0.146) [0.006]
0.342 (0.321) [0.036]
-0.897 (0.451) [-0.044]
-1.016 (0.311) [-0.116]
-0.289 (0.348) [-0.048]
0.163

Change 1997-2001
(5)
1.339 (0.526) [0.103]
0.170 (0.198) [0.064]
-0.070 (0.324) [-0.004]
0.186 (0.284) [0.013]
0.354 (0.253) [0.030]
0.349 (0.311) [0.037]
-0.464 (0.388) [-0.023]
-0.598 (0.641) [-0.068]
-0.871 (0.623) [-0.145]
0.089

0.066
0.026
0.092
0.112
0.131

Note: Panel A reports means and standard deviations (in parentheses) of skill variables. Panel B reports effects of skill variables on women’s employment share.
Observations are three-digit occupations. Numbers in brackets give the standard errors and the numbers in squared brackets the predicted effects of the change in
the variable between 1997 and 2001. Regressions are estimated using 2SLS, with the importance of the job tasks instrumented by the importance of the job tasks
among men.

46

Table VII
The Effects of Job Tasks on Female Relative Employment in Germany, 1979-1998
A. Means and Standard
1979
(1)

1998
(2)

People Tasks
0.077 (0.058) 0.465
Analytic Skills
0.043 (0.057) 0.160
Routine Cognitive
0.369 (0.253) 0.209
Routine Manual
0.331 (0.237) 0.138
Non-Routine Manual
0.156 (0.181) 0.156
R2
n
28,337
25,739
Female Relative Emp.
-1.176 (2.203) -0.584
Women’s Relative Wages -0.175
-0.185
Change in Demand e=1
Change in Demand e=1.75
Change in Demand e=2.5

(0.164)
(0.112)
(0.200)
(0.199)
(0.221)

(1.708)

GLS - Random Effects
(3)
1.126
(0.136)
-0.089
(0.137)
-0.115
(0.041)
0.056
(0.041)
-0.232
(0.063)
.225
306
Change in Share

[0.437]
[-0.010]
[0.018]
[-0.011]
[0.000]

0.592
-0.010
0.582
0.575
0.567

B. Regression Estimates
Within - Fixed Effects
(4)
0.715
0.388
-0.079
0.058
0.160
.298
306

(0.412)
(0.431)
(0.120)
(0.115)
(0.208)

[0.278]
[0.046]
[0.013]
[-0.011]
[0.000]

0.592
-0.010
0.582
0.575
0.567

IV, Within - Fixed Effects
(5)
0.700
0.372
-0.082
0.058
0.160
.287

(0.488)
(0.515)
(0.132)
(0.118)
(0.219)

[0.272]
[0.044]
[0.013]
[-0.011]
[0.000]
306
0.592
-0.010
0.582
0.575
0.567

Note: Panel A reports means and standard deviations (in parentheses) of skill variables. Panel B reports effects of skill variables on women’s employment share.
Observations are two-digit occupations. Numbers in brackets give the predicted effects of the change in the variable between 1979 and 1998. The instrumental
variables regressions are estimated by instrumenting for the importance of the job tasks by the importance of the job tasks among men.

47

Table VIII
The Effect of Job Tasks on Female and Black Employment in the United States, 1980-1990

People Tasks
Reasoning
Mathematics
Language
Strength
Physical Tasks
Specific Skills

Women
1980 Cross section
1980 to 1990 Change
(1)
(2)
.219
(.046)
[.506]
.116
(.062)
[.267]
-.864
(.443) [-.757] -.137
(.159)
[-.120]
-.214
(.205) [-.200] -.028
(.093)
[-.026]
2.129 (.272) [2.279] .269
(.095)
[.288]
-.586
(.169) [-.416]
-2.166 (.411) [-.669]
-.601
(.121) [-.955]

R2
n

Between Occupations
Total (Between is .5)
Total (Between is .28)
Total (Between is .1)
Total (Between is .05)

.499
484

In 1977
0.241
0.482
0.861
2.411
4.822

.144
483

Blacks
1980 Cross-Section
Changes 1980-1990
(3)
(4)
-.058
(.015)
[-.135]
-.090
(.040) [-.208]
.266
(.150)
[.233]
-.092
(.102) [-.081]
-.549
(.069)
[-.513]
-.079
(.059) [-.074]
.047
(.092)
[.050]
.172
(.061)
[.185]
.029
(.057)
[.020]
.169
(.139)
[.052]
-.204
(.041)
[-.325]
.503
482

.119
478

Annual Demand Shift Implied By Change in People Skills Based and Estimates (*100)
In 1992
In 1977
In 1992
In 1977
In 1992
In 1977
-0.197
0.127
-0.104
-0.064
0.052
-0.099
-0.395
0.255
-0.208
-0.128
0.105
-0.198
-0.705
0.455
-0.372
-0.321
0.262
-0.495
-1.973
1.273
-1.041
-0.642
0.525
-0.990
-3.945
2.545
-2.083
-1.283
1.050
-1.979

In 1992
0.081
0.162
0.405
0.810
1.619

Note. Lower panel gives the implied effect of breaks in the importance of people tasks, given by the estimated effect of people tasks on the employment of
women or blacks multiplied by the change in trend increase in the importance of people tasks in 1982 or 1995. The total estimates multiple the breaks in the
within trends under the assumption that the within trend breaks are the shown share of the total.

48

Table IX
The Effects of Job Tasks on Employment by Race and Ethnicity in the United States, 1980-1990
Blacks

Non-Whites, Non-Blacks

Hispanics

Panel A: All
People Tasks
Reasoning
Mathematics
Language
R2
n

-0.090
-0.092
-0.079
0.172
.119
478

Panel B: Men
People Tasks
Reasoning
Mathematics
Language
R2
n

(1)
(0.040)
(0.102)
(0.059)
(0.061)

[-0.208]
[-0.081]
[-0.074]
[0.185]

Black Men
-0.204
0.146
0.048
-0.118
0.048
467

(0.053)
(0.134)
(0.078)
(0.080)

-0.044
-0.186
0.021
0.051
.182
477

(2)
(0.027)
(0.070)
(0.041)
(0.042)

[-0.103]
[-0.163]
[0.020]
[0.054]

0.008
0.060
-0.146
-0.095
.153
463

Non-White, Non-Black Men
[-0.471]
[0.128]
[0.045]
[-0.126]

-0.263
-0.186
0.061
0.110
0.216
474

(0.045)
(0.114)
(0.067)
(0.069)

[-0.606]
[-0.163]
[0.057]
[0.117]

(3)
(0.055)
(0.141)
(0.082)
(0.085)

[0.018]
[0.053]
[-0.137]
[-0.101]

Hispanic Men
-0.203
0.221
-0.054
-0.138
0.051
450

(0.070)
(0.178)
(0.103)
(0.106)

[-0.470]
[0.193]
[-0.050]
[-0.147]

Note: Estimates based on changes between 1980 and 1990. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Predicted effects of a one standard deviation change in
the variable in brackets.

49

Table X
The Effects of Job Tasks on English Ability and Immigrant Status in the United States, 1980
Speaks English at Home

People Tasks
Reasoning
Mathematics
Language
Strength
Physical Tasks
Specific Skills
R2
n

0.049
0.189
-0.040
0.039
-0.084
0.307
0.003
0.316
485

(1)
(0.010)
(0.093)
(0.043)
(0.057)
(0.035)
(0.086)
(0.025)

[0.114]
[0.165]
[-0.037]
[0.042]
[-0.059]
[0.095]
[0.005]

English Best Category Given Speaks
Other Language at Home
(2)
0.075
(0.011)
[0.174]
0.103
(0.104)
[0.090]
0.017
(0.048)
[0.016]
0.160
(0.064)
[0.172]
-0.164
(0.040)
[-0.116]
0.185
(0.096)
[0.057]
-0.030
(0.028)
[-0.048]
0.746
476

Born Outside United States and Its
Territories
(3)
-0.037
(0.014)
[-0.084]
-0.295
(0.138)
[-0.259]
0.223
(0.064)
[0.208]
-0.147
(0.085)
[-0.158]
0.060
(0.053)
[0.042]
-0.506
(0.128)
[-0.156]
0.030
(0.038)
[0.047]
0.166
485

Note: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Predicted effects of a one standard deviation change in the variable in brackets.

50

Table A1
Definitions of People Tasks in the United States, Germany, and Britain
Country

Data Source

Definition of People Tasks

Variable Construction

United
States

Dictionary of Occupational
Titles Fourth [1977] and
Revised Fourth Edition [1991]

The presence or absence of
a given temperament, rather
than the level or degree
required, is indicated.
Temperaments are coded 0
or 1. The interests equal -1,
0, or 1. In constructing the
measures we took the mean
of the sum of the
occupation score on these
items.

Germany

Bundesinstitut für
Berufsbildung (BIBB) and
Institut für Arbeitsmarkt- und
Berufsforschung der
Bundesanstalt für Arbeit
(IAB) [1979, 1985, 1991, and
1998]
First [1997] and Second
[2001] British Skills Survey

We use three variables from the DOT
temperaments: (i) adaptability to situations
involving the interpretation of feelings, ideas or
facts in terms of personal viewpoint, (ii)
adaptability to influencing people in their
opinions, attitudes or judgments about ideas or
things, and (iii) adaptability to dealing with
people beyond giving and receiving instructions.
Two variables from DOT interest factors to
signify interests, tastes and preferences for
certain kinds of activities that are entailed in job
performance: (i) a preference for activities
involving business contact with people, and (ii) a
preference for working for the presumed good of
people.
We use variables for whether the job involves
negotiating, lobbying, coordinating and
organizing; teaching or training; selling, buying,
advising, or advertising; entertaining or
presenting; serving and accommodating; and
helping others

The variables are coded 0
or 1. We average across the
responses to the questions
and multiply by 100

9.272
(15.516)
[1979]

21.624
(31.087)
[1998]

We use variables for the importance of dealing
with people; working with a team of people;
instructing, training or teaching people; making
speeches or presentations; persuading or
influencing others; selling a product; counseling,
advising or caring for customers or clients; and
listening carefully to colleagues

The variables range from 1
(not important) to 5
(essential). We average
across the responses to the
various questions..

3.468
(0.933)
[1997]

3.554
(0.875)
[2001]

Britain

51

Mean
(Standard Deviation)
[Year]
.9274
1.1499
[DOT ’77 in
[DOT ’77 in
1977]
1991]
.9408
1.1788
[DOT ’91 in
[DOT ’91 in
1977]
1991]

Table A2
Definitions of Sociability in the United States, and Britain
Country
Measure
Clubs
United
States
Sociability at
age 6
Sociability in
adulthood
Social behavior
during school
term
Britain

Social behavior
during holidays

Social behavior
during leisure
time
Number of
friends
Self description
of character:
outgoing

Sociability Variables
Definition
Respondents were shown cards with 9 types of high school clubs and
asked how many of them they participated in during high school.
Respondents were asked, “Thinking of yourself when you were 6 years
old, would you describe yourself as: (1) extremely shy; (2) somewhat shy;
(3) somewhat outgoing; or (4) extremely outgoing?”
Respondents were asked, “Thinking of yourself as an adult, would you
describe yourself as: (1) extremely shy; (2) somewhat shy; (3) somewhat
outgoing; or (4) extremely outgoing?”
Stay at home with boy/girlfriend; Stay at home of boy/girlfriend; Go to the
cinema etc. with boy/girlfriend; Stay at home with other friends; Spend
time at the homes of other friends; Go with friends to cinema, disco etc.;
and Go out with friends do nothing special
Stay at home by yourself or with family; Go out by myself or with family;
Go to a friend’s house; Have friends round to my house; Go to a youth
club/organization; Go out with brothers/sisters; Do community/volunteer
work; Go to a meeting/political club; Go out with my boy/girlfriend; and
Go out with friends
Go to a friend’s house; Have friends round to my house; Go to a youth
club/organization; Go out with brothers/sisters; Do community/volunteer
work; Go to a meeting/political club; Go out with my boy/girlfriend; and
Go out with friends
Boy or Girlfriend; Number of best friends; Number of friends in school;
and Number of friends outside school
We average responses to whether the person is Friendly; Loving;
Outgoing; Shy (entered in reverse); and Quiet (entered in reverse). The
respondents are asked to react to the statement: “I am …”. The response
categories are (1) does not apply; (2) applies somewhat; (3) applies very
much.

Note: The data source for the United States is the NLSY79 and for Britain the BCS.

52

Variable Construction
The sum of the number
of different types of
clubs is used.
The responses are used.

Mean
(Standard Deviation)
1.970
(1.183)
2.421
(0.912)

The responses are used.

2.949
(0.663)

The questions asked
are whether you are
engaged in the social
activities listed. The
responses range from 0
to 5. We construct
dummy variables equal
to 1 if the response is
1-5. For the number of
friends we just use the
absolute number of
friends, including
whether the person has
a boy/girlfriend.

8.764
(4.657)
10.574
(5.361)

17.023
(4.048)
11.780
(5.482)
2.542
(1.816)

Table A3
25 Largest Occupations in 1980 Census Sorted by People Tasks in the United States

People Tasks Reasoning
4.842
3.920
4.375
3.553
3.880
4.985
3.602
2.918
3.570
3.997
3.525
3.259
2.929
4.343
2.884
4.330
2.654
3.137
2.225
3.682
1.955
4.919
0.960
4.067
0.167
2.293
0.167
2.293
-0.395
2.956
-0.395
2.956
-0.578
2.418
-0.925
2.554
-0.925
4.000
-1.117
3.484
-1.296
3.265
-1.577
3.887
-1.661
3.924
-1.953
4.806
-2.597
3.844

Math
2.986
2.927
3.045
1.993
2.925
2.262
3.734
3.769
2.470
2.728
3.922
3.138
1.860
1.860
1.809
1.809
1.795
1.590
3.703
2.527
2.368
2.915
3.010
4.611
3.654

Language
3.833
3.137
4.962
2.237
3.976
2.574
3.753
3.818
2.178
3.419
4.904
3.282
1.745
1.745
2.126
2.126
2.173
1.904
3.073
2.651
2.387
2.956
2.880
4.642
3.684

Strength
1.829
1.944
1.944
2.004
1.007
3.025
1.347
1.367
2.000
1.304
2.814
1.641
2.869
2.869
1.900
1.900
3.143
1.997
1.018
2.909
2.088
2.870
2.956
0.969
3.242

Physical
0.011
0.057
0.009
0.016
0.003
0.764
0.060
0.049
0.009
0.019
0.025
0.131
0.362
0.362
0.516
0.516
0.870
0.171
0.005
0.146
0.475
0.883
0.932
0.002
0.803

Specific
Vocational
Training
5.056
3.804
6.130
3.011
6.001
4.251
6.999
7.011
3.003
4.643
6.881
6.905
2.637
2.637
3.455
3.455
3.452
3.318
4.834
5.929
5.454
6.750
6.849
7.268
6.625

53

Occupation
Sales representatives mining manufacturing and wholesale
Sales workers other commodities
Teachers elementary school
Waiters and waitresses
Secretaries
Nursing aides orderlies and attendants
Supervisors and proprietors sales occupations
Managers and administrators n.e.c.
Cashiers
General office clerks
Registered nurses
Supervisors production occupations
Laborers except construction
Stock handlers and baggers
Truck drivers light
Truck drivers heavy
Janitors and cleaners
Assemblers
Bookkeeping accounting and auditing clerks
Short-order cooks
Machine operators n.s.
Automobile mechanics except apprentices
Carpenters except apprentices
Accountants and auditors
Farmers except horticultural

Table A4
10 Largest Occupations in 1979 and 1991 BIBB/IAB by People Tasks in Germany
10 Largest Occupations in 1979
Ranked According to the Importance of People Tasks in 1979
Ranked According to the Importance of People Tasks in 1991
1979 1991 %Change
Occupation
1979 1991 %Change
Occupation
0.290 0.310 0.069 Registered Nurses and care takers
0.290 0.310 0.069 Registered Nurses and care takers
0.220 0.260 0.182 Teachers
0.190 0.260 0.368 Organizers and entrepreneurial occupations
0.190 0.260 0.368 Organizers and entrepreneurial occupations
0.220 0.260 0.182 Teachers
0.160 0.210 0.313 Sales persons (goods)
0.140 0.250 0.786 Health occupations
0.140 0.250 0.786 Health occupations
0.120 0.210 0.750 Secretaries
0.130 0.160 0.231 Engineers (chemical, physics, and math)
0.160 0.210 0.313 Sales persons (goods)
0.120 0.210 0.750 Secretaries
0.090 0.190 1.111 Sales persons (bank services and insurance)
0.100 0.120 0.200 Engineers (technical)
0.090 0.170 0.889 Security persons
0.090 0.190 1.111 Sales persons (bank services and insurance)
0.130 0.160 0.231 Engineers (chemical, physics, and math)
0.090 0.170 0.889 Security persons
0.100 0.120 0.200 Engineers (technical)
10 Largest Occupations in 1991
Ranked According to the Importance of People Tasks in 1979
Ranked According to the Importance of People Tasks in 1991
0.220 0.260 0.182 Teachers
0.220 0.260 0.182 Teachers
0.160 0.210 0.313 Sales persons (goods)
0.140 0.250 0.786 Registered Nurses and care takers
0.140 0.250 0.786 Registered Nurses and care takers
0.160 0.210 0.313 Sales persons (goods)
0.130 0.160 0.231 Engineers (chemical, physics, and math)
0.130 0.160 0.231 Engineers (chemical, physics, and math)
0.100 0.120 0.200 Engineers (technical)
0.100 0.120 0.200 Engineers (technical)
0.060 0.100 0.667 Secretaries
0.060 0.100 0.667 Secretaries
0.050 0.060 0.200 Laborers except construction
0.040 0.100 1.500 Cash operators and book keepers
0.040 0.100 1.500 Cash operators and book keepers
0.050 0.060 0.200 Laborers except construction
0.020 0.040 1.000 Truck drivers
0.020 0.040 1.000 Truck drivers
0.020 0.020 0.000 Machine operators n.s.
0.020 0.020 0.000 Machine operators n.s.

54

Table A5
10 Occupations with largest Increases and Decreases in People Tasks in Germany, 1979-1991
% Change
0.667
0.786
0.889
0.892
1.000
1.111
1.258
1.357
1.500
1.940

10 Occupations with largest increase in people tasks
Secretaries
Registered Nurses and care takers
Security persons
Doctors
Truck Drivers
Sales persons (bank services and insurance)
Hair dressers
Musicians
Cash operators and book keepers
Entrepreneurs

% Change
-0.116
-0.164
-0.248
-0.254
-0.257
-0.414
-0.535
-0.561
-0.625
-0.899

55

10 Occupations with largest decrease in people tasks
House Painters
Glassblowers
Bricklayers
Moving men
Technicians
Cleaners
Potters
Paper constructors
Rollers
Tailors

