NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW’S YOUR GOVERNMENT?
INTERNATIONAL EVIDENCE LINKING
GOOD GOVERNMENT AND WELL-BEING
John F. Helliwell
Haifang Huang
Working Paper 11988
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11988
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2006

Earlier versions of this paper were presented at the Oxford conference in honour of John Flemming,
September 9-10, 2005, and the Göteborg conference on the Quality of Government, November 1719, 2005. Comments from Daron Acemoglu, Danny Kaufmann, Avner Offer, Torsten Persson,
Guido Tebellini, Jan Teorell and Eric Uslaner are gratefully acknowledged. Further comments and
suggestions to john.helliwell@ubc.ca. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by John F. Helliwell and Haifang Huang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

How’s Your Government? International Evidence Linking Good Government and Well-Being
John F. Helliwell and Haifang Huang
NBER Working Paper No. 11988
January 2006, Revised September 2006
JEL No. H11, I31, P52
ABSTRACT
In this paper we employ World Values Survey measures of life satisfaction as though they were
direct measures of utility, and use them to evaluate alternative features and forms of government in
large international samples. We find that life satisfaction is more closely linked to several World
Bank measures of the quality of government than to real per capita incomes, in simple correlations
and more fully specified models explaining international differences in life satisfaction. We test for
differences in the relative importance of different aspects of good government, and find a hierarchy
of preferences that depends on the level of development. The ability of governments to provide a
trustworthy environment, and to deliver services honestly and efficiently, appears to be of paramount
importance for countries with worse governance and lower incomes. The balance changes once
acceptable levels of efficiency, trust and incomes are achieved, when more value is attached to
building and maintaining the institutions of electoral democracy.
John F. Helliwell
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver B.C. V6T 1Z1 CANADA
and NBER
john.helliwell@ubc.ca
Haifang Huang
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver B.C. V6T 1Z1 CANADA
hhaiff@yahoo.ca

1. Introduction
Adam Smith hypothesized that five factors serve to explain why some jobs are paid more than
others: “First, the agreeableness or disagreeableness of the employments themselves; Secondly,
the easiness and cheapness, or the difficulty and expense, of learning them; Thirdly, the
constancy or inconstancy of employment in them; Fourthly, the small or great trust that must be
reposed in those who exercise them; and, fifthly, probability or improbability of success in
them”(Smith 1850, 45- Part I of Chapter 10 of Book 1). He argued that, in the absence of policy
or other impediments to mobility, wages would tend to adjust so as to be the same for all jobs of
equivalent characteristics, so that these wage differences would reflect the relative attractiveness
of different employments. This analysis lies behind much of modern labour economics.
Smith’s first factor- the agreeableness or disagreeableness of the job - underlies attempts to
establish the value of life as reflected in wages for jobs of differing physical risks, to establish the
amenity value of jobs and hence life in different locations, and to assess the value of different job
characteristics, mainly disagreeable rather than agreeable features. This factor will also be the
main focus of attention in this paper, although our methodology differs from previous studies,
since we do not estimate compensating differentials by comparing different assumed market
equilibria (as is implied by the usual equations using wages at the dependent variable). Instead,
we calculate the income-equivalents of different job characteristics by comparing the effects of
income and job characteristics as factors influencing life satisfaction, with the latter being treated
as a direct measure of utility.

2. Previous Approaches
There have been many previous attempts to value non-financial aspects of jobs using wages or
incomes as the dependent variable. In his survey of estimates of compensating wage variations
for risk of injury or death, Viscusi (1993) notes that industry-average data were used before large
samples of individual data became available in the final decades of the 20th century. He argues
that individual-level data are likely to be superior, not just because of the larger sample sizes, but
because worker tastes and attributes, as well as unspecified aspects of jobs, are likely to vary
across industries in ways that may be correlated with accident risks. For cross-sectional studies
using individual wage or earnings data to estimate compensating differentials, there are other
estimation problems. The most obvious is that posed by unmeasured differences in employee

2

ability and training. More able or better-trained workers are in a position to choose jobs that
produce more income and more safety, making the usual assumption that safety is a normal good.
A typical estimation form is:
(1)

ln(yi)= α - βXi + γ Zi + θZui + εi

where yi is the earnings level for worker i, Xi is a vector of job characteristics, applicable to
worker i’s job, with compensating differentials estimated by the coefficient vector β. The Zi are
measured characteristics of worker i, and the Zui are unmeasured characteristics of the worker, the
job, or the market environment in which the wage is being paid. The εi are the assumed error
terms, usually taken to be iid.
To demonstrate the problem posed by un-measured differences in ability, we can start from a
worker’s theoretical optimization problem, and show that this unobserved ability affects both the
earnings of the worker and characteristics of the chosen job:
Max(yi, Xi)U(yi, Xi)
s.t. ωi= yi + βXi
U(.,.) is the utility function. The two arguments are income and non-financial job attributes in that
order. Positive elements in the vector of job attributes Xi enhance utility, and vice versa. We
assume that jobs differ in their characteristics, and that employees can choose a more interesting
or engaging job with lower wage, or work in a less pleasant environment for a higher wage. The
labour market is presumed to offer potential workers many different packages, with prices as
denoted by the vector β. The budget constraint requires that the money wage and the cost (or
benefit if negative) of the chosen job attributes should sum to the total earning potential of the
worker, denoted as ωi.
The solution to the maximization has to satisfy the following three-equation system including the
first order condition for chosen wage, the first order condition for the chosen job attributes, and
the budget constraint, in that order.
(2)

∂U(yi, Xi)/∂yi =λi

(3)

∂U(yi, Xi) /∂Xi =λiβ
ωi= yi +βXi

where λi is the Lagrangian multiplier.

3

Solution of this system gives optimal choice of yi and Xi , both of which are functions of the
compensating differentials β, and the unobservable skill level ωi
yi = yi(ωi, β); with ∂yi /∂ωi >0; ∂yi/∂β >0
Xi = Xi(ωi, β); with ∂Xi/∂ωi >0; ∂Xi/∂β <0
By substituting the optimal choices back into the budget constraint and moving the wage to the
left hand side, we have the relation between wage and job attributes in the equilibrium that is
underlying equation (1):
yi(ωi, β)= - βXi(ωi, β)+ ωi
With cross-sectional data, the unobservable earning potential ωi becomes part of the error term,
thus making the error term correlated with both the dependent wage variable and the job
characteristics used as independent variables. The estimation of β is going to be biased
downward. For instance, suppose that the safety of the job is included among the X variables. The
usual theoretical presumption is that safety is a normal good, so that workers possessing higher
than average abilities will use their extra bargaining power to obtain jobs that are both safer and
more highly paid. In the absence of a variable measuring ability, this behaviour would lead to an
upward bias on the coefficient measuring the effects of education (assuming ability and education
to be positive correlated) and a bias towards zero on the coefficients of variables measuring job
safety. In the absence of variables measuring worker education and training, the downward bias
in the estimation of the compensating variation for safety would probably be even greater.
Data from one of the surveys used in this paper can be used to illustrate the reality of this
problem, and show also that attempts to remove the bias in the estimation of compensating
differentials by allowing for the effects of education on income are likely to be insufficient. In the
Canadian Equality, Security and Community (ESC) survey, for example, working respondents are
asked to measure the extent to which their jobs possess five job characteristics and one workplace
characteristic that are presumed (and subsequently found) to have a positive influence on job
satisfaction, independent of the level of income. Each respondent is asked whether their job:
allows them to make a lot of decisions on their own, requires a high level of skill, has a variety of
tasks, provides enough time to get the job done, and is free of conflicting demands. These

4

answers are on a four-point scale, converted to a 0 to 1 scale for the analysis presented below.
Respondents are also asked, this time on a scale of 1 to 10, to rate the level of trust that workers
have in management at their workplace. Of these six factors, three have positive correlations with
income (decision scope, skill and variety), while the other three have negative correlations. This
pattern holds whether the correlations with income are measured individually or jointly, and
occur whether or not the substantial effects of education on income are allowed for in the way
depicted by equation 12. The empirical results of Brown (1980) suggest that while omitted ability
may be part of the story, it is not the only reason for earlier failures to find plausible estimates of
equalizing differentials. More recently, Lang and Majumdar (2004) have developed a theoretical
job search model involving jobs with both pecuniary and non-pecuniary aspects, and used it to
show that in the presence of plausible frictions the resulting equilibrium allocation of workers to
jobs can easily be expected to produce a cross-sectional positive simple correlation between
income and (favourable) non-pecuniary job characteristics, even if workers are homogeneous.
Previous studies using Canadian income data to estimate compensating differentials include
Meng (1989), Cousineau, Lacroix and Girard (1992), and Gunderson and Hyatt (2001), with the
latter paper including a survey of earlier results.

3. Using Life Satisfaction Data to Value Job Characteristics
The econometric difficulties posed by using wage equations to identify compensating
differentials suggests that it might be more promising to use subjective well-being data as a direct
measure of utility, thereby permitting compensating differentials to be estimated as ratios of
coefficients estimating the well-being effects of income and job characteristics. We propose an
alternative to estimate compensating differentials, which is to utilize equation (2) and equation
(3), the two first-order conditions that describe worker’s optimal choices. We take note of the
implication that the compensating differentials, β, are simply the ratios of the marginal utilities of
job attributes over the marginal utility of income, i.e.,
β =[∂U(yi, Xi) /∂Xi ]/[∂U(yi, Xi)/∂yi ]
Easy as it sounds, this approach will not be available unless utility is measured in a meaningful
way, and the marginal contributions of income and job characteristics can be estimated. This is
precisely where our dataset fits in. All the three surveys we are going to use for this paper include

2

If a version of equation 1 is estimated using all six job characteristics and three education level variables,
the sign patterns are as described in the text. Of the ‘correctly’ (negatively) signed job characteristics, “free
of conflicting demands” is insignificant. See the Appendix for details.

5

a question that asks respondents to report their satisfaction with life. We argue that this measure
of life satisfaction, subject to some issues we shall deal with later, can be used as a direct measure
of utility. The measurement of utility permits the estimation of marginal utilities, and hence of
compensating differentials, while at the same time avoiding the difficulties posed by unobserved
skills.
More precisely, our proposed approach is to linearize the utility function U(y, X) at the
equilibrium point, then to estimate the marginal contributions of job characteristics and income to
life satisfaction, and finally to calculate the compensating differentials directly from these
estimated coefficients, as ratios of the job characteristics coefficients to the coefficient on the (log
of) income. To the extent that jobs are actually available with the characteristics in question, these
ratios reflect the prevailing market prices of job attributes, usually described as compensating
differentials. Essentially the same approach has been applied by Van Praag and Baarsma (2005)
to estimate compensating differentials for aircraft noise in the neighbourhoods surrounding
Amsterdam Airport.
In its general form, the proposed strategy is described by
LSi = δΦy(yi) + µΦx(Xi) + γ Zi +εi
β = µ/ δ
Where LS is the mnemonic for life satisfaction, Φy(y) is transformation of income, Φx(X) is the
transformation of job attributes, Zi are all other controls. The transformations with Φ() are needed
in some cases to have stable coefficients δ and µ, which denote marginal utilities, across
heterogeneous agents. Without any transformation, the linear specification of the utility function
would imply constant marginal utility of income regardless of level, which runs counter to
standard economic assumptions and many empirical results suggesting that less affluent agents
derive greater utility from extra income. We acknowledge the point by using the log of income in
the model instead of the level of income, therefore Φy(y)=log(y). For job attributes we adopt a
simplistic view that their per unit contribution to workers is the same regardless of income or
level of X, so that Φx(Xi)= Xi. Finally we use Zi to control for many observed heterogeneities
across agents, including, in some tests, personality differences.
The compensating differentials are calculated as ratios of coefficients. Their interpretation
depends on the transformation performed on yi and Xi . For instance, in our empirically preferred
case where income is in log form and X is in linear form, β will be the log change in income (we

6

convert to percentage changes in our key tables of results) that has for the average employee the
same life satisfaction effect as a change of one unit in the non-financial job characteristic X.
One last point to make is that the utility function is an approximation around the equilibrium.
This is because the marginal utilities, i.e., the coefficients δ and µ, are likely to change if the
market price changes. But for a given price, and hence a given equilibrium point, these estimated
coefficients allow us to back out the price.
In the remaining sections, we describe our data and the exact empirical model used for estimating
compensating differentials, present our main results, test their robustness and discuss the
implications for future research.

4. Data and Empirical Implementation
Our three survey sources include the second wave (2002~2003) of the SSHRC-supported
Equality, Security, and Community survey (ESC hereafter, it is described in more detail in
Soroka et al 20063) and two Statistics Canada surveys: the 2002 post-censal Ethnic Diversity
Survey (EDS), and the 2003 General Social Survey (GSS). The scope and contents of the two
latter surveys are described in detail on the Statistics Canada website, and these data were
accessed through the interuniversity Research Data Centre located at UBC. The surveys differ in
their sample size and the nature and number of questions asked. For the results reported in this
paper, we generally restrict our analysis to the working population, roughly 1700 for the second
wave of the ESC, 19,300 for the EDS and 9,900 for the GSS. Fortunately, the same life
satisfaction question is asked in all three surveys: “In general, how satisfied are you with your life
as a whole these days, on a scale of…” The preferred ten-point scale is used for responses in the
ESC and GSS, while a 5-point scale was used in the EDS. For closer comparability across
surveys, we have adjusted the EDS data to an approximate 10-point scale. For the survey-ordered
probit regressions we use in this paper, this rescaling has no effect on the ratios of coefficients
within the same equation, and it is these ratios that provide the raw material for our calculation of
compensating differentials.

3

Description of the survey can also be found on the website maintained by the Centre for Research on
Economic and Social Policy, the University of British Columbia, URL:
http://www2.arts.ubc.ca/cresp/bk2nonsec.htm

7

Both the ESC and the GSS asked a job satisfaction question, also on a 10-point scale. In addition,
in the second wave of the ESC survey there were a number of questions relating to job
characteristics, and we use these in two different ways, both to estimate a reduced-form equation
in which job characteristics are used directly as part of the explanation for life satisfaction, and in
the estimation of an instrumental variable for job satisfaction designed to avoid variation due to
income effects, to personality differences, and to issues related to the framing of questions. The
wording of the relevant questions is shown in the Appendix.
Finally, and helpfully, the GSS contains a series of questions designed to measure each
respondent’s psychological coping resources (Pearlin and Schooler 1978, 20). The ‘mastery
scale’ thereby constructed may run the risk of over-correcting for the effects of pure personality
differences, since the answers document the extent to which respondents feel they are in
command of their circumstances4. The answers will thus be influenced not just by underlying
personality traits, but also by the current range of problems exercising each respondent’s coping
skills. In the GSS we are also able to include measures of satisfaction in other domains of life, so
that the job satisfaction coefficient should reflect only the extent to which satisfaction with the
job differs from satisfaction in other domains.
Equations (4) to (6) show the basic structure of our equations for life satisfaction, which we are
interpreting as a direct measure of utility. Equation (4) is designed to estimate compensating
differentials for specific job characteristics. Equations (5) and (6) are for the estimation of
compensating differentials for a summary measure of job satisfaction.
(4) LSi = α + δ1ln (yi) + δ2ln (yct) + µXi + γ Zi + θZui + εi
LSi is life satisfaction for respondent i, measured on a scale of 1 to 10, yi is the level of income of
the respondent’s household, yct is the average level of household income in the respondent’s
census tract, and the other variables are as in equation (1), except that the coefficients now
measure their impact on life satisfaction rather than on wages, and the variable set is expanded to
include all other determinants of life satisfaction. When we use equation (4) to estimate the value
4

The index, labeled a ‘mastery scale’ by Statistics Canada is based on a principal component analysis of
extent of agreement with the following statements: I have little control over the things that happen to me;
There is really no way I can solve some of the problems I have; There is little I can do to change many of
the important things in my life; I often feel helpless in dealing with the problems of life; Sometimes I feel
that I’m being pushed around in life; What happens to me in the future depends mainly on me; I can do just
about anything I really set my mind to do.

8

of job characteristics, we will do so by taking the ratio of a coefficient on one of the components
of the job characteristic vector X to δ1 , the coefficient on log income. This matches the functional
form assumptions implicit in most previous attempts to evaluate job characteristics using wage
equations. It presumes that for each worker the monetary value of a change in some job
characteristic is measured as a fraction of his or her income, which in turn implies that higherincome households are prepared to give up more dollars to obtain a higher level of non-financial
job satisfaction. We report later on the fit and implications of alternative functional forms; finding
that this simple form performs well against more complex alternatives. In any event, all of the
versions we have considered give us similar basic results.
In the next two equations we limit the well-being effects of job characteristics by assuming that
they flow entirely through direct measures of job satisfaction. This more restricted approach is
necessary for those surveys lacking measures of job characteristics, and is also useful for
comparison with the reduced-form equation (4) when the more comprehensive ESC data are
being used.
(5) JSi = αj + δ1jln (yi) + δ2jln (yct) + βjXi + γj Zi + θjZui + εji
(6) LSi = α + δ1ln (yi) + δ2ln (yct) + β1JSi + γ Zi + θZui + εli
The main challenge of estimating this system is the possibility that survey responses about job
satisfaction and about life satisfaction may be influenced by the same excluded variables or are
subject to similar measurement errors. All of these risks of positive bias of the estimate of the
influence of job satisfaction on life satisfaction have been established in other studies, and we
have found some supporting evidence in our own samples. We want to eliminate, or even overeliminate, these risks of positive bias so that our estimates of the well-being effects of job
satisfaction can reasonably be thought to err on the conservative side.
Three main methods are used. The first is a two-stage instrumental estimation in which we first
regress job satisfaction on a suitable set of job characteristics, and then use the predicted value to
replace reported job satisfaction in equation (6). The ESC survey provides a fairly broad set of
answers to particular questions about job characteristics. These are specific enough to remove the
key risks attached to the job satisfaction measure, while numerous enough to span the main
determinants of job satisfaction, and hence to provide an adequate information base for

9

instrumental variables regression. This should serve to eliminate the risks from omitted variables,
question-framing and placing issues, and two-way causality.
For this approach, we have also made an adjustment to remove the effects of income entirely
from our measure of job satisfaction. In the case of the ESC, it is

(7) JSn i = ĴSi - δˆ1 j ln( yi )
The adjusted measure JSn in equation (7) is what we use for the ESC life satisfaction equations.
The purging of income effect from job satisfaction is to make sure that, when we run regressions
with job satisfaction and income on the right hand side, all the well-being effects of income flow
through the income variable. JSn is to be seen as a measure of non-financial job satisfaction. The
ratio of its coefficient to that of log income thus measures the log change in household income
that would provide the same life satisfaction as a one-unit change in non-financial job
satisfaction5. Another issue arises with respect to the treatment of census-tract income. We might
expect, following earlier results by Clark and Oswald (1996) and many others, that some measure
of comparator incomes would have a significant negative effect on job satisfaction. We did
include average census-tract income in regressions for job satisfaction in both surveys (see
Appendix table 1), but CT income is statistically insignificant in both of them. We therefore
ignore census tract income in the adjustment to define non-financial job satisfaction
The second method, where there are enough pre-determined measures of job characteristics, is to
estimate the reduced form equation (4) directly, as we can do with the ESC data.
A third method is used for the GSS, where we do not have enough specific measures of job
characteristics. One element of this strategy is to test the robustness of the job satisfaction effect
to the inclusion of other variables likely to be correlated with both job satisfaction and life
satisfaction. These include a personality variable and various measures of satisfaction in other
domains of life. A second element is to use an adjusted measure of job satisfaction designed to
minimize the risk that we are over-estimating the size of the compensating differential for nonfinancial job satisfaction. Since we have established that job satisfaction is positively related to
5

Another possibility would be to simply leave income out of the first-stage JS equation, intending that the
full reduced-form effects of income would thereby be captured in the LS equation. But, given the positive
simple correlations between income and other job characteristics, this would be expected to bias downward
the estimated effect of income in the LS equation, something that we are anxious to avoid. Experiments
with the ESC data show this to be the case. By excluding income from the first stage regression, we obtain
a smaller income effect in the LS equation, and hence a larger estimate of the compensating differential,
than we get using our preferred method, although the difference is very small.

10

income, and since we want to make sure that all the well-being effects of income flow only
through the income variable itself, we have two alternative ways to define a measure of nonfinancial job satisfaction. One is to mimic what we have done for ESC by using the instrumental
regression approach, recognizing that we have a rather limited set of instruments. Because the
only job-specific variable in the GSS version of equation (5) is trust in co-workers, this procedure
captures only the impact of trust on life satisfaction. It will be used only when we get to Table 5,
where we compare alternative measures of the life satisfaction effects of trust.
The alternative procedure, which keeps more information in the measure of job satisfaction, is
simply to subtract the estimated income effects from the job satisfaction data. This has the
advantage of including the effects of all the additional determinants of non-financial job
satisfaction, but at the expense of some possible bias caused by positive correlation between the
error terms in equations (5) and (6). In this case, non-financial job satisfaction in GSS is
calculated as

(7 - b) JSn i = JSi - δˆ1 j ln( yi )
Figure 1 shows the presumed underlying causal schematic. We try to control for as many as
possible of the direct determinants of utility, so that our estimates of the effects of income and
workplace characteristics should be relatively accurate, and hence useful for constructing
estimates of the income-equivalent values of various elements of workplace social capital. These
control variables include gender, age, and marital status, as well as level of education,
immigration and ethnic information. They also include a measure of self perceived health status
(scale 1 to 5, with 5 representing the best of health), which we believe not only control for
physical health, but also psychological health and some unobserved personality differences.
Furthermore, we have information from all three surveys about the respondent’s frequency of
contacts with family members outside household, with friends, and with neighbours, and also the
number of memberships (or extent of activity) in voluntary organizations. These measures are all
scaled between zero and one, but they are not defined in the same way across all three surveys, so
their coefficients are not strictly comparable across surveys. But they all serve the same purpose,
which is to control for factors that are likely to affect life satisfaction, thereby making the
coefficients on income and jobs as comparable as possible across the three surveys6. We use
survey-ordered probit estimation with errors presumed to be clustered at the level of the census
tract. Although the probit and linear forms give similar results for compensating differentials, the
6

For more information about these controls, and how they influence life satisfaction, see Helliwell (2003,
2006) and Helliwell and Putnam (2004).

11

probit form is perhaps more convincing, since it permits us to drop the cardinality assumption
required for the linear form. In fact, the computed cut-lines for the probit suggest that there is
only slightly less at stake in moving across the relatively unpopulated bottom half (in the ESC
working sample, more than 90% of the respondents rank their life satisfaction at 6 or above on the
10 point scale) than the top half of the life satisfaction scale.

5. Results
The set of preferred equations, based on the availability of data in each survey, is contained in
Table 1. Columns 1 and 2 are based on the ESC survey. In column 1 we estimate the reducedform equation (4) in which all five job characteristics and the measure of workplace trust directly
enter the utility function. We later use these job characteristic coefficients, together with that of
income, to calculate the compensating differentials reported in Table 4. In column 2 we present
results from instrumental variables estimation of equation (6). The first stage estimation of
equation (5), to provide the instruments for equation (6), can be found in Appendix Table 1.
The third column of Table 1 is based on the GSS. This equation does not have any job or
workplace characteristics except for job satisfaction itself. The job satisfaction variable used is
the measured value for job satisfaction with the income effect subtracted, as described in equation
(7-b), using the income coefficient obtained from applying equation (5) to the GSS data. The
differing treatments for the ESC and GSS data reflect the characteristics of each dataset. ESC
provides a broad set of job-related information and therefore enables us to use both the reduced
form and instrumental estimation. GSS does not have these variables, but it does have the mastery
scale and measurements of satisfactions in other domains, thus allowing us to compensate, or
perhaps even over-compensate for the risk of positive bias on the job satisfaction coefficient due
to excluded variables. Table 2 shows our progress toward the final GSS equation in Table 1.
Table 2 has two columns, with the only difference being the addition of the income-adjusted
mastery scale in column 2. When the domain satisfaction variables are then added, we get the
final GSS equation shown in Table 1.
Our main results, the estimated compensating differentials and their standard errors, are presented
in Tables 4 and 5. Table 4 includes all job attributes, Table 5 focuses on workplace trust. Since
these compensating differentials are calculated as ratios of coefficients from the regressions in
Table 1, their validity depends on the credibility of the variance-covariance matrix of the
parameters shown in Table 1. We therefore discuss the Table 1 results before moving on to the

12

compensating differentials. In particular, we address two issues. The first is the use of the mastery
scale and domain satisfaction to deal with the risk of positive bias in the estimation of the job
satisfaction coefficient in the GSS case. The second is the choice of income variables and the use
of contextual income measures.
We deal first with personality, omitted variables and framing effects. Table 2 has two equations
for the GSS, one with and one without allowing for individual-level personality differences, as
embodied in the mastery scale. Because the previous literature has argued that the often-found
positive relation between job satisfaction and life satisfaction might be due to the correlation with
unmeasured personality differences (Arvey et al 1989, Heller et al 2002), it is important to note
some of the key consequences of including individual-level personality variables.
We adjusted the mastery scale to remove its correlation with income, so as to avoid the lower
income coefficient in the LS equation that would otherwise result. We had previously observed
from our experiments that the effects of income on life satisfaction are much smaller when the
unadjusted mastery scale is included in the equation. This may be because those with better
coping personalities are more able to find and hold higher-paying positions. It may also be
because those who have higher incomes, from any source, may feel better placed to deal with
whatever comes their way. The coefficient on non-financial job satisfaction, on the other hand, is
unchanged by addition of the mastery scale. Combined with the lower estimated effects of
income, this means that making explicit allowance for individual personality differences raises
rather than lowers the size of the resulting estimates of compensating variations for non-financial
job satisfaction. Since we wish our estimates of these differentials to err if anything on the
conservative side (because they are likely to be thought surprisingly large), we base our results on
a measure of mastery scale adjusted to remove its correlation with income. This restores the
income coefficient to what it was without the inclusion of the mastery scale. This makes it easier
to compare the GSS results with those from the other surveys, since the ESC and the EDS do not
have personality variables.
The first thing to note is that personality does indeed have a strong positive relation to life
satisfaction, with the significance of the mastery scale coefficient being exceeded only by that of
job satisfaction. This is consistent with numerous psychological studies, including those of
identical twins raised together or apart, that show a large degree of heritability in happinessdetermining aspects of personality. It is remarkable, and encouraging, that the introduction of

13

such an important variable has almost no effect on the size and significance of the coefficient on
job satisfaction. Neither does it lead to significant difference in other places where personality
differences have been held by sceptics to underlie some frequently observed cross-sectional
correlations. For example, it has been argued that the strong positive correlation between being
married and being satisfied with life exists because marriage is to a substantial degree a sorting
device that enables those with outgoing and well-coping personalities to find and wed equally
well-found spouses, making marriage a prize rather than a causal factor. Our results cast
considerable doubt on that interpretation, as the coefficient on marriage retains its size and
significance when the personality variable is included. The introduction of the mastery scale does
make a difference in places where they might be expected. For example, the previously modest
negative partial effects of higher education on life satisfaction (the simple correlation is strongly
positive) become larger and more significantly negative, as one would expect to be the case if
education provides students a chance to develop their latent coping skills. The inclusion of the
mastery scale also sharpens the rise in subjective well-being after middle age, just as was
previously found for health. Thus older age is more likely to lead to increased happiness for those
who keep their physical health and self-perceived ability to cope with whatever life throws their
way. The fact that the mastery scale itself has a negative simple correlation with age may suggest
either a decline in bravado as age occurs or, alternatively or additionally, that older people see
themselves as having a smaller range of options for dealing with life’s exigencies.
Even after we control the personality difference with the mastery scale, there still remains in our
GSS equations the possibility of framing effects, reverse causality or spill-over effects, and some
remaining risk that variations in optimism through time and across individuals might skew
answers to all satisfaction equations in ways not fully accounted for by the inclusion of the
mastery scale. Fortunately, the GSS includes other domain satisfaction questions, each of which
is likely to have a direct effect on life satisfaction but also to be subject to the same possible
biases. We have therefore included the GSS responses to three key domain satisfaction questions,
one related to health satisfaction, a second measuring satisfaction with the way that non-work
time is spent, and the third measuring financial satisfaction. The financial satisfaction variable is
purged of the influence of income, so as to keep all income effects flowing through the main
income variable. These satisfaction questions were asked at the same place in the GSS as the life
satisfaction and job satisfaction questions, and are scaled in exactly the same way. If framing
effects were pervasive, then there would be substantial multi-collinearity among the domain
satisfaction variables, and imprecise coefficients as a result. In fact, each of the domain

14

satisfactions has a highly significant coefficient in the life satisfaction equation. However,
including the additional domain satisfaction variables does provide extra insurance against the
possibility that our job satisfaction results are driven by correlated errors, and in the process also
reduces substantially the coefficient on non-financial job satisfaction. We have also undertaken
experiments to ensure that our results are robust to the exclusion of groups of respondents whose
answers suggest the risk of measurement error, for example, those who give nearly identical
answers to all of the satisfaction questions.
The GSS life satisfaction equation in Table 1 provides our most conservative estimate of the life
satisfaction effects of job satisfaction. It includes job satisfaction measured net of the Appendix
Table 1 estimate of the effects of personal income (the selection of income measures is discussed
shortly), other non-financial domain satisfaction answers, and the effects of personality, as
represented by the mastery scale, again net of income effects. This equation thus gives us,
compared to the alternatives shown in Table 2, the smallest estimate of the value, expressed in log
of household income, of non-financial job satisfaction. This is given by the ratio of the job
satisfaction coefficient to the coefficient on the log of household income.
We turn next to consider the alternative ways of estimating the effects of income on life
satisfaction. In our previous work (e.g. Helliwell 2003), we included dummy variables for each of
several income classes, so as not to constrain the all-important functional form linking income
and life satisfaction. From time to time we and others have used linear approximations (which are
fairly accurate over a broad range of middle-income classes in Canada) to calculate the income
equivalents of other variables entering the life satisfaction equation. For the current paper, we
have done further tests, and found a preferred strategy. We were interested in testing a
logarithmic form as a possible substitute for the linear form for two main reasons. First, it
increases comparability with earlier studies of compensating differentials. Second, if a
logarithmic form should prove to be empirically defensible, it introduces in a simple way the
presumed non-linearities that reduce capacity to pay as incomes fall very low, and reveal
declining marginal utility of consumption as incomes get large.
We have done a number of tests of log income against more general specifications, and find the
log form to be an acceptable simplification. For all three surveys, an encompassing model for life
satisfaction including both household income and its logarithm (r=.73 between these two
variables in ESC) allows the linear income variable, but not the log form, to be excluded. The

15

pure linear form is also dominated in all three surveys by an equation including the income class
dummy variables. When log income and the income classes are tested against one another, the
choice is less clear-cut. Taking account of the saving in degrees of freedom, the log form is
nonetheless preferable.
Another change to our treatment of income has been to consider various measures of contextual
income levels, allowing us to test absolute versus relative income models. As a starting point, we
compared personal and household income as determinants of life satisfaction reported by the
survey respondent (who, in our samples, was employed, and was as likely to be female as male).
We found in all three surveys that household income was the stronger of the two alternative
income variables in the life satisfaction equation, with personal income being stronger in the job
satisfaction equation. However, ESC and EDS life satisfaction equations that include personal
and household income have significant positive coefficients on both, although the household
income effect is always larger as well as more significant. In the GSS life satisfaction equation,
there is no significant effect from personal income. In all three surveys, household income takes a
positive coefficient given the level of personal income. This positive spill-over from the incomes
of other household members implies that the empathy and income-pooling effects dominate
relative income effects at this closest level of aggregation, echoing the South African results of
Kingdon and Knight (2004).
In our estimation, we use personal income in our job satisfaction equations for the GSS and ESC
data (EDS does not have a measure of job satisfaction). We subtract the effect of personal income
to create non-financial job satisfaction, as described by equation (7) for ESC, and equation (7-b)
for GSS. We do so because personal income is the stronger measure in job satisfaction and also
because personal income is likely to be better than household income as a measure of the
respondent’s income from the job being evaluated. However, in our life satisfaction equation we
include income of other household members as well, because the data show positive well-being
spillovers from these other household incomes. We would like to be able to divide total
household income into own income and income from other members. The compensating
differential would then be estimated using personal income’s coefficient. This is done in the case
of ESC. The GSS data do not allow us to do this partition in a meaningful way, because GSS
household income is in categories. As the result, we use only total household income in the GSS
life satisfaction equation, and use its coefficient as the base for our calculation of compensating

16

differentials. In order to assure comparability, we apply the second, less desirable, approach to the
ESC data, and find that it gives very similar results7.
When we include the log of the average household income in the census tract, the coefficient is
negative and strongly significant in all three surveys, in each case being large enough to make the
life satisfaction effects of household income mostly (entirely, in the case of the GSS) relative in
nature8. There are important implications of this result.9 There are other contextual effects that
can be assessed with our current survey data, given the large number of census tracts represented
(more than 2000 in our EDS sample, for example). We chose to include only average census-tract
income in the analysis reported in this paper, since it is the only contextual variable that has a
material effect on the estimated size of the compensating differentials for job characteristics.
Because there is a positive correlation between respondent family income and the average family
income in their census tract (e.g. +.26 in the ESC, see Appendix Table 3), and since own-family
income and average income take different signs in the estimated life satisfaction equations shown
in Table 1, it is important to include average income in the equation to get an unbiased estimate
of the family income effect. Including average income in the census tract raises the size and the
precision of our estimates of the positive life-satisfaction effects of household income. The
resulting estimates of compensating differentials are thus smaller and more precise than they
would otherwise be. This fits our general strategy of wishing to err if anything on the
conservative side when estimating compensating differentials.
To complete our calculations of compensating differentials, we next need to develop estimates of
the life satisfaction effects of workplace characteristics. The three surveys ask different questions
about life in the workplace, so that some issues have to be dealt with by triangulation rather than
independent parallel tests. For example, only in the GSS can we assess the likelihood that
answers to workplace questions might be affected by individual-level personality differences.
Only the ESC and the GSS include questions about job satisfaction, and only in the ESC is there a
full set of more detailed questions about job characteristics. Fortunately, all three surveys have
7

The preferred approach produces a compensating differential that is 0.68 between job satisfaction and
personal income. As expected (since household income is larger than personal income, and the reference
employment income is a smaller fraction thereof), using household income gives a slightly lower value, at
0.614.
8
Luttmer (2005), using UK data, shows that this general pattern of results is robust to a wider variety of
sensitivity tests than can be performed with our data.
9
The negative externalities implied by the negative well-being effects of rising comparator incomes and
expenditure, have been noted by economists from Veblen (1899) on, including Easterlin 1995, Frank 1997,
Layard 2005 and Eaton and Eswaran 2005.

17

questions about the level of trust in the workplace, a key determinant of job satisfaction, so we
can estimate the well-being effects of workplace trust for all three surveys.
Now we are ready to move on to Table 4 and Table 5 for the compensating differentials. Table 4
presents estimates for non-financial job satisfaction, the five job characteristics, and workplace
trust. Table 5 presents a comparison, across surveys and across equation specifications, of the
estimated compensating differentials for workplace trust. In these two tables, we also present the
estimated standard errors for the compensating differentials, which are ratios of coefficients. For
both ESC and GSS we calculate standard errors using the delta method and the relevant parts of
the parameter variance-covariance matrix. In the case of the GSS and EDS, we are also able to
use bootstrapping procedures to calculate the standard errors for the ratios as the standard
deviations of the distribution of the estimated ratios from 200 bootstrap replications, multiplied
by a factor of 5 in the case of GSS10.
The estimated compensating differentials for non-financial job satisfaction are very large in both
the ESC and the GSS. The log income value of a one-point change in job satisfaction, on a tenpoint scale, is estimated to be .681 in the ESC and .711 in the GSS. As shown in the right-hand
column in the top section of Table 4, a one-point increase on the ten-point job-satisfaction scale
would have the same life satisfaction consequence as a doubling of income. These results are
from our preferred equations, chosen to make all available adjustments to avoid over-statement of
the effect. In the case of the ESC, the equation is based on an instrument driven from specific job
characteristics, while the GSS equation includes the mastery scale and three other measures of
domain satisfaction. In both cases the effects of income on job satisfaction have been removed to
ensure that all income effects flow through the income variable, so that the ratio should measure
the income value of change in non-financial job satisfaction.
The ESC also permits us to assess the importance of specific job characteristics, and to do so in
two ways. One way is simply to estimate the reduced form, so as to reveal the net effects of job
characteristics on life satisfaction. This is done in the bottom panel of Table 4. To move one-tenth
of the way from the bottom to the top of the scale for different non-financial aspects of the job
has an income equivalence ranging from 11% for having sufficient time to complete the assigned

10

This adjustment is necessary because the GSS uses mean bootstrap weights from groups of 25. On the
use of bootstrapping in GSS, See Phillips (2004).

18

tasks to about 20% for both skill-requirements and variety, and to more than one-third for trust in
management.
The second method is to estimate the effects of job characteristics on job satisfaction, and then to
calculate their effects on life satisfaction as mediated through the estimated effect of job
satisfaction on life satisfaction. These two procedures (which are compared in Table 6) are not
expected to give the same answers, since they are measuring interestingly different things. The
biggest difference relates to the well-being consequences of having a job involving lots of
decision-making. Decision-making has a significantly positive effect on job satisfaction (and
hence on life satisfaction as mediated through the effect of job satisfaction in the life satisfaction
equation), but in the reduced form the net effect is insignificantly negative, as shown in Tables 1,
4 and 6. Thus the gains on the job are offset by losses on the home front. The reverse is true for
skill, variety, time available and freedom from conflicting demands, all of which have greater
effects in the reduced-form life satisfaction equation than where their impact is limited to that
flowing through job satisfaction. This suggests positive spillovers from these job characteristics,
in contrast to the negative ones from decision-making.
These results suggest some re-interpretation of the famous Whitehall study (Marmot et al 1991)
showing that those at the higher levels in the UK civil service have better health outcomes. This
result has been interpreted by some (e.g. Wilkinson 1996) by reference to animal studies showing
worse health among those in non-dominant positions in hierarchical societies. Our evidence
suggests, on the contrary, that the features of jobs that give greater life satisfaction (and by
extension, better health outcomes) do not relate to control (as measured by decision-making
content of the job) but instead to trustworthy management, variety, and demand for skills,
features that may well be found in higher-level jobs in the Whitehall hierarchy.
As can be seen from the job satisfaction equations in Table 3, the extent of workplace trust is by
far the strongest determinant of job satisfaction. This provides our key measure of social capital
in the workplace.

6. Valuing Workplace Social Capital
Although job satisfaction has long been known to have predictive power for absenteeism, illness,
and productivity, there has been less study of the role of trust and social capital as contributors to
job satisfaction. In a parallel way, most studies of social capital and its effects have concentrated

19

on the influence of family, friends, and community groups, with much less attention thus far paid
to either the causes or consequences of workplace social capital (Halpern 2005). Given the large
fraction of waking hours spent in the workplace, it should perhaps be expected that workplace
social capital might be strongly linked to life satisfaction.
The ESC, GSS and EDS surveys all contain some measure or measures of workplace trust. The
ESC asks about the extent to which management can be trusted in the respondent’s workplace,
while the GSS and EDS ask to what extent there is trust among colleagues. The resulting ratios
for the values of workplace trust are shown in Table 5, and Table 4 shows the ESC-based
estimates of the values of other specific job characteristics.
The social capital literature (see Halpern 2005 for a recent review) gives a central place to trust,
with high levels of trust being positively related to other measures of social capital (and
sometimes being used themselves as either proxy or direct measures of social capital), with
causation likely to flow both ways (Putnam 2000). The well-being equations in this paper suggest
that several different sorts of trust have direct effects on well-being. The fact that a variety of
domain-specific trust measures have even greater well-being effects than the classical general
trust responses gives us confidence that the large effects of trust on well-being are not simply due
to influence of congenital optimism on both trust and reported well-being.
Another demonstration that the measured effects of trust are not simply due to personality
differences is provided by the GSS job satisfaction equations in Table 3.The coefficient on the
trust variable drops only from 1.02 to .95 when the mastery scale is added, and its standard error
remains below .06. In addition, the preferred well-being equations in Table 1 show that trust in
neighbours, trust in police and workplace trust are all independently strong determinants of
respondents’ subjective well-being in both the ESC and GSS. The size and significance of the
workplace trust effects are even larger than for the other domains. In both surveys, inclusion of
the specific trust measures renders the general trust measure insignificant.
Thus it is no surprise to see in Table 5 that there are very large compensating differentials for
workplace trust. The lowest estimate we can obtain is from the GSS equation including mastery
and other domains of satisfaction. We also include the GSS estimates without these variables for
comparison with the ESC and EDS results, which cannot make these extra adjustments. The
adjusted (lowest) GSS estimate for the ratio is 1.75, measured as the log change in income

20

corresponding to a move from the bottom to the top of workplace trust (which is converted from
the 10-point scale to a zero to 1.0 scale so as to have the same scale as the other trust variables).
In ESC, the mean workplace trust response is 6.5 on the ten-point scale, with a standard deviation
of 2.5. The modal answer is 8. To move up one point on the 10-point scale, using the lowest GSS
estimate, has a log income value of .175, almost $13,000 for a modal family income of $65,000.
The right-hand column of Table 5 shows the percentage income changes matching a move from
the 75th percentile to the top rung on the measure of each survey’s measure of workplace trust. In
all cases, the estimates are generally four or more times as large as their estimated standard errors.
The lowest estimate is for the most controlled version of the GSS equation, where a move from
the 75th percentile to the top level of workplace trust has a compensating differential equivalent to
a 48% increase in household income.

7. What Next?
Our estimates are among the first using measures of life satisfaction to estimate compensating
variations for job characteristics, and are the first we know of to provide estimates of the value of
workplace trust. The estimated values of non-financial job characteristics, and especially of trust
in the workplace, are very large, and remain so even when we make a number of adjustments
designed to remove risks of over-estimation. Our workplace trust results are independently
estimated from three different large Canadian surveys, using different samples, and different
question wording. That all three surveys should show such consistently large effects convinces us
of the likely importance of our results. The estimated life satisfaction effects of workplace trust
are so large as to suggest that there are large unexploited gains available for trust-building
activities by managers, shareholders and employees. Although current levels of workplace trust in
Canada are already fairly high (almost two-thirds of employed ESC respondents rate workplace
trust at 7 or better on a ten-point scale), even small improvements promise large returns, and there
also a significant number of employers and employees trapped in an environment of very low
trust.
Should these results be taken seriously? If trust is so important for life satisfaction, and has been
found to be associated also with higher productivity, why should it not be everywhere maximized,
with no need for a compensating differential? We agree that there are likely to be many trustincreasing changes in the workplace that would improve both life satisfaction and productivity,
because it is probably true that the importance, fragility and complexity of workplace trust have
always, and perhaps increasingly, been under-estimated by managers and by economists.

21

Employees in low-trust environments, whose life satisfaction is most at risk, may simply treat low
trust as a necessary part of work.
On the econometric front, some have argued that since both income and non-financial job
characteristics are endogenous variables, it is not possible to interpret their coefficients. This form
of objection is perhaps a carry-over from earlier studies using income as the dependent variable,
and non-financial characteristics as independent variables. We are doing something quite
different. We are estimating the utility function directly, and wish to include all of the relevant
endogenous variables on the right-hand side. The key econometric issues in our case relate to
ensuring that the specific coefficient ratios under study (the compensating variations) are not
sensitive to the assumed functional structure and contents of the estimated utility function. In
cases like ours, where we are finding large estimated effects for non-financial job characteristics,
relative to those of income, our estimation strategy is to choose those specifications, among those
with roughly equivalent predictive power, that produce high effects for income and low effects
for non-financial job characteristics. More generally, we have more confidence in our results if
and when they are robust to inclusion or exclusion of other variables in the estimated utility
function. Our various tests on this score have thus far been encouraging.
What Next? Some have asked: Where’s the optimizing economic model underlying the jobmatching behaviour depicted here? What equilibrating mechanisms are in play, and why are they
producing such high values for workplace trust and other non-financial job characteristics? These
are good questions, and if our results are to be believed these questions provide a fruitful agenda
for future research. To go beyond the theoretical possibilities, which are likely to be driven by
issues relating to information, networks, and transaction costs, will require, for estimation,
workplace-based data on job characteristics and workplace trust. We do not want to pre-judge the
answers, since we do not yet have sufficient workplace-based data to enable the key elements of
job design and job change to be clarified in ways that explain why so many workplaces seem to
offer such substantial returns from paying more attention to non-financial features of life at work.
We hope that our use of life satisfaction data to estimate the possibilities has been convincing
enough to encourage the next stages of research. Ideally some of this research would be based on
explicit experimentation by employers with alternative ways of improving life at work.

22

References
Arvey, R.D., T.J. Bouchard, N.L. Segal, and L.M. Abraham (1989) “Job Satisfaction:
Environmental and Genetic Components.” Journal of Applied Psychology 74: 187-92.
Brown, Charles (1980) “Equalizing Differences in the Labor Market.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 74(1): 113-34.
Clark, Andrew E., and Oswald, Andrew J. (1995) “Satisfaction and Comparison Income.”
Journal of Public Economics 61: 359-81.
Cousineau, Jean-Michel, Robert Lacroix, and Anne-Marie Girard (1992) “Occupational Hazard
and Wage Compensating Differentials.” Review of Economics and Statistics 74(1):
166-9.
Easterlin, Richard (1995) “Will Raising the Incomes of All Raise the Happiness of All?” Journal
of Economic Behavior and Organization 27(1): 35-47.
Eaton, B. Curtis, and Mukesh Eswaran (2005) “The Evolution of Leisure, Consumption, and
Community in the Presence of a Consumption Externality.” (Paper presented at the
Annual Meetings of the Canadian Economics Association)
Frank, Robert (1997) “The Frame of Reference as a Public Good.” Economic Journal 107:183247.
Gunderson, Morley, and Douglas Hyatt (2001) “Workplace Risks and Wages: Canadian Evidence
from Alternative Models.” Canadian Journal of Economics 34(2): 377-95.
Halpern, David (2005) Social Capital (Cambridge: Polity Press)
Heller, Daniel, Timothy M. Judge, and David Watson (2002) “The Confounding Role of
Personality and Trait Affectivity in the Relationship between Job and Life Satisfaction.”
Journal of Organizational Behavior 23: 815-35.
Helliwell, John F. (2003) “How’s Life: Combining Individual and National Variables to Explain
Subjective Well-Being.” Economic Modelling 20: 331-60.

Helliwell, John F. and Robert D. Putnam (2004) “The social context of well-being” Phil
Trans R. Soc Lon. B 359: 1435-46. Reprinted in F.A. Huppert, B. Kaverne and
N. Baylis, eds., The Science of Well-Being. (London: Oxford University Press,
2005, 435-59).
Helliwell, John F. (2006) “Well-Being, Social Capital and Public Policy: What’s New?”
Economic Journal 116: C34-45.
Kingdon, Geeta G. and John Knight (2004) “Community, Comparisons and Subjective WellBeing in a Divided Society.” CSAE Working Paper 2004-21 (Oxford: Centre for the
Study of African Economies)

23

Lang, Kevin, and Suman Majumdar (2004) “The Pricing of Job Characteristics When Markets Do
Not Clear.” International Economic Review 45(4): 1111-28.
Layard, Richard (2005) Happiness: Lessons from a New Science. (London and New York:
Penguin).
Luttker, Ezro F.P. (2005) “Neighbours as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-Being.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics (January): 963-1002.
Marmot, M.G., G. Davey Smitth, S. Stansfield, C. Patel, F. North and J. Head (1991) “Health
Inequalities among British Civil Servants: the Whitehall Study II” Lancet 337:1387-93.
Meng, Ronald (1989) “Compensating Differences in the Canadian Labour Market.” Canadian
Journal of Economics 25: 413-22.
Pearlin, L.I. and C. Schooler (1978) “The Structure of Coping”. Journal of Health and Social
Behavior 19(1):2-21.
Phillips, Owen (2004) “On the use of bootstrap weights with Wes Var and SUDAAN”. Research
Data Centres Technical Bulletin 1(2): 7. (Statistics Canada No. 12-002-XIE).
Putnam, Robert D. (2000) Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American
Community (New York: Simon and Schuster).
Rosen, Sherwin (1986) “The Theory of Equalizing Differentials.” Handbook of Labor
Economics, Vol 1. edited by Orley Ashenfelter and Richard Layard. (North-Holland:
Amsterdam) 641-92.
Smith, A. (1850) An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. (4th
edition, edited by J. R. McCulloch, Edinburgh: Adam and Charles Black; first edition
1786)
Soroka, Stuart, John F. Helliwell and Richard Johnston (2006) “Measuring and Modelling
Interpersonal Trust.” In Fiona Kay and Richard Johnston, eds., Diversity, Social Capital
and the Welfare State (Vancouver: UBC Press).
Van Praag, B.M.S. and B.E. Baarsma (2005) “Using Happiness Surveys to Value Intangibles: the
Case of Aircraft Noise.” Economic Journal 115(January): 224-46.
Veblen, Torsten (1899) The Theory of the Leisure Class. (New York: Macmillan)
Viscusi, Kip (1993) “The Value of Risks to Life and Health.” Journal of Economic Literature
31: 1912-46.
Wilkinson, R.G. (1996) Unhealthy Societies: The Afflictions of Inequality (London:
Routledge)

24

Figure 1: An overview of potential biases
Personality;
Framing issues;
Spillovers

Life Satisfaction

Total Family Income

Job satisfaction

Trade-offs

Personal
income from
Labor Market

Total Earning Potential

Observed
Productivity

Un-observed
Productivity
(Source of Skill-Error)

Other Family
Members’ Income

Table 1: Preferred Well-Being Equations in ESC and GSS, Estimated with Survey Ordered Probit
GSS Sample
ESC Sample
D.V: Life satisfaction
Number of obs=1748
Number of obs=1739 Numberof obs = 9949
F( 33, 886)=9.75
F( 28, 888)=9.97 F(37, 3532) = 66.01
Coef.
Std. Err.
Coef. Std. Err.
Coef.
Std. Err.
Mastery scale, with income effect subtracted (GSS only)
1.046
0.102
Job satisfaction, with income effect subtracted
0.156
0.022
0.152
0.009
Log of personal income
0.200
0.047
0.229
0.044
Log of other family members' income
0.065
0.018
0.056
0.017
Log of total household income (GSS only)
0.215
0.029
Log of avg. household income in census tract
-0.167
0.085
-0.161
0.085
-0.179
0.042
Satisfaction with health (GSS only)
0.203
0.015
Satisfaction with the way other time spent(GSS only)
0.204
0.010
Satisfaction with financial situation, with income effect subtracted(GSS only)
0.161
0.010
Job: Makes own decision (ESC only)
-0.156
0.115
Job: Requires skill(ESC only)
0.340
0.120
Job: Have enough time(ESC only)
0.210
0.094
Job: Free of conflicting demands(ESC only)
0.139
0.091
Job: Has variety of tasks(ESC only)
0.377
0.131
0.619
0.121
Job: Trust in management(ESC), or Trust in co-wo
Self-perceived health status, scaled 1 to 5
0.266
0.036
0.253
0.036
0.037
0.021
Gender: Male
-0.126
0.054
-0.110
0.054
-0.099
0.025
Age Group: 25~34
-0.291
0.104
-0.261
0.104
-0.172
0.059
Age Group: 35~44
-0.157
0.108
-0.096
0.109
-0.270
0.060
Age Group: 45~54
-0.197
0.113
-0.166
0.113
-0.298
0.063
Age Group: 55~64
0.081
0.148
0.082
0.149
-0.265
0.069
Age Group: 65 up
0.013
0.295
-0.059
0.293
-0.066
0.154
Marital Status: Married
0.264
0.084
0.272
0.084
0.319
0.037
Marital Status: As Married
0.345
0.103
0.384
0.103
0.214
0.044
Marital Status: Divorced
-0.092
0.167
-0.091
0.168
-0.119
0.071
Marital Status: Separated
-0.216
0.156
-0.267
0.152
-0.052
0.053
Marital Status: Widowed
-0.440
0.356
-0.444
0.361
-0.218
0.110
Education: High school
-0.044
0.117
-0.033
0.117
-0.180
0.059
Education: Between
-0.044
0.107
-0.022
0.106
-0.152
0.052
Education: University Degree
-0.043
0.111
-0.020
0.110
-0.229
0.057
Contacts with family member outside household
0.098
0.096
0.079
0.096
0.169
0.044
Contacts with friends
0.206
0.107
0.212
0.106
0.009
0.056

25

Contacts with neighbours
0.001
0.094
-0.013
0.093
-0.036
0.046
Number of membership or extent of activity
-0.012
0.016
-0.013
0.017
-0.012
0.033
Trust in general
0.070
0.062
0.057
0.062
-0.073
0.030
Trust in neighbours
0.167
0.084
0.179
0.083
0.071
0.017
Trust in police / Confidence in police
0.254
0.113
0.298
0.110
0.237
0.063
Importance of religion
0.147
0.110
0.132
0.109
0.097
0.048
Frequency of attending religious services
0.002
0.117
-0.024
0.116
-0.061
0.054
Immigrant(GSS only)
-0.020
0.040
Ethnic: Aboriginal(GSS only)
0.132
0.094
Ethnic: Chinese(GSS only)
-0.092
0.080
Ethnic: South Asia(GSS only)
-0.205
0.103
Ethnic: Others non-major European countries (GSS only)
0.014
0.041
Living in non-tracted area(GSS only)
-0.022
0.032
/cut1
0.971
0.971
0.883
0.968
0.012
0.526
/cut2
1.096
0.973
1.009
0.969
0.541
0.505
/cut3
1.224
0.976
1.136
0.971
1.036
0.500
/cut4
1.434
0.973
1.344
0.968
1.364
0.500
/cut5
1.945
0.977
1.842
0.970
2.303
0.499
/cut6
2.265
0.977
2.162
0.971
2.883
0.501
/cut7
2.949
0.979
2.843
0.972
3.933
0.504
/cut8
3.866
0.983
3.754
0.975
5.209
0.507
/cut9
4.481
0.984
4.370
0.977
6.135
0.510
* All satisfaction variables are in the scale of 1~10, health is in a 5 point scale. Mastery, job characteristics, family, friends, neighbours,
trust and religious measures are recorded to be within the scale of 0~1, with 0 being the lowest possible answer, and 1 being the highest.

26

Table 2: Before the final GSS equation in Table 1
The difference between the two columns is the addition of mastery scale in the second column
When the domain satisfaction variables are then added, we get the final GSS equation shown in Table 1
D.V: Life satisfaction
#obs = 9949
F(33,3536) = 59.24
Coef.
Mastery scale, with income effect subtracted
Job satisfaction, with income effect subtracted
Log of total household income
Log of avg. household income in census tract
Self-perceived health status, scaled 1 to 5
Gender: Male
Age Group: 25~34
Age Group: 35~44
Age Group: 45~54
Age Group: 55~64
Age Group: 65 up
Marital Status: Married
Marital Status: As Married
Marital Status: Divorced
Marital Status: Separated
Marital Status: Widowed
Education: High school
Education: Between
Education: University Degree
Contacts with family member outside household
Contacts with friends
Contacts with neighbours
Number of membership or extent of activity
Trust in general
Trust in neighbours
Trust in police / Confidence in police
Importance of religion
Frequency of attending religious services
Immigrant

0.241
0.142
-0.168
0.322
-0.055
-0.221
-0.370
-0.427
-0.349
-0.167
0.273
0.156
-0.234
-0.069
-0.169
-0.207
-0.185
-0.259
0.211
0.131
-0.002
0.043
-0.024
0.126
0.308
0.105
-0.090
-0.035

GSS Sample
of obs = 9949
F(34,3535) = 60.46
Std. Err.
Coef. Std. Err.
1.204
0.101
0.009
0.233
0.009
0.029
0.167
0.030
0.040
-0.164
0.040
0.016
0.302
0.016
0.025
-0.055
0.025
0.057
-0.210
0.057
0.057
-0.348
0.058
0.061
-0.379
0.062
0.066
-0.299
0.067
0.151
-0.106
0.152
0.035
0.283
0.035
0.042
0.157
0.042
0.065
-0.245
0.065
0.051
-0.092
0.051
0.109
-0.175
0.109
0.057
-0.215
0.057
0.050
-0.225
0.050
0.055
-0.316
0.055
0.043
0.214
0.043
0.053
0.121
0.053
0.046
-0.006
0.046
0.032
0.006
0.032
0.029
-0.067
0.030
0.017
0.120
0.017
0.060
0.285
0.061
0.048
0.119
0.048
0.053
-0.078
0.054
0.038
-0.008
0.038

27

Ethnic: Aboriginal
Ethnic: Chinese
Ethnic: South Asia
Ethnic: Others non-major European countries
Living in non-tracted area
/cut1
/cut2
/cut3
/cut4
/cut5
/cut6
/cut7
/cut8
/cut9

0.145
-0.090
-0.185
-0.016
0.000
-1.284
-0.853
-0.488
-0.244
0.491
0.960
1.840
2.931
3.736

0.084
0.082
0.109
0.041
0.031
0.505
0.491
0.487
0.487
0.487
0.488
0.491
0.494
0.496

28

0.126
-0.030
-0.128
-0.003
0.009
-1.208
-0.763
-0.386
-0.136
0.617
1.094
1.988
3.093
3.904

0.084
0.082
0.111
0.041
0.031
0.505
0.490
0.485
0.486
0.486
0.488
0.490
0.493
0.495

Table 3: Job Satisfaction Equations of ESC and GSS with and without mastery scale
Survey Ordered Probit
ESC Sample
D.V. Job satisfaction
Number of obs=2032
F( 18, 937)=45.62
Coef. Std. Err.
Mastery scale, with income effect subtracted (GSS only)
Log of personal income
0.187
0.042
Log of other family members' income
0.016
0.015
Job: Makes own decision (ESC only)
0.190
0.087
Job: Requires skill(ESC only)
0.307
0.105
Job: Have enough time(ESC only)
0.425
0.087
Job: Free of conflicting demands(ESC only)
0.299
0.082
Job: Has variety of tasks(ESC only)
0.222
0.113
Job: Trust in management(ESC), or Trust in co-workers(GSS)
3.491
0.150
Self-perceived health status, scaled 1 to 5
0.062
0.032
Gender: Male
-0.151
0.049
Age Group: 25~34
-0.165
0.105
Age Group: 35~44
-0.289
0.101
Age Group: 45~54
-0.139
0.106
Age Group: 55~64
0.069
0.137
Age Group: 65 up
-0.019
0.276
Education: High school
-0.111
0.105
Education: Between
-0.153
0.094
Education: University Degree
-0.251
0.093
/cut1
1.808
0.443
/cut2
2.289
0.444
/cut3
2.746
0.441
/cut4
3.225
0.435
/cut5
3.817
0.441
/cut6
4.291
0.442
/cut7
5.146
0.444
/cut8
6.258
0.452
/cut9
6.897
0.454

29

GSS Sample
obs# 11085;
obs# 11085;
F( 13, 3792)=66.74
F( 12,3793)=64.15
Coef. Std. Err.
Coef.
Std. Err.
0.829
0.090
0.102
0.021
0.077
0.021

1.017
-0.036
0.237
-0.039
-0.089
-0.080
0.026
0.325
-0.273
-0.322
-0.340
-0.002
0.251
0.496
0.694
1.165
1.503
2.098
2.881
3.454

0.056
0.025
0.014
0.052
0.052
0.055
0.058
0.119
0.051
0.041
0.045
0.207
0.205
0.206
0.206
0.206
0.207
0.207
0.208
0.210

0.949
-0.029
0.216
-0.015
-0.055
-0.030
0.084
0.391
-0.281
-0.354
-0.382
0.172
0.427
0.674
0.874
1.350
1.690
2.289
3.077
3.653

0.057
0.025
0.014
0.052
0.052
0.055
0.059
0.119
0.051
0.041
0.045
0.205
0.203
0.204
0.204
0.204
0.205
0.205
0.206
0.208

Table 4: Estimated Compensating Differentials and their Standard Errors
Panel a: Compensating differentials for non-financial job satisfaction, ESC and GSS

ESC, from column 2 of Table 1

GSS, from column 3 of Table 1

Ratio
Non financial job satisfaction
Log of personal income
Ratio
Non financial job satisfaction
Log of household income

Estimate
0.681
0.156
0.229
0.711
0.152
0.215

Std Error of the ratio % income equivalence
of a one-unit increase,
Using the Using the out of a ten-point scale,
Delta
Bootstrap in non-financial jobsatis
Std error Method
Method
Estimate
Std error
0.162
97.6%
23.2%
0.022
0.044
0.104
0.097
103.5%
15.1%
0.009
0.029

Estimate
-0.778
-0.156
0.200
1.701
0.340
0.200
1.048
0.210
0.200
0.697
0.139
0.200
1.884
0.377
0.200
3.093
0.619
0.200

Std Error of the ratio
Using the Using the
Delta
Bootstrap
Std error Method
Method
0.578
0.115
0.047
0.797
0.120
0.047
0.517
0.094
0.047
0.492
0.492
0.091
0.047
0.823
0.131
0.047
0.889
0.121
0.047

Panel b: Compensating differentials for specific job characteristics; ESC only

ESC, from column 1 of Table 1

ESC, from column 1 of Table 1

ESC, from column 1 of Table 1

ESC, from column 1 of Table 1

ESC, from column 1 of Table 1

ESC, from column 1 of Table 1

Ratio
Job: Makes own decision (ESC
Log of personal income
Ratio
Job: Requires skill(ESC only)
Log of personal income
Ratio
Job: Have enough time(ESC on
Log of personal income
Ratio
Job: Free of conflicting demand
Log of personal income
Ratio
Job: Has variety of tasks(ESC o
Log of personal income
Ratio
Job: Trust in management(ESC
Log of personal income

30

% income equivalence
of a jump that equals
to 1/10 of the bottom-to-top difference
Estimate
Std error
statistically insignificant

18.5%

8.7%

11.0%

5.4%

statistically insignificant

20.7%

9.1%

36.2%

10.4%

Table 5: Compensating Differentials for Workplace Trust; GSS, EDS, and ESC

Estimate
GSS
step1, with minimum control

Std Error of the ratio Income equivalence of
a jump from 75% to top
of the distribution*
Std Error Delta
Bootstrap Estimate
Std error

Ratio
4.259
0.841
0.804
Trust in co-workers
0.653
0.065
Log of household income
0.153
0.027
step2, controling for mastery scale
Ratio
3.678
0.746
0.742
Trust in co-workers
0.596
0.066
Log of household income
0.162
0.029
step3, controling satisfaction in other domains Ratio
1.754
0.381
0.370
as well as mastery scale. Also seen
Trust in co-workers
0.380
0.070
in column 3 of Table 1
Log of household income
0.216
0.029
EDS
Ratio
6.546
1.208
1.263
with minimum control
Trust in co-workers
0.811
0.064
Log of household income
0.124
0.022
ESC
Ratio
3.093
0.841
0.619
0.120
from the prefered equation
Job: Trust in management(ESC
Also seen in column 1 of Table 1
Log of personal income
0.200
0.046
* In the scale of 0 to 1, the changes are best approximated by an increase of 0.225 in GSS, 0.212 in EDS, and 0.22 in ESC

31

160.7%

31.7%

128.8%

26.1%

48.4%

10.5%

300.6%

55.5%

97.5%

26.5%

Table 6: Comparing Direct and Indirect Effects of Job Characteristics; ESC
Direct and indirect effects
Indirect effect
Supplementary direct
from reduced form
mediated through
effect in equation that
regressions*
job satisfaction**
including job satisfaction***
Job: Makes own decision
-0.156
0.044
-0.176
Job: Requires skill
0.340
0.061
0.312
Job: Have enough time
0.210
0.070
0.161
Job: Free of conflicting demands
0.139
0.049
0.107
Job: Has variety of tasks
0.377
0.015
0.352
Job: Trust in management
0.619
0.742
0.022
* From column 1 of Table 1
** Essentially these are products of job attributes' coefficients in job satisfation equation and J.S.'s coefficient in life satisfaction equation
***The regression is not shown here due to space limit, but it is available upon request

Table 7: Redo Table 1's GSS regression, excluding respondents whose answer to satisfaction questions has little variation
Full Sample
Variation*>2
Variation*>3
Job satisfaction, with income effect subtracted
0.152 [0.009]
0.128 [0.009]
0.124 [0.009]
Log of total household income
0.215 [0.029]
0.188 [0.032]
0.185 [0.033]
sample size
9949
7721
6871
Variation*>4
VarCoef**>0.1
VarCoef>0.15
Job satisfaction, with income effect subtracted
0.107 [0.009]
0.135 [0.009]
0.097 [0.010]
Log of total household income
0.175 [0.033]
0.184 [0.031]
0.168 [0.039]
sample size
5613
6482
4202
* Variation = Variation of Lsatis and the four domain satisfactions
** VarCoef =Standard deviation of the five satisfaction measures / Average of the five measures

32

Sum of
2nd and 3rd
column
-0.131
0.373
0.230
0.156
0.367
0.764

Appendix Tables
A-1: First Stage Regression of Job satisfaction in ESC and GSS, Survey Linear Regression
(Survey Linear Regression)
ESC Sample
GSS Sample
D.V: Job satisfaction
Number of obs=1739
Number of obs=9949
R-squared=0.5122
F( 37, 3532)=51.57
Coef.
Std. Err.
Coef. Std. Err.
Mastery scale, with income effect subtracted (GSS only)
0.995
0.157
Log of personal income
0.287
0.058
0.187
0.035
Log of other family members' income
0.034
0.022
Log of avg. household income in census tract
-0.192
0.103
0.016
0.067
Satisfaction with health (GSS only)
0.304
0.021
Satisfaction with the way other time spent(GSS only)
0.047
0.013
Satisfaction with financial situation, with income effect subtracted(GSS only)
0.217
0.014
Job: Makes own decision (ESC only)
0.284
0.136
Job: Requires skill(ESC only)
0.393
0.148
Job: Have enough time(ESC only)
0.449
0.125
Job: Free of conflicting demands(ESC only)
0.317
0.114
Job: Has variety of tasks(ESC only)
0.096
0.166
4.761
0.172
1.435
0.119
Job: Trust in management(ESC), or Trust in co-wo
Self-perceived health status, scaled 1 to 5
0.035
0.043
-0.080
0.030
Gender: Male
-0.155
0.068
-0.074
0.042
Age Group: 25~34
-0.213
0.144
0.005
0.093
Age Group: 35~44
-0.343
0.152
-0.065
0.095
Age Group: 45~54
-0.179
0.157
-0.016
0.099
Age Group: 55~64
0.024
0.181
0.093
0.105
Age Group: 65 up
0.189
0.356
0.335
0.180
Marital Status: Married
-0.025
0.106
0.074
0.053
Marital Status: As Married
-0.179
0.141
0.185
0.068
Marital Status: Divorced
-0.045
0.176
0.043
0.116
Marital Status: Separated
-0.057
0.184
0.031
0.087
Marital Status: Widowed
-0.316
0.463
0.083
0.163
Education: High school
-0.205
0.137
-0.224
0.083
Education: Between
-0.177
0.133
-0.255
0.069
Education: University Degree
-0.295
0.131
-0.237
0.075
Contacts with family member outside household
0.083
0.116
0.011
0.068
Contacts with friends
0.414
0.137
0.277
0.084

33

Contacts with neighbours
0.098
Number of membership or extent of activity
0.016
Trust in general
0.029
Trust in neighbours
0.008
Trust in police / Confidence in police
-0.163
Importance of religion
0.247
Frequency of attending religious services
-0.087
Immigrant(GSS only)
Ethnic: Aboriginal(GSS only)
Ethnic: Chinese(GSS only)
Ethnic: South Asia(GSS only)
Ethnic: Others non-major European countries (GSS only)
Living in non-tracted area(GSS only)
Constant
1.956

0.123
0.021
0.074
0.110
0.141
0.132
0.128

1.125

34

0.140
-0.119
-0.092
-0.062
0.224
0.183
0.066
0.136
0.181
-0.258
-0.257
-0.013
-0.021
1.668

0.069
0.050
0.044
0.027
0.093
0.073
0.075
0.062
0.120
0.119
0.152
0.060
0.048
0.757

A-2: Regressing Personal Income on workplace variables, ESC and GSS
Survey Linear Regression
ESC
# of obs
2520
F(16, 1100)=73.94
R-squared
0.317
Coef.
Std. Err.
Job: Makes own decision (ESC only)
0.283
0.051
Job: Requires skill(ESC only)
0.499
0.055
Job: Have enough time(ESC only)
-0.115
0.042
Job: Free of conflicting demands(ESC only)
-0.087
0.045
Job: Has variety of tasks(ESC only)
0.169
0.064
Job: Trust in management(ESC), or Trust in
-0.266
0.058
Gender: Male
0.367
0.024
Self-perceived health status, scaled 1 to 5
0.050
0.018
Age Group: 25~34
0.360
0.052
Age Group: 35~44
0.526
0.048
Age Group: 45~54
0.619
0.047
Age Group: 55~64
0.659
0.061
Age Group: 65 up
0.537
0.102
Education: High school
0.132
0.045
Education: Between
0.190
0.040
Education: University Degree
0.470
0.042
_cons
8.884
0.112

D.V. Log of Income

GSS
Number of o 11427
F( 11, 383 237.500
R-squared
0.285
lninc_p
Std. Err.

0.022
0.403
0.063
0.538
0.742
0.789
0.733
0.753
0.173
0.301
0.644
9.038

0.029
0.014
0.008
0.034
0.035
0.035
0.038
0.079
0.030
0.025
0.028
0.050

A-3: Correlation Tables
a. ESC
Life
Log of
Log of
Log of
Job
Job:
satisfaction personal household
Avg. CT Satisfaction
Make
income
income
Income
decision
Life satisfaction
1.00
0.11
1.00
Log of personal incom
Log of household inco
0.19
0.58
1.00
0.04
0.18
0.26
1.00
Log of Average Censu
Job Satisfaction
0.10
0.35
0.27
0.03
1.00
0.06
0.44
0.35
0.12
0.74
1.00
Job: Makes own decis
Job: Requires skill(ES
0.08
0.48
0.36
0.11
0.74
0.84
Job: Have enough tim
0.06
0.25
0.20
0.06
0.69
0.64
0.08
0.22
0.17
0.02
0.62
0.56
Job: Free of conflicting
Job: Has variety of tas
0.07
0.44
0.33
0.10
0.77
0.84
0.10
0.32
0.25
0.07
0.84
0.75
Job: Trust in managem
Job: free frJob: have v Trust in Management
Job: free from conflicting demand
1.00
Job: have variety
0.59
1.00
Trust in Management
0.65
0.77
1.00
b. GSS
Life satisfaction
Job Satisfaction
Mastery Scale
Log of personal income
Trust in co-workers

Job:
Job:
requires have time
skill

1.00
0.61
0.56
0.86
0.72

Life satis. Job Satis. Mastery
Log of persoTrust in co-workers
1.00
0.43
1.00
0.24
0.14
1.00
0.05
0.08
0.16
1.00
0.21
0.25
0.15
0.06
1.00

35

1.00
0.71
0.68
0.71

A-4: Distributions
Distribution of reported life satisfaction, GSS
Job
Satisfaction
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Distribution of reported life satisfaction,
ESC
Job Satisfaction
% distribution

% distribution
0.68
0.52
0.83
1.14
5.72
5.78
17.54
31.56
19.27
16.95

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Distribution of reported job satisfaction, GSS
Job Satisfaction
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

0.8
0.44
0.51
1.38
4.63
5.14
18.22
31.78
17.71
19.39

Distribution of reported job
satisfaction, ESC
Job Satisfaction
% distribution

% distribution
1.33
1
1.62
1.93
7.44
7.6
18.49
28.39
16
16.2

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Distribution of reported trust in colleagues
GSS
trust in
% distribution
colleagues
0
3.69
0.25
5.96
0.5
24.91
0.75
37.7
1
27.73
EDS
trust in
% distribution
colleagues
0
2.21
0.25
5.21
0.5
24.76
0.75
38.46
1
29.39

1.31
1.06
2.26
3.46
7.4
9.26
22.16
29.05
11.66
12.39

Distribution of reported trust in
management, ESC
trust in
% distribution
management
0
3.02
0.11
2.29
0.22
4.54
0.33
5.74
0.44
9.99
0.56
10.94
0.67
17.91
0.78
20.71
0.89
12.32
1
12.54

36

Distribution of other job characteristics in ESC
a)..job requires a high level of skill

b)..job has a variety of tasks

j_skill |
Freq. Percent
Cum.
------------+----------------------------------0|
108
3.45
3.45
.33 |
298
9.51
12.96
.67 |
1,100
35.12
48.08
1|
1,626
51.92
100.00
------------+----------------------------------Total |
3,132
100.00

j_varie |
Freq. Percent
Cum.
------------+----------------------------------0|
66
2.11
2.11
.33 |
170
5.43
7.54
.67 |
796
25.42
32.95
1|
2,100
67.05
100.00
------------+----------------------------------Total |
3,132
100.00

c)..job is free from conflicting demands

d)..You have enough time to get the job done

j_free |
Freq. Percent
Cum.
------------+----------------------------------0|
540
17.26
17.26
.33 |
963
30.78
48.03
.67 |
1,002
32.02
80.06
1|
624
19.94
100.00
------------+----------------------------------Total |
3,129
100.00

j_time |
Freq. Percent
Cum.
------------+----------------------------------0|
299
9.55
9.55
.33 |
514
16.41
25.96
.67 |
1,193
38.09
64.05
1|
1,126
35.95
100.00
------------+----------------------------------Total |
3,132
100.00

e)..job allows you to make a lot of decisions on your own
j_owndec |
Freq. Percent
Cum.
------------+----------------------------------0|
148
4.73
4.73
.33 |
306
9.77
14.50
.67 |
938
29.95
44.44
1|
1,740
55.56
100.00
------------+----------------------------------Total |
3,132
100.00

37

A-5: Exact Wording in the Survey
Vairble Name

Scale

Variable Names in raw data

ESC2
Life Saisfaction
lsatis
1~10
lifesat1
Now a question about life satisfaction. On a scale of 1-10 where ONE means
dissatisfied and TEN means satisfied, all things considered how satisfied are
you with your life as a whole these days?
Job Satisfaction
jobsat_1

1~10

jobsat_1

On a scale of 1 to 10, where 1 means very poor and 10 means very good, on
average, how would you rate job satisfaction for workers at your workplace?
Workplace Trust
emp_tr
zero to one
jobsat_3
Using the same scale, how would you rate the level of trust that workers have
in management at your workplace?
Job Characteristics
j_owndec
zero to one
jobdes_6
Your job allows you to make a lot of decisions on your own. Do you strongly
agree, somewhat agree, somewhat disagree or strongly disagree?
j_skill
zero to one
jobdes_7
Your job requires a high level of skill. Do you strongly agree, somewhat agree,
somewhat disagree or strongly disagree?
j_varie
zero to one
jobdes_8
Your job has a variety of tasks. Do you strongly agree, somewhat agree,
somewhat disagree or strongly disagree?
j_time
zero to one
jobdes_9
You have enough time to get the job done. Do you strongly agree, somewhat
agree, somewhat disagree or strongly disagree?
j_free
zero to one
jobdes10
Your job is free from conflicting demands. Do you strongly agree, somewhat
agree, somewhat disagree or strongly disagree?

GSS
Life Satisfaction
Lsatis
1~10
Please rate your feelings about them, using a scale of 1 to 10 where 1 means
“Very dissatisfied” and 10 means “Very satisfied”. What about:
...your life as a whole right now?
Job Satisfaction
jobsatis
1~10
Please rate your feelings about them, using a scale of 1 to 10 where 1 means
“Very dissatisfied” and 10 means “Very satisfied”. What about
...your job or your main activity?
Other Domains of Satisfaction
Please rate your feelings about them, using a scale of 1 to 10 where 1 means
“Very dissatisfied” and 10 means “Very satisfied”. What about:

38

satis_h
…your health?
satis_ot
…the way you spend your other time?
satis_fn
…your finances?
Workplace Trust
tr_col
zero to one
Using a scale of 1 to 5 where 1 means ‘Cannot be trusted at all’ and 5 means
‘Can be trusted a lot’, how much do you trust
people you work with or go to school with?
Mastery Scale
mastery
zero to one
Please tell me if you strongly agree, agree, neither agree nor disagree,
disagree, or strongly disagree that:
…you have little control over the things that happen to you.
…there is really no way you can solve some of the problems you have.
…there is little you can do to change many of the important things in your life.
…you often feel helpless in dealing with problems of life
…sometimes you feel that you are being pushed around in life .
…what happens to you in the future mostly depends on you.
…you can do just about anything you really set your mind to.

EDS
Life Satisfaction
Lsatis

Ts_Q010

All things considered, how satisfied are you with your life as a whole these
days? 1 measures not satisfied at all and 5 means very satisfied
Workplace Trust
tr_col
Ts_Q050
Using a scale of 1 to 5 where 1 means cannot be trusted at all and 5 means
can be trusted alot, how much do you trust each of the following group of
people:
...People that you work with or go to school with

39

