NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SECURITIZATION AND THE DECLINING IMPACT
OF BANK FINANCE ON LOAN SUPPLY:
EVIDENCE FROM MORTGAGE ACCEPTANCE RATES
Elena Loutskina
Philip E. Strahan
Working Paper 11983
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11983
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2006

We thank Scott Frame, Jeff Pontiff, Toby Moskowitz, Amir Sufi, and Andrei Zmatchenok for helpful
comments on the paper, as well as seminar participants at the Financial Research Association Conference,
the Federal Reserve Banks of New York and San Francisco, RPI, the University of Connecticut, and the
University of Chicago. The authors also thank the Fondation Banque de France for financial support. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Elena Loutskina and Philip E. Strahan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Securitization and the Declining Impact of Bank Finance on Loan Supply: Evidence from
Mortgage Acceptance Rates
Elena Loutskina and Philip E. Strahan
NBER Working Paper No. 11983
January 2006
JEL No. G2
ABSTRACT
This paper shows that securitization reduces the influence of bank financial condition on loan supply.
Low-cost funding and increased balance-sheet liquidity raise bank willingness to approve mortgages
that are hard to sell (jumbo mortgages), while having no effect on their willingness to approve
mortgages easy to sell (non-jumbos). Thus, the increasing depth of the mortgage secondary market
fostered by securitization has reduced the impact of local funding shocks on credit supply. By
extension, securitization has weakened the link from bank funding conditions to credit supply in
aggregate, thereby mitigating the real effects of monetary policy.
Elena Loutskina
Boston College
loutskin@bc.edu
Philip E. Strahan
Carroll School of Management
324B Fulton Hall
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
strahan@bc.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
Liquidity transformation – funding illiquid loans with liquid deposits – has been viewed
as a fundamental role for banks. Diamond and Dybvig (1983) argue that banks improve welfare
by allowing depositors to diversify liquidity risk while investing in high-return, illiquid projects.
Securitization has changed the way banks provide liquidity. Today, while real projects remain
illiquid, loans have become more liquid because banks often securitize them, thereby replacing
deposits with bonds as the primary source of finance. Securitization has grown fastest in
mortgage markets because the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs, i.e. Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac) enhance mortgage-loan liquidity.1 By regulation, however, the GSEs only buy
mortgages below a given size threshold (the jumbo-loan cutoff). Mortgages below this threshold
are more liquid than those above the threshold. This paper shows that bank financial condition,
while continuing to affect bank acceptance rates on illiquid loans (jumbos), has no effect on
acceptance rates on liquid loans (non-jumbos). Thus, securitization has reduced the impact of
bank financial condition on credit supply.
We study mortgages because their liquidity falls sharply around the jumbo-loan cutoff.
Such a discrete and exogenous drop in liquidity is difficult to find elsewhere.2 To exploit this
special feature of the U.S. mortgage market, we first regress the difference in acceptance rates
for non-jumbo and jumbo mortgages on bank financial variables and other controls. By
comparing relative acceptance rates in our regressions, we ‘difference out’ unobservable but
potentially confounding demand-side factors. The results suggest that this acceptance-rate
difference widens at financially constrained banks.

1

We further show that while acceptance rates depend on financial condition for jumbo
mortgages, acceptance rates for non-jumbos do not vary with the originating bank’s financial
position because these loans can be easily sold. Thus, loan liquidity seems to eliminate the link
from a bank’s financial condition to its willingness to supply credit. Mortgage liquidity has
increased rapidly over the past 30 years, in part through GSE subsidies. Private-sector financial
institutions, however, have also increased loan liquidity in other sectors by securitizing consumer
and business loans. Our results therefore extend into these other markets as well.
Figure 1 illustrates our main findings. Panel A compares the aggregate probability of
accepting mortgages originated by banks in the top quartile of the funding-cost distribution with
those in the bottom quartile of this distribution, where funding costs equal the ratio of a bank’s
total interest expenses on deposits to total deposits. The figure suggests that banks with high
funding costs are reluctant to approve jumbo mortgages, relative to competing banks with low
funding costs. On average, the acceptance rate for jumbo mortgages rises from 88.4 percent for
high-cost banks to 91.1 percent for low-cost banks. In contrast, the acceptance rate for nonjumbo mortgages barely reflects the originating bank’s funding costs at all.3 This difference
makes sense because banks usually fund accepted jumbo mortgages with deposits. In contrast,
banks have the option to sell non-jumbo mortgages to the GSEs, thus avoiding the need to
finance them. Panel B reports a similar set of results but focuses on balance-sheet liquidity,
defined as the ratio of marketable securities and federal funds sold to assets. Like funding costs,
bank liquidity seems to matter less for non-jumbo mortgages (because the bank holds the option
to sell the loan) than for jumbos (because the bank must hold the loan).
Funding costs and liquidity may also affect the characteristics of a bank’s flow of
mortgage applications. For example, loan-application size may be endogenous if funding-

2

constrained banks encourage some customers to reduce their borrowing below the jumbo-loan
cutoff, either by offering pricing incentives or by threatening to reject the loan. Panel C of
Figure 1 tests this idea using marginal loan applications, defined as those within 5 percent of the
jumbo-loan cutoff (i.e. between 95 percent and 105 percent of the cutoff). The flow of these
marginal applications is related both to bank cost of funds and liquidity. We find that banks with
high funding costs or low levels of liquidity receive a larger share of non-jumbo mortgage
applications, relative to other banks. Thus, banks better positioned to originate and hold illiquid
loans – banks with low cost of deposits and/or a large buffer of liquid assets – supply more of
these loans. These banks are more willing to approve jumbo loans, and they receive a greater
flow of jumbo-loan applications.
This paper contributes to several strands of research at the intersection of finance and
macroeconomics. First, the results suggest that propagation of local business cycles across
regions is less pronounced today than in the past, due in part to the developing depth of the
mortgage secondary markets. In contrast to the jumbo-loan market, we find no link between a
bank’s funding or liquidity and its propensity to supply non-jumbo mortgages. Hence, there is
no reason to expect that a reduction in local banking capacity will affect most mortgage
borrowers. This result matters quantitatively because more than 90 percent of mortgage
applications fall below the jumbo-loan cutoff, and because shocks to the local financial system
can potentially worsen business downturns.4 Integration of the banking system has reduced the
effect of these local shocks by allowing capital to flow more freely through the banking system
(Ashcraft (2003), Houston, James and Marcus (1997), Morgan, Rime and Strahan (2004),
Demyanyk, Ostergaard, and Sorensen (2005)). The growth of mortgage secondary markets is
one means by which the financial system has become better integrated over time. Other

3

dimensions of integration include expansion of bank branching, cross-state bank consolidation
and loan syndication.
Second, consistent with Estrella (2002) and Loutskina (2005), expansion of the secondary
market in mortgages has likely dampened the effects of monetary policy on real economic
activity. According to the ‘bank lending’ channel of monetary policy, central banks can slow
real activity by raising bank funding costs (e.g. the cost of deposits) and thereby constrain the
supply of credit. Our results suggest that there is no link between bank funding costs and credit
supplied to the non-jumbo mortgage market. Hence, the lending channel to borrowers in this
market has been mitigated by the growth of securitization.5 Together with studies on the
increasing size and geographical scope of banks, our results thus suggest that the overall potency
of monetary policy ought to be reduced relative to earlier times when banks were smaller, less
well integrated with other banks, and less able to sell their loans into secondary markets.6
Finally, our results shed more light on how non-financial firms’ cost of capital depends
on their bank’s financial condition.7 Most of the extant research has tested for effects of
monetary policy or bank solvency (capital) shocks on credit supply to bank-dependent firms.8
Our results indicate that securitization increases banks’ willingness to supply credit to all (even
illiquid) sectors, but that high costs of deposits or limited balance-sheet liquidity only affect the
supply of illiquid loans (jumbo mortgages here, although the result likely generalizes to other
illiquid lending such as small business credit). Like the earlier literature, we also find some
evidence that bank solvency affects credit supply -- better capitalized banks receive a larger flow
of jumbo applications than less capitalized ones. However, we find no direct link from bank
capital to mortgage acceptance rates.

4

II. THE SECONDARY MARKET FOR RESIDENTIAL MORTGAGES
A. The Growth of Securitization
Credit markets have been reshaped by the growth of trading in secondary markets. Banks
traditionally originated and held loans on their balance sheets, and thus credit availability
depended in part on the cost and availability of funds to banks. Over the past quarter century,
however, loan securitization has reshaped lending markets. Securitization typically involves
pooling the cash flows from a number of similar assets (e.g. mortgages or credit card accounts)
and selling the pool to a separate legal entity known as a special purpose vehicle (SPV). The
pooling process results in a diversified portfolio of cash flows, which are used to support
payments on debt securities issued by the SPV. Often, the cash flows come with some additional
implicit or explicit guarantees from the originating financial institution (or the originator retains
the residual or equity tranche in the SPV). Creating this separate SPV isolates the cash-flow
generating assets and/or collateral so that securities issued by the SPV are not a general claim
against the issuer, just against those assets. Cash flows from the original pool of loans can be
further stripped and repackaged based on various characteristics (e.g., the prepayment behavior
or payment priority) to enhance their liquidity.9
Table 1 illustrates the growing quantitative significance of loan securitization for
different types of loans over time. The Table presents the amount of loans outstanding and
securitized for six loan categories between 1976 and 2003. Consider, for example, home
mortgages: In 1976, the amount of securitized home mortgages was $28 billion; by the end of
2003 the total amount of securitized home mortgages had grown almost 150 times, reaching
$4.2 trillion. Over the same period, the amount of home mortgages outstanding grew almost 15

5

times, from $489 billion to $7.3 trillion. Mortgage securitization has grown 10 times as fast as
the market itself!
Securitization has also made inroads in the financing of other kinds of loans, albeit less
dramatically. In 1976 there was no securitization of commercial mortgages, business loans
(commercial and industrial, or C&I, loans) or consumer loans. By the end of 2003, $294 billion
of commercial mortgages were securitized, $104 billion worth of C&I loans were securitized,
along with $658 billion worth of consumer loans. Figure 2 illustrates these trends graphically.
To understand why securitization of mortgages has taken off so dramatically, one needs
to appreciate the role of The Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae) and the
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (Freddie Mac). These two so-called GovernmentSponsored Enterprises (GSEs) were created by the U.S. Congress to provide stability and
liquidity to the market for residential mortgages, and to promote access to mortgage credit and
home ownership. Together, they have played the dominant role in fostering the development of
the secondary market. Starting in the 1970s, the GSEs began to purchase mortgages from banks,
savings institutions and other mortgage originators. As shown by Frame and White (2005), the
GSEs have played an increasingly important part in mortgage markets since the early 1980s. For
example, by 1990 about 25 percent of the $2.9 trillion in outstanding mortgages were either
purchased and held or purchased and securitized by the two major GSEs. By 2003, this market
share had increased to 47 percent. In other words, today approximately half of all mortgages
outstanding were sold to the GSEs after origination (neither Fannie nor Freddie is permitted to
originate mortgages themselves).
The GSEs enhance mortgage liquidity either by buying and holding mortgages or by
securitizing them. When the GSEs buy mortgages, they bear both credit and interest rate risk.

6

When GSEs securitize mortgages, they either buy them and issue mortgage-backed securities
(MBS), or they just sell credit protection to the original lender. In the first case, the originating
bank retains no stake in the mortgage. In the second case, the bank continues to fund the
mortgage and bear the interest rate risk, but obtains the option to sell it off as an MBS. In all
cases, the GSEs enhance liquidity.10
Most important, the GSE charters limit the size of mortgages that they may purchase or
securitize. For example, in 2005 the GSEs could only purchase ‘non-jumbo’ mortgages, those
below $359,650.11 This cutoff is set annually based on a housing price index. Thus, there is a
discrete drop in mortgage liquidity around the jumbo-loan cutoff that is exogenous to financial
intermediary decisions.
B. Mortgage Market Segmentation
The GSE charter limitation conveniently splits the market into a liquid segment (nonjumbo mortgages) and an illiquid segment (jumbo mortgages). How do we know that liquidity
really falls at the cutoff? Perhaps the private sector steps in and seamlessly facilitates mortgage
securitization in the jumbo market. First, in contrast to jumbos, most non-jumbo mortgages can
be sold by the original lender. Second, the GSEs are the only financial institution that will buy
individual mortgage loans. Thus, securitization of non-jumbos would be especially costly for
small banks without the GSEs. Third, mortgage-backed securities issued by GSEs come with
required capital only one-fourth as large as required capital for similar securities (such as jumbomortgage securitizations) issued by private financial institutions under the Basel Capital Accord.
Fourth, there is a sharp increase in the frequency of mortgage applications just below the jumboloan cutoff, suggesting that the GSE withdrawal from the jumbo market increases the cost of
borrowing. And, more directly, the pricing of mortgages changes around the jumbo-loan cutoff.

7

Yields on non-jumbo loans are on the order of 20 basis points lower than the yields on jumbos
(e.g. Mckenzie (2002) provides a survey of this literature). If liquidity fell gradually with
mortgage size, yields would rise smoothly with size. Instead, yields jump discretely around the
jumbo-loan cutoff. Moreover, this yield differential has been relatively stable over time (Figure
3).12
The jumbo/non-jumbo spread would seem to offer a natural measure of the value of
liquidity from the GSEs. Passmore, Sherlund and Burgess (2005) present a model in which this
spread rises with bank funding costs, and they use aggregate data to show that this spread
increases as the availability of core deposits declines. There are no empirical studies testing how
the jumbo/non-jumbo spread varies across lenders because pricing information by lender is not
available. Our approach differs from the extant studies of pricing. We focus on the quantity side
of the market, where loan applications can be linked to the originating bank, and test how
approval rates vary across banks.
We test whether a lender’s willingness to approve a jumbo mortgage is affected by its
financing conditions. Funding costs should not affect a bank’s willingness to make a non-jumbo
loan – the loan can be sold to one of the GSEs. Funding costs, however, should affect a bank’s
willingness to approve jumbo mortgages, since the bank has to hold and hence fund these loans.
Similarly, banks with relatively low holdings of liquid assets may be reluctant to approve illiquid
jumbo loans because they are difficult to sell, while liquidity concerns should not affect approval
rates for non-jumbo mortgages that banks can choose either to sell or to hold. Our main tests
focus on the willingness of banks to approve jumbo mortgages, relative to non-jumbo mortgages,
as a function of the bank’s funding costs and balance-sheet liquidity.

8

III. DATA & SAMPLE SELECTION
A. Sample of Mortgage Applications
To build our dataset, we start with a comprehensive sample of mortgage applications and
originations that have been collected by the Federal Reserve since 1992 under provisions of the
Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA). The sample covers loan applications from 1992 to
2003. HMDA was passed into law by Congress in 1975 and expanded in 1988, with the purpose
of informing the public (and the regulators) about whether or not financial institutions adequately
serve local credit needs. In addition, regulators use the HMDA data to help identify
discriminatory lending. These data are collected by the Federal Reserve under Regulation C, and
all regulated financial institutions (e.g. commercial banks, savings institutions, credit unions, and
mortgage companies) with assets above $30 million must report.
The HMDA data include information on the year of the application (although we know
nothing about exactly when during a given year a loan application was made), the dollar amount
of the loan, and whether or not the loan was accepted. The dataset also has information on the
identity of the lender, which we use to measure the funding and liquidity variables described
below. To control for loan risk, we can observe the location of the property, the sex and race of
the applicant, and the level of the applicant’s income as well as the income-to-loan-size ratio. To
control for economic conditions near the property, we know whether or not the property is
located within an urban Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA), the share of the population that is
minority in the property’s Census Tract, and the median income in that Census Tract. We will
control for all of these factors in our models to absorb variation in the risk characteristics of loan
applicants. There is unfortunately no information on the market value of the property in the
HMDA data.

9

Figure 4 plots a histogram of the frequency distribution of mortgage applications from
HMDA data over the 1992-2003 period (on the order of 106 million loan applications), as a
function of the ratio of loan size to the jumbo-loan cutoff (Panel A).13 The figure shows first that
most mortgage applications come in below the cutoff value (i.e. most mortgages can be sold
easily into the secondary market). Also, we see a sharp spike in the frequency of loan
applications just below the cutoff. This spike suggests that the applicant pool itself is
endogenously determined, at least in part, by financial conditions. That is, we know that interest
rates are higher for jumbo loans, thus some applicants with loan demand “near” the jumbo-loan
cutoff may borrow less than they otherwise would to take advantage of the lower rate.
Panel B of Figure 4 reports the average acceptance rate for mortgages, again as a function
of the ratio of the loan amount to the jumbo-loan cutoff. As in Panel A, we see a sharp upward
spike in the acceptance rate for loans just below the cutoff. The high acceptance rate just below
the cutoff suggests that some of the most creditworthy clients borrow less than the cutoff, either
to take advantage of lower rates or because the lender would not approve a jumbo loan for these
clients. (We address this loan-application size endogeneity in Sections V.B-V.D.) The figure
also shows that acceptance rates appear to fall off sharply for very small loans, and the
acceptance rate also falls off gradually as loan size increases beyond the jumbo-loan cutoff. The
very small loans may be riskier due to the low income and wealth of the applicants, while the
very large loans may be riskier due to unusually high demand for credit (Stiglitz and Weiss,
1982).
B. Bank Financial Variables
To understand how funding costs and liquidity affect the supply of mortgage credit, we
collect bank-level data by merging the HMDA loan application data to the Reports of Income

10

and Condition for commercial banks (the ‘Call Report’). We merge each application to the Call
Report from the fourth quarter of the year of the mortgage application using the HMDA bank
identification number with call report identification number (RSSD ID) for banks reporting to
Federal Reserve Bank, with FDIC certificate ID (item RSSD9050 in Call report) for banks
reporting to FDIC, and with OCC ID (item RSSD9055 in Call report) for banks reporting to
OCC. The unmatched institutions from HMDA dataset are then matched manually using a
bank’s name and the zip code of its location.
Using Call Report data, we focus our attention on the cost of deposits to the lender
(measured by the ratio of total interest expenses on deposits to total deposits), and on the lender’s
balance sheet liquidity (the ratio of cash plus securities to total assets). We also control for
lender size (log of total assets), leverage (the ratio of capital to assets) and profitability (net
income to total assets). Last, we supplement the traditional measure of balance sheet liquidity
with an additional measure of loan liquidity, defined following Loutskina (2005) as follows:
6
⎛ Share of Type j Loans ⎞
LoanLiquid ity it = ∑ ⎛⎜ Economy-wide Securitized Loans of Type j at Time t ⎞⎟ * ⎜
Economy-wide Total Loans Outstanding of Type j at Time t ⎠ ⎝ in Bank i Portfolio at Time t ⎟⎠
j =1 ⎝

The economy-wide data on securitization and loans outstanding come from the U.S. Flow
of Funds, while the bank-level data come from the Call Report. This index can be thought of as
a weighted average of the potential to securitize loans of a given type (based on economy-wide
averages – the first term in parentheses), where the weights reflect each bank’s individual loan
portfolio (the second term in parentheses). Thus, market trends generate time variation in the
index (recall Figure 2), whereas differences in bank loan portfolios generate variation across
institutions. To construct this measure, we break the loan portfolio into six categories: (i) home

11

mortgages; (ii) multifamily residential mortgages, (iii) commercial mortgages, (iv) consumer
credit, (v) business loans not secured by real estate (commercial and industrial loans), and (vi)
farm mortgages.
The raw HMDA data contain almost 250 million mortgage applications. Of these, we
first drop those originated by savings institutions, mortgage bankers, credit unions and other nonbank lenders, leaving about 120 million mortgage applications to financial institutions reporting
to FDIC, FRB, and OCC (mostly commercial banks). We then drop mortgages where borrowers
are subsidized by the Federal Housing Authority, the Veterans Administration or other
government programs, leaving us with about 106 million loan applications. Of these, we keep
loans for home purchase only, which reduces the sample to around 35 million (more than half of
the loan applications are for mortgage refinancing). We drop cases where a loan application was
incomplete or withdrawn – that is, we only keep loan applications where we can determine
whether or not the lender approved or denied the application. To be sure our sample is relatively
homogeneous (recall Figure 4 above), we keep only those loans between 50 percent and 250
percent of the jumbo-mortgage cutoff, which reduces the sample to about 8.6 million
applications. We then take this sample of loans and merge the observation to the Bank Call
Report. This merge leaves us with a final sample of 6,143,057 loan applications.
Since we are only using about three percent of all mortgage applications, one might
legitimately question the generality of the results. To address this concern, we report the
frequency distribution and acceptance rates for mortgages between 50 percent and 250 percent of
the jumbo-loan cutoff for both our sample, and for the full sample of applications in HMDA. As
shown in Figure 5, both the frequency and acceptance rates look very similar for the two
samples, suggesting that our data filters have not created a biased or unusual selection of

12

mortgage applications. For example, we see in both samples a similar large upward spike in the
number of applications and a jump in the acceptance rate just below the jumbo-loan cutoff. We
also see the same fall off in the acceptance rate as the size of the mortgages falls, and as
mortgage size increases beyond the cutoff.
Table 2 contains simple summary statistics for the mortgage application data that we use
in our regression sample, and for selected years between 1992 and 2003. We report the
acceptance rate, loan size, applicant income, and the share of loans made in urban areas (i.e. in
MSAs). Of the six million applications, about 91 percent are accepted. The average loan size is
$209 thousand, and the mean ratio of loan size to applicant income is 2.4. About 14 percent of
the loan applicants are to minority borrowers, and about 15 percent are to female borrowers. In
terms of neighborhood attributes, 92 percent of the loan applications are for properties located in
MSAs. The median census tract income (averaged across tracts) is $51 thousand per year.14
Table 2 also shows that most of these characteristics are quite stable over time, although the
jumbo-loan cutoff increases as housing prices have risen throughout the sample.
Table 3 reports summary statistics for the potential-lender (bank) characteristics included
in our sample (Panel A). We also report these characteristics for those banks that are excluded
from our tests, either because they did not appear in the HMDA dataset, or because we were
unable to match their identifier to HMDA (Panel B). The median bank in our sample holds
about $85 million in assets, and the median bank received 16 mortgage applications (15
accepted) in a typical year in the sample. This number of applications may appear small, but
note that the median bank is small, and that we only consider loans near the jumbo-loan cutoff.
In fact, 88 percent of loan applications are smaller than 50 percent of the jumbo-loan cutoff. The
median deposit cost, defined as interest expenses on deposits divided by total deposits, equals

13

about 3.3 percent, and the median bank held about 28 percent of its assets in either cash or other
marketable securities. Our measure of loan liquidity, which again takes account of both a bank’s
portfolio choices and the depth of the market for securitization in aggregate, was about 23
percent. This variable trends upward throughout our sample period as the securitization market
has expanded. In contrast, the banks excluded tend to be smaller, less focused on lending, and
less focused on mortgage lending in particular, although no less profitable. This is reasonable to
expect since the HMDA data cover mortgage lenders with total assets in excess of $30 million.

IV. EMPIRICAL STRATEGY
A. Identification
The fundamental question that we ask here is: how do funding conditions and liquidity
affect an individual bank’s willingness to supply credit? Answering the question convincingly
creates the challenge of separating the effects of loan demand from those of loan supply. To
understand this identification problem, consider the correlation between loan growth and a
bank’s cost of raising deposits. If availability of local deposits affects loan supply, then an
increase in a bank’s cost of deposits ought to be associated with a decline in loan growth. Strong
loan demand, however, will tend to increase a bank’s appetite for deposits to fund that demand,
thus potentially leading to higher yields on deposits (and thus a positive correlation between
deposit yields and loan growth). Similarly, a bank’s willingness to hold liquid assets – for
example, cash or other marketable securities – may be directly affected by loan demand. Where
loan demand is weak, we would expect banks to hold more securities. Thus, demand-side forces
will tend to generate a negative correlation between measures of bank liquidity and loan growth.

14

Our research method is designed specifically to address these identification problems.
The first advantage of our approach is that we focus on the acceptance rate for mortgages, rather
than originations. Demand conditions will have first-order effects on the flow of loan
applications, but will not directly influence a bank’s decision to accept a loan. Thus, we link a
bank’s funding cost (the yield on deposits) and balance-sheet liquidity (the ratio of cash plus
securities to assets) to its willingness to approve mortgages, conditional on all observable
dimensions of loan risk.
Modeling the acceptance rate helps but does necessarily fully resolve the identification
problem. Loan demand may have indirect effects on a bank’s acceptance rate by altering the
credit quality of the pool of applicants. For example, when demand is very strong, the loan-tovalue ratio for the typical mortgage application may be above average (due to high housing
prices relative to buyers’ access to equity). Because we are not able to observe property values
in our data set, this demand-driven change in the applicant pool could bias our results toward
finding a negative (positive) link from deposit yields (liquidity) to a bank’s acceptance rate.
Rather than model the overall acceptance rate, we instead focus initially on whether the
acceptance rate of jumbo mortgages – mortgages that the bank must hold and therefore fund –
reflects funding conditions and liquidity relative to a bank’s acceptance rate for non-jumbo
mortgages – those that the bank can readily sell into the secondary market. So, in our benchmark
tests, we regress the differential acceptance rate, defined as a bank’s average acceptance rate for
non-jumbo mortgages minus its acceptance rate for jumbos, on the bank’s funding costs,
traditional bank balance-sheet liquidity, and bank loan liquidity measure. We assume that
unobserved demand-side variables affect the acceptance rates of jumbo and non-jumbo
mortgages at a given bank in the same way. The identification strategy requires a relatively

15

homogenous pool of loans around jumbo-loan cutoff, so we drop all loan applications below 50
percent of the jumbo-loan cutoff and above 250 percent of the cutoff.15
B. Estimation
To understand our estimation, consider two reduced form equations relating the
acceptance rates to market-level demand-side variables and to bank-level funding characteristics
(supply-side variables), as follows:

ARNJi,t = γNJ1Balance-sheet liquidityi,t-1 + γNJ2Deposit costi,t-1 + γNJ3Loan liquidityi,t-1 +
+ βNJBorrower RiskNJi,t + Unobservable Demand-Side Variablesi,t + εNJi,t,

(1a)

ARJi,t = γJ1Balance-sheet liquidityi,t-1 + γJ2Deposit costi,t-1 + γJ3Loan liquidityi,t-1 +
+βJBorrower RiskJi,t + Unobservable Demand-Side Variablesi,t + εJi,t,

(1b)

where the unit of observation in these regressions is the bank-year. Subscript i indicates bank,
and subscript t indicates year. For each bank-year, the dependent variable equals the acceptance
rate for non-jumbo mortgages (ARNJi,t = the share of mortgage applications below the jumboloan cutoff accepted by bank i in year t), or the acceptance rate for jumbo mortgages (ARJi,t,
defined similarly to ARNJi,t for jumbos). Each equation contains demand-side variables that are
unobservable, as well as variables reflecting the funding and liquidity position of the potential
lender. We expect that banks with more balance-sheet liquidity will be more willing to supply
illiquid jumbo mortgages than banks that are liquidity constrained. In contrast, liquidity
constraints should not affect a bank’s willingness to supply non-jumbo mortgages because these
can be converted to mortgage-backed securities (which are liquid), or they can be sold off easily

16

(to one of the GSEs). For funding costs, we expect banks with high deposit costs to reduce loan
supply more for illiquid jumbo mortgages than for liquid non-jumbos, again because the bank
must hold and thus fund the illiquid ones (Kashyap and Stein, 2000; Campello, 2002). That is,
we expect the following relationships to hold:
0 <= γNJ1 < γJ1

and

0 >= γNJ2 > γJ2.

If demand-side effects are common across equations (1a) and (1b), then they can be eliminated
by subtraction, as follows:
ARNJi,t - ARJi,t = β1Balance-sheet liquidityi,t-1 + β2Deposit costi,t-1 + β3Loan liquidityi,t-1 +
+ βNJBorrower RiskNJi,t - βJBorrower RiskJi,t + ηi,t,

(1c)

where β1 = γNJ1 - γJ1, etc. Thus, we can remove the potentially biasing demand-side effects, but
we are only able to identify the difference in the coefficients in equations (1a) and (1b).
Equation (1c) represents our benchmark regression.
Balance sheet liquidity and the cost of holding deposits, our main variables of interest,
are defined above. We also include loan liquidity in the regressions, which may affect the
differential acceptance rate either positively or negatively. On the one hand, loan liquidity per se
ought to increase a bank’s willingness to make illiquid loans for the same reason that the more
standard measure of balance sheet liquidity does. On the other hand, banks holding very high
levels of mortgages (and hence having a relatively liquid loan portfolio), may be motivated to
originate non-jumbo mortgages that can easily be removed from the balance sheet.16 The
increasing depth of the securitization market (illustrated in Figure 2), which tends to increase our
measure of loan liquidity over time, may also encourage banks to set a lower acceptance hurdle

17

for non-jumbo relative to jumbo mortgages. Thus, we include loan liquidity as a control
variable, although as it turns out the main results are not sensitive to the inclusion of this
variable.
To control for risk characteristics of the pool of loans used to build the dependent
variable, we include the following: the ratio of the loan size to applicant income; the log of
applicant income; the share of properties located in MSAs; the percent minority in the population
around the property; the median income in the area around the property; and shares of female
and minority loan applicants. We construct these characteristics by averaging across all of the
non-jumbo loans (Borrower RiskNJi,t) and across all of the jumbo loans (Borrower RiskJi,t). We
allow the coefficients on these risk characteristics to differ by loan type.17 In addition to loan
pool characteristics, we include bank size (log of assets), a measure of leverage (the capital-asset
ratio), and accounting profits (net income to assets). Because there may be additional
unobserved bank effects, we cluster the error in the model by bank in constructing standard
errors.18
Changes in the stance of monetary policy could in principle be included in our model to
test how aggregate funding shocks (e.g. an increase in the Fed Funds rate) affect the supply of
liquid v. illiquid loans. Loutskina (2005) finds, for example, that banks with balance sheets
dominated by liquid mortgages tend to be less affected by changes in monetary policy than other
banks. Unfortunately, the HMDA loan application data are not ‘time stamped’. All we can
observe is the year in which a given application is made. Since Federal Reserve policy can
change sharply over the course of a single year, we simply absorb year effects with a set of
indicator variables. We also incorporate state indicator variables in all of our models.
According to Passmore, et al (2005), removing state effects is important, both because of

18

differences in foreclosure laws across states, and because the jumbo-mortgage market is much
better developed in states with relatively high housing costs, compared to states with lowerpriced houses.

V. RESULTS
A. Benchmark Regressions
Table 4 reports the benchmark results. We estimate the regression specification (1c) on
the sample of bank-years in which the total number of applicants for each type (non-jumbo and
jumbo) is at least three to assure that we have a reasonable estimate of the acceptance rate for
each observation. Balance sheet liquidity, loan liquidity, and the cost of holding deposits, our
main variables of interest, are defined above. Each of these variables comes from the fourthquarter Call Report for the year before the loan application. We use prior-year bank data to
reduce any mechanical relationship between our dependent variable and the bank characteristics.
The first three specifications of Table 4 focus on balance-sheet liquidity, deposit cost, and
loan liquidity individually (columns 1-3). Then, we report one specification with all three
variables together (column 4). Last, we report a full specification with all three variables of
interest plus the full set of control variables (column 5). All five specifications suggest that
banks with more balance sheet liquidity and banks with lower cost of deposits supply more credit
to the illiquid sector (non-jumbos) relative to the liquid sector (jumbos). The effects are robust
across specifications. This robustness suggests that omitted risk factors, such as the loan-tovalue ratio, are not biasing our key findings.
The coefficients are not only statistically significant but also economically important.
For example, if we raise the balance sheet liquidity variable from the 25th to the 75th percentile of

19

its distribution (an increase of 17.5 percent of assets), the difference between the acceptance rate
of non-jumbo mortgages and jumbo mortgages falls by 0.4 percentage points. This change
represents about 6 percent of the variation in the dependent variable (based on the inter-quartile
range of 6.9 percentage points). For deposits, a move from the 25th to 75th percentile in the
distribution of yields (and increase of 1.1 percentage points) is associated with a relative increase
in the acceptance rate for non-jumbo mortgages of about 0.5 percentage points. So, if we
compare two banks, one with low liquidity and expensive deposits and the other flush with
liquidity and cheap deposits, the first bank’s acceptance rate for jumbo mortgages would be
about one percentage point lower than the second.
The effect of bank size in Table 4 is also notable, and further confirms our overall
findings. Log of bank assets enters the regression with a negative and statistically significant
coefficient. An increase in assets from the 25th to the 75th percentile comes with an increase in
the relative acceptance rate for jumbo mortgages of 0.6 percentage points, comparable to the
magnitude of the effects of both the cost of deposits and the balance-sheet liquidity ratio. Thus,
larger banks are, all else equal, more likely than smaller banks to approve jumbo mortgages
relative to non-jumbo mortgages. Because there are many differences in the operating and
financial policies of large and small banks, we include size mainly as a control variable. But this
result may reflect in part large banks’ better access to alternative sources of funds, as well as
their greater ability to manage liquidity risk. For example, large banks have a greater ability to
borrow in the Fed Funds market than smaller banks.19 Similarly, with better ability to borrow in
capital markets, large banks are also less reliant on deposits as a marginal source of funds for
their lending.

20

B. Endogenous Loan-Application Size
As we noted above, loan-application size itself may be determined (or affected) by banks’
ability to securitize or sell off mortgages near the jumbo-loan cutoff. This notion seems
consistent with the flow of applications that spikes upward for loans just below the cutoff. We
do not observe exactly how a bank might influence its applicants, although it seems likely that
influence could be accomplished with carrots (‘lower interest rates below the cutoff…’) or sticks
(‘the loan will only be accepted if it comes in below the cutoff…’).
To test whether the pool of loans around the jumbo-loan cutoff is endogenous to bank
financial condition, we construct the share of non-jumbo loans (95 percent to 100 percent of the
cutoff) in all applications near the cutoff (95 percent to 105 percent of the cutoff), irrespective of
whether or not the loan is accepted. We then relate this measure to bank financial conditions, as
follows:
Non-jumbo applications within 5% of jumbo cutoff / All applications within 5% of cutoffi,t =
= β1Balance-sheet liquidityi,t-1 + β2Deposit costi,t-1 + β3Loan liquidityi,t-1

(2)

+ Control Variablesi,t + εi,t. .
The dependent variable indicates the extent to which a given bank may encourage
marginal applicants to apply for a mortgage just below the cutoff, as a function of the bank’s
funding and liquidity. If more constrained banks create more high-powered incentive for
applicants to reduce their demand (e.g. with a larger jumbo/non-jumbo pricing differential), then
we would expect constrained banks to receive a larger share of non-jumbo applications. Thus,
we expect β1 < 0 and β2 > 0. We use the same set of bank and loan-pool control variables
included in our model of the differential probability. As before, the unit of observation is the

21

bank-year, but we now include all banks with at least one loan applications of each type around
the jumbo-loan cutoff (i.e. within 5 percent). And, we continue to include state and year
indicators, and to cluster the residual at the bank level in constructing standard errors.
Table 5 reports the results, with the same set of five specifications reported earlier. As
before, balance sheet liquidity and funding costs are significantly related to the flow of loan
applications. The applicant flow is skewed toward the relatively liquid mortgages (those below
the cutoff) for banks with lower levels of balance sheet liquidity or higher cost of deposits.
Banks that have less liquidity or higher deposit costs seem more likely to push applicants below
the jumbo-loan cutoff. This is consistent with the notion that more liquid banks and banks with
cheaper deposits are better financially positioned to originate illiquid loans and hence are less
likely to affect the flow of mortgage applications. These effects across specifications are robust
in the statistical sense, although the coefficient on deposit cost declines when we add the full set
of control variables (column 5). In terms of the coefficient magnitudes, the effect of liquidity is
notable. A move from the 25th to the 75th percentile in the liquid-assets distribution is associated
with an increase of 1.8 percentage points in the share of jumbo loans. This increase represents a
10 percent rise relative to the mean share of jumbo-loan applications (only 18 percent of the
mortgages near the jumbo-loan cutoff fall above that level).
In addition, we find that both bank size and the capital-asset ratio strongly affect the flow
of applications. Larger banks receive a larger share of non-jumbo loans. And, in contrast to the
relative acceptance rates, where bank capital was not significant, the share of non-jumbo loan
applications declines with bank capital. Well-capitalized banks seem less likely to push
borrowers below the jumbo-loan threshold, perhaps indicating their willingness to originate and
hold (jumbo) mortgages.

22

C. Applicant-Pool Endogeneity and Acceptance Rates
The strong link between the applicant flows around the jumbo-loan cutoff and bank’s
funding and liquidity suggests that the effects of financial conditions on acceptance rates
estimated in Table 4 may be understated. As shown earlier in Figure 4, the overall differential
acceptance rate is biased upward (the acceptance rate spikes up just below the cutoff). The high
acceptance rate just below the cutoff probably reflects high-wealth applicants’ ability to reduce
their borrowing relative to applicants with less wealth. The better the quality of applicants
shifting below the cutoff, the larger is the bias. The financially unconstrained banks are likely to
provide the weakest pricing incentive for applicants to borrow below the cutoff, leading only the
highest wealth applicants to shift. In contrast, the constrained banks are likely to provide
stronger incentives, leading lower quality applicants to shift as well. Thus, the bias should be
largest for the unconstrained banks.20
To test this notion, we re-estimate the differential acceptance rate regressions, dropping
loan applications within 5 percent of the jumbo-loan cutoff. These results are reported in
Table 6. As expected, the coefficients on the financial variables are larger in magnitude and
have higher levels of statistical significance than those reported in Table 4.21
D. Sorting of Borrowers across Banks
Beyond the endogeneity of applicant size, the whole distribution of loan applications
across banks may shift in response to the relative pricing of non-jumbos. Funding-constrained
banks presumably price jumbos at higher relative rates than unconstrained banks (remember that
we are unable to observe loan prices). Sorting of borrowers across banks is facilitated by
mortgage brokers and internet companies that lower the cost of search relative to potential
savings from small changes in prices. To the extent that most jumbo-loan borrowers avoid

23

applying to funding constrained banks at all, it will be harder to observe differences in
acceptance rates because the most constrained banks may price themselves out of the jumbo
market entirely. Or, said slightly differently, the most constrained banks with the highest
rejection rates for jumbo loans will not be observed in our data (because they receive no
applications).
To test for sorting effects, we regress the overall share of non-jumbo applications
(between 50 and 250 percent of the cutoff) on the same set of financing variables, loan-pool
characteristics and bank characteristics (Table 7). Since we are interested in borrower’s choice
of bank, we drop the marginal loan applications (those within five percent of the jumbo-loan
cutoff), where the size of loan itself may be endogenous. In these specifications, we include all
banks that receive at least 3 applications in the 50 to 250 percent interval. We find, again, that
financially constrained banks receive a significantly lower share of jumbo-loan applications,
although the coefficients are smaller in magnitude than those that we estimate for the marginal
loan applicants (i.e. those near the cutoff). A move from the 25th to the 75th percentile in the
liquid-assets distribution, for example, is associated with an increase of about 1.2 percentage
points in the share of jumbo loans. So, the pool of applications shifts toward more liquid loans
as the originating banks become more financially constrained.
E. Separating the Financial Effects on Non-jumbo and Jumbo Mortgages
The results so far are limited in that we have estimated how a bank’s liquidity or funding
costs affect its supply of jumbo mortgages relative to non-jumbo mortgages. As noted, this
approach is conservative because it allows us to difference out demand-side forces that might
bias the relationship between bank characteristics and loan supply. However, the cost is that we
are not able to identify the direct effects of the financial variables on mortgage acceptance rates.

24

To estimate a model that separates the effects of funding and liquidity on non-jumbo mortgages
from its effect on jumbos, we separate the acceptance rate for jumbos and non-jumbo mortgages
and relate each to the balance sheet liquidity, loan liquidity and the cost of holding deposits.
This approach essentially boils down to estimating equations (1a) and (1b) above as a
system of seemingly unrelated regressions (Zellner, 1962). Thus, we now analyze two
acceptance rates for each bank-year: one for the non-jumbo mortgages, and one for the jumbos.
We include a jumbo-loan indicator and its interaction with bank funding and liquidity
characteristics (as well as every other variable), allowing us to disentangle how bank
characteristics affect the acceptance rates for both types of loans. In this expanded model, the
unobservable demand-side variables are no longer differenced out, but will only (potentially)
bias the direct effects of liquidity and funding costs on the acceptance rate. The approach is
more comprehensive because it allows us to consider significantly more bank-years in our
analysis since we do not impose a condition that a bank should have at least three loan
applications in both confirming and jumbo-loan categories.
Table 8 reports these results. As before, we estimate simple specifications that focus only
on the variables of greatest interest, and then we report multi-variate specifications with the full
set of control variables. In Panel A, we report the results for the full sample of loans, and in
Panel B we again drop applications in which loan-application size is potentially endogenous (i.e.
observations that are within 5 percent of the jumbo-loan cutoff). The interaction terms of
balance sheet liquidity and cost of deposits with the jumbo-loan dummy have the same
interpretation as the coefficients in Table 4 and Table 6. Even though we have dramatically
increased the sample, the magnitudes of these coefficients are similar to those reported earlier.

25

The coefficients suggest that neither balance sheet liquidity nor deposit yields are
correlated with the acceptance rate for non-jumbo mortgages. Since banks don’t need to hold
these loans on their balance sheet, the acceptance rate is not affected by the bank’s cost of
deposits or liquidity. If a bank chooses to hold a non-jumbo mortgage, then its overall liquidity
does not affect this decision because it could, at relatively low cost, remove the loan by selling it
into the secondary market. In contrast, the loan liquidity measure, which again is driven in large
part by the depth of the securitization market as a whole, is very strongly related to the
acceptance rate for both kinds of mortgages. Moreover, its effect is greater for the non-jumbo
loans. This result seems sensible because it reflects the increasing relative advantage of holding
the non-jumbo loans as the depth of this market has increased over time. Finally, the results
once again confirm that higher liquidity and lower costs of deposits positively affect a bank’s
willingness to supply illiquid loans.

VI. CONCLUSIONS
Traditional banks originated illiquid loans and funded them with liquid deposits. As a
result, a decline in deposit supply (such as one following a monetary policy tightening) reduced
loan supply. Banks also needed to hold enough cash to satisfy random demands for liquidity
from depositors. Securitization is changing the model of banking from one of ‘originate and
hold’ to one of ‘originate and sell’, thereby mitigating the effects of both deposit supply and
balance sheet liquidity on loan supply. As evidence, we show that a bank’s willingness to
approve jumbo mortgages (an example of illiquid loans) depends on both its cost of deposits and
its holdings of liquid assets. In contrast, financial condition has no effect on acceptance rates for
non-jumbo loans. Given the rapid expansion of loan securitization (as well as the growth of loan

26

sales and syndication), the results suggest that access to capital is less subject to variations in the
supply of local deposits to banks than in the past. The expansion of the secondary market in
mortgages has also likely dampened the effects of monetary policy on real economic activity by
limiting the extent of the bank lending channel.

27

References
Ashcraft, Adam, 2003, “New Evidence on the Lending Channel,” forthcoming at the Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking.
Ashcraft, Adam, 2005, “Are Banks Really Special? New Evidence from the FDIC-Induced
Failure of Healthy Banks, forthcoming at the American Economic Review.
Ambrose, Brent, Michael LaCour-Little, and Anthony Sanders, 2004, “The Effects of
Conforming Loan Status on Mortgage Yield Spreads: A Loan Level Analysis,” Real Estate
Economics, 32, 541-569.
Becker, Bo, 2005, “Geographical Segmentation of US Capital Markets,” mimeo, April 2005.
Benmelech, Effi, Mark Garmaise and Tobias Moskowitz, 2005, “Do Liquidation Values affect
Financial Contracts? Evidence from Commercial Loan Contracts and Zoning Regulation,”
mimeo, June 2005.
Bernanke, Ben S., 1983, “Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in Propogation of the
Great Depression,” American Economic Review 73(3), 257-276.
Bernanke, Ben S. and Cara Lown, 1991, “The Credit Crunch,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 2, 205-247.
Campello, Murillo, 2002, “Internal Capital Markets in Financial Conglomerates: Evidence from
Small Bank Responses to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Finance 57(6), 2773-2805.
Degryse, Hans and Steven Ongena, 2005, “Distance, Lending Relationships and Competition,”
Journal of Finance 60, 231-266.
Demyanyk, Yuliya, Charlotte Ostergaard and Bent E. Sorensen, 2005, “U.S. Banking
Deregulation, Small Businesses, and Interstate Insurance of Personal Income,” mimeo, April
2005.
Estrella, Arturo, 2002, “Securitization and the Efficacy of Monetary Policy,” Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, Economic Policy Review, 1-13.
Gorton, Gary and Nicholas Souleles, 2005, “Special Purpose Vehicles and Securitization,”
mimeo.
Frame, W. Scott and Lawrence J. White, 2005, “Fussing and Fuming about Fannie and Freddie:
How much Smoke, How much Fire?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 2005.
Greenspan, Alan, 2004, Testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban
Affairs, U.S. Senate, February 24, 2004.

28

Hubbard, R. Glenn, Kenneth Kuttner and Darius Palia, 2002, “Are There Bank Effects in
Borrowers’ Cost of Funds? Evidence from a Matched Sample of Borrowers and Banks,” Journal
of Business 75(4), 559-581.
Houston, Joel, David Marcus, and Christopher James, 1997, “Capital Market Frictions and the
Role of Internal Capital Markets in Banking?” Journal of Financial Economics 46(2), 135-164.
Jayaratne, Jith and Donald P. Morgan, 2000, “Capital Market Frictions and Deposit Contraints at
Banks,” Journal of Money Credit and Banking.
Kashyap, Anil and Jeremy Stein, 2000, “What do a Million Observations on Banks Say about the
Transmission of Monetary Policy?” American Economic Review 90(3), 407-428.
Loutskina, Elena, 2005, “Does Securitization affect Bank Lending? Evidence from Bank
Responses to Funding Shocks,” mimeo, March 2005.
Holmstrom, Bengt and Jean Tirole, 1997, “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and the
Real Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 663-691.
Khwaja, Asim Isaz and Atif Mian, 2005, “Tracing the Impact of Bank Liquidity Shocks,”
mimeo, June 2005.
Morgan, Donald P., Bertrand Rime, and Philip E. Strahan, 2004, “Bank Integration and State
Business Cycles,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 1555-1584.
Mckenzie, Joseph A., 2002, “A Reconsideration of the Jumbo/Non-Jumbo Mortgage Rate
Differential,” Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 25(2/3), 197-213.
Paravisini, Daniel, 2004, “Constrained Banks, Constrained Borrowers: The Effects of Bank
Liquidity on the Availability of Credit,” MIT mimeo, November.
Passmore, Wayne, Shane M. Sherlund, and Gillian Burgess, 2005, “The Effect of Housing
Government-Sponsored Enterprises on Mortgage Rates,” Federal Reserve Board of Governors,
working paper 2005-06.
Peek, Joe and Eric Rosengren, 2000, “Collateral Damage: Effects of the Japanese Banking Crisis
on Real Activity in the United States,” American Economic Review 90(1), 30-45.
Petersen, Mitchell and Raghuram G. Rajan, 1994, “The Benefits of Lending Relationships,”
Journal of Finance 49, 3-37.
Petersen, Mitchell and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2002, “Does Distance Still Matter? The Information
Revolution in Small Business Lending,” Journal of Finance 57, 2533-2570.

29

Slovin, M, M. Sushka, and J. Polonchek, 1993, “The Value of Bank Durability: Borrowers as
Bank Stakeholders,” Journal of Finance, 247-266.
Zellner, Arnold, 1962, “An Efficient Method of Estimating Seemingly Unrelated Regressions
and Tests for Aggregation Bias,” Journal of the American Statistical Association 57, 348-368.

30

Figure 1A: Aggregate Probability of Accepting Loans and Cost of Deposits
91
90.5
90
89.5
89
88.5
88
87.5
87
50% to100%

100% to 150%

Ratio of Loan Size to Jumbo-Loan Cutoff

Lowest Quartile Cost of Deposits

Highest Quartile Cost of Deposits

Figure 1B: Aggregate Probability of Accepting Loans and Liquidity
94
Probability of Acceptance

Probability of Acceptance

91.5

92

90

88

86
50% to100%

100% to 150%

Ratio of Loan Size to Jumbo-Loan Cutoff

Lowest Quartile Loan Liquidity

Highest Quartile Loan Liquidity

Figure 1C: Share of Non-Jumbo Loans in 95% to 105% Interval
0.84
0.82
0.8
0.78
0.76
0.74
0.72
0.7

Liquidity

Cost of Deposits
Share of Non-jumbo Loans

Lowest Quartile

Highest Quartile

Figure 2
Securitization of Loans in the US Economy
The Figure presents the percentage of loans securitized relative to total loans outstanding for six categories of loans: (i) home mortgages, (ii) multifamily residential mortgages,
(iii) commercial mortgages, (iv) consumer credit, (v) business loans, and (vi) farm mortgages. The data are from Flow of Funds Accounts of the United States.

0.65
0.6
0.55
0.5

SHARE SECURITIZED

0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
1976

1978

1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

HORIZON (QUARTERS)
Home mortgages

Multifamily residential mortgages

Commercial mortgages

Farm mortgages

Business Loans

Consumer credit

2002

Figure 3: Jumbo/Non-Jumbo Spread Controlling for Credit Risk
Source: McKenzie (2002)
30

Spread, Basis Points

25
20
15
10
5
0
1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

Figure 4A: Histogram of All Loan Applications, 1992-2003
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2

2.2

2.4

2.6

2.8

3

Ratio of Loan Size to Jumbo-Loan Cutoff

Figure 4B: Probability of Acceptance for All Loan Applications, 1992-2003
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2

2.2

Ratio of Loan Size to Jumbo-Loan Cutoff

2.4

2.6

2.8

3

Figure 5A: Histogram of Loan Applications, 1992-2003
0.16
0.14
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
0.55 0.65 0.75 0.85 0.95 1.05 1.15 1.25 1.35 1.45 1.55 1.65 1.75 1.85 1.95 2.05 2.15 2.25 2.35 2.45

Ratio of Loan Size to Jumbo-Loan Cutoff
Full Smaple

Our Sample

Figure 5B: Probability of Acceptance for Loan Applications, 1992-2003
0.94
0.93
0.92
0.91
0.9
0.89
0.88
0.87
0.86
0.85
0.84
0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

1.6

1.7

1.8

1.9

2

2.1

Ratio of Loan Size to Jumbo-Loan Cutoff
Full Smaple

Our Sample

2.2

2.3

2.4

2.5

Table 1: Loans Outstanding and Securitization

1976

1986

1996

2003

Single-Family Mortgages
Loans Outstanding (Billions)
Securitized Loans (Billions)
Securitized Share

$489
$28
5.7%

$1,554
$411
26.4%

$3,533
$1,806
51.1%

$7,283
$4,223
58.0%

Multi-Family Residential Mortgages
Loans Outstanding (Billions)
Securitized Loans (Billions)
Securitized Share

$101
$1
1.0%

$212
$9
4.2%

$268
$40
14.9%

$504
$175
34.7%

Commercial Mortgages
Loans Outstanding (Billions)
Securitized Loans (Billions)
Securitized Share

$162
$0
0.0%

$553
$1
0.3%

$729
$45
6.2%

$1,452
$294
20.2%

Farm Mortgages
Loans Outstanding (Billions)
Securitized Loans (Billions)
Securitized Share

$51
$2
3.9%

$104
$0
0.4%

$85
$0
0.0%

$132
$0
0.0%

Commercial & Industrial Loans
Loans Outstanding (Billions)
Securitized Loans (Billions)
Securitized Share

$409
$0
0.0%

$1,192
$0
0.0%

$1,674
$30
1.8%

$2,194
$104
4.7%

Consumer Loans
Loans Outstanding (Billions)
Securitized Loans (Billions)
Securitized Share

$205
$0
0.0%

$607
$0
0.0%

$1,163
$226
19.4%

$2,040
$658
32.3%

This table presents economy-wide loans outstanding and securitized. Data are from the U.S. Flow of Funds.

Table 2: Summary Statistics for Mortgage Applications Characteristics

Number of Loan Applications
Probability of Acceptance (%)
Average Loan Amount (thousands)
Average Applicant Income (thousands / year)
Average Area Income (thousands / year)
Average Loan-to-Income Ratio
Percent Minority
Percent of Minority Population in the Area
Percent Female
Percent of Loans in MSA
Jumbo-Loan Cutoff (thousands)

Full
Sample
6,143,057
90.85
$209
$120
$51
2.4
14.14
14.83
15.02
91.84

1992
314,927
87.13
$174
$101
$53
2.4
14.60
15.92
12.05
97.51
$202

Selected Years:
1998
2003
526,356
354,992
92.36
90.28
$191
$282
$117
$142
$49
$70
2.3
2.8
10.09
18.68
11.63
24.12
13.92
19.49
89.10
89.83
$227
$323

This table contains summary statistics for the sample of mortgages used in the regressions reported in
Tables 4-6. Figures are based on a sample of conventional home mortgage applications to commercial
banks, from the HMDA data collected by the Federal Reserve Board. The mortgage applications are for
loans between 50% and 250% of the jumbo-loan cutoff. The jumbo-loan cutoff is 50% higher in Alaska
and Hawaii than in the other states.

Table 3: Summary Statistics for Bank Characteristics
Panel A: Banks Included in Our Sample
25th
Percentile

75th
Percentile

Median

Panel B: Excluded Banks
25th
Percentile

Median

75th
Percentile

Total Assets (millions of $s)

42.6

84.4

194.1

17.4

32.5

62.9

Financial Struture & Liquidity (%)
Liquid Assets / Assets
Loan Liquidity
Cost of Deposits
Capital / Assets

19.9
16.9
2.7
7.4

27.8
22.8
3.3
8.5

37.4
30.1
3.9
10.1

22.9
13.1
2.7
8.0

32.7
19.6
3.5
9.4

43.9
26.8
4.1
11.6

53.9
9.7
20.2
10.7
4.9

63.3
17.6
31.2
18.1
9.9

71.1
27.4
46.3
26.9
17.5

47.0
14.4
14.3
4.9
7.6

58.1
25.7
25.2
10.7
12.8

67.4
41.4
37.8
19.4
20.4

Net Income / Assets

0.7

1.0

1.3

0.7

1.1

1.4

Mortgage application
Number of loan applications
Number of loans Issued
Probability of Acceptance (%)

6
5
88.9

16
15
96.5

54
50
99.0

Loan Shares (% of assets)
Total Loans
Commercial & Industrial Loans
Home Mortgages
Commercial Mortgages
Consumer Loans
Profit (%)

n/a
n/a
n/a

n/a
n/a
n/a

n/a
n/a
n/a

This table reports information on the distribution of characteristics for banks that we matched to the mortgage application data, and for
banks that we exclude from our analysis. Liquid assets equals cash plus marketable securities. The cost of deposits equals interest
expense on deposits to total deposits. Loan liquidity is a measure of the ability of a bank to sell its loans into the secondary market (see
text for details).

Table 4: Regressions Analysis of Relative Acceptance Rates
for Jumbo and Non-Jumbo Mortgages

Dependent Variable Differential Acceptance Rate
(1)
(2)
(3)
Bank Financial Condition
Liquid Assets / Assets

-2.65
(2.88)***

Loan Liquidity
Cost of Deposits

(4)

-2.534
(2.78)***
4.473
3.742
(3.55)***
(2.87)***
57.133
43.242
(3.56)*** (2.62)***

Other Bank Controls
Log of Bank Assets

-2.345
(2.58)**
1.791
(1.97)**
42.392
(2.62)***
-0.322
(3.93)***
0.241
(0.07)
-7.559
(0.46)

Capital / Assets
Net Income / Assets
Loan-Pool Characteristics
MSA share - Jumbos
MSA share - Non-Jumbos
Local area Percent Minority Population - Jumbos
Local area Percent Minority Population - Non-Jumbos
Loan-to-Income Ratio - Jumbos
Loan-to-Income Ratio - Non-Jumbo
Log of Applicant Income - Jumbos
Log of Applicant Income - Non-Jumbos
Local area median income - Jumbos
Local area median income - Non-Jumbos
Share minority applicants - Jumbos
Share minority applicants - Non-Jumbos
Share Female applicants - Jumbos
Share Female applicants - Non-Jumbos
Observations
R-squared

(5)

14,787
0.01

14,787
0.01

14,787
0.01

14,787
0.01

2.27
(2.17)**
-1.072
(0.99)
0.043
(1.67)*
-0.004
(0.15)
0.488
(4.74)***
-0.502
(2.21)**
-0.004
(4.82)***
0.004
(3.76)***
-0.039
(2.73)***
0.072
(3.27)***
5.156
(4.24)***
-6.522
(4.29)***
2.693
(2.40)**
-0.988
(0.65)
14,787
0.03

T-statistics in parentheses, based on errors clustered at the bank level.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
This table reports regressions of the acceptance rate of non-jumbo mortgages minus the acceptance rate for jumbos for
bank-year observations from 1992 to 2003. Columns 1-4 report simple specifications with only bank-level financial
variables; column 5 reports specifications with the full set of control variables. The acceptance rates are based on
mortgages between 50% and 250% of the jumbo-loan cutoff. We only include a bank-year observation if the bank
received at least 3 applications of each type. All regressions also include year and state indicators.

Table 5: Regression Analysis of the Share of Non-jumbo Mortgage Applications
within 5% of the Jumbo-Loan Cutoff

Dependent Variable Non-Jumbo Applications / Total Applications
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Bank Financial Condition
Liquid Assets / Assets

-0.11
(5.05)***

Loan Liquidity
Cost of Deposits

-0.111
(5.09)***
0.102
0.072
(3.16)***
(2.21)**
1.158
1.012
(3.49)*** (3.05)***

Other Bank Controls
Log of Bank Assets

-0.100
(4.59)***
0.076
(2.34)**
0.628
(1.95)*
0.025
(13.36)***
-0.35
(3.87)***
-0.23
(0.64)

Capital / Assets
Net Income / Assets
Loan-Pool Characteristics
MSA share
Local area Percent Minority Population
Loan-to-Income Ratio
Log of Applicant Income
Local area median income
Share minority applicants
Share Female applicants
Observations
R-squared

(5)

7,303
0.09

7,303
0.08

7,303
0.08

7,303
0.09

-0.097
(4.85)***
0.001
(0.38)
-0.005
(0.73)
-0.003
(1.47)
0.107
(10.13)***
-0.017
(1.01)
-0.019
(1.24)
7,158
0.18

T-statistics in parentheses, based on errors clustered at the bank level.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
This table reports regressions of the share of non-jumbo mortgages applications within 5% of the jumbo-loan cutoff for
bank-year observations from 1992 to 2003. Columns 1-4 report simple specifications with only bank-level financial
variables; column 5 reports specifications with the full set of control variables. We only include a bank-year observation
if the bank received at least one applications of each type. All regressions also include year and state indicators.

Table 6: Regression Analysis of Relative Acceptance Rates for Jumbo and Non-Jumbo Mortgages
Without Mortgages within 5% of Jumbo-Loan Cutoff
Dependent Variable Differential Acceptance Rate
(1)
(2)
(3)
Bank Financial Condition
Liquid Assets / Assets

-3.104
(3.22)***

Loan Liquidity

4.805
(3.70)***

Cost of Deposits

65.737
(3.97)***

(4)
-2.974
(3.12)***
3.95
(2.93)***
51.134
(2.99)***

Other Bank Controls
Log of Bank Assets

-2.886
(3.00)***
1.574
(2.01)**
49.654
(2.95)***
-0.306
(3.54)***
0.116
(0.03)
-6.937
(0.42)

Capital / Assets
Net Income / Assets
Loan Pool Characteristics
MSA share - Jumbos
MSA share - Non-Jumbos
Local area Percent Minority Population - Jumbos
Local area Percent Minority Population - Non-Jumbos
Loan-to-Income Ratio - Jumbos
Loan-to-Income Ratio - Non-Jumbo
Log of Applicant Income - Jumbos
Log of Applicant Income - Non-Jumbos
Local area median income - Jumbos
Local area median income - Non-Jumbos
Share minority applicants - Jumbos
Share minority applicants - Non-Jumbos
Share Female applicants - Jumbos
Share Female applicants - Non-Jumbos
Observations
R-squared

(5)

14,428
0.01

14,428
0.01

14,428
0.01

14,428
0.01

-1.45
(1.23)
0.736
(0.60)
-0.019
(0.69)
0.053
(1.87)*
0.444
(4.51)***
-0.647
(4.14)***
-0.005
(5.22)***
0.004
(3.80)***
-0.098
(6.79)***
0.136
(5.87)***
5.515
(4.42)***
-6.603
(4.08)***
2.817
(2.47)**
-0.71
(0.46)
14,137
0.04

T-statistics in parentheses, based on errors clustered at the bank level.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
This table reports regressions of the acceptance rate of non-jumbo mortgages minus the acceptance rate for jumbos for bankyear observations from 1992 to 2003. Columns 1-4 report simple specifications with only bank-level financial variables;
column 5 reports specifications with the full set of control variables. The acceptance rates are based on mortgages between
50% and 250% of the jumbo-loan cutoff, without mortgages within 5% of the cutoff. We only include a bank-year observation
if the bank received at least 3 applications of each type. All regressions also include year and state indicators.

Table 7: Regression Analysis of the Share of Non-jumbo Mortgage Applications
50%-95% and 105%-250% of Jumbo-Loan Cutoff
Dependent Variable Non-Jumbo Applications / Total Applications
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Bank Financial Condition
Liquid Assets / Assets

-0.070
(4.69)***

Loan Liquidity
Cost of Deposits

-0.074
-0.068
(4.94)*** (5.06)***
0.270
0.257
0.242
(11.38)***
(10.34)*** (10.55)***
1.790
1.084
0.564
(8.42)*** (5.01)*** (2.92)***

Other Bank Controls
Log of Bank Assets

0.013
(8.36)***
-0.203
(3.40)***
0.344
(1.82)*

Capital / Assets
Net Income / Assets

-

Loan-Pool Characteristics
Observations
R-squared

(5)

27,539
0.1

27,539
0.12

27,539
0.1

Included
27,539
0.12

27,148
0.3

T-statistics in parentheses, based on errors clustered at the bank level.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
This table reports regressions of the share of non-jumbo mortgages applications between 50 and 250% of the jumbo-loan
cutoff, exlcuding those within 5% of the cutoff, for bank-year observations from 1992 to 2003. Columns 1-4 report
simple specifications with only bank-level financial variables; column 5 reports specifications with the full set of control
variables. All regressions also include year and state indicators.

Table 8: Regression Analysis of Acceptance Rates for Jumbo and Non-jumbo Mortgages
Panel A: Loan Applications in 50 to 250% of Jumbo-Loan Cutoff
Dependent Variable Mortgage Acceptance Rate
(1)
(2)
(3)
Jumbo Indicator
Bank Financial Condition
Liquid Assets / Assets
Jumbo * Liquid Assets / Assets

(4)

12.54
14.543
16.046
16.877
(4.18)*** (4.82)*** (5.07)*** (5.33)***
-1.383
(1.54)
2.871
(2.68)***

Loan Liquidity
Jumbo * Loan Liquidity
Cost of Deposits
Jumbo * Cost of Deposits

(1.18)
-1.33
2.57
(2.41)**

-1.492
(1.68)*
2.633
(2.47)**
7.854
7.71
(5.86)***
(5.83)***
-5.322
-4.814
(4.24)***
(3.83)***
35.074
20.728
(2.20)** (1.31)
-54.526
-50.11
(3.93)*** (3.60)***

Other Bank Controls

Included, coefficients not reported

Conforming Loan-Pool Characteristics
Jumbo Loan-Pool Characteristics

Included, coefficients not reported

Observations
R-squared

55,994
0.08

55,994
0.08

55,994
0.08

55,994
0.09

T-statistics in parentheses, based on errors clustered at the bank level.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
This table reports regressions of the acceptance rate of mortgages for both jumbo and non-jumbo mortgages
for bank-year observations from 1992 to 2003 (i.e. there are 2 observations per bank-year). The acceptance
rates are based on mortgages between 50% and 250% of the jumbo-loan cutoff. We only include a bankyear-loan observation if the bank received at least 3 applications. All regressions also include year and state
indicators. We include all of the other bank & loan-pool characteristics that appear in Tables 4-6, and we
allow the coefficients to vary between the jumbo and non-jumbo acceptance rates. These coefficients are
not reported here to save space.

Table 8: Regression Analysis of Acceptance Rates for Jumbo and Non-jumbo Mortgages
Panel B: Loan Applications in 50-95% and 105-250% of Jumbo-Loan Cutoff
Dependent Variable Mortgage Acceptance Rate
(1)
(2)
(3)
Jumbo Indicator
Bank Financial Condition
Liquid Assets / Assets
Jumbo * Liquid Assets / Assets

(4)

11.148
13.124
15.764
16.003
(3.57)*** (4.18)*** (4.77)*** (4.85)***
-1.369
(1.50)
2.467
(2.24)**

Loan Liquidity
Jumbo * Loan Liquidity
Cost of Deposits
Jumbo * Cost of Deposits

-1.439
(1.59)
2.209
(2.02)**
7.753
7.539
(5.75)***
(5.67)***
-5.701
-5.134
(4.44)***
(3.99)***
41.211
25.893
(1.59)
(1.64)
-62.691
-55.763
(4.41)*** (3.93)***

Other Bank Controls

Included, coefficients not reported

Conforming Loan-Pool Characteristics
Jumbo Loan-Pool Characteristics

Included, coefficients not reported

Observations
R-squared

54,523
0.08

54,523
0.08

54,523
0.08

54,523
0.09

T-statistics in parentheses, based on errors clustered at the bank level.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
This table reports regressions of the acceptance rate of mortgages for both jumbo and non-jumbo mortgages
for bank-year observations from 1992 to 2003 (i.e. there are 2 observations per bank-year). The acceptance
rates are based on mortgages between 50-95% and 105-250% of the jumbo-loan cutoff. We only include a
bank-year-loan observation if the bank received at least 3 applications. All regressions also include year
and state indicators. We include all of the other bank & loan-pool characteristics that appear in Tables 4-6,
and we allow the coefficients to vary between the jumbo and non-jumbo acceptance rates. These
coefficients are not reported here to save space.

Endnotes
1

In recent years, the GSEs have opted to hold rather than securitize many of the mortgages that they buy to take
advantage of subsidized borrowing rates. Policymakers have become concerned about the resulting expansion of
interest rate risk at the GSEs (Greenspan, 2004). As of 2003, for example, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac held over
$1.5 trillion in mortgages (Frame and White, 2005). Passmore, Sherlund and Burgess (2005) argue that most (but
not all) of the benefits of GSE subsidized borrowing benefits their shareholders rather than mortgage borrowers.
Vickery (2005) shows that GSE subsidies are concentrated in the fixed-rate mortgage (FRM) segment rather than
the adjustable-rate mortgage segment, explaining why FRMs dominate in the U.S. relative to the U.K. While the
effects of this government subsidy are important for public policy, they are not the focus here.

2

Benmelech, Germaise and Moskowitz (2005) use a similar identification strategy to analyze how real-asset
liquidity (as opposed to financial-asset liquidity here) affects debt capacity. In their case, they exploit differences in
the liquidity of commercial properties stemming from variation in zoning restrictions.

3

We are only able to identify which mortgages are jumbo in our data, and hence can not be sold to the GSEs. For
loans below the jumbo-loan cutoff, most can be sold to the GSEs (i.e. most are ‘conforming’ mortgages). However,
some non-jumbo loans do not meet the other criteria used to determine whether a mortgage is conforming, such as
the loan-to-value ratio. Thus, there is some measurement error in our classification of loans as conforming.
4

Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) present a theoretical analysis showing how real shocks can be exacerbated by
reductions in credit supply. Bernanke (1983) first showed that shocks to finance can have empirically significant
effects on the magnitude of business downturns, focusing on the U.S. Great Depression. More recent research has
focused on regional downturns, and most studies find that such shocks are amplified by their effects on local banks
(e.g. Bernanke and Lown (1991), Ashcraft (2005), Becker (2005)).

5

Kashyap and Stein (2000) show that banks flush with balance-sheet liquidity respond less to monetary tightening
because such banks can continue originating loans in the face of increased funding costs by running down their
stock of liquid assets. Their findings complement ours, because we find that the supply of liquid loans does not
respond to banks’ cost of funds.
6

For evidence that bank size and scope reduces the potency of monetary policy, see Ashcraft (2003),
Campello (2002), Jayaratne and Morgan (2000), Kashyap and Stein (2000), and Loutskina (2005).
7

Petersen and Rajan (1994) show that small firms benefit by concentrating their business with a single lender, and
their results suggest that such borrowers face high costs of switching banks. Thus, many small firms are ‘bank
dependent’. The geographical scope of loan markets, particularly for bank dependent firms, tends to be limited
geographically because local lenders have better information than competing lenders. Technology has increased the
average distance between small-business borrowers and lenders, but physical proximity continues to affect bank
lending supply and pricing (Petersen and Rajan, 2002; Degryse and Ongena, 2005). Our results suggest that bank
dependent firms’ cost of capital depends on the financial condition (cost of deposits and liquidity) of local lenders.
8

Bernanke (1983) focused on credit effects of bank failures during the Depression. More recently, Bernanke and
Lown (1991) show that credit in regions with many poorly capitalized banks suffered most during the 1991-92
recession. Peek and Rosengren (2000) show that distressed Japanese banks reduced credit supply to borrowers in
California (relative to California banks). Ashcraft (2005) shows that local output falls when the FDIC closes even
healthy banks. Slovin, Sushka and Polonchek (1993) provide evidence that borrowers from Continental Illinois
were potentially harmed by that bank’s failure. Hubbard, Kuttner and Palia (2002) show that low capital banks price
business loans at higher yields than better-capitalized banks. Like our paper, Mian and Khwaja (2005) and
Paravisini (2004) focus on how liquidity shifts loan supply. Mian and Khwaja exploit bank runs following
Pakistan’s unexpected nuclear test in 1998; they show that firms borrowed less from banks experiencing greater runs
and more from banks experiencing smaller runs. Paravisini finds that profitable lending expands following an
infusion of liquidity by the Argentine government into banks.

9

Gorton and Souleles (2005) argue that this process reduces financial distress costs of debt.

10

We have also disaggregated our liquidity measure by separating out mortgage-backed securities from other liquid
assets. In these robustness tests, there is no additional effect of mortgage-backed securities, suggesting that our
coefficient represent shifts in bank behavior in response to variation in liquidity. We thank Scott Frame for
suggesting this test to us.

11

See http://www.fanniemae.com.

12

The extent to which the yield differentials reflects liquidity, rather than differences in credit risk, between nonjumbo mortgages and jumbos remains somewhat controversial. A recent study by Ambrose, LaCour-Little and
Sanders (2004) controls carefully for credit risk and concludes that the yield differential is only about 5 basis points
between non-jumbo and jumbo mortgages. Nevertheless, there seems to be little doubt that there is an increase in
yields for jumbos, and that some of that increase reflects differences in liquidity.

13

Here we consider only single-family home purchase mortgage applications across the lending financial
institutions in the United States.

14

Note that the difference between average census tract income ($51 thousand) and the average applicant income
($208 thousand) in our sample is due to the fact that we only consider mortgages between 50 percent and 250
percent of the jumbo-loan cutoff.
15

Our results are not sensitive to this assumption. For example, we have also estimated our models for loans
between 75 percent and 150 percent of the jumbo-loan threshold and find similar results to those reported here.
These results are available on request from the authors.

16

We are not able to observe the fraction of on-balance sheet mortgages that are below the jumbo-loan cutoff.

17

We have also estimated a more parsimonious approach, in which we control for average bank-specific loan pool
characteristics, and obtain results that are very similar to those reported here.

18

We have also estimated standard errors clustered by state and clustered by year. We find similar levels of
statistical significance in each of these alternative approaches to those reported here.

19

Large banks typically borrow in this market, whereas smaller banks typically supply funds to the Fed Funds
market.

20

Note that some borrowers may split their borrowing into a non-jumbo loan plus a small subordinated second
mortgage to take advantage of the jumbo/non-jumbo pricing differential. Wealthier applicants will be more able to
exploit this possibility.
21

The statistical significance of these results increases when we estimate the model on the logistic transformation of
the non-jumbo share.

