                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE U.S. HEALTH CARE SYSTEM AND LABOR MARKETS

                                           Brigitte C. Madrian

                                         Working Paper 11980
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11980


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2006




Written for the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 50th Economic Conference, “Wanting It All: The Challenge
of Reforming the U.S. Health Care System,” June 15-17, 2005, Chatham, MA. This paper draws quite
extensively on three previously written papers: “Health Insurance Portability, Labor Supply, and Job
Mobility,” July 2004, written for the Inter-American Conference on Social Security; “Health Insurance and
the Labor Market,” in Huizhong Zhou, ed., The Political Economy of Health Care Reforms (Kalamazoo, MI:
Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 2001), and “Health, Health Insurance and the Labor Market”
(with Janet Currie) in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3
(Amsterdam: Elsevier-North Holland, 1999). The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Brigitte C. Madrian. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The U.S. Health Care System and Labor Markets
Brigitte C. Madrian
NBER Working Paper No. 11980
January 2006
JEL No. I10, J3, J6

                                           ABSTRACT




This paper provides a broad and general overview of the relationship between the U.S. health care
system and the labor market. The paper first describes some of the salient features of and facts about
the system of health insurance coverage in the U.S., particularly the role of employers. It then
summarizes the empirical evidence on how health insurance impacts labor market outcomes such
as wages, labor supply (including retirement, female labor supply, part-time vs. full-time work, and
formal vs. informal sector work), labor demand (including hours worked and the composition of
employment across full-time, part-time and temporary workers), and job turnover. It then discusses
the implications of having a fragmented system of health insurance delivery--in which employers
play a central role--on the health care system and health care outcomes.


Brigitte C. Madrian
Department of Business and Public Policy
University of Pennsylvania, Wharton School
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
bmadrian@wharton.upenn.edu
                The U.S. Health Care System and Labor Markets



I. Introduction and Motivation

         There is no universal provider of health insurance or health care in the United States.

Rather, a patchwork system of institutions exists, each covering different subgroups of the

population. Certain types of health insurance are provided as a condition of employment, while

other types of health insurance are more readily available when individuals are not employed or

not fully employed, while still others are available regardless of employment status. The two

most significant sources of health insurance coverage in the U.S. are employers, who collectively

insure 63% of the non-elderly (<65) population, and governments, who collectively cover 17%

of the non-elderly population (Fronstin, 2004). Other types of insurance, such as individually

purchased policies or coverage obtained through other institutions or organizations, cover about

7% of the non-elderly population with health insurance coverage.1 But a non-trivial fraction of

the population, 18% or 44.7 million individuals, are uninsured (Fronstin, 2004).

         As its title suggests, this paper considers the relationship between the U.S. health care

system and the labor market. Section II describes some of the salient features of and facts about

the system of health insurance coverage in the U.S., particularly the role of employers. Much

academic and media attention has been focused on the presumption that the relationship between


         1
           Note that some individuals may have more than one source of health insurance coverage, so the sum of
the fraction of individuals with the various sources of health insurance discussed in this paragraph plus the fraction
of the population uninsured may add to more than 100%.


                                                           2
the labor market and the type(s) of health insurance coverage available to individuals may

motivate some individuals and firms to make different labor market decisions than they would

otherwise, in ways that adversely impact overall labor market performance. Section III

summarizes the empirical evidence on this issue, examining how health insurance impacts labor

market outcomes such as wages, labor supply (including retirement, female labor supply, part-

time vs. full-time work, and formal vs. informal sector work), labor demand (including hours

worked and the composition of employment across full-time, part-time and temporary workers),

and job turnover. But the implications of the relationship between employer provided-health

insurance and the labor market are not limited to labor market outcomes. Section IV discusses

the implications of having a fragmented system of health insurance delivery--in which employers

play a central role--on the health care system and health care outcomes. The paper concludes in

Section V.



II. Health Insurance Institutions in the United States

       The most prevalent type of health insurance, covering 63% of the non-elderly U.S.

population, is employer-provided health insurance coverage (Fronstin, 2004). Some of those

covered, about half, receive this type of insurance by virtue of their own employment, while the

rest receive it as dependents of a spouse or parent who is employed. Employers in the U.S. who

provide health insurance do so voluntarily, and many individuals (17% of those not self-

employed) work in firms where such benefits are not offered (Fronstin, 1999). Even in those

firms where health insurance is provided as a benefit, not all employees are necessarily eligible,

and those who are eligible must generally elect coverage in order to receive it. Indeed, only 62%

of wage and salary workers are eligible to receive health insurance benefits through their own




                                                 3
employment, and 17% of those individuals decline the coverage that is available to them

(although they may receive health insurance from another source) (Fronstin, 1999). Some

employers also provide health insurance to former employees who have retired, so-called

"retiree" health insurance. At present, about 29% of firms employing more than 500 workers

offer health insurance to current and future retirees (Fronstin and Salisbury, 2003, citing the

Mercer/Foster-Higgins National Survey of Employer-Sponsored Health Plans 2002); the fraction

of firms offering this coverage, however, has been declining quite substantially over time and is

likely to continue to decline.

        Various types of government insurance programs cover most, but not all, of the

population who are not covered by employer-provided insurance. It is interesting that even at the

governmental level, there is no single unified health insurance program. By far the largest

government health insurance program is Medicare. Medicare was implemented in 1965 to

provide health insurance coverage to individuals aged 65 and over, many of whom were left

uninsured or underinsured upon their retirement when coverage through their former employers

ceased.2 Medicare also covers some individuals under age 65, specifically those who are

disabled and eligible for Social Security Disability Insurance. Currently, Medicare covers over

96% of those over age 65, and 3% of those under age 65 (Fronstin, 2003 and 2004).

        Medicaid is a state-run health insurance program funded jointly by the federal and

various state governments (some states call the program by different names, for example, in

California the program is referred to as Medi-Cal). Historically this was a health insurance

program for public assistance recipients, primarily low income single mothers and their children,

and also a source of supplemental insurance for the low income elderly. In recent years it has


        2
          At the time the federal Medicare program was implemented individuals were not eligible for Social
Security benefits until age 65.


                                                        4
been expanded to provide coverage to non-welfare-eligible individuals in families with modest

incomes, particularly children through the SCHIP program (State Children’s Health Insurance

Program). There is great heterogeneity across states in the eligibility requirements for Medicaid

and in the benefits that are actually provided. Overall, 9% of the elderly are covered by

Medicaid, as are 13% of the non-elderly (Fronstin, 2003 and 2004). The federal government also

provides health insurance to members of the uniformed services and their families. About 3% of

the non-elderly population is covered by this type of health insurance (Fronstin, 2004).

       Various other types of private insurance cover about 7% of the non-elderly population,

and perhaps as much as a third of the elderly population (Fronstin, 2003 and 2004). These

include individually purchased policies from private insurance companies (such as Blue

Cross/Blue Shield), insurance provided through membership organizations such as a trade union

or professional association, university-provided health insurance for college students, and

supplemental insurance for the Medicare-eligible elderly (often referred to as Medigap

coverage).

       This patchwork system of health insurance coverage leaves many people uninsured:

those who do not have health insurance through their own or a family member'
                                                                           s employment,

who are not old enough or disabled enough to qualify for Medicare, who are not eligible or

decline to participate in Medicaid, and who either cannot afford or choose not to purchase health

insurance in the private market. The estimated 43 million uninsured individuals in the U.S.

represent about 17% of the non-elderly population (Fronstin, 2003). Due in large part to

Medicare, only a small fraction of the elderly (65+), about one percent, are uninsured.

       It is interesting to consider why the U.S., in contrast to most other developed countries,

has a health insurance system in which employers are the primary providers of insurance rather




                                                5
than the government, at least for the non-elderly.3 The U.S. has repeatedly rejected broad

attempts to "socialize" either medical care or health insurance provision. The first such

initiative, during the 1930s, failed despite the concurrent genesis of so many other government

social programs (including Social Security, Unemployment Insurance, and the Aid to Families

with Children program, the precursor to contemporary public assistance programs for low

income families). The most recent initiative was the failed Clinton administration attempt at

national health reform in 1993 (there have been other unsuccessful attempts in the interim).

         Even though there are some limited examples of U.S. companies providing health

insurance coverage before World War II, employer-provided health insurance, as an institution,

really came into being during the two decades following the War. In the absence of universal

government-provided health insurance coverage, market forces pushed employers into their role

as the primary providers of insurance. These market forces are several, and include: a

substantial price advantage given to employers through the tax code since firm health insurance

expenditures on behalf of their employees are not counted as taxable income to either the firm or

the employees; significant economies of scale that derive from providing health insurance to a

large group of individuals; and the ability to pool individuals into insurance groups in a way that

largely overcomes the problem of adverse selection that plagues the individual market for health

insurance.



III. Empirical Evidence on Health Insurance and Labor Market Outcomes

         With this understanding of how the various U.S. health insurance institutions work, we

can now consider the relationship between health insurance and various different labor market


         3
          It is also interesting to consider why employers are the primary providers of health insurance, but not
other types of insurance.


                                                          6
outcomes. This section describes some of the key empirical estimates of the relationship

between health insurance and labor market outcomes, including retirement, employment, full-

time vs. part-time work, and job turnover. It does not, however, go into great detail on the

strengths and weaknesses of the various empirical studies that are cited. Currie and Madrian

(1999), Gruber (2000), and Gruber and Madrian (2004) provide greater detail on the data and

methods used in many of the studies cited in this paper (and many others), and offer opinions on

the relative merit of the different empirical approaches.



Retirement and the Labor Supply of Older Workers

       Perhaps the most important labor market outcome to consider is employment itself—how

does health insurance affect individual participation in the labor market? The potential impact of

health insurance on labor force participation derives from the fact that for some individuals,

being employed is the cheapest (and perhaps even the only) way to obtain health insurance,

while for other individuals, not being employed is in fact the cheapest way to obtain health

insurance. Health insurance will be a more important factor in the decision about whether or not

to be employed for individuals who place high value on health insurance—those with high

anticipated medical expenditures either for themselves, or their dependents. Because medical

expenditures tend to increase with age, individuals approaching retirement should be particularly

interested in maintaining their health insurance coverage.

       It should not be surprising, then, that the most widely studied facet of labor force

participation that has been examined in the literature on health insurance and labor market

outcomes is retirement: to what extent does health insurance determine when and how

individuals choose to withdraw from the labor force? Health insurance is a potentially important




                                                 7
determinant of retirement outcomes because some types of health insurance are more portable

across the transition from work to retirement than are others. For example, employer-provided

health insurance is typically lost upon retirement; in companies that provide retiree health

coverage, however, employer-provided health insurance is portable—individuals retain their

coverage even after they retire. Health insurance that comes from a source other than one’s own

employment would also be portable, including individual health insurance purchased in the

private market or employer provided coverage obtained as a dependent through one’s spouse (as

long as the spouse does not lose coverage).

        If health insurance is not portable across the transition from work to retirement, the

potential loss of health insurance coverage associated with leaving the work force creates a

deterrent to retirement. Thus, we would expect retirement rates to be higher among those with

portable health insurance. Once individuals reach age 65 and are eligible for Medicare, losing

health insurance coverage completely is no longer a concern for those workers previously

covered by employer-provided health insurance. Thus, after age 65, retirement rates among

those with non-portable insurance will no longer be lower, and indeed, may increase if

individuals have postponed retirement until becoming eligible for Medicare.4

        The empirical evidence on health insurance and retirement largely concurs with these

theoretical predictions. Several studies have found consistent evidence that individuals whose

employers provide retiree health insurance leave the labor force earlier than individuals whose

employers do not. For example, Rust and Phelan (1997) estimate that retiree health insurance

increases the probability of retiring before age 65 by 12% to 29% (the effects vary with age);

Karoly and Rogowski (1994) and Rogowski and Karoly (2000) estimate effects ranging from

        4
          If individuals value their current health insurance coverage more than Medicare, which is not implausible,
there may still be some deterrent to retirement from having non-portable health insurance coverage even after
individuals are eligible for Medicare.


                                                         8
47% to 62%; while Blau and Gilleskie (2001) estimate effects ranging from 26% to 80%.

Madrian (1994a) finds that individuals with access to retiree health insurance leave the labor

market between 6 and 18 months earlier than individuals who do not have access to retiree health

insurance and are also much more likely to retire before the age of 65.

        Individuals who are covered by non-employment-based health insurance, for example,

through policies purchased individually in the private market, through trade associations, or

Medicaid, also have a type of health insurance coverage that is portable across the transition

from work to retirement. Rust and Phelan (1997) extend their analysis to these other types of

portable health insurance, and find that as with retiree health insurance, individuals with such

coverage also have higher retirement rates than individuals who would lose their health

insurance coverage upon retirement. Johnson, Davidoff and Perese (2003) look at the health

insurance related costs of retiring more generally, and find that the higher are these costs, the less

likely individuals are to retire.

        One set of institutions designed to increase the portability of employer-provided health

insurance, both across the transition from work to retirement and across other types of labor

market transitions as well (e.g. job change), are state and federal “continuation of coverage”

laws. These include two well-known federal laws that go by the acronyms COBRA (for the

Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act) and HIPAA (for the Health Insurance

Portability and Accountability Act). COBRA and other similar state-level continuation of

coverage laws mandate that employers must allow employees and their dependents the option to

continue purchasing health insurance through the employer’s health plan for a specified period of

time after coverage would otherwise terminate, even if the employee is no longer employed by




                                                  9
the firm.5 HIPAA restricts the ability of insurers to impose preexisting conditions exclusions on

individuals who change their health insurance coverage.6 Both of these laws reduce the costs in

terms of potential health insurance coverage loss associated with either retiring or changing jobs.

         Although no research has yet been done on the impact of HIPAA on retirement, Gruber

and Madrian (1995) examine the effect of COBRA and its state-level precursors on retirement.

They find that among those with employer-provided health insurance, these continuation of

coverage laws increase the probability of retiring by 30%; in contrast, among those without

employer provided health insurance for whom the laws provide no benefit, continuation

coverage has no effect on retirement. These results, using a relatively exogenous source of

variation in the portability of health insurance, confirm that retirement is very sensitive to health

insurance availability.

         An interesting thing happens at age 65 when individuals become eligible for Medicare.

Even for those individuals with employer-provided health insurance that does not continue into

retirement, leaving the labor force no longer implies a loss of health insurance because

individuals are covered by Medicare. Thus, Medicare eligibility should provide a strong

retirement incentive for those individuals not eligible for retiree health insurance. And indeed, a

substantial fraction of 64-year-olds do retire at age 65 when they become eligible for Medicare.

Empirical research has to date been unable to precisely quantify the magnitude of this Medicare

effect because age 65 also happens to be the Social Security normal retirement age and the age at

which many pension plans provide full retirement benefits. With so many other factors

motivating retirement that are coincident with Medicare eligibility, it is difficult to quantify


         5
            Minnesota, in 1974, was the first state to pass a continuation of coverage law. Several states passed
similar laws over the next decade. See Gruber and Madrian (1995, 1996) for more detail on continuation of
coverage laws.
          6
            See Berger at al. (1999) for more detail on the health insurance portability aspects of HIPAA.


                                                          10
exactly how big each of the respective effects are. But the evidence on how other types of health

insurance affect retirement suggest that Medicare eligibility should be very important as well.

       One idiosyncratic feature of Medicare relative to other types of health insurance that also

generates interesting variations in retirement behavior is that Medicare only covers individuals

and not spouses or dependent children. As a result, the retirement decisions of two individuals

without retiree health insurance who are both about to turn 65, one with a spouse who is younger

and the other with a spouse who is older, could be quite different. For the individual with the

older spouse, retirement at the age of Medicare eligibility will result in a loss of health insurance

coverage for neither spouse—both will be covered by Medicare (the older spouse already is). In

contrast, retirement at the age of Medicare eligibility for the individual with a younger spouse

will result in a loss of health insurance coverage for the spouse if the spouse was covered as a

dependent on the employee'
                         s plan and not through his or her own independent coverage.

Interestingly, Madrian and Beaulieu (1998) find that men with younger wives are less likely to

retire than are men with older wives until their spouses also become eligible for Medicare. Thus,

retirement is affected by not only one'
                                      s own Medicare eligibility, but also the Medicare eligibility

of one'
      s spouse.

       Health insurance also impacts the nature of the transition from work to retirement. Some

individuals move from full-time work to full-time retirement, while others pursue a more gradual

transition from work to retirement, moving from full-time work to part-time work (so-called

bridge jobs), and then eventually to full-time retirement. Although many older workers, when

asked, express a desire to make a gradual transition from work to retirement, it may be difficult

for many to actually do this before becoming eligible for Medicare while also maintaining health

insurance coverage. This is because employer-provided health insurance in the U.S. is typically




                                                 11
contingent upon full-time employment; very few employers provide health insurance benefits to

part-time employees. Individuals with retiree health insurance, however, can retire from their

full-time job and move to a different part-time or self-employment job while maintaining health

insurance through their former employer. Research has shown that individuals with retiree

health insurance are indeed much more likely to make a gradual transition from work to

retirement than are individuals without retiree health insurance (Quinn, 1997). Thus, health

insurance that is portable across the transition from work to retirement appears to be an

institution that enables individuals to retire both when and how they desire.



Health Insurance Eligibility through Government Public Assistance Programs and Labor Supply

       While much of the research on how health insurance affects labor force participation has

been directed at the issue of retirement, older individuals are certainly not the only ones whose

employment decisions are impacted by health insurance. Another margin along which health

insurance might affect labor market outcomes is through the labor supply decisions of potential

public assistance recipients. A key feature of the two primary public assistance programs in the

U.S. (TANF, or Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, and SSI, or Supplemental Security

Income) is that, in addition to cash and other benefits, recipients qualify for Medicaid—health

insurance provided by the states to public assistance recipients and (potentially) other low

income individuals. Because the groups who qualify for these types of programs—low income

single female-headed families and the low income disabled and elderly—tend to qualify for low-

wage, low-skilled jobs without health insurance, the coupling of Medicaid with public assistance

encourages individuals to sign up for and to remain enrolled in public assistance programs.




                                                12
       Overall, the literature suggests that health insurance availability, and Medicaid in

particular, has either no (Meyer and Rosenbaum, 2000; Blank, 1989; Montgomery and Navin,

2000; Decker, 1993; Ham and Shore-Sheppard, 2003) or a small effect (Yelowitz, 1995; Moffit

and Wolfe, 1992; Winkler, 1991) on the labor force participation of low income single mothers.

This is somewhat surprising given the potential importance of health insurance for this

population and their children. On the other hand, there is some evidence that the decision to

participate in welfare programs, conditional on labor supply decisions, is fairly responsive to the

availability of health insurance (Ellwood and Adams, 1990; Moffit and Wolfe, 1992; Decker,

1993; Yelowitz 1996, 1998a and 1998b, 2000), an interesting finding in its own right, and one

with important public policy implications.



The Labor Supply of Married Women

       Married women, and to a lesser extent married men, are another group whose labor force

participation is likely to be impacted by the availability of health insurance coverage. Although

most of the interest in the effect of health insurance on labor force participation in both policy

and academic circles has been focused on older workers and public assistance recipients, the

potential impact in terms of aggregate effects on total hours worked may very well be largest for

prime-aged workers, particularly married women who are typically estimated to have a large

labor supply elasticity. Given the responsiveness or married women to wage changes, one might

expect sensitivity to the availability of health insurance coverage as well.

       Because most companies that offer health insurance make it available to both employees

and their spouses, many married women receive health insurance coverage through their spouses.

Whether or not a married women has health insurance through her spouse turns out to be a very




                                                 13
important factor in whether and how much married women work. Married women with health

insurance through their husbands are 7-20 percentage points less likely to work than are women

without health insurance from their spouse (Buchmueller and Valletta, 1999; Olson, 1998;

Schone and Vistnes, 2000; Wellington and Cobb-Clark, 2000). Among those that do work, they

are much more likely to be employed in part-time jobs that typically do not provide health

insurance than full-time jobs (Buchmueller and Valletta, 1999; Olson 1998; Schone and Vistnes,

2000; Wellington and Cobb-Clark, 2000). Thus, for married women, the lack of health insurance

from a spouse'
             s employment seems to have a strong influence in motivating married women to

find jobs with health insurance themselves.

       Bradley et al. (2005) find large differences in the labor market responses of married

women to health shocks based on whether these women have health insurance attached to their

own or their spouse’s job. This study, which tracks the labor market behavior of working

married women diagnosed with breast cancer, finds only small reductions in the labor force

participation and hours worked of women with breast cancer whose health insurance comes

through their own employment, but large reductions in both labor force participation and hours

worked for those whose health insurance comes through their spouse.

       In one of the few studies of health insurance and the labor market using non-U.S. data,

Chou and Staiger (2001) examine the effects of health insurance on spousal labor supply in

Taiwan. Before March, 1995 when Taiwan implemented a new National Health Insurance

program, health insurance was provided primarily through one of three government-sponsored

health plans which covered workers in different sectors of the economy. Historically these plans

covered only workers and not their dependents. Thus, own employment was the only way for

most individuals to obtain health insurance. There was one exception—coverage for spouses




                                               14
was extended to government workers in 1982, and subsequently to children and parents as well.

By exploiting this variation in the availability of dependent health insurance coverage, Chou and

Staiger (2001) are able to identify the effect of health insurance on employment. They estimate

that the labor force participation rate of women married to government employees declined by

about 3% after they were able to obtain coverage as spousal dependents relative to the labor

force participation rate of women married to other private-sector workers. They estimate similar

declines in labor force participation for the wives of private-sector workers following the 1995

implementation of National Health Insurance which made health insurance available to all

individuals. Their results are largely corroborated in an analogous study by Chou and Lui (2000)

using a different dataset on labor force participation in Taiwan.

       A study of married women'
                               s labor supply in Spain uncovered another interesting link

between health insurance finance and female labor supply (De la Rica and Lemieux, 1993). In

Spain, health care is provided by the government and financed out of a mandatory payroll tax

paid partially by the firm and partially by the employee. Payment of the payroll tax entitles both

workers and their spouses and dependent children to health care, as well as to a pension and sick

leave. Among men, compliance with the payroll tax is nearly universal. Among married

women, however, over one-quarter of those who are employed work in the "underground"

economy where "required" taxes are not paid.

       Only two studies have empirically examined the effect of health insurance on the labor

force participation decisions of prime-aged men. The first, by Wellington and Cobb-Clark

(2000), examines the effect of spousal health insurance on the employment decisions of both

husbands and wives. As noted earlier, they find large effects of husbands health insurance on

the labor force participation of married women. They also find an effect of spousal health




                                                15
insurance on the labor force participation of married men: having a wife with health insurance

reduces husbands labor force participation, although the effect is less than half the size of that

estimated for married women.

       The only other study of health insurance and employment among prime-age men, Gruber

and Madrian (1997), exploits the continuation of coverage mandates discussed earlier in the

context of retirement to consider the impact of health insurance on the transition from

employment to non-employment and on the subsequent duration of non-employment. This study

finds that the availability of continuation coverage increases the likelihood of experiencing a

spell of non-employment by about 15% and also increases the total amount of time spent non-

employed by about 15%.

       Overall, the body of empirical literature on the effects of health insurance on the labor

supply of married women and other prime-aged workers gives strong and consistent support to

the notion that health insurance affects individual labor supply decisions. When there is a ready

source of health insurance available not attached to one s own employment, individuals

(particularly married women) are much less likely to be employed. This suggests that the

institutional link between health insurance and employment may be a significant factor in the

employment decisions of individuals.

       There are many other less-studied avenues through which health insurance is likely to

impact labor supply. The link between Medicare coverage and the receipt of Social Security

Disability Insurance for disabled individuals under the age of 65 could act as a deterrent for work

among the disabled, or at least work that would be sufficient to disqualify them from further

disability payments and the health insurance (Medicare) that accompanies these benefits.

University-provided health insurance to students operates in a similar way. Individuals can




                                                 16
participate in a student health plan if they maintain their student status, which typically involves

registering for a certain number of credit hours and maintaining satisfactory grades.

Employment, or at least full-time employment, may jeopardize an individual'
                                                                          s ability to maintain

status as a student. Thus, some students who value their health insurance may be deterred from

entering the labor market. Anecdotally, this tends to take the form of delaying graduation.



Health Insurance and Job Choice

       Beyond the full- vs. part-time dimension labor supply, health insurance also has the

potential to impact the initial choice of where to work and subsequent decisions about whether to

change jobs, including the choice about whether or not to become self-employed. Economists

are interested in the issue of job turnover because it is the process by which workers are

reallocated away from jobs where they are less productive and into jobs where they are more

productive. Impediments to productivity-enhancing job turnover are thus a barrier to economic

growth.

       Why does health insurance impact job turnover? There are several reasons. One obvious

reason is that not all employers offer health insurance. Individuals who have employer-provided

health insurance and place a high value on it will be reluctant to switch to a company that does

not provide health insurance. In addition, individuals who don'
                                                              t have employer-provided health

insurance and who place a high value on it may attempt to find jobs at companies that do provide

health insurance. An interesting piece of evidence on this front comes from the behavior of

married men who are working in jobs without health insurance. Married men without health

insurance but who have pregnant wives are two-times more likely to change jobs than married

men without health insurance whose wives are not pregnant (Madrian, 1994b). The impending




                                                 17
birth of a child clearly increases the value of health insurance, and these men clearly respond by

changing jobs, presumably in an attempt to find something with health insurance.

        A second reason that health insurance affects the job turnover decisions of individuals is

that not all employer-provided health insurance plans are equal, at least not for an employee who

contemplates changing jobs. In addition to variation across employers in the generosity of the

health insurance package in terms of copyaments, deductibles and what is and is not covered,

there are two more subtle issues to consider. The first is that many employers exclude

preexisting conditions for a certain period of time.7 So, even though a new employer and one'
                                                                                            s

current employer may appear to provide identical coverage, the coverage of the new employer

may in fact be vastly inferior for families with medical problems if these problems are not

covered under the terms of a preexisting conditions exclusion restriction. The second issue is

that employers do not generally offer their employees free choice amongst the universe of

medical providers in the health insurance plans that they provide. Thus, an employment change

that is accompanied by a health insurance change may also necessitate a medical provider

change. Individuals who value relationships with their current doctors may be averse to

changing health insurance plans even if preexisting conditions are not an issue.

        My own research on the relationship between health insurance and job turnover suggests

that health insurance is indeed an important factor in the decision to change jobs. One

interesting finding is that among individuals who have employer-provided health insurance,

those who also have coverage through the employment of a spouse are much more likely to

change jobs than those that do not (Madrian, 1994b). In essence, health insurance coverage

through a spouse'
                s employment is portable across the transition from one job to another and is


        7
           HIPAA restricts the circumstances under which employers can impose preexisting conditions exclusions
in their health insurance plans.


                                                      18
one way to skirt the preexisting conditions exclusions that may be in place at a new employer.

Another interesting finding is that COBRA, in addition to motivating retirement among older

workers, also motivates job turnover among younger workers (Gruber and Madrian, 1994).

COBRA makes the health insurance from one'
                                         s former employer portable across jobs, at least for

a limited time, but long enough to skirt preexisting conditions exclusions.

         Beyond my own work, the broader literature on health insurance and job choice is more

divided. About one-third of the papers studied find that health insurance significantly impacts

the job choice decisions made by workers, with a potential loss of health insurance as a result of

job change acting as a deterrent to job turnover, and a potential gain in health insurance leading

to increased mobility (Cooper and Monheit, 1993; Madrian, 1994b; Gruber and Madrian, 1994;

Anderson, 1997; Stroupe, Kinney and Knieser, 2001; Bansak and Raphael, 2005). Another one-

third of the papers find no significant relationship between job choice and health insurance

(Mitchell, 1982; Holtz-Eakin, 1994; Penrod, 1994, Holtz-Eakin, Penrod and Rosen, 1996; Slade,

1997; Kapur, 1998; Spaulding, 1997). And the remaining third find evidence that varies by

empirical specification or the sub-group analyzed, or effects that are not statistically significant

at standard levels (Buchmueller and Valletta, 1996; Brunetti, et al. 2000; Madrian and Lefgren,

1998; Berger, Black and Scott, 2004; Gilleskie and Lutz, 2002). It is interesting to note that a

fair number of the studies that find a significant effect of health insurance on job choice obtain

estimates that are fairly similar in magnitude—that the potential loss of employer-provided

health insurance associated with job change reduces job mobility by 25-50% (Cooper and

Monheit, 1993; Madrian, 1994b; Buchmueller and Valletta, 1996; Stroupe, Kinney and Kniesner,

2001).




                                                 19
       It is also interesting to consider the relationship between health insurance and job

turnover from the employer'
                          s perspective. For an employer that offers health insurance

coverage, a sick employee is costly in two ways. First, a sick employee may be less productive.

Second, a sick employee (or a healthy employee with sick dependents) is likely to generate

higher insurance claims. Because of their medical expenditures, these employees may be

relatively more attractive targets for layoffs. The link between health insurance and employment

may thus have an adverse impact on families with medical problems if these problems lead to

claims-based layoffs (see Anderson 1997).



Health Insurance and Labor Demand

       In addition to its impact of the employment and job choice decisions of individuals,

health insurance may also affect the labor demand decisions of employers. There are two

features of health insurance provision that are particularly salient in this regard. The first is that

health insurance is a fixed cost of employment. Expected employer expenditures on health

insurance do not increase when the weekly hours worked by their employees increase, and they

do not increase when compensation increases. They only increase when more employees are

hired. This feature of employer-provided health insurance, its fixed-cost nature, gives firms an

incentive to economize on the costs of providing health insurance in two ways. The first is by

hiring fewer employees but at longer weekly hours—this is one way to maintain production

while reducing the overall costs of providing health insurance. The second is by hiring fewer but

more productive employees—employees who can produce more than the average employee

would. Cutler and Madrian (1998) provide partial evidence that firms have substituted long

weekly hours for fewer workers as health insurance costs have increased over recent years.




                                                  20
Moreover, the effects are nontrivial. The increase in weekly hours associated with the increase

in health insurance costs between 1980 and 1993 resulted in a change in average weekly hours

among those with health insurance equivalent to roughly half the change in labor input that is

observed in a typical recession. Baicker and Chandra (2005) examine the impact of rising health

insurance costs on employment and find that a 10 percent increase in health premiums reduces

the aggregate employment rate by 1.6 percent.

       The second feature of health insurance that is salient to the labor demand decision is the

distinction between full- and part-time workers in the tax treatment of employer expenditures on

health insurance. Employer expenditures on health insurance are usually not subject to

taxation—with one caveat: employers must satisfy a set of Internal Revenue Service

nondiscrimination rules which stipulate that if a firm is to provide health insurance, it must make

it widely available to substantively all employees. In essence, employers cannot selectively

decide that they will provide health insurance to some employees and not to others, either

because of favoritism, or as a cost-saving measure. However, certain groups of employees,

namely part-time, temporary and seasonal workers, are exempt from the requirements of the

nondiscrimination rules. Thus, employers can deny health insurance coverage to part-time,

temporary and seasonal workers while still obtaining favorable tax treatment for their health

insurance expenditures on full-time permanent employees. As health insurance becomes more

expensive to provide, the non-discrimination rules give employers an incentive to hire part-time

and temporary workers in lieu of full-time workers as a way to economize on insurance

expenditures. This could account for some of the phenomenal growth in the temporary services

industry over the past two decades.




                                                21
       More concrete evidence that employers substitute from full- to part-time workers in the

face of higher health insurance costs comes from the state of Hawaii. In 1974, Hawaii mandated

employer provision of health insurance to full-time, but not part-time workers. Thurston (1997)

finds that those industries most affected by the mandate, namely industries in which relatively

few full-time workers were covered by health insurance, saw large increases in the fraction of

workers employed in part-time jobs. In contrast, industries in which almost all full-time

employees were already receiving health insurance saw little shift in the fraction of full- vs. part-

time workers. Baicker and Chandra (2005) also find a shift to part-time employment as a result

of recent increases in health insurance costs.

       Thus, health insurance affects both the size and composition of the work force that firms'

employ. As health insurance becomes more costly to provide, employers have an incentive to

reduce their health insurance costs by substituting overtime for employment, skilled labor for

unskilled labor, and part-time and temporary workers for regular full-time employees.



Health Insurance and Wages

       A final labor market outcome of interest, wages, is determined jointly by the labor supply

decisions of individuals and the labor demand decisions of employers. From the firm’s

perspective, providing health insurance imposes an additional compensation cost on the

employer and will reduce the level of wages it is willing to offer for a given level of labor input.

From the worker’s perspective, employer-provided health insurance is simply another form of

compensation and will reduce the level of wages required to supply a given level of labor input.

In a competitive labor market, the level of total compensation received by employees will be

determined by worker productivity. The composition of that compensation between wages and




                                                 22
fringe benefits will be dictated by the value that employees place on having employer-provided

health insurance relative to the cost to the employer of providing it. If employees value

employer-provided health insurance at less than the cost to the employer of providing it, the firm

will not be able to pass the full cost of offering the insurance onto workers in the form of lower

wages and will opt not to provide health insurance. That employers do provide health insurance

would seem to indicate that at least some employees are willing to accept a wage reduction at

least equivalent to the cost to the firm of providing the insurance.

       Given the inherent risks of being uninsured, risk-adverse individuals should value having

some sort of health insurance, although as noted above in Section II, there may be more than one

way to obtain this insurance. The value to employees having employer-provided health

insurance have already been mentioned: the tax deductibility of employer expenditures on health

insurance, economies of scale from providing health insurance to a large group of individuals,

and the ability to pool individuals into insurance groups in a way that largely overcomes the

problem of adverse selection that plagues the individual market for health insurance. These

advantages of employer-provided health insurance are potentially large, and we should expect

many employees to be willing to accept a wage reduction at least equivalent to the cost to their

employer of providing health insurance. However, some individuals have cheaper health

insurance available from another source (for example, the government or a family member), and

they may place a very low value on having employer-provided health insurance from their own

employer.

       Despite the strong presumption of a trade-off between wages and health insurance, the

early literature on this topic was focused not on the magnitude of the wage-health insurance

tradeoff, but on the reasons why researchers could not find support that there is one (Currie and




                                                 23
Madrian, 1999). The fundamental problem was a lack of appropriate data for estimating the

magnitude of any such relationship. More recent studies that have been careful in both finding

suitable data and specifying the empirical relationship have found evidence of a wage-health

insurance tradeoff. Gruber and Krueger (1991) and Gruber (1994) exploit exogenous changes in

the cost of benefits offered to workers and find that essentially the full amount of these cost

increases are passed onto workers in the form of lower wages.8 Royalty (2003) examines the

choices that workers make among health plans within a given firm when those plans receive

different employer subsidies and require different employee contributions and finds evidence of

an incomplete tradeoff between wages and health insurance. Baicker and Chandra (2005),

exploiting variation in health insurance costs driven by variation in medical malpractice

payments, similarly find an incomplete tradeoff between wages and health benefits. These

recent studies all concur that there is a trade-off between wages and health benefits, but the

magnitude of this trade-off, that is, whether workers are willing to accept a dollar-for-dollar

reduction in wages in exchange for receiving health benefits or something less, is still open to

question.

        Health insurance may also affect wages through mechanisms other than a direct trade-off

between wages and fringe benefits. For example, health insurance has the potential to affect the

job matching process. As discussed earlier, the costs of relinquishing health insurance upon job

change may lead individuals to remain in their current jobs even if higher productivity job

alternatives are available. This productivity loss would presumably result in lower levels of

compensation as well. Gruber and Madrian (1997) find evidence that unemployed individuals


        8
           Gruber and Krueger (1991) exploit changes across states in the cost of offering workers compensation
insurance that are largely driven by changes in the medical component of workers compensation. Gruber (1994)
exploits the widespread adoption of maternity benefits following the Pregnancy Discrimination Act of 1978 to
estimate the impact on wages of this type of additional health insurance.


                                                        24
who have access to continued health insurance coverage while out of work spend more time

unemployed (presumably searching for better jobs) and are subsequently reemployed at higher

wages.



IV. The U.S. Health Insurance System and Health Care Outcomes

          Despite a large and growing body of literature on the impact of U.S. health insurance

institutions on labor market outcomes, surprisingly little attention has been focused on the effect

of U.S. health insurance institutions on health outcomes. As Levy and Metlzer (2004) noted in a

recent survey of the literature on health and health insurance: “Literally hundreds of studies

have documented the fact that the uninsured have worse health outcomes than the insured…Very

few of these studies establish a causal relationship between health insurance and health,

however.” Beyond the question of whether health insurance as a general proposition impacts

health is the question of whether, or how, the U.S. health care system impacts health.

          The U.S. system of health insurance provision is anything but stable for most individuals.

Although some people may never experience a spell without health insurance, the type of health

insurance coverage that individuals have is likely to change several times over the course of a

lifetime as individuals change jobs or move between different types of public, private, or other

coverage. And many people will experience not only changes in the source of their health

insurance coverage, but also intermittent or sometimes lengthy spells without any coverage.

What implications does the patchwork-quilt nature of the U.S. health care system have for

health?

          One way in which the system can impact both health and medical care expenditures is

through its effect on the incentives to invest in socially efficient preventative care or disease




                                                  25
management. Some forms of preventative medicine have both short-term costs and short-term

benefits (e.g., a flu vaccine). Others, however, have short-term costs but much longer-term

benefits (e.g., weight control, smoking cessation, diabetes management). Under the current

system of health insurance provision in the U.S., no one may have the appropriate incentives to

make socially efficient investments in preventative care if the costs accrue in the short-term (or

on an ongoing basis) but the benefits (lower costs in the future) accrue only many years hence.

       Any investments in health that yield a payoff beyond an insured’s expected tenure with

the insurance provider (either an employer, a public insurer, or a private insurer) will not be cost

effective for the insurer to provide. And individuals, who are largely insensitive to the price of

medical care by virtue of being insured, will also have little incentive to make personal

investments today that lead to reduced social costs in the future. Moreover, to the extent that

some types of preventative measures involve investments that are not specific to the insurer or

the insured (e.g., investments in computer systems to help doctors monitor patient conditions that

are not specific to the patients covered by a particular insurer), the large number of agents in the

current system will result in a free-rider problem and underprovision of socially valuable

preventative investments.

       Beaulieu, Cutler and Ho (2003) discuss these problems for the specific case of diabetes

management. They analyze monitoring systems that reduce the long-run costs of diabetes, but

that yield a pay-off only over the time span of several years. They note that from a social

perspective, the long-run benefits of these monitoring systems far exceed the costs. But, from

the perspective of a profit-maximizing insurer, the private benefits to the firm are negative for

the first few years, and the firm only begins to break even after a decade. As a consequence,




                                                 26
firms with high levels of turnover are unlikely to invest in such systems because other insurers

are the ones who will reap the benefits.

       Another way in which the system can impact health is through disruptions in the

continuity of care as individual move between different health insurance providers or between

spells of insurance and uninsurance. The “start-up” costs of interacting with the health system

following a change in health insurance (e.g., finding a new doctor) may lead individuals to delay

getting treatment. Or, individuals who lose health insurance coverage may delay getting needed

treatment, hoping to obtain insurance coverage before things get “too bad”. Individuals who are

transitioning from one doctor to another as a result of a change in health insurance coverage may

also generate increased medical expenditures through the duplication of tests or diagnostic

procedures done to generate measures of baseline health status or to determine an appropriate

course of treatment. Their health may also suffer if there are miscommunications between the

old and new medical care providers about the nature of an individual health condition and/or its

treatment.



V. Conclusion

       There is an important relationship between labor market outcomes and the institutions

and rules governing health insurance provision in the U.S. Health insurance is an important

factor in almost every labor market decision made by individuals: whether to work, where to

work, and how much to work. It is also an important factor in the human resource decisions

made by employers: how many workers to hire, whom to hire, and how to structure the terms

and conditions of employment.




                                                27
       An important lesson to be learned from the experience of the U.S. is that while employer

provision of health insurance is a convenient way to finance insurance benefits without involving

the government budget directly, not everyone is tied to the labor market. Reliance on and

encouragement of employer provision of health insurance will invariably result in government

programs to fill in the gaps—to cover the otherwise uninsured either in whole or in part. But it is

the interplay between these various institutions, some tied directly to the labor market and others

not, that results in distortions of the labor market decisions of individuals and firms. This type of

fragmented system may also lead to inefficiencies in the provision of health care services, such

as inadequate investments in disease management of preventative medicine.




                                                 28
References


Anderson, Patricia M. (1997). “The Effect of Employer-Provided Health Insurance on Job
      Mobility: Job-Lock or Job-Push?,”unpublished paper (Dartmouth University).

Baicker, Kate and Amitabh Chandra (2005). “The Labor Market Effects of Rising Health
       Insurance Premiums,” NBER Working Paper No. 11160 (National Bureau of Economic
       Research: Cambridge, MA).

Beaulieu, Nancy Dean, David M. Cutler, and Katherine E. Ho (2003). “The Business Case for
       Diabetes Management at Two Managed Care Organizations,” unpublished paper
       (Harvard University)..

Bansak, Cynthia and Steven Raphael (2005). “The State Children’s Health Insurance Program
      and Job Mobility: Identifying Job Lock Among Working Parents in Near-Poor
      Households,” unpublished paper (University of California at Berkeley).

Berger, Mark C., Dan A. Black, Amitabh Chandra and Frank A. Scott (1999). “Health Insurance
       Coverage of the Unemployed: COBRA and the Potential Effects of Kassebaum-
       Kennedy,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 18(3): 430-48.

Berger, Mark C., Dan A. Black and Frank A. Scott (2004). “Is There Job-Lock?: Evidence from
       the Pre-HIPAA Era,” Southern Economic Journal 70(4): 953-976.

Blank, Rebecca M. (1989). “The Effect of Medical Need and Medicaid on AFDC Participation,”
       Journal of Human Resources 24:54-87.

Blau, David M. and Donna B. Gilleskie (2001). “Retiree Health Insurance and Labor Force
       Behavior of Older Men in the 1990s,” Review of Economics and Statistics 83 (1): 64-80.

Bradley, Cathy J., David Neumark, Zhehui Luo, and Heather L. Bednarkek (2005).
       “Employment-Contingent Health Insurance, Illness, and Labor Supply of Women:
       Evidence from Married Women with Breast Cancer,” NBER Working Paper No. 11304
       (National Bureau of Economic Research: Cambridge, MA).

Brunetti, Michael A. et al. (2000). “Health Status, Health Insurance, and Worker Mobility: A
       Study of Job Lock in California,” unpublished Paper (University of California Berkeley,
       UC DATA/Survey Research Center).

Buchmueller, Thomas C. and Robert G.Valletta (1999). “The Effect of Health Insurance on
     Married Female Labor Supply,” Journal of Human Resources 34(1): 42-70.

Buchmueller, Thomas.C. and Robert G. Valletta (1996), “The Effects of Employer-Provided
     Health Insurance on Worker Mobility,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 49(3):
     439-455.


                                              29
Chou, Shin-Yi and Jin-Tan Liu (2000). “National Health Insurance and Female Labor Supply:
       Evidence from Taiwan,” unpublished paper (New Jersey Institute of Technology).

Chou, Y. J. and Douglas Staiger (2001). “Health Insurance and Female Labor Supply in
      Taiwan,” Journal of Health Economics, 20(2): 187-211.

Cooper, Philip F. and Alan C. Monheit (1993). “Does Employment-Related Health Insurance
      Inhibit Job Mobility?,” Inquiry 30(4): 400-416.

Costa, Dora (1995). "The Political Economy of State Provided Health Insurance in the
       Progressive Era: Evidence from California." NBER Working Paper No. 5328 (National
       Bureau of Economic Research: Cambridge, MA).

Currie, Janet and Brigitte C. Madrian (1999). “Health, Health Insurance, and the Labor Market,”
        in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3,
        (Elsevier Science: Amsterdam) 3309-3416.

Cutler, David M. and Brigitte C. Madrian (1998). “Labor Market Responses to Rising Health
        Insurance Costs: Evidence on Hours Worked,” RAND Journal of Economics, 29(3): 509-
        530.

Decker, Sandra L. (1993). “The Effect of Medicaid on Access to Health Care and Welfare
      Participation.” Ph.D. Dissertation, Harvard University.

De la Rica, Sara and Thomas Lemieux (1994). “Does Public Health Insurance Reduce Labor
       Market Flexibility or Encourage the Underground Economy? Evidence from Spain and
       the United States,” in Rebecca.M. Blank, ed., Social Protection Versus Economic
       Flexibility: Is There a Tradeoff? (University of Chicago Press: Chicago) 265-99.

Ellwood, David and Kathleen Adams (1990). “Medicaid Mysteries: Transitional Benefits,
      Medicaid Coverage, and Welfare Exits,” Health Care Financing Review, 1990 Annual
      Supplement, 119-131.

Fronstin, Paul (1999). Employment-Based Health Benefits: Who is Offered Coverage vs. Who
       Takes It, EBRI Issue Brief No. 213 (Employee Benefit Research Institute: Washington
       DC).

Fronstin, Paul (2003). Sources of Health Insurance and Characteristics of the Uninsured:
       Analysis of the March 2003 Current Population Survey, EBRI Issue Brief No. 264
       (Employee Benefit Research Institute: Washington DC).

Fronstin, Paul (2004). Sources of Health Insurance and Characteristics of the Uninsured:
       Analysis of the March 2004 Current Population Survey, EBRI Issue Brief No. 276
       (Employee Benefit Research Institute: Washington DC).




                                              30
Fronstin, Paul and Dallas Salisbury (2003). Retiree Health Benefits: Savings Needed to Fund
       Health Care in Retirement, EBRI Issue Brief No. 254 (Employee Benefit Research
       Institute: Washington DC).

Gilleskie, Donna B. and Brian Lutz (2002). “The Impact of Employer-Provided Health
       Insurance on Dynamic Employment Transitions,” Journal of Human Resources 37(1):
       129-162.

Gruber, Jonathan (1994). The Incidence of Mandated Maternity Benefits, American
       Economics Review, 84(3): 622-41.

Gruber, Jonathan (2000). “Health Insurance and the Labor Market,” in Anthony J. Culyer and
       Joseph P. Newhouse, eds., Handbook of Health Economics Volume 1, (Elsevier Science:
       Amsterdam), 645-706.

Gruber, Jonathan and Alan Krueger (1991). “The Incidence of Mandated Employer-Provided
       Insurance: Evidence from Workers’ Compensation Insurance,” in David Bradford, ed.,
       Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 5 (MIT Press: Cambridge, MA), 111-143.

Gruber, Jonathan and Brigitte C. Madrian (1994). “Health Insurance and Job Mobility: The
       Effects of Public Policy on Job-Lock,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 48(1):
       86-102.

Gruber, Jonathan and Brigitte C. Madrian (1995). “Health Insurance Availability and the
       Retirement Decision,” American Economic Review 85(4): 938-948.

Gruber, Jonathan and Brigitte C. Madrian (1996). “Health Insurance and Early Retirement:
       Evidence from the Availability of Continuation Coverage,” in D.A. Wise, ed., Advances
       in the Economics of Aging (University of Chicago Press, Chicago) 115-143.

Gruber, Jonathan and Brigitte C. Madrian (1997). “Employment Separation and Health
       Insurance Coverage,” Journal of Public Economics 66(3): 349-382.

Gruber, Jonathan and Brigitte C. Madrian (2004). “Health Insurance, Labor Supply and Job
       Mobility: A Critical Review of the Literature,” in Catherine G. McLaughlin, ed., Health
       Policy and the Uninsured (Urban Institute Press: Washington, DC) 97-178.

Ham, Jon and Lara Shore-Sheppard (2003). “Did Expanding Medicaid Affect Welfare
      Participation?” NBER Working Paper No. 9803 (National Bureau of Economic Research:
      Cambridge, MA).

Holtz-Eakin, Douglas (1994), “Health Insurance Provision and Labor Market Efficiency in the
       United States and Germany,” in Rebecca.M. Blank, ed., Social Protection Versus
       Economic Flexibility: Is There a Tradeoff? (University of Chicago Press: Chicago) 157-
       187.




                                              31
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, John R. Penrod, and Harvey S. Rosen (1996). “Health Insurance and the
       Supply of Entrepreneurs,” Journal of Public Economics 62(1-2): 209-235.

Institute of Medicine of the National Academies (2003). “Hidden Costs, Value Lost:
        Uninsurance in America (National Academies Press: Washington, DC).

Johnson, Richard W., Amy J. Davidoff and Kevin Perese (2003). “Health Insurance Costs and
      Early Retirement Decisions,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 56(4): 716-729.

Kaiser Family Foundation Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured (2004). “Health
       Insurance Coverage in American: 2003 Data Update.”

Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research and Educational Trust (2004). “Employer
       Health Benefits: 2004 Annual Survey.”

Kapur, Kanika. (1998). “The Impact of Health on Job Mobility: A Measure of Job Lock,”
       Industrial and Labor Relations Review 51(2): 282-297.

Karoly, Lynn A. and Jeannette A. Rogowski (1994). “The Effect of Access to Post-Retirement
       Health Insurance on the Decision to Retire Early,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review
       48(1): 103-123.

Madrian, Brigitte C. (1994a). “The Effect of Health Insurance on Retirement,” Brookings
      Papers on Economic Activity, 1994 1, 181-232.

Madrian, Brigitte C. (1994b). “Employment-Based Health Insurance and Job Mobility: Is There
      Evidence of Job Lock?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109(1): 27-54.

Madrian, Brigitte C. and Lars John Lefgren (1998). “The Effect of Health Insurance on
      Transitions to Self Employment,” unpublished paper (University of Chicago).

Madrian, Brigitte C. and Nancy D. Beaulieu (1998). “Does Medicare Eligibility Affect
      Retirement?” in David A. Wise, ed., Inquiries in the Economics of Aging (University of
      Chicago Press: Chicago) 109-131.

Meyer, Bruce D. and Dan T. Rosenbaum (2000). “Medicaid, Private Health Insurance, and the
       Labor Supply of Single Mothers,” unpublished paper (Northwestern University).

Mitchell, Olivia S. (1982). “Fringe Benefits and Labor Mobility,” Journal of Human Resources
       17(2) :286-298.

Moffitt, Robert and Barbara L. Wolfe (1992). “The Effect of the Medicaid Program on Welfare
       Participation and Labor Supply,” Review of Economics and Statistics 74(4): 615-626.

Montgomery, Edward and John C. Navin (2000). “Cross-State Variation in Medicaid Program
      and Female Labor Supply,” Economic Inquiry 38(3): 402-18.



                                              32
Olson, Craig A. (1998). “A Comparison of Parametric and Semiparametric Estimates of the
       Effect of Spousal Health Insurance Coverage on Weekly Hours Worked by Wives,”
       Journal of Applied Econometrics, 13(5): 543-565.

Penrod, John R. (1994). “Empirical Essays in the Economics of Labor and Health.” Ph.D.
       Dissertation, Princeton University.

Quinn, Joseph (1997). "The Role of Bridge Jobs in the Retirement Patterns of Older Americans
       in the 1990s." In Retirement Prospects in a Defined Contribution World, D. Salisbury,
       ed., (Washington, DC: Employee Benefit Research Institute), 25-39.

Rogowski, Jeannette A. and Lynn A. Karoly (2000). “Health Insurance and Retirement
     Behavior: Evidence from the Health and Retirement Survey.” Journal of Health
     Economics, 19 (4): 529-39.

Royalty, Anne Beeson (2003), “A Discrete Choice Approach to Estimating Workers’ Marginal
       Valuations of Fringe Benefits,” unpublished paper (Indiana University-Purdue University
       Indianapolis).

Rust, John and Christopher Phelan (1997), “How Social Security and Medicare Affect
        Retirement Behavior in a World of Incomplete Markets,” Econometrica 65(4): 781-831.

Schone, Barbara Steinberg and Jessica Primoff Vistnes (2000). “The Relationship Between
      Health Insurance and Labor Force Decisions: An Analysis of Married Women,”
      unpublished Paper (Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality).

Slade, Eric P. (1997). “The Effect of the Propensity to Change Jobs on Estimates of ‘Job-
       Lock’,” unpublished paper (Johns Hopkins University).

Spaulding, James Wallace (1997). “Fringe Benefits, Job Quality, and Labor Mobility: Pension
       and Health Insurance Effects on Job-Change Decisions.” Ph.D. Dissertation, University
       of Wisconsin-Madison.

Stroupe, Kevin T., Eleanor D. Kinney and Thomas J. Kniesner (2001). “Chronic Illness and
       Health Insurance-Related Job Lock,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 20(3):
       525-44.

Thurston, Norman K. (1997). “Labor Market Effects of Hawaii’s Mandatory Employer-
       Provided Health Insurance,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 51(1): 117-35.

Wellington, Allison J. and Deborah A. Cobb-Clark (2000). “The Labor-Supply Effects of
       Universal Health Coverage: What Can We Learn From Individuals with Spousal
       Coverage?,” in Simon W. Polachek, ed., Worker Well-Being: Research in Labor
       Economics, Volume 19 (Elsevier Science: Amsterdam).




                                              33
Winkler, Anne E. (1991). “The Incentive Effects of Medicaid on Women'
                                                                    s Labor Supply,”
      Journal of Human Resources 26(2): 308-337.

Yelowitz, Aaron.S. (1995). “The Medicaid Notch, Labor Supply and Welfare Participation:
      Evidence from Eligibility Expansions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(4):
      909-940.

Yelowitz, Aaron S. (1996). “Did Recent Medicaid Reforms Cause the Caseload Explosion in the
      Food Stamp Program?” UCLA Working Paper #756, July 1996; IRP Discussion Paper
      1109-96.

Yelowitz, Aaron S. (1998a). “The Impact of Health Care Costs and Medicaid on SSI
      Participation.” In Growth in Disability Benefits: Explanation and Policy Implications,
      Kalman Rupp and David C. Stapleton, eds. (Kalamazoo, MI: W. E Upjohn Institute for
      Employment Research).

Yelowitz, Aaron S. (1998b). “Why Did the SSI-Disabled Program Grow So Much?
      Disentangling the Effect of Medicaid,” Journal of Health Economics 17(3): 321-350.

Yelowitz, Aaron S. (2000). “Using the Medicare Buy-In Program to Estimate the Effect of
      Medicaid on the SSI Participation,” Economic Inquiry 38(3): 419-441.




                                              34
