                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           HOW RAPIDLY DOES SCIENCE LEAK OUT?

                                             James D. Adams
                                           J. Roger Clemmons
                                             Paula E. Stephan

                                          Working Paper 11997
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11997


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2006




The Andrew W. Mellon Founadtion has provided generous support for this research. Nancy Bayers and
Henry Small of the Institute for Scientific Information (ISI) offered many clarifications concerning the data.
We thank Adam Jaffe for nonlinear regression programs that we have adapted for use in this paper as well
as discussants and participants at seminars and conferences. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by James D. Adams, J. Roger Clemmons, and Paula E. Stephan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
How Rapidly Does Science Leak Out?
James D. Adams, J. Roger Clemmons, and Paula E. Stephan
NBER Working Paper No. 11997
January 2006
JEL No. O3, L3

                                            ABSTRACT

In science as well as technology, the diffusion of new ideas influences innovation and productive
efficiency. With this as motivation we use citations to scientific papers to measure the diffusion of
science through the U.S. economy. To indicate the speed of diffusion we rely primarily on the modal
or most frequent lag. Using this measure we find that diffusion between universities as well as
between firms and universities takes an average of three years. The lag on science diffusion between
firms is 3.3 years, compared with 4.8 years in technology for the same companies using the same
methodology. Industrial science diffuses fifty per cent more rapidly than technology, and academic
science diffuses still faster. Thus the priority publication system in science appears to distribute
information more rapidly than the patent system, although other interpretations are possible. We also
find that the speed of science diffusion in the same field varies by a factor of two across industries.
The industry variation turns out to be driven by frictional publication lags and firm size in R&D and
science. Friction increases the lag, but firm size in R&D and science decrease it. Industries having
a lot of R&D or science and composed of fields with little friction exhibit rapid diffusion. Industries
where the reverse is true exhibit slow diffusion.

James D. Adams                                         Paula E. Stephan
Department of Economics                                Department of Economics
3504 Russel Sage Laboratory                            and Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute                       Georgia State University
110 8th Street                                         Atalanta, GA 30303-3083
Troy, NY 12180-3590                                    pstephan@gsu.edu
and NBER
adamsj@rpi.edu

J. Roger Clemmons
Institute for Child Health Policy
University of Florida
PO Box 100147
Gainesville, FL 32610-0147
jrc@ichp.ufl.edu
I.       Introduction
     The speed with which science and technology leak out very likely increases both innovation and

productive efficiency. This is true for the simple reason that firms possess more knowledge when diffusion

is more rapid. But in addition, recent ideas may be more valuable than older ones. Recent ideas could

improve on earlier ones so that their quality is higher. Recent ideas are less likely to have been

commercialized. And ideas could be recombinant, so that new ideas make earlier ideas more valuable.

     It follows that the rate of innovation and productive efficiency depend on diffusion, so that a faster rate

of diffusion moves technology-in-use closer to the best-practice technology. These points apply to science

as well as to technology. The diffusion of science is important because it contributes to output through an

increase in the efficiency of research and development1. This line of thought leads to several questions.

How rapidly do science and technology leak out? How does the speed of diffusion vary among firms and

universities? How and why does the speed of diffusion vary across industries?

     To answer these questions we begin by measuring the speed of diffusion of science, primarily using

the modal or most frequent lag in citation as a measure of its central tendency. Afterwards we compare

this with the speed of diffusion of patented technology. In this way we establish stylized facts about

diffusion in both science and technology. We rely on lags between citing and cited scientific papers and

industrial patents for this purpose. Our approach to estimating the lags builds on the methodology for

estimating patent citation functions in Jaffe and Trajtenberg (1996, 1999, and 2002). This use of a common

methodology increases comparability of the measurements. Even so, we do not claim that the two

diffusion processes are the same, and indeed we find that they are rather different.

     Diffusion is the topic of a large literature, although none of this appears to describe, interpret, and

compare the diffusion of science and technology as this paper does. Griliches (1957) examined the

adoption of hybrid corn by farmers in U.S. states and crop reporting districts. His findings showed that

lags in the adoption of hybrid corn shortened as profits from adoption increased. Mansfield (1963) showed

that adoption of the diesel locomotive by U.S. railroads resulted from growing advantages of diesel over




1
 Adams (1990, 2005), Adams and Clemmons (2005), and Cohen, Nelson, and Walsh (2002) contain
additional discussions.
steam as influenced by profitability, liquidity, and other characteristics. Mansfield (1991) found that many

industrial innovations would have been impossible or would have been delayed without recent science.

    Monetary and other gains should also drive adoption of new scientific approaches. For example, drug

companies adopted biotechnology for the purpose of avoiding mass testing of chemical compounds

(Henderson and Cockburn, 1996). However, scarcity of molecular and cell biologists in industry hindered

adoption, and led to the establishment of firms whose founders were academics. In this way diffusion

entailed entry (Audretsch and Stephan, 1996; Zucker, Darby, and Brewer, 1998; Ruttan, 2001, Ch. 10).

   A related literature considers the role of intellectual property in diffusion. Mansfield (1985) showed

that knowledge of a company’s development efforts leaked out to competitors within 12 to 18 months.

Once developed, knowledge of new products leaked out in 12 more months, but imitation costs imposed

additional lags. Indeed Mansfield, Schwartz and Wagner (1981) found that imitation costs were two-thirds

of innovation costs and that patenting increased these costs.

    Weak incentives hinder invention and its adoption in planned economies. Berliner (1976) argued that

inadequacies of the bonus system undermined Soviet Russia’s productive efficiency compared with

Western economies. Building on such evidence Dearden, Ickes, and Samuelson (1990), and Hart, Vishny,

and Shleifer (1997) undertook theoretical studies of the limits to public sector innovation.

    To a lesser extent imperfect rewards to inventors may deter invention in firms. Scherer (1984, chapter

9) noted that firms’ innovative output rose at a decreasing rate with firm size and suggested that incentive

failures were the cause. Imperfections in patent rights across earlier and later inventors reduce incentives to

improve products (Scotchmer 1991; 2004, Chapters 4, 5). In summary a substantial literature relates

technology diffusion to secrecy, adoption costs and incentives.

    Incentives in science often take the form of fame and reputation. However, the priority system in

science, as Robert Merton has shown, encourages individuals to share knowledge quickly, since sharing

establishes property rights in science (Stephan, 2004). For this reason the priority publication system may

accelerate the diffusion of science compared with technology. This hypothesis is strengthened by evidence

on the use of secrecy to protect industrial technology (Levin, Klevorick, Nelson, and Winter, 1987; Cohen,

Nelson, and Walsh, 2002; Furman and Stern, 2004).




                                                      2
    Turning to our results we find that the modal lag among U.S. universities averages about three years.

This lag does not increase systematically with geographic distance between researchers. Citation lags vary

strongly among fields, with physics and biology diffusing more rapidly than average and computer science

and engineering diffusing less rapidly. Variations in review times (Ellison, 2002) partly drive these

differences. Perhaps reflecting higher costs of absorption, citation lags between fields exceed within-field

lags by 0.4 years. To an extent same-university citations get around review lags. Accordingly the lag on

same-university citations averages 1.8 years—60 percent of the between-university lag.

    Science citation lags in industry are similar. The lag on citations by firms to universities is 3.0 years.

We find a lag that is10 percent longer, or 3.3 years, or in the case of firms citing each other. One

interpretation is that firms impose strategic publication delays, but that the delays are slight. The lag on

same-firm citations is the same as the lag on same-university citations, which again suggests bypassing of

publication lags.

    So far the findings apply to science. To provide a benchmark for these results we estimate modal lags

on patents for the same firms using the same methodology. When this is done we find that the lag on firm

citations is 4.8 years. Comparing these findings we find that science diffuses fifty percent faster among

firms than patented technology. In previous research U.S. patents display a lag ranging from 4.6 to 5.3 and

this lag is greater still between countries (Jaffe and Trajtenberg, 1996, 1999; Peri, 2005). Thus results from

several sources indicate that technology diffuses more slowly than science.

    Additional results explore variation in science diffusion by industry and field. The range of variation

is large: a given science takes about twice as long to reach the slowest industry as the fastest. Drugs and

biotechnology, electrical equipment, and communications are industries to which science diffuses rapidly

while diffusion occurs slowly in metals and machinery. Section VI seeks to explain this puzzle. The

dependent variable is the citation lag. Independent variables include the instrumented frictional publication

lag, mean firm R&D, and mean scientific papers. We find that the frictional lag, a type of supply dynamic,

increases the lag, but that firm size in R&D and science decrease it. Industries having a lot of R&D and

science and industries that are dominated by fields with little friction exhibit rapid diffusion. Industries

where the reverse is true exhibit slow diffusion. These findings suggest that in science, just as in invention,

dynamics of supply and firm optimization establish the speed of diffusion (Griliches, 1957).




                                                       3
      The rest of the paper consists of six sections. Section II discusses the citation function. We use the

modal lag implied by this function, or the lag at which citation peaks, to measure the central tendency of

citation lags. We discuss the modal lag and show that it is a robust statistic for ranking the speed of

diffusion. Section III describes the database of papers and citations on which the findings are based. The

data derive from the Institute for Scientific Information (ISI) and consist of 2.7 million scientific papers and

20.2 million citations to these papers during 1981-1999. The papers are written in 110 top U.S. universities

and 200 top U.S. R&D firms that account for most science publication in the U.S. during this period.

Section IV presents estimates of the speed of diffusion of science among U.S. universities. Section V

reports similar estimates of science’s speed of diffusion from universities to U.S. firms and among the

firms. In addition we report estimates of the speed of science diffusion by industry as well as field. Finally

the section estimates the speed of diffusion of patents for the firms. Section VI studies the sources of

industry variation in science citation lags. Section VII concludes and discusses additional research.

II.       The Citation Function
      We use the citation function to estimate the speed of diffusion between scientific papers. Jaffe and

Trajtenberg (1996, 1999) use this function to quantify the use of patents and their diffusion. In this article

we apply the citation function to scientific papers and science citations. The citations are backward

citations from later to earlier researchers because we are interested in how rapidly earlier science reaches

later users. Since the citation function is at the center of the empirical analysis of Sections IV-V, we

provide a brief discussion in this section.

          We begin by clarifying the differences between science and patent citations. Both refer to prior

literature but the reasons for doing so are not clear. Motivations include the influence of earlier ideas and

their role in defining the problem and its solution. This motive is apparent in patent citations, which limit

commercial applications of inventions to improvements on prior art, and also in science citations. Science

citations are more likely to refute findings and they could be a strategy to achieve publication. Science

citations are controlled by authors while patent citations are often chosen by patent examiners and

attorneys. While referees of scientific journals suggest references, their inclusion requires author’s assent.

Another difference is that a single patent office controls patent grants, so application dates as well as grant

dates are known. In science, numerous journals control publication, rejections occur, and initial application



                                                       4
dates are typically unknown. We conclude that differences as well as similarities apply to science and

patent citations, though their impact on diffusion is not obvious.

      We estimate the citation function on cells defined by the exogenous characteristics of citing and cited

papers. Each cell includes a citation probability which is the dependent variable in the analysis. This is

composed of citations, papers citing, and papers cited as follows:

                                     ciTjt
(1)                       piTjt =
                                    niT n jt

In (1) p iTjt is the probability that a group i paper published in year T cites a group j paper published in


year t ,   T > t . c iTjt is the number of citations or paper-pairs linked by citation. niT is the number of

papers that could but might not cite papers in group j at time t whose number is n jt . For this reason niT


is the number of potentially citing papers and n jt is the number of potentially cited papers. Their product


niT × n jt is the number of paper-pairs that could be linked by citation. Notice that (1) can be thought of as a

sampling rate by the average paper in group i at time T applied to papers in group j at time t . In the case

of universities citing universities we use group i and T to refer to citing field and year, while group j is

the cited field and t the cited year. The fields and years define four-dimensional cells in the data.

      The citation function is a parametric representation of the probability of citation based on citing and

cited fields and years that allows for intercepts corresponding to these characteristics. However, we do not

discuss the intercepts in this paper. This is because of the large number of intercept terms (ranging from

several dozen to several hundred) and the variety of citation functions that we estimate. Another reason is

that our chief concern is with transitional diffusion and decay parameters2.

          The citation function for universities citing universities is


(2)           p
                  iTjt
                                               [
                         = α ij α T α t exp − β β (T − t )
                                               1 1i
                                                           ]{ 1 − exp [ − β 2 (T − t )] }+ u iTjt

      2
      The intercepts can be thought of as long-run linkages between science fields and institutions. See
Adams, Clemmons and Stephan (forthcoming) for a full description of estimated intercepts based on
science citation functions for universities citing each other.



                                                             5
The   α ij   terms capture the average probability that field i cites field j ,     αT    the average probability that a


citation is made in period T , and α t , the average probability that a citation is received in period t . The

probability parameters are defined relative to baseline values. The α ij parameters are normalized by the


value for chemistry, whose value is set equal to 1.0. Likewise, the            αT   and   αt   parameters are normalized

by the earliest citing and cited periods, whose values are set equal to 1.0.

      The exponential form of (2) accounts for the peaking of citations (see Figure 1) and compares closely

to patent citation functions. The        β1   parameter represents the rate of decay in citation to chemistry

while β 1i is a vector of decay parameters relative to this baseline. Thus β 1i in chemistry is fixed at 1.0.

Finally β 2 governs overall diffusion. Since β 2 positions the rate of citation, it is not identified by field

independently of the         α ij vector. Again we limit reported parameters to β 1 , β 1i , and β 2 for concise

presentation of diffusion. The error term is u iTjt ; the equation is estimated by nonlinear least squares.

      In addition to citation functions for universities citing universities, we estimate similar functions for

firms citing universities, and we estimate both science and patent citation functions for firms citing firms.

The following explains how these differ from (2). In the case of firms citing universities we include

parameters       αI     that capture citing industry and two others,   αJ   and α j , that capture citing and cited field.


The vector of industry parameters is normalized by the value for one industry (petrochemicals), since β 2

absorbs the overall citation probability The citation function for firms citing universities is


(3)          p
                 ITjt
                                                 [
                         = α I α J α j α T α t exp − β β (T − t )
                                                      1 1i
                                                                   ] { 1 − exp [ − β 2 (T − t ) ] }+ u iTjt

      If firms cite firms we include intercept vectors for citing and cited industries, α I and α i , and citing

and cited fields α J and α j . The citation function is



(4)    p
           IiJjTt
                                                     [
                        = α I α i α J α j α T α t exp − β β (T − t )
                                                         1 1i
                                                                       ] { 1 − exp [ − β 2 (T − t )] } + u IiJjTt

                                                              6
In some of our analysis we allow for more freedom in the pattern of diffusion. For example, we allow the

rate of decay in citation between universities to differ depending on whether the citing field is the same or

different from the cited field. Where firms cite universities and other firms, we allow the decay parameters

to vary by industry as well as field. In these cases β 1i becomes β 1ik , where                     k stands for citing industry.

          The speed of diffusion is implicit in the estimates. We show that the modal or most frequent lag

in citation is a robust measure of speed given (2)-(4), which differ only in their intercept terms. The modal

lag for science field j, or the lag at which the citation probability peaks, is

                                           1
(5)                   LModal =                    .
                                        β1 β1 j

To prove (5) take the derivative of citation functions (2)-(4), set it equal to zero and solve for LModal .

      The cumulative citation probability for L=∞ is found by integrating (2)-(4). This is given by:



                                                                                              αβ 2
                             α exp (− β 1 β 1 j L ) [1 − exp (− β 2 L )] dL =
                         ∞
(6)       C (∞ ) =   ∫
                                                                                                                .
                         0                                                         β 1 β 1 j (β 1 β 1 j + β 2 )


We collapse the intercept terms into a single term α . To compute the average lag in citation, multiply the

probability of citation by the lag L and integrate to a lag of infinity:



(7)        M (∞ ) =
                             ∞
                                 α L exp (− β 1 β 1 j L ) [1 − exp (− β 2 L )] dL =
                                                                                      α   [( β β             + β 2 ) − ( β1β1 j )
                                                                                                                          2                  2
                                                                                                                                                 ]
                         ∫
                                                                                                1     1j
                             0
                                                                                           (β   1   β1 j )   2
                                                                                                                 (β   1   β1 j + β 2 )   2




The result on the right is proved by applying integration by parts to the middle expression. However, this

average is based on a cumulative “probability” that does not sum to unity, as (6) shows. To obtain the

mean divide (7) by (6) so that the probability mass is normalized to 1.0. After some algebra we reach

                     1                    1                 2
(8)        L=                    +                    ≈             = 2 • LModal
                β1 β1 j              β1 β1 j + β 2        β1 β1 j

The approximation is based on β 2 / β 1 β 1 j ≈ 0 , which is true for the estimates in this paper. Since




                                                                       7
citations have a positive skew the mean exceeds the mode. The point of discussing the modal and mean

lags is to show that they rank different fields in the same order3. It follows that the modal lag is a robust

way to compare speed of diffusion.

           There is another reason for comparing these measures. The econometric estimates of (2)-(4)

provide estimates of modal lags, whereas the figures and some of the regressions use mean lags. According

to (5) and (8), mean lags are about twice as long as modal lags. The derivations in this section show that

there is no inconsistency involved in finding that the mean exceeds the mode. For the rest of this paper the

modal and mean citation lags will measure the speed of diffusion of science and technology.

III. Database
       The data consist of 2.4 million scientific papers written in the top 110 U.S. universities during 1981-

1999 and 18.8 million citations to those papers. Also included are 230 thousand scientific papers written

by the top 200 U.S. R&D firms as well as 640 thousand citations to these papers by other firm papers. In

addition the 200 firms make one million citations to papers by the 110 universities. The universities and

firms account for the majority of academic and industrial research conducted in the U.S. The source of the

data is ISI, the Institute for Scientific Information, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

       The papers appear in 7137 scientific journals. Each journal is assigned to a unique science field along

with the papers published in them. The alternative to this journal assignment method is to assign papers

according to sciences of “origin”, as given by author’s departments. But that approach is ruled out by the

lack of standardized information on academic departments4.

       A. Distribution of Papers and Citations
       Table 1 describes the distribution of university and firm papers by science field. The first column

contains the data for universities. Sixty-one percent of university papers originate in agriculture, biology,




3
    The median lag divides the probability mass into 50 percent before and after the median, which is
Lmedian ≈ − ln(1 / 2) / β1 β1 j = 0.6931 / β1 β1 j = 0.6931 • LModal . This is again based on
β 2 / β1β1 j ≈ 0 .   Thus the modal, mean, and median lags rank diffusion speeds in the same order.
4
  As an experiment we tried to assign all papers of Harvard University to one of the 12 main science fields
in our data using departmental address information. About one-third of the papers could not be assigned to
fields using this information. Given the failure rate we abandoned the effort.


                                                        8
and medicine. Chemistry, engineering, and physics rank second and account for 24 percent. Remaining

fields (astronomy, computer science, earth sciences, economics and business, mathematics and statistics,

and psychology) account for 15 percent of university papers.

    The second column shows an even greater concentration among fields in industrial science. Nine

fields are shown: astronomy, economics and business, and psychology account for less than one percent of

industrial papers and are dropped from the table. In the industrial distribution, agriculture, biology, and

medicine account for 32 percent of papers instead of 61 percent as in universities. Conversely chemistry,

engineering and physics account for 59 percent of industrial papers rather than 24 percent. Life science is

simply less important in industry than in academia. Another feature is the much greater importance of

computer science, which accounts for five percent of industrial papers compared with one percent in

academia. While these differences are hardly surprising, they show that industrial citations originate far

less often in life science than do academic citations.

    Notice that 223 out of 235 thousand industrial scientific papers, or 95 percent, belong to biology,

chemistry, computer science, engineering, medicine, and physics. Since a major point of this paper is its

comparison of diffusion speeds in different sectors, we restrict our reporting (though not our estimation) to

these six fields.

    Recall that the citation function is estimated on cells defined by citing and cited groups and years.

Table 2 reports mean citation probabilities and their components by cell characteristics. For each cell we

calculate numbers of citations, potentially citing and cited papers, and mean probabilities. For firms, the

citing and cited groups include the added dimension of industry.

    Consider universities citing other universities, where citing and cited fields and years classify the

cells5. In the case where citing and cited universities are different, the number of cells is 36,8346. In the

case of same-university citations the number of cells is 21,8017.



5
  For citations within the same university-field, where the majority of citations take place, we also keep
track of citations and papers cited and citing of the top 20%, the middle 40%, and the lowest 40% of
universities in each field. Within a field the cells are six-dimensional. They consist of citing field, rank-
class, and year; and cited field, rank-class, and year. This extra dimension affects the intercept terms.
6
  Cross-field citations do not occur in some years. The number of within-field cells (allowing for rank) is
9×12 for each citing and cited year combination. Likewise the number of cross-field combinations is
11×12. The potential number of citing and cited year combinations is (19×18)/2. The potential number of
cells is (9×12 +11×12) × (19×18)/2=41,040. But 4,206 of the cross-field cells do not exist.


                                                         9
    Where firms cite universities, the cells are classified by citing industry, field and year, and cited field

and year. The number of citing industry-field-year, cited field-year cells is 30,604. Finally consider firms

citing firms. In this case the cells are classified by citing and cited industry, field and year. They are thus

six-dimensional. There are 34,246 cells consisting of citations where citing and cited firms are different.

The number of cells involving same-firm citations is 10,687.

    Table 2 describes the cells for different sets of data, but excluding same-institution citations. The first

three columns present mean citations and potentially cited and citing papers, where means are taken across

cells. The final column presents the mean citation probabilities computed according to equation (1).

    The three panels report means for different citing and cited sectors. Panel A. presents means for

universities citing other universities. Mean citations and citing papers vary more than cited papers do,

reflecting differences in size of citing fields. Citations are of course more numerous in this dominant sector

of U.S. science. The probability of citation is on the order of 10-4.

    Panel B. reports means for firms citing universities by field and industry. Since industrial papers are

one-tenth as many as university papers, numbers of citations and papers citing are far less than in Panel A.8.

The dominant role of chemistry, engineering, and physics in industry shows up in the larger means of

papers in these fields relative to biology and medicine, as compared with Panel A. The industry means

indicate the greater frequency of citations and publications in pharmaceuticals and biotechnology and their

scarcity, say, in metals and machinery. Notice that mean probabilities based on firms citing universities are

on the order of 10-5, about one-tenth as frequent as citation probabilities within academia and industry.

    Means by citing fields and industries are shown in Panel C., in which firms cite other firms. The

number of dimensions exceeds that of other panels since industry is taken into account on both citing and

cited sides. This and the smaller number of firm papers contribute to the low numbers of citations and

papers cited that are shown in panel C.9



7
  Same-university and same-firm citations differ from pure self-citation. True self-citations, where the same
investigators reference their own research, are likely to diffuse even more rapidly than same-institution
citations, which are the type that we record here.
8
  The mean number of potential university papers that are cited by firms in agriculture, biology, and
medicine exceeds the numbers cited by universities. This is because firms are latecomers to citation
compare with universities, when article counts in these fields are larger.
9
  In panel B the cells are classified by citing industry, field and year; and by cited field and year. In panel C
industry, field, and year on both citing and cited sides classify the cells.


                                                       10
     B. Mean Diffusion Lags by Sector
     Figure 1 graphs citation curves between universities, firms and universities, and between firms. The

curves illustrate the mean citation probability arrayed by the lag between citing and cited papers. The

curves peak in the second year, though fitted citations peak later (see Sections IV and V). The irregular

shape of the firm-firm citation curve results from smaller sample sizes in these data.

     The narrowing of the curves is an artifact of differences in the citation probability. To show this

Figure 2 normalizes the curves in Figure 1 by the citation probability at a lag of one year. This brings out

differences in shape independently of scale. The normalized curve for universities is higher at

intermediate lags but otherwise lies close to the firm citation curves. This suggests a slightly faster speed of

diffusion between universities. Still, from a visual perspective, the diffusion of science proceeds at a very

similar rate across sectors of the U.S. economy.

     Figure 3 introduces rank of universities citing other universities. We compute separate curves for

universities ranked in the top 20 percent, middle 40 percent, and bottom 40 percent of their fields according

to National Research Council (1995)10. Figure 3 indicates a modest effect of rank of university-field on the

speed of diffusion. Top 20 percent citations occur slightly more rapidly than middle 40 percent and bottom

40 percent citations.

     C. Influence of Geographic Distance
     The last four figures examine the influence of geographic distance on the speed of diffusion. Figure 4

graphs mean citation lags by distance between citing and cited universities. For this graph we take a close-

in perspective. We examine the relationship between mean citation lag and distance in intervals of 50

miles up to 500 miles. The thickened line displays mean lags for all observations. The mean increases

slightly, from 4.6 years within 50 miles to 4.9 years at 500 miles11. Much of the increase occurs within

100 miles suggesting temporary localization of scientific information, perhaps due to local collaborations.



10
   Peer rankings are missing for agriculture and medicine so that university-fields in these two disciplines
are ranked according to size of federal R&D support in 1998. This has the effect of blurring rankings by
quality. For more on this point, see Adams, Clemmons, and Stephan (forthcoming).
11
   Recall that the mean lag is twice as long as the modal lag hence the lags of four to five years in this
figure. For more, see (5) and (8) in Section II.


                                                      11
    The other line graphs are based on data from top 20, middle 40, and bottom 40 percent university-

fields. These data are subsets of the data yielding the main line graph. The subsets form a nebulous cloud

of points around this graph but the bottom 40 percent curve clearly lies above the mean. Knowledge

diffuses more slowly to the bottom 40 percent, and yet this difference is less than a tenth of the mean lag.

    Figure 5 takes a wide-angle perspective. It examines the citation lags for distances ranging from 500

to 3,000 miles. The heavy line covers all the data and begins at a lag of 4.9 years, but declines to 4.7 years

at 3,000 miles, which is the distance between the East and West coasts. Across Figures 4 and 5 the mean

lag follows an inverted-U shape with respect to distance. It does not increase monotonically.

    We observe a sharp decline for top 20 percent university-fields at longer distances. The citation lag at

3,000 miles is 4.5 years, about the same as at 50 miles. The lag increases with distance among the middle

40 percent and is unrelated to distance among the bottom 40 percent. Apparently, top departments on both

coasts work together more closely than others.

    Figures 6 and 7 re-examine interactions mean lags by distance in the case of firms citing universities

and each other. Figure 6 displays the lags by distances from 0 to 500 miles. A tendency for citation lags to

increase with distance is clear in Figure 6. The increase is 0.5 years over 500 miles, with most of this

occurring within 100 miles, hence the suspicion that collaboration drives it. Figure 7 displays lags for

distances from 500 to 3,000 miles. The lag is flat for firms citing other firms but declines slightly for firms

citing universities. Together Figures 6 and 7 indicate a rough inverted-U in the citation lag structure.

Based on Figures 3-7 we cannot say that science leaks out more slowly with distance.

    IV. Regression Findings: Universities
    In this section and the next we present several estimates of diffusion speed. While the findings can

seem repetitive they are essential to getting the facts of diffusion right. One can think of them as

standardized experiments in diffusion that are readily compared. We begin with the university sector. The

speed of diffusion is likely to be fastest in this sector, since being first to publish is a key to success. For

this reason the university estimates provide a benchmark for the estimates of citation lags in industrial

science and technology, which are reported in Section V below.

    Tables 3 and 4 contain regressions that result from fitting citation function (2) to the data. In these

tables and others to follow we report the exponential portion of the citation function for the six fields that



                                                        12
dominate science. Table 3 reports basic findings on the rate of diffusion among universities. The first two

columns concern citations between different universities. The first column reports decay and diffusion

parameters while the second reports estimated modal lags. Towards the bottom are estimates of the

baseline decay and diffusion parameters β 1 and β 2 . The decay parameter is       β 1 =0.351.   This indicates a

modal lag of 2.85 years for chemistry ( 1 / β1 =1/0.351=2.85). The diffusion parameter is        β 2 =0.000108.

Taken together with β 1 this indicates a peak citation probability of    β 2 / β 1 ≈ 0.00031.

     Field decay rates provide estimates of modal lags by field. Using (5), where the modal lag

equals 1 / β 1 β 1i , we find that the shortest lag is 1.75 years in physics while the longest is 4.25 years in

computer science12. The average of the modal lags across fields is 3.06 years. Variation in the speed of

acceptance and publication across fields plays a part in these differences, while another part reflects

differences in propensities to collaborate. Of course, fields with shorter modal lags exhibit more rapid

decay in citation probabilities given the shape of the citation function.

     To see how frictional publication lags affect the diffusion of science, we introduce same-university

citations, where these lags are less important. The third and fourth columns of Table 3 report the parameter

estimates and modal lags. Lags for same-university citations occur 1.29 years sooner than for citations

between universities. In chemistry the modal lag is 1.65 years and lags for other fields are correspondingly

shorter. The average of the estimates is 1.77 years. Citations between universities are 73 percent slower

(3.06/1.77=1.73). Differences by field are shown in the final column. Same-university citations get around

most of the frictional publication lags. This explains why same-university lags differ so little across fields

as the last column shows. The lag shortens most in computer science, where frictional lags are longest, and

least in biology and physics, where these lags are shortest. However, these are same-institution citations,

not true self-citations. Their speed of diffusion understates the speed of self-citation.

     Table 4 estimates a more elaborate citation function. This distinguishes within-field from between-

field dimensions for every citing field. This is done by estimating separate parameters when cited fields are

the same or different as each citing field. Within-field decay rates and modal lags appear in columns one

and two. Between-field decay rates and modal lags appear in columns three and four. We expect between-

12
  Ellison (2002), Table 2 finds long submission-resubmission times in computer science but much shorter
times in biology and physics.


                                                        13
field diffusion to proceed more slowly because of the higher cost of assimilating “outside” information.

Computer science is the exception. This reversal, in which outside fields are cited more rapidly, probably

follows from very short publication lags in cited fields such as electrical engineering and physics compared

with computer science itself.

    The within-field results in Table 4 are about the same as the total results in Table 3. This shows how

much within-field citation dominates the parameter estimates. In the third and fourth columns, where citing

and cited fields are different, decay parameters are smaller and implied modal lags are larger. The average

between-field lag is 3.41 years, about four months longer than the lag of 3.06 within-fields. Thus, the

additional delay due to the movement of knowledge across fields is a second order effect.

    V.        Regression Findings: Firms
    We turn next to the diffusion of science in firms. While similar to diffusion among universities, we

consider a wider range of evidence for industry. We estimate the speed of diffusion from universities to

firms, between firms, and within firms, and we compare the estimates with the university results.

Afterwards we examine the diffusion of science by industry and field. At the end of the section we use

patent data to estimate the speed of diffusion of technology and we compare this to science.

    A. Diffusion from Universities to Firms
    We begin with firms citing universities. Tables 5 and 6 contain the findings, in which citation function

(3) is fitted to the data. As before the tables report exponential terms of the citation function (3) for the

dominant fields of biology, chemistry, computer science, engineering, medicine, and physics, although all

fields and all parameters are included in the estimation procedure.

    Table 5 reports decay and diffusion parameters along with modal lags. The estimates are quite close to

the university-university results. The equally weighted average of the modal lags is 3.02 years compared

with 3.06 in Table 3. This confirms the intuition of Figures 1 and 2, that there is little difference in the rate

with which university research diffuses among sectors. Another feature is that modal lags rank the fields in

the same order in Tables 3 and 5. Physics remains the fastest field, computer science the slowest, and so on.

Relative diffusion speeds are a feature of fields rather than broad sectors of the economy.

    Table 6 allows the rate of decay and thus the speed of diffusion to vary by industry and field.

Industries form rows of the table. Fields form the columns until the last, which reports the average lag by



                                                       14
industry. The first column for each science reports the estimated decay rate and its standard error, while

the second reports the modal lag. In this case the modal lag is LModal = 1 / β1 β1ij . Here β1 is the baseline


decay rate of citations for chemistry in petrochemicals and β 1ik is the decay rate of field i in industry k .

There are 66 possible parameters representing six fields and 11 industries, but since certain fields are

negligible in several industries we obtain 59 significant parameters.

    Within the same field the speed of diffusion varies by a factor of two across industries. The modal lag

ranges from 1.93 to 4.55 years in biology, from 2.13 to 3.59 in chemistry, from 3.14 to 5.68 in computer

science, from 3.06 to 4.62 in engineering, from 2.03 to 3.37 years in medicine, and from 1.72 to 2.56 in

physics. The average lag in an industry is a mixture of field and industry effects but in spite of this drugs

and biotechnology stand out as a rapidly-diffusing industry while machinery is slowly-diffusing. This

variation by industry is a puzzle to which we return in Section VI.

    B. Diffusion of Science in Firms
    If firms were to strategically defer publication, then diffusion among firms should be significantly

slower than diffusion elsewhere. The additional strategic lag should drive a wedge between citing and cited

publication years. This is the issue that we explore in Tables 7 and 8, which contain estimates of equation

(4). Table 7 reports a basic set of results. The results suggest that strategic delays are not major in

industrial science. The average lag in column two for firms citing each other is 3.30 years. This is three

months longer than the 3.06 years observed for universities citing each other (Table 3, column two) and the

3.02 years (Table 5, column two) for firms citing universities. Of course the estimates cannot directly

measure publication delays but the observed lags suggest that these delays are not large. If they were, firms

would cite an older literature than universities. The only way to avoid this conclusion is to assume that

firms permanently block publication, in which case the lags would be censored.

    Columns three and four contain findings for firms citing themselves. The average of the modal lags is

1.70 years, about the same as the lag on same-university citations (1.77 years). Citations to other firms take

nearly twice as long (3.30/1.70=1.94). Still, same-firm citations occur 1.5 years faster than citations to

other firms and this pattern closely resembles the findings for universities.




                                                       15
    Table 8 explores the interfirm diffusion of science by industry as well as field. We allow the citation

decay parameter to vary in both dimensions to achieve this flexibility. Industries form rows of the table,

and fields form the columns up to the last, which reports averages by industry. Allowing for the fact that

some of the sciences are negligible in several industries, we obtain 50 significant parameters out of 66.

    The speed of diffusion varies widely for the same field. The modal lag ranges from 2.24 to 3.87 years

in biology, from 2.33 to 4.81 in chemistry, from 3.45 to 4.83 in computer science, from 2.11 to 4.34 in

engineering, from 2.47 to 6.10 in medicine, and from 1.81 to 3.32 in physics. Also, the average lags in the

final column do not rank the industries in the same way. This suggests that in a given industry and field,

the value of new science available from other firms differs from its value in universities.

    C. Comparative Diffusion of Science and Technology
         We have established stylized facts concerning the diffusion of science by sector, field and

industry. However, these results lack a benchmark outside of science. In this section we provide a

benchmark by comparing the interfirm speed of diffusion of science with the interfirm diffusion of patented

technology.

         We start by reviewing findings on the diffusion of patents. Jaffe and Trajtenberg (1996) estimate

citation functions for patents by U.S. universities and the federal government. Their purpose is to

understand firms’ use of public sector technologies and its diffusion. Using citing and cited grant years to

define the diffusion lag, they find that the modal lag is 4.7 years. Since grant years are analogous to

publication years, the estimate in this sense is comparable to modal lags in science. In a study of

international patent citations, Jaffe and Trajtenberg (1999) find that the modal lag for U.S. patents citing

other U.S patents varies from 4.6 years to 5.3 years, depending on technology field, with an average modal

lag of five years. These estimates again use citing and cited grant years to define the lags.

         Popp (2002) uses the citation function to compute stocks of energy-saving knowledge. His goal is

to distinguish the contributions of energy prices and stocks of knowledge to the search for new energy-

saving technologies. His citation function uses the application year of citing patents and grant year of cited

patents. The idea is that application year is a better measure of the date of the citing invention, while grant

year of the cited invention captures the date at which the information goes public. Citing application year

shortens the measured citation lag, and consistent with this, his estimate of the modal lag on energy patents



                                                      16
is 2.8 years. Since patents require an average of two years from application date to grant date this result is

close to the five year lag reported in Jaffe and Trajtenberg (1996, 1999).

         Branstetter and Ogura (2005) estimate the citation function for U.S. patents citing scientific papers

of California’s research universities. Citing year is the grant year while cited year is the publication year.

Thus, the concept of citation lag compares closely with that used in Jaffe and Trajtenberg (1996, 1999),

except that lags run from invention to science rather than from invention to invention. The modal lag

between patents and scientific papers is 8.33 years. This is the time that science takes to move first

between researchers in academic and industrial science, and subsequently from industrial science to

industrial invention13. This double lag explains why the estimate exceeds others. In fact, Branstetter and

Ogura’s (2005) modal lag comes tantalizingly close to the sum of the 4.8 year modal lag on patents plus the

3.0 year modal lag in science based on publication years that we find in this paper.

         These comparisons are in a way wishful. Earlier studies include a different set of firms than the

top 200 R&D firms. To remedy this we calculate a patent citation function for the top 200 firms using data

that span the same period as the science citation data. We begin by drawing all 356,000 patents issued to

the top 200 during 1975-1999, along with their citations14. This is a 20 percent sample of all U.S. patents.

It demonstrates the weight of the top 200 firms in U.S. technology. Using citing and cited technology

classes and grant years we construct cells that contain patent citation probabilities like equation (1) in

Section II. Using these data we estimate a patent citation function very like the science citation functions

reported in Tables 3-8. Table 9 contains the results.

         Columns one and two contain the estimated decay and diffusion parameters. Modal lags are

shown in column two. These range from 3.77 to 5.83 years, with a mean of 4.78 years. This lag is closely

similar to modal lags found in other studies of patents citation that use grant years to construct the lags and

estimates based on them. The average lag on patents is 45 percent greater (4.78/3.30=1.45) than the lag of

3.30 years on scientific papers reported in Table 7. By this measure science diffusion is about 50 percent

faster than technology’s.



13
   Adams (1990) finds a mean lag of 20 years for the peak effect of stocks of scientific papers on
productivity growth. Since the mean lag for the citation function is twice the modal lag (see (8)), a modal
lag of 8.33 years corresponds to a mean of 16.67 years, not very different from 20 years.
14
   The data source is the NBER patent citation data described in Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2002).


                                                        17
      Columns three and four report findings for modal lags on same-firm patent citations. The average lag

drops to 2.97 years, implying that other-firm citations on patents take 61 percent longer (4.78/2.97=1.61).

This compares with 94 percent longer lags on other-firm science citations in Table 7 and suggests that

frictional lags are relatively less important for patents than papers. A possible explanation is that

disclosure may begin with the application year, not the grant year.

      Industrial science leaks out about fifty percent faster than industrial technology, but it is not clear why.

One interpretation is that delays in application and processing are longer for patents than scientific papers.

This agrees with the notion that technology contains more sensitive information rather than science. A

second interpretation is that the shorter lag for papers reflects the efficiency of the priority publication

system in science. Yet another interpretation is that technology relies on older information than science.

Only time will distinguish among these explanations.

      VI. Explaining Industry Diffusion Differences
      The findings so far fall into two classes. Easily interpreted results include all the empirical

regularities. Diffusion speed does not fall with geographic distance. Science diffuses more rapidly in some

fields than others and the ranking of fields stays constant. The diffusion speed of industrial science is

slightly slower than academic science and science diffuses more rapidly than technology.

      This simplicity is spoiled by hard to explain differences in diffusion across industries. In this section

we try to interpret these differences using two factors. Frictional lags slow down diffusion of a field in all

industries. The size of R&D and science speeds up diffusion in particular industries. The simple model that

follows organizes these ideas. Let     p t be patents that are produced according to a Cobb-Douglas

production function,

                                                        ηj
                                  ⎡ N ⎛ t − L jt      ⎞    ⎤
(9)                 pt = Al Pt Rt ⎢∑ j =1 ⎜ ∫
                              α    β
                                                 s dτ ⎟ ⎥
                                  ⎣       ⎝   0   j τ ⎠ ⎦

This resembles standard patent production functions (Griliches, 1984; Hall and Hayashi, 1989; Klette,

1996) in that patents depend on the firm’s scientists and inventors l Pt , with exponent α , and on its R&D

stock Rt , with exponent β . These terms are multiplied by a science term in square brackets that consists

of the sum over stocks of scientific knowledge j , whose exponents areη j . These are shown as integrals



                                                       18
under the summation sign. Each science stock             j dates from at least t − L jt periods ago, reflecting the

vintage of knowledge available to the firm. We assume that this lag is to some extent controllable by the

firm. Notice that we treat the science stocks as separable across fields. This is approximately right for

recent science, where cross-field citations are rare (Adams, Clemmons, and Stephan, forthcoming). If

decreasing or constant returns prevail, then the exponents obey the inequality α + β +             ∑       η j ≤ 1.
                                                                                                       N
                                                                                                       j =1


            We indicate by means of an example how firms could set the lags on each science stock, thereby

determining how current they are in a science15. We assume that the lag in each field t − L jt depends on

a catch-up function:

                                         Cj
(10)                 L jt = F j +             φ
                                                     ,
                                    1 + B j l Ajtj

which determines the upper limits on the integrals or science stocks in (9). The constant F j > 0 is like the


frictional publication lags that we have discussed while B j , C j > 0 determine the ease of cutting the lag,


and    φ j > 0 the response of the lag to catch-up resources l Ajt . As catch-up resources l Ajt go to infinity

the lag goes to L jt = F j , while as resources go to zero the lag goes to L jt = F j + C j . Notice that the lag


cannot fall below the frictional lag F j . Differentiating (9) and (10) with respect to catch-up resources we

find that

                       ∂pt                 β ⎛ t − Lkt      ⎞
                                                              η k −1
                                                                           φ k Bk C k l φAkt
                                                                                         k −1

(11)                         = η k Al Pt Rt ⎜ ∫
                                     α
                                                       s dτ ⎟ s k ,t − Lkt                     >0
                      ∂l Akt                 ⎝ 0        kτ  ⎠                  (
                                                                            1 + Bk l φAkt
                                                                                       k
                                                                                             )
                                                                                             2




The marginal product of catch-up resources increases with scientists and inventors l Pt and the stock of

R&D Rt which provide the firm with an incentive to be more current. The incentive decreases as the

frictional lag Fk increases, since by (10) that reduces         t − Lkt the upper limit on the integral in (11) and the




15
     Nelson and Phelps (1966) present models that are precursors to this point of view.


                                                              19
stock of scientific knowledge in field k . Thus, there could be negative repercussions from increases in the

frictional lag16.

       This gives us a story as to why frictional lags and size in R&D and science matter for incentives to stay

current, but the task of finding empirical counterparts still lies ahead. This turns out to be tractable. One

measure of the frictional lag in a field is the difference between same-university and other-university lags,

which appear in the final column of Table 3 under “Difference in Modal Lags”. We shall instrument the

frictional lag in industry using the difference in modal lags in university science in the same field. The

difference in university lags derives from a different set of data than industrial science17. It is therefore

exogenous for a study of modal lags in industry.

       We also have measures of industry and firm scale in R&D and science. The average R&D stock per

firm speeds up diffusion by increasing the marginal benefit of searching the literature. Average papers in

an industry and field are a similar variable, but they offer an advantage over R&D stock in that they vary by

field as well as industry. We are unable to identify a third factor in the data, the amount of recent science

that attracts effort to stay current.

       Table 10 reports regressions using modal citation lags as the dependent variable. The regressions are at

the industry and field level. The estimated lags are taken from Table 6, where firms cite universities and

there are 59 such lags; and from Table 8, where firms cite other firms and there are 50 lags. Equations

10.1-10.3 concern diffusion from universities to firms. Equations 10.4-10.6 concern diffusion between

firms. The independent variables include the instrumented frictional lag. Also they include the mean stock

of R&D per firm and primary industry as reported in Compustat. The stock is expressed in millions of

1992 dollars, depreciated at 15 percent over the previous eight years, and summed . The final independent

variable is an alternative to the R&D stock18. This is the mean number of papers in an industry and field.

The data form a cross section rather than a panel, so that fixed effects estimation is infeasible.

       Equations 10.1 and 10.4 are arithmetic regressions, while the rest are logarithmic. The arithmetic form

estimates gradients while the logarithmic form estimates elasticities. In 10.1 and 10.4 the frictional lag

16
     Increases in Bk and   C k have more uncertain effects on the marginal product in (11).
17
   The overlap between the two sets of papers is two percent: 50 thousand of the 2.43 million university
papers are written jointly with firms. The estimates for universities in Table 3 stay the same whether the 50
thousand jointly authored papers are included or left out.
18
   The simple correlation between mean R&D stock and mean number of papers is 0.63.


                                                        20
significantly lengthens the modal lag. Point estimates are 0.99 and 0.69 implying that an extra frictional

lag of a year increases the lag by 1.0 and 0.7 years. Firm R&D shortens the modal lag and sometimes

significantly. The gradients are -0.65×10-4 in 10.1 and -1.38×10-4 in 11.4. An increase in the R&D stock by

one billion (104, given its scaling in millions) cuts the lag by 0.7 to 1.4 years.

    Equations 10.2 and 10.4 report specifications where the logarithm of the modal lag is the dependent

variable and logarithms of the frictional lag and R&D stock are the independent variables. Equation 10.2

contains results for firms citing universities. The elasticity of the frictional lag is 0.37. This exceeds zero at

the one percent level. The elasticity with respect to R&D stock is -0.06; the estimate is not very precise.

Results are qualitatively similar in 10.4. In this case elasticities of the frictional lag and R&D stock are

0.27 and -0.15. Both estimates are significant at the one percent level. Equations 10.3 and 10.6 replace the

logarithm of mean R&D stock with mean papers. The elasticity of the frictional lag stays the same, but the

elasticities of papers are -0.04 and -0.10. This is a decline in absolute value, but the estimates are

statistically significant. Friction slows down science diffusion, but firm size speeds it up. Industries with

large firms and fields with little friction exhibit rapid diffusion. Industries where the reverse is true exhibit

slow diffusion. Mixtures of the two elements produce intermediate results.

    Table 11 revisits Table 10 using data at the firm and field level. Again the data form a cross section,

so that fixed effects estimation is infeasible. Apart from comparability the reason is this. Owing to

truncation the average citation lag in a panel automatically increases with year and duration. To avoid

ambiguity we simply compute mean lags over years for the entire period. To reduce errors in measurement

we require at least 10 observations per year. Firm R&D stock is required to have an R&D history of eight

years in Compustat.

    The first half of the table concerns firms citing universities, while the second concerns firms citing

other firms. The table layout is the same and the format of the regressions almost the same as in Table 10,

except that we include industry dummies (with petrochemicals omitted). We do not report the industry

effects but simply note that in drugs, instruments, communications, and software they are negative and

often significant. Diffusion of science appears to be faster in these industries than in others.

    Equations 11.1 and 11.4 contain arithmetic regressions; the rest are logarithmic. Gradients are smaller

in absolute value than before but all are significant and all carry the expected signs. The frictional lag




                                                       21
increases the mean lag with a gradient of 0.6. This implies an increase in the mean lag of 0.6 years for each

additional year of the frictional lag. Firm R&D stock shortens the lag: its gradient is -0.46×10-4 in 11.1 and

-0.34×10-4 in 11.4. The results suggest that an increase in the stock of firm of one billion (104, given its

scaling in millions) reduces the mean lag by 0.5 or 0.3 years.

    Equations 11.2 and 11.5 express all variables in logarithms and use firms’ R&D stock as a measure of

size. The equations imply that doubling the frictional lag increases the mean lag by 12 percent. Doubling

firm R&D decreases the mean lag by one to two percent. Equations 11.3 and 11.6 replace R&D stock with

firm papers. The results imply that a doubling of firm papers in a field cuts the mean lag by four percent.

These results agree with the earlier findings at the industry and field level. Of course, the data sets are

cross-sections and we cannot control for fixed effects. But the direction of the effects agrees with

expectations and in this sense the findings are helpful in understanding industry variation in diffusion.

    VII. Conclusion
    In this paper we have provided new evidence on the diffusion of science, not only between universities

and between universities and firms, but also between firms. The modal or most frequent lag in science

citation is 3.0 years between universities and from universities to firms. The modal lag in science citations

between firms is 3.3 years, about three months longer than the lag involving universities. This result

suggests that publication and diffusion are delayed only slightly in industry. The modal lag of 3.3 years on

the diffusion of science between firms compares with 4.8 years based on patents for the same firms using

the same estimation procedure. Thus science diffusion appears to take place about fifty per cent more

rapidly than technology diffusion. This is consistent with the view that Open Science leads to more rapid

diffusion than the patent system, although other explanations are possible.

    Certain fields stand out for the rapidity with which their research disperses. Most rapid of all is

physics. Certain others diffuse slowly, such as computer science. Some of these differences are due to

publication lags as the results on self-citation demonstrate. In some fields papers are long and intricate and

costs of refereeing are greater in such disciplines. This is clearly helpful in understanding the structure of

frictional lags in science. Still other differences are due to collaboration, which is common in rapidly

diffusing fields such as physics (Adams, Black, Clemmons and Stephan, 2005). More work is needed to

fully understand the sources of variation in science diffusion across fields.



                                                      22
    Industry and firm variation in the diffusion of science, as we have seen, is partly driven by the

frictional lags and by the size of enterprise in R&D and science, but also it is driven by differences in the

value of new knowledge over old, and differences in this knowledge across sectors that are difficult to

measure. It seems that this too is a fruitful area for additional research. And finally, to the extent that firms

absorb knowledge from other scientific institutions that is already old at the source, there is an externality

involved in diffusion lags that has not been studied, to our knowledge.

     It is important to see that all of this evidence provides a lower bound on the speed of diffusion

between science and technology. Additional time is required for industrial science, once it arrives at a firm,

to affect industrial invention as well as conversely, and the determinants of these long lags and feedback

effects have yet to be fully investigated. More elusive still is the nature of the connection between

technology and science within R&D firms that we have already alluded to in this paper.




                                                       23
                                            References

Adams, James D., “Fundamental Stocks of Knowledge and Productivity Growth,” Journal of Political

        Economy 98 (August 1990): 673-702.

______________, “Industrial R&D Laboratories: Windows on Black Boxes?” Journal of Technology

        Transfer 30 (January 2005): 129-137.

______________, Grant C. Black, J. Roger Clemmons, and Paula E. Stephan, “Scientific Teams and

        Institutional Collaborations: Evidence from U.S. Universities, 1981-1999,” Research Policy 34

        (2005): 259-285.

______________, and J. Roger Clemmons, “Industrial Scientific Discovery,” Working Paper, Rensselaer

        Polytechnic Institute, October 2005.

______________, J. Roger Clemmons, and Paula E. Stephan, “Standing on Academic Shoulders:

        Measuring Scientific Influence in Universities”, forthcoming in Les Annales D’Economie et de

        Statistique.

Audretsch, David, and Paula E. Stephan, “Company-Scientist Locational Links: the Case of

        Biotechnology,” American Economic Review 86 (June 1996): 641-652.

Berliner, Joseph, The Innovation Decision in Soviet Industry, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1976.

Branstetter, Lee, and Yoshiaki Ogura, “Is Academic Science Driving a Surge in Industrial Innovation?

        Evidence from Patent Citations”, Cambridge, Mass., NBER Working Paper No. 11561, August

        2005.

Cohen, Wesley M., Richard R. Nelson, and John P. Walsh, “Links and Impacts: The Influence of Public

        Research on Industrial R&D,” Management Science 48 (January 2002): 1-23.

Dearden, James, Barry W. Ickes, and Larry Samuelson, “To Innovate or Not To Innovate: Incentives and

        Innovation in Hierarchies,” American Economic Review 80 (December 1990): 1105-1124.

Ellison, Glenn, “Evolving Standards for Academic Publishing: A q-r Theory,” Journal of Political

        Economy 110 (October 2002): 994-1034.

Furman, Jeffrey L., and Scott Stern, “Climbing Atop the Shoulders of Giants: The Impact of Institutions on




                                                   24
        Cumulative Research,” Working Paper, Boston University and Northwestern University, March

        2004.

Griliches, Zvi, “Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of Technical Change,” Econometrica 25

        (October 1957): 501-522.

___________, editor, R&D, Patents, and Productivity, Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the

        National Bureau of Economic Research, 1984.

Hall, Bronwyn H., and Fumio Hayashi, “Research and Development as an Investment,” NBER Working

        Paper No. 2973, May 1989.

Hart, Oliver, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, “The Proper Scope of Government,” Quarterly Journal

        Of Economics 112 (November 1997): 1127-1162.

Henderson, Rebecca, and Iain Cockburn, “Scale, Scope, and Spillovers: the Determinants of Research

        Productivity in Drug Discovery,” RAND Journal of Economics 27 (Spring 1996): 32-59.

Jaffe, Adam B., and Manuel Trajtenberg, “Flows of Knowledge from Universities and Federal

        Laboratories,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 93 (November 1996): 12671-

        12677.

_________________________________, “International Knowledge Flows: Evidence from Patent

        Citations,” Economics of Innovation and New Technology 8 (1999): 105-136.

_________________________________, Patents, Citations, and Innovations: A Window on the

        Knowledge Economy, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2002.

Klette, Tor Jakob, “R&D, Scale Economies, and Plant Performance,” RAND Journal of Economics 27

        (Autumn 1996): 502-522.

Levin, Richard C., Alvin K. Klevorick, Richard R. Nelson, and Sidney G. Winter, “Appropriating the

        Returns to Industrial Research and Development,” Brookings Papers in Economic Activity 1987

        (Issue 3, 1987): 783-820.

Mansfield, Edwin, “Intra-firm Rates of Diffusion of an Innovation,” The Review of Economics and

        Statistics 45 (November 1963): 348-359.

______________, “How Rapidly Does New Industrial Technology Leak Out?” The Journal of Industrial

        Economics 34 (December 1985): 217-213.




                                                  25
______________, “Academic Research and Industrial Innovation,” Research Policy 20 (1991): 1-12.

______________, Mark Schwartz, and Samuel Wagner, “Imitation Costs and Patents: An Empirical

        Study,” The Economic Journal 91 (December 1981): 907-918.

Nelson, Richard R., and Edmund S. Phelps, “Investment in Humans, Technological Diffusion, and

        Economic Growth”, American Economic Review 56 (March 1966): 69-75.

Peri, Giovanni, “Determinants of Knowledge Flows and their Effect on Innovation,” Review of Economics

        And Statistics 87 (May 2005): 308-322.

Popp, David, “Induced Innovation and Energy Prices”, American Economic Review 92 (March 2002):

        160-180.

Ruttan, Vernon W., Technology, Growth, and Development, New York, Oxford University Press, 2001.

Scherer, F. Michael, Innovation and Growth: Schumpeterian Perspectives, Cambridge, Mass: MIT

        Press, 1984.

Scotchmer, Suzanne, “Standing on the Shoulders of Giants: Cumulative Research and the Patent Law,”

        Journal of Economic Perspectives 5 (1991): 29-41.

________________, Innovation and Incentives, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004.

Stephan, Paula E., “Robert K. Merton’s Perspective on Priority and the Provision of the Public Good,

        Knowledge,” Scientometrics 60 (2004): 81-87.

Zucker, Lynne G., Michael R. Darby, and Marilynn B. Brewer, “Intellectual Human Capital and the Birth

        Of U.S. Biotechnology Enterprises,” American Economic Review 88 (March 1998): 290-306.




                                                   26
                                        Table 1
                    Scientific Papers by Field, Top 110 Universities
                       And Top 200 U.S. R&D Firms, 1981-1999

                   Field                        University                Firm
                                                 Papers a                Papers b

                                                  189,740                  6,025
Agriculture                                       (7.8%)                  (2.5%)
                                                   35,795
Astronomy                                                                   __ c
                                                   (1.5%)
                                                  639,195                  44,082
Biology                                           (26.3%)                 (18.5%)
                                                  195,437                  39,346
Chemistry                                         (8.0%)                  (16.5%)
                                                   28,184                 12,367
Computer Science                                   (1.2%)                 (5.2%)
                                                   73,126                  3,616
Earth Sciences                                     (3.0%)                 (1.5%)
                                                   43,892
Economics                                                                   __ c
                                                   (1.8%)
                                                  170,569                  50,203
Engineering                                       (7.0%)                  (21.1%)
                                                   61,061                  2,665
Mathematics and Statistics
                                                   (2.5%)                 (1.1%)
                                                  659,000                  26,739
Medicine                                          (27.1%)                 (11.2%)
                                                  217,026                  50,346
Physics                                           (8.9%)                  (21.1%)
                                                  116,976
Psychology                                                                  __ c
                                                  (4.8%)
Source: Institute for Scientific Information and Computer Horizons, Inc. a Sum of university
articles is 2,430,001. b Sum of firm articles is 235,389. c Astronomy, economics, and psychology
contribute less than one percent of firm papers and are dropped from this table. Papers are
assigned to the unique field of each journal according to the Journal-Field Assignment Method
discussed in the text. Percentages noted are percents of column totals.




                                          27
                                                       Table 2
                      Mean Science Citations, Papers Cited and Citing, and Citation Probabilities
                                 Top 110 Universities and Top 200 U.S. R&D Firms


                                                                    Potential         Potential     Mean Citation
                 Classification                     Citations
                                                                   Papers Cited     Papers Citing    Probability


Panel A. Citations between Top 110 Universities
Citing Field
 Biology                                              4,158           16,840            51,541        0.21×10-4
 Chemistry                                             660            14,095            14,486        0.40×10-4
 Computer Science                                       55            12,262             2,462        1.37×10-4
 Engineering                                           230            12,543            13,369        0.13×10-4
 Medicine                                             3,614           19,355            54,570        0.14×10-4
 Physics                                              1,333           13,731            19,270        0.51×10-4

Panel B. Citations from Top 200 R&D Firms to Top 110 Universities
Citing Field
 Biology                                            120               26,348             579          0.87×10-5
 Chemistry                                           33               17,689             301          1.21×10-5
 Computer Science                                    13                4,564             180          5.81×10-5
 Engineering                                         16               10,690             333          0.83×10-5
 Medicine                                           106               30,467             556          0.85×10-5
 Physics                                             35               12,727             367          0.98×10-5

Citing Primary Industry of Firm (SIC Code)
 Petrochemicals (13, 28 except 283, 29-30)              37            20,037             323          1.20×10-5
 Pharmaceuticals & Biotechnology (283)                 182            22,816             994          1.49×10-5
 Primary and Fabricated Metals (33,34)                  7             18,781              37          1.60×10-5
 Machinery, Except Computers (35, except 357)            6            10,009              44          1.63×10-5
 Computers (357)                                       14             13,990             124          1.95×10-5
 Electrical Equipment (36)                              22            12,539             319          5.17×10-5
 Transportation Equipment (37)                         21             14,964             214          5.12×10-5
 Instruments (38)                                      20             22,717             119          2.88×10-5
 Communications Services (48)                          28             11,097             265          7.39×10-5
 Computer Software & Services (737)                     25            13,298             268          4.64×10-5
 All Other                                             10             23,119             41           1.49×10-5

Panel C. Citations between Top 200 R&D Firms
Citing Field
 Biology                                               20              568               1172         0.81×10-4
 Chemistry                                              5              415               346          0.63×10-4
 Computer Science                                       3              232                215         1.40×10-4
 Engineering                                            3              429               466          0.25×10-4
 Medicine                                              13              654               867          0.46×10-4
 Physics                                                7              398               410          0.59×10-4

Citing Primary Industry of Firm (SIC Code)
 Petrochemicals (13, 28 except 283, 29-30)              5              464               400          0.59×10-4
 Pharmaceuticals & Biotechnology (283)                 22              511              1,405         0.33×10-4




                                                          28
                                                        Table 2
                       Mean Science Citations, Papers Cited and Citing, and Citation Probabilities
                                  Top 110 Universities and Top 200 U.S. R&D Firms


                                                                           Potential            Potential          Mean Citation
                 Classification                          Citations
                                                                          Papers Cited        Papers Citing         Probability


Citing Primary Industry of Firm (SIC Code)
 Machinery, Except Computers (35, except 357)                 2                637                  37                1.40×10-4
 Computers (357)                                              4                421                 151                0.81×10-4
 Electrical Equipment (36)                                    5                341                 478                0.88×10-4
 Transportation Equipment (37)                                4                408                 357                0.45×10-4
 Instruments (38)                                             3                604                 126                0.63×10-4
 Communications Services (48)                                 6                363                 469                0.64×10-4
 Computer Software & Services (737)                           5                348                 374                0.60×10-4
 All Other                                                    2                881                 38                 0.91×10-4

         Notes: The table entries are means over cells and not sums. The number of cells that enter into the
         calculations for Panel A is 36,834. Citing and cited fields and citing and cited years classify these
         university-university cells. For Panel B, which consists of firm-university cells, this number is 30,604. In
         this case citing industry, citing and cited fields, and cited fields and years classify the cells. The number of
         cells in Panel C is 34,246. In the firm-firm cells the classifying variables are citing and cited industries,
         fields, and years.




                                                                  29
                                                       Table 3
                    Diffusion Estimates: Science Citations Between the Top 110 U.S. Universities


   Parameter, Science Field                Citations to Other               Self-Citations to the Same
                                             Universities a                        University b                Difference in
                                       Estimate                             Estimate                           Modal Lags
                                      (St. Error)      Modal Lag c         (St. Error)      Modal Lag c



Decay Parameters (β1i)

 Biology                                 1.090              2.61              0.894              1.84               0.77
                                        (0.016)                              (0.010)
 Chemistry                               1.000              2.85               1.00              1.65               1.20
                                          (--)                                 (--)
 Computer Science                        0.671              4.25              0.866              1.90               2.35
                                        (0.011)                              (0.011)
 Engineering                             0.744              3.83              0.907              1.82               2.01
                                        (0.028)                              (0.017)
 Medicine                                0.922              3.09              0.814              2.02               1.07
                                        (0.019)                              (0.018)
 Physics                                 1.632              1.75              1.211              1.36               0.39
                                        (0.022)                              (0.012)
Baseline Decay Parameter (β1)*           0.351               __               0.607               __                 __
                                        (0.004)                              (0.003)
Diffusion Parameter (β2)*              1.08×10-4             __             4.95×10-4             __                 __
                                      (3.23×10-6)                          (5.86×10-6)
Average of the Modal Lags d                                3.06                                1.77                  1.29
                                         __                                    __
      Notes: The equations include intercept terms for citing and cited fields, cited years and citing intervals,
      which are significant. The functional form is p iTjt = α exp( − β 1 β 1i (T − t ))[1 − exp( − β 2 (T − t ))] ,
      where the intercept terms are α and β1 , β1i , β 2 are the exponential parameters reported above. a The
      number of observations is 36,834. Adjusted R2=0.938. The estimated standard error of the regression (root
      mean squared error) is 0.0010. b The number of observations is 21,801. Adjusted R2=0.952. The
      estimated standard error of the regression (root mean squared error) is 0.0006. c The modal lag equals the
      reciprocal of β1β1i . See equation (5) in the text. d The average is the simple or un-weighted average of the
      field-specific modal lags.




                                                             30
                                                      Table 4
                   Diffusion Estimates: Science Citations Between the Top 110 U.S. Universities,
                                           Within and Between Sciences


                                         Citations to the Same              Citations to Other
                                                Field a                           Fields a
   Parameter, Citing Field of                                                                               Difference in
           Science                                                                                          Modal Lags
                                       Estimate          Modal         Estimate (St.        Modal
                                      (St. Error)        Lag b            Error)            Lag b


Decay Parameters (β1i)

Biology                                   1.090               2.61          0.958            2.97                    0.36
                                         (0.016)                           (0.097)
Chemistry                                 1.000               2.85          0.908            3.14                    0.29
                                           (--)                            (0.171)
Computer Science                          0.671               4.25          0.751            3.79R               -0.46 R
                                         (0.011)                           (0.203)
Engineering                               0.749               3.80          0.577            4.94                    1.14
                                         (0.029)                           (0.109)
Medicine                                  0.921               3.09          0.911            3.13                    0.04
                                         (0.019)                           (0.070)
Physics                                   1.631               1.75          1.135            2.51                    0.76
                                         (0.022)                           (0.216)
Baseline Decay Parameter (β1)*            0.351               __             __               __                     __
                                         (0.004)
Diffusion Parameter (β2)*               1.08×10-4             __             __               __                     __
                                       (3.25×10-6)
Average of the Modal Lags c                __                 3.06           __              3.41                    0.35

     Notes: The equations include intercept terms for citing and cited fields, cited years and citing intervals,
     which are significant. The functional form is p iTjt = α exp( − β 1 β 1i (T − t ))[1 − exp( − β 2 (T − t ))] ,
     where the intercept terms are α and β1 , β1i , β 2 are the exponential parameters reported above.     a
                                                                                                               The
                                                          2
     number of observations is 36,834. The adjusted R =0.938. The estimated standard error of the regression
     (root mean squared error) is 0.0010. R Citation lag to other fields is shorter than citation lag within a field
     and represents a reversal in the relative speed of within field diffusion. b The modal lag equals the
     reciprocal of β1β1i . See equation (5) of the text. c The average is the simple or un-weighted average of the
     field-specific modal lags.




                                                               31
                                                   Table 5
                     Diffusion Estimates: Science Citations from Top 200 U.S. R&D Firms
                                         To Top 110 U.S. Universities


                                                                                  Citations to Universities a
                   Parameter, Science Field
                                                                              Estimate
                                                                                                       Modal Lag b
                                                                             (St. Error)

Decay Parameters (β1i)

 Biology                                                                        0.997                         2.57
                                                                               (0.036)
 Chemistry                                                                      1.000                         2.56
                                                                                 (--)
 Computer Science                                                               0.622                         4.12
                                                                               (0.020)
 Engineering                                                                    0.655                         3.91
                                                                               (0.040)
 Medicine                                                                       0.886                         2.89
                                                                               (0.043)
 Physics                                                                        1.242                         2.06
                                                                               (0.045)
Baseline Decay Parameter (β1)*                                                  0.390                          __
                                                                               (0.010)
Diffusion Parameter (β2)*                                                     0.69×10-4                        __
                                                                             (3.75×10-6)
Average of the Modal Lags c                                                       __                          3.02

    Notes: The equation includes intercept terms for citing and cited fields, cited years and citing intervals,
    which are significant. The functional form is p iTjt = α exp( − β 1 β 1i (T − t ))[1 − exp( − β 2 (T − t ))] ,
    where the intercept terms are α and β1 , β1i , β 2 are the exponential parameters reported above.     a
                                                                                                              The
                                                         2
    number of observations is 30,604. The adjusted R =0.711. The estimated standard error of the regression
    (root mean squared error) is 0.0009. b The modal lag equals the reciprocal of β1β1i . See equation (5) in
    the text. c The average is the simple or un-weighted average of the field-specific modal lags.




                                                             32
                                                                           Table 6
                                                          Diffusion Estimates by Field and Industry:
                                         Science Citations from Top 200 U.S. R&D Firms to Top 110 U.S. Universities


                                                                             Field of Science
                                                                                                                                               Average
                                                                                                                                              Modal Lag
                                                                      Computer
     Industry Group            Biology             Chemistry                             Engineering        Medicine           Physics            By
                                                                       Science
                                                                                                                                               Industry
                              β      Modal         β      Modal       β      Modal        β      Modal      β      Modal      β      Modal
                           (s. e.)    Lag       (s. e.)    Lag     (s. e.)    Lag      (s. e.)    Lag    (s. e.)    Lag    (s. e.)    Lag


Petrochemicals              0.855    2.56        1.000    2.19      __         __       0.578    3.79     0.682    3.21     1.192    1.83       2.72
                           (0.025)                (--)                                 (0.044)           (0.034)           (0.031)
Drugs and Biotechnology     0.984    2.22        0.759    2.88      __         __        __       __      0.854    2.56      __          __     2.55
                           (0.018)              (0.023)                                                  (0.020)
Metals                      0.736    2.97        0.900    2.43      __         __       0.660    3.31     0.648    3.37     0.891    2.45       2.91
                           (0.074)              (0.040)                                (0.042)           (0.069)           (0.057)
Machinery except            0.480    4.55        0.609    3.59     0.487      4.49      0.698    3.13     0.692    3.16     0.852    2.56       3.58
Computers                  (0.078)              (0.040)           (0.018)              (0.049)           (0.101)           (0.056)
Computers                   0.807    2.71        0.860    2.54     0.564      3.88      0.645    3.39     0.848    2.58     1.265    1.73       2.81
                           (0.053)              (0.035)           (0.013)              (0.036)           (0.091)           (0.033)
Electrical Equipment        0.901    2.43        1.005    2.18     0.541      4.04      0.616    3.55     1.074    2.03     1.106    1.88       2.69
                           (0.067)              (0.042)           (0.012)              (0.031)           (0.051)           (0.034)
Transportation Equipment    0.855    2.56        0.764    2.86     0.697      3.14      0.615    3.56     0.760    2.88     1.129    1.94       2.82
                           (0.053)              (0.029)           (0.019)              (0.030)           (0.076)           (0.036)
Instruments                 0.986    2.22        0.950    2.30     0.385      5.68      0.714    3.06     0.866    2.52     1.088    2.01       2.97
                           (0.031)              (0.029)           (0.013)              (0.057)           (0.034)           (0.058)
Communications              1.131    1.93        1.028    2.13     0.594      3.68      0.553    3.95      __         __    1.270    1.72       2.68
                           (0.042)              (0.030)           (0.012)              (0.035)                             (0.029)
Software and Business       1.012    2.16        0.877    2.49     0.548      3.99      0.473    4.62     0.896    2.44     1.245    1.76       2.91
Services                   (0.061)              (0.023)           (0.011)              (0.021)           (0.081)           (0.029)




                                                                             33
                                                                                Table 6
                                                               Diffusion Estimates by Field and Industry:
                                              Science Citations from Top 200 U.S. R&D Firms to Top 110 U.S. Universities


                                                                                     Field of Science
                                                                                                                                                                   Average
                                                                                                                                                                  Modal Lag
                                                                              Computer
     Industry Group                 Biology             Chemistry                                  Engineering            Medicine              Physics               By
                                                                               Science
                                                                                                                                                                   Industry
                                   β      Modal         β       Modal         β      Modal          β      Modal          β      Modal         β      Modal
                                (s. e.)    Lag       (s. e.)     Lag       (s. e.)    Lag        (s. e.)    Lag        (s. e.)    Lag       (s. e.)    Lag


Miscellaneous                   0.666      3.28       1.018      2.15        __         __       0.679      3.22       0.666      3.28      1.189      1.84             3.44
                               (0.042)               (0.033)                                    (0.061)               (0.058)              (0.066)

   Notes: The equation includes intercept terms for citing and cited fields, cited years, and citing intervals, which are significant. The functional form is
   p iTjt = α exp( − β 1 β 1i (T − t ))[1 − exp( − β 2 (T − t ))] , where the intercept terms are α and β1 , β1i , β 2 are the exponential parameters reported above.   a


   The number of observations is 22,855. The adjusted R2=0.800. The estimated standard error of the regression (root mean squared error) is 0.000274. b The
   identity of the industry for which diffusion is the slowest or the fastest of course varies across the six science fields. c The modal lag equals the reciprocal
   of β1β1ij , where β1 = 0.457 is the estimate of the rate of decay within petrochemicals in the field of chemistry, and subscripts ij stand for citing industry and
   field. See equation (5) in the text.




                                                                                      34
                                                   Table 7
                                    Diffusion Estimates: Science Citations
                                 Within and Between Top 200 U.S. R&D Firms


                                              Citations to Other Firms a           Self-Citations to the Same Firm b
      Parameter, Science Field
                                              Estimate                                Estimate
                                                                 Modal Lag c                             Modal Lag c
                                             (St. Error)                             (St. Error)


Decay Parameters (β1i)

 Biology                                         1.050               2.95               0.948                  1.60
                                                (0.018)                                (0.038)
 Chemistry                                       1.000               3.10               1.000                  1.52
                                                  (--)                                   (--)
 Computer Science                                0.800               3.87               0.700                  2.17
                                                (0.020)                                (0.118)
 Engineering                                     1.019               3.83               0.888                  1.71
                                                (0.030)                                (0.089)
 Medicine                                        0.820               3.78               1.024                  1.48
                                                (0.027)                                (0.040)
 Physics                                         1.371               2.26               0.884                  1.72
                                                (0.023)                                (0.032)
Baseline Decay Parameter (β1)*                   0.323                __                0.658                      __
                                                (0.005)                                (0.019)
Diffusion Parameter (β2)*                      0.93×10-4              __             13.46×10-4                    __
                                              (5.89×10-6)                            (2.28×10-4)
Average of the Modal Lags d                       __                 3.30                 __                   1.70

   Notes: Both equations include intercept terms for citing and cited fields, cited years and citing intervals,
   which are significant. The functional form is p iTjt = α exp( − β 1 β 1i (T − t ))[1 − exp( − β 2 (T − t ))] ,
   where the intercept terms are α and β1 , β1i , β 2 are the exponential parameters reported above.     a
                                                                                                             The
                                               2
   number of cells is 34,246. The adjusted R =0.580. The estimated standard error of the regression (root
   mean squared error) is 0.0010. b The number of observations is 10,687. The adjusted R2=0.805. The
   estimated standard error of the regression (root mean squared error) is 0.0124. c The modal lag equals the
   reciprocal of β1β1i . See equation (5) in the text. d The average is the simple or un-weighted average of the
   field-specific modal lags.




                                                            35
                                                                        Table 8
                                                       Diffusion Estimates by Field and Industry:
                                                 Science Citations Among the Top 200 U.S. R&D Firms


                                                                          Field of Science
                                                                                                                                            Average
     Industry Group                                                                                                                        Modal Lag
                                                                   Computer                                                                    By
                               Biology           Chemistry                            Engineering        Medicine           Physics
                                                                    Science                                                                 Industry
                              β      Modal       β      Modal      β      Modal        β      Modal      β      Modal      β      Modal
                           (s. e.)    Lag     (s. e.)    Lag    (s. e.)    Lag      (s. e.)    Lag    (s. e.)    Lag    (s. e.)    Lag


Petrochemicals              0.835    2.83      1.000    2.36      __        __       0.617    3.82     0.601    3.93     1.241    1.90       2.97
                           (0.051)              (--)                                (0.151)           (0.038)           (0.064)
Drugs and Biotechnology     1.052    2.24      1.002    2.35      __        __        __       __      0.957    2.47      __          __     2.35
                           (0.046)            (0.052)                                                 (0.064)
Metals                      0.610    3.87      0.575    4.10      __        __       0.543    4.34     0.386    6.10     0.842    2.80       4.24
                           (0.023)            (0.036)                               (0.098)           (0.029)           (0.061)
Machinery except             __          __    0.627    3.76      __        __       1.119    2.11      __       __      0.841    2.80       2.89
Computers                                     (0.031)                               (0.058)                             (0.040)
Computers                   0.638    3.70      0.626    3.77     0.488     4.83      0.657    3.59      __       __      1.086    2.17       3.61
                           (0.091)            (0.038)           (0.029)             (0.060)                             (0.046)
Electrical Equipment        0.889    2.65      1.013    2.33     0.684     3.45      0.664    3.55      __       __      1.110    2.12       2.82
                           (0.032)            (0.050)           (0.031)             (0.049)                             (0.044)
Transportation Equipment    0.727    3.24      0.691    3.41      __        __       0.608    3.88      __       __      1.071    2.20       3.18
                           (0.043)            (0.049)                               (0.076)                             (0.061)
Instruments                 0.799    2.95      0.782    3.02      __        __       0.763    3.09     0.557    4.23     0.711    3.32       3.32
                           (0.083)            (0.042)                               (0.106)           (0.060)           (0.035)
Communications              1.024    2.30      0.911    2.59     0.624     3.78      0.904    2.61      __       __      1.303    1.81       2.61
                           (0.190)            (0.053)           (0.044)             (0.101)                             (0.058)
Software and Business       0.748    3.16      0.838    2.81     0.573     4.11      0.768    3.07      __       __      1.318    1.79       2.99
Services                   (0.152)            (0.040)           (0.031)             (0.057)                             (0.057)




                                                                          36
                                                                                Table 8
                                                               Diffusion Estimates by Field and Industry:
                                                         Science Citations Among the Top 200 U.S. R&D Firms


                                                                                      Field of Science
                                                                                                                                                                    Average
     Industry Group                                                                                                                                                Modal Lag
                                                                               Computer                                                                                By
                                    Biology              Chemistry                                 Engineering             Medicine              Physics
                                                                                Science                                                                             Industry
                                   β      Modal          β      Modal          β      Modal         β       Modal         β       Modal         β      Modal
                                (s. e.)    Lag        (s. e.)    Lag        (s. e.)    Lag       (s. e.)     Lag       (s. e.)     Lag       (s. e.)    Lag


Miscellaneous                   0.632      3.73       0.491      4.81        __         __        0.551      4.28       0.574      4.11      0.784       3.01          3.99
                               (0.076)               (0.028)                                     (0.070)               (0.049)              (0.038)

   Notes: The equation includes intercept terms for citing and cited fields, cited years, and citing intervals, which are significant. The functional form
   is p iTjt = α exp( − β 1 β 1i (T − t ))[1 − exp( − β 2 (T − t ))] , where the intercept terms are α and β1 , β1i , β 2 are the exponential parameters reported above.   a


   The number of observations is 31,770. The adjusted R2=0.545. The estimated standard error of the regression (root mean squared error) is 0.00103. b The
   identity of the industry for which diffusion is the slowest or the fastest of course varies across the six science fields. c The modal lag equals the reciprocal of
    β1β1ij , where β1 = 0.424 is the estimate of the rate of decay within petrochemicals in the field of chemistry, and subscripts and ij stands for citing industry and
   field. See equation (5) in the text.




                                                                                      37
                                                    Table 9
                                     Diffusion Estimates: Patent Citations
                                 Within and Between Top 200 U.S. R&D Firms


                                                  Citations to Other Firms a       Self-Citations to the Same Firm b
  Parameter, Technological Group
                                               Estimate                                Estimate
                                                                 Modal Lag c                             Modal Lag c
                                              (St. Error)                             (St. Error)


Decay Parameters (β1i)

 Chemical Technologies (1)                       0.894               5.83                1.053                 3.05
                                                (0.018)                                 (0.014)
 Computers and Communication                     1.374               3.79                1.087                 2.96
   Technologies (2)                             (0.021)                                 (0.014)
 Drugs and Medical Technologies (3)              0.965               5.40                1.055                 3.05
                                                (0.015)                                 (0.012)
 Electrical and Electronic                       1.382               3.77                1.217                 2.64
   Technologies (4)                             (0.023)                                 (0.020)
 Mechanical Technologies (5)                     1.114               4.67                1.112                 2.89
                                                (0.024)                                 (0.016)
 All Other Technologies (6)                      1.000               5.21                1.000                 3.21
                                                  (--)                                    (--)
Baseline Decay Parameter (β1)*                   0.192                __                 0.311                     __
                                                (0.003)                                 (0.003)
Diffusion Parameter (β2)*                      0.24×10-4              __               0.58×10-4                   __
                                              (0.62×10-6)                             (1.39×10-6)
Average of the Modal Lags d                       __                 4.78                  __                  2.97

   Notes: The equation includes intercept terms for citing and cited fields, cited years and citing intervals,
   which are significant. The functional form is p iTjt = α exp( − β 1 β 1i (T − t ))[1 − exp( − β 2 (T − t ))] ,
   where the intercept terms are α and β1 , β1i , β 2 are the exponential parameters reported above.     a
                                                                                                             The
                                              2
   number of cells is 9,658. The adjusted R =0.935. The estimated standard error of the regression (root mean
   squared error) is 0.00022. b The number of observations is 10,687. The adjusted R2=0.805. The estimated
   standard error of the regression (root mean squared error) is 0.0124. c The modal lag equals the reciprocal
   of β1β1i . See equation (5) in the text. d The average is the simple or un-weighted average of the field-
   specific modal lags.




                                                            38
                                                            Table 10
                                      Sources of Variation in Modal Science Citation Lags
                                                By Industry and Field of Science
                                               (Standard Errors in Parentheses)


     Variable or Statistic                    Firms Citing Universities,                          Firms Citing Other Firms,
                                                Dependent Variable a                                Dependent Variable b

                                      Modal           Log (Modal       Log (Modal         Modal          Log (Modal          Log (Modal
                                       Lag               Lag)             Lag)             Lag              Lag)                Lag)

                                       10.1              10.2              10.3            10.4              10.5               10.6


Frictional Citation Lag in           0.987***                                            0.685***
University Science                    (0.112)                                             (0.175)
Mean R&D per Firm in an            -0.654 ×10-4*                                      -1.379 ×10-4**
Industry                           (0.389 ×10-4)                                       (0.582 ×10-4)
Log (Frictional Citation Lag in                        0.369***         0.360***                           0.265***           0.274***
University Science)                                     (0.040)          (0.039)                            (0.053)            (0.050)
Log (Mean R&D per Firm in                              -0.064**                                           -0.146***
an Industry)                                            (0.031)                                             (0.042)
Log (Mean Papers per Firm in                                           -0.037***                                             -0.101***
an Industry and Field)                                                  (0.014)                                               (0.023)

Number of Observations                  59                59               59               50                50                 50
Root Mean Squared Error               0.551             0.180            0.176            0.787             0.223              0.210
Adjusted R2                           0.572             0.593            0.610            0.269             0.407              0.480
F-Statistic                          39.8+++           43.2+++          46.3+++          10.0+++           17.8+++            23.6+++

           Notes: Method is Ordinary Least Squares. a Dependent variable is the arithmetic or logarithmic modal lag
           as shown in Table 6. b Dependent variable is the arithmetic or logarithmic modal lag as shown in Table 8.
           *** Regression coefficient is significant at greater than the one percent level. ** Regression coefficient is
           significant at greater than the five percent level. +++ F-statistic is significant at more than the 0.1 percent
           level.




                                                                  39
                                                            Table 11
                                       Sources of Variation in Mean Science Citation Lags
                                                  By Firm and Field of Science
                                                (Standard Errors in Parentheses)


     Variable or Statistic                     Firms Citing Universities,                           Firms Citing Other Firms,
                                                 Dependent Variable a                                 Dependent Variable b

                                        Mean            Log (Mean       Log (Mean           Mean           Log (Mean        Log (Mean
                                        Lag               Lag)            Lag)              Lag              Lag)             Lag)

                                        11.1               11.2               11.3           11.4              11.5             11.6


Industry Dummies                         Yes                Yes               Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes

Frictional Citation Lag in            0.598***                                            0.587***
University Science                     (0.079)                                             (0.084)
Mean R&D per Firm in an            -0.456×10-4***                                      -0.337 ×10-4**
Industry                            (0.135×10-4)                                        (0.125 ×10-4)
Log (Frictional Citation Lag in                          0.124***           0.129***                        0.115***        0.118***
University Science)                                       (0.016)            (0.016)                         (0.017)         (0.017)
Log (Mean R&D per Firm)                                  -0.032***                                          -0.021**
                                                          (0.008)                                            (0.008)
Log (Mean Papers per Firm                                               -0.040***                                           -0.037***
and field)                                                               (0.007)                                             (0.008)

Number of Observations                   559               559                559           356               356              356
Root Mean Squared Error                 1.189             0.223              0.220         0.974             0.190            0.186
Adjusted R2                             0.161             0.169              0.193         0.253             0.243            0.270
F-Statistic                            9.9+++            10.5+++            12.1+++       11.0+++           10.5+++          12.0+++

            Notes: Method is Ordinary Least Squares. a Dependent variable is the arithmetic or logarithmic mean lag,
            where the mean is the average by firm and field. The number of observations used to calculate the mean
            is n ≥ 10 . b Dependent variable is the arithmetic or logarithmic mean lag, where the mean is the average
            by firm and field. The number of observations used to calculate the mean is n ≥ 10 . *** Regression
            coefficient is significant at greater than the one percent level. ** Regression coefficient is significant at
            greater than the five percent level. +++ F-statistic is significant at more than the 0.1 percent level.




                                                                  40
                                                                    Figure 1--Mean Probability of Citation,
                                                                         By Citing and Cited Sector

                                 0.00018

                                 0.00016

                                 0.00014
         Citation Probability




                                 0.00012

                                  0.0001                                                                      Universities Citing Each Other
                                                                                                              Firms Citing Universities
                                 0.00008                                                                      Firms Citing Each Other

                                 0.00006

                                 0.00004

                                 0.00002

                                       0
                                               1       3        5       7      9     11    13   15   17
                                                                            Lag in Years




                                                           Figure 2--Normalized Mean Probability of Citation,
                                                                 By Citing and Cited Sector, Lag 1=1.0

                                 1.4


                                 1.2
Nomalized Citation Probability




                                  1
                                                                                                                Universities Citing Each
                                                                                                                Other
                                 0.8
                                                                                                                Firms Citing Universities
                                 0.6
                                                                                                                Firms Citing Each Other
                                 0.4


                                 0.2


                                  0
                                       1   2       3   4    5   6   7   8     9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
                                                                        Lag in Years




                                                                                           41
                                                Figure 3--Normalized Mean Probability of Citation,
                                                  By Rank of University-Science Field, Lag 1=1.0

                                  1.4

                                  1.2
Normalized Citation Probability




                                   1

                                  0.8                                                                Top 20 Percent
                                                                                                     Middle 40 Percent
                                  0.6                                                                Bottom 40 Percent

                                  0.4

                                  0.2

                                   0
                                        1   3       5     7      9      11        13   15   17
                                                              Lag in Years




                                                                             42
                                   Figure 4--Mean Citation Lag by Rank of University-Field,
                                                Distance from 0 to 500 Miles

           5.2




            5




           4.8
Mean Lag




                                                                                                                                               All Ranks
                                                                                                                                               Top 20 %
                                                                                                                                               Middle 40 %
                                                                                                                                               Bot t om 40 %
           4.6




           4.4




           4.2
                    0- 50         50-100   100-150    150-200     200- 250   250-300   300-350   350- 400   400- 450   450- 500

                                                                Distance in Miles




                                  Figure 5--Mean Citation Lag, by Rank of Universty Science-
                                            Fields, Distance from 500 to 3000 Miles

                            5.2




                              5




                            4.8
                 Mean Lag




                                                                                                                                  All Ranks
                                                                                                                                  Top 20%
                                                                                                                                  Middle 40%
                                                                                                                                  Bot t om 40%
                            4.6




                            4.4




                            4.2
                                    500-1000         1000-1500         1500-2000       2000-2500        2500-3000

                                                                 Distance in Miles




                                                                                43
                              Figure 6--Mean Citation Lags, Firms Citing Universities and Other
                                            Firms, Distance from 0 to 500 Miles

                       5.1




                       4.9




                       4.7
            Mean Lag




                       4.5
                                                                                                                         Firms Cit ing Universit ies
                                                                                                                         Firms Cit ing Fir ms
                       4.3




                       4.1




                       3.9




                       3.7
                               0- 50    50-100   100-150 150-200   200-250 250- 300 300-350 350-400 400- 450 450-500

                                                               Distance in Miles




                              Figure 7--Mean Citation Lags, Firms Citing Universities and Other
                                           Firms, Distance from 500 to 300 Miles

           5.1




           4.9




           4.7
Mean Lag




           4.5
                                                                                                                                Firms Cit ing Univer sit ies
                                                                                                                                Firms Cit ing Firms
           4.3




           4.1




           3.9




           3.7
                             500-1000             1000- 1500          1500- 2000         2000-2500          2500- 3000

                                                               Distance in Miles




                                                                                    44
