                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               SLIPPING INTO AIcD OUT OF POVERTY:
                     THE DYNAMICS OF SPELLS




                          Mary .30 Bane

                        David T. Eliwood




                     Working Paper No. 1199




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                         September 1983




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research progran
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureaa of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #1199
                                                  September 1983




             Slipping Into and Out of Poverty: The Dynamics of Spells




                                     Abstract




      This paper examines the dynamics of poverty. Previous analyses of the

dynamics   of poverty have either examined only fluctuations in the male heads
earnings   or looked at the frequency of poverty periods over a fixed time

frame. We argue that a more appropriate way to understand the dynamics of

poverty is to define spells of poverty. Using this methodology we find that

the majority of poor persons at any point in time are in fact in the midst of

a rather long spell of poverty. The methodology also allows us to estimate

the extent to which poverty spell beginnings and endings are associated with

changes in income or changes in family structure. Less than 40 percent of

poverty spell beginnings seem to be caused by a drop in the heads earnings,

while 60 percent of endings occur when the head's earnings increase. Ai a

result we argue that to understand the causes and potential remedies for

poverty, researchers must focus on household formation decisions and on the

behavior of so called secondary family members.




                                 David   T. Ellwood
                                 Mary Jo Bane
                                 Harvard   Univeraity
                                 John F. Kennedy School of Government
                                 79 John F. Kennedy Street
                                 Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
         There has been a dramatic resurgence recently of discussion of the

 "underclass." The discussion is rsminiscent of debates about poverty during

 the 1960s, when the notions of a "culture of poverty," particularly as

 popularized by Michael Barrington's Other Aaerica (1962), dominated both

 intellectual and policy thinking.


        The idea of an underclass seems inconsistent, however, with much of the

 research on the dynamics of poverty during the 1970s. That research, using new

 longitudinal data, seemed to show that the bulk of the poor were poor for only

a few years. The research also showed, of course, that the poor were a very

heterogeneous group, including a small but worrisome minority of persistently

poor.


        The persistence of poverty is of interest both for understanding the

phenomenon and for developing policy. Claims about dependency and separate

life—styles among the poor rest on assumptions about the long term nature of

poverty. Questions about the allocation of resources can better be answered

when the characteristics of the poor are understood.


        To answer all these questions it is important to be able to describe the

experience both of people who ever slip into poverty and of people currently

poor. As we shall show in this paper, the distinction between the ever—poor

(or the newly poor) and the poor at a point in time is crucial in

understanding poverty and in shedding light on the question of culture,

dependency, and allocation of resources.


        The availability of longitudinal income and poverty data now   spanning
more than i   decade   makes comprehensive analyses of the durations, beginnings,




                                         —1—
and endings of spells of poverty possible. The preliminary analyses we report

in this paper lead us to conclude that the
                                             seaningly inconsistent findings on

permanent and transitory poverty from the sixties and seventies can indeed be

reconciled. Our primary finding is that although many people have very short

spells of poverty, the few with very long spells account for the bulk of all

poverty and represent the bulk of the poor at any point in time. We also

report some analyses of events leading to the beginnings and endings of spells

of poverty which help to understand the ways in which the poor slip into

poverty and escape it.




Describing Dynamics —   Previous Research



      There are three primary approaches which have been followed in recent

years to describe the dynamics of various types of behavior. These include

statistical methods which model the level of some variable such as income,

allowing for a complex lag or error structure to capture dynamics; methods

using spell durations and exit probabilities; and finally tabulations of the

frequency of the event over some fixed time frame. The bulk of the literature

on the dynamics of poverty uses the first and third methods. We anploy the

second and explore the dynamics of poverty using spells. We begin by briefly

considering the advantages and disadvantages of each approach.


     Any   model of income estimated with longitudinal data implicitly or
explicitly provides a model of intertenporal dynamics. Typically the dynamics
are subsumed in the error structure. In their classic paper Lillard and



                                      —2—
Willis (1978) model the level of earnings of a group of prime age men and pay

close attention to the error structure, allowing for both permanent and

transitory components in the error. After estimating such a model it is

possible to examine the frequency and duration of periods of poverty, by

simply asking what fraction of the population is likely to be below the

poverty line and for how long based on the estimated structure of earnings.


      This sort of approach has enormous appeal to economists. First it

largely mirrors the famous Friedman theroetical decomposition of permanent and

transitory income. Moreover it deals explicitly with the problan that the

poverty line is an arbitrarily defined standard, around which income can

fluctuate randomly. Permanent income can be estimated and poverty classified

accordingly; it allows poverty to be decomposed into the group which is

permanantly rather than transitorily poor. And the expected durations in

poverty can be inferred for any arbitrary poverty line. Both Levy (1977) and

Gottschalk (1982) also enphasize the importance of the permanant/transitory

decomposition although they use different methodologies than Lillard and

Willis.


     Yet we believe there are serious shortcomings to this approach when one

is interested in understanding the nature and dynamics of poverty for the

entire population. The most serious problen is that it is exceptionally

difficult to cope with the fact that "poverty" is a concept that applies to

families——and that family membership changes. One can certainly speak of

permanent and transitory ciponents in earnings for prime age males, but how

should one treat the income pattern that results when a family splits up and

the former wife who was previously out of the labor force goes to work to help




                                    —3—
support her children? Bow should one characterize changes in income and

economic status caused by the household formation choices of young people who

leave well—to—do homes and are poor for a period while they make the complete

transition to the labor market? In principle the income of each family member

could be modeled individually allowing for simultaneous influences from and to

family structure and allowing for life cycle changes. In fact such models are

exceptionally difficult to develop.


      The notion of a permanent income is far more appropriate (or at least far

easier to implement empirically) for able—bodied prime age males than it is

for women, children, the elderly or the disabled. Both Lillard and Willis and

Gottechalk limit their analyses to prime—age males, and Levy did not actually

implement a permanent income model. In 1981, however, males aged 22—64 made

up only 15.5 percent of the officially defined poor. (u.s. Bureau of the

Census) The experience of the rest of the poor may   not   be well described by

the permanent income notion.


     Perhaps   even more fundamentally, all deviations from permanent income
tend to be treated as random and behaviorally equivalent in these models.
Typically   all "disturbances" in income lead to the same temporal path of

income in the future. But    all changes in family income are not likely to lead
to the same sort of long run dynamics. The worker who is poor because he was
temporarily   laid off from his job is unlikely to have the same prospect of

long term poverty as one who lost his job when he became disabled.


     And quite often these disturbances are of great interest in their own

right. Indeed if dynamics are being considered, it is the changes which




                                      —4—
 really are the driving force. Presumably those interested in understanding

poverty are very much interested in knowing what sorts of adverse events lead

people into poverty, whether the duration of a poverty stay varies
                                                                       depending
on how it began, and bow (if ever) families escape poverty. When the events

 leading into and out of poverty are thanselves the source of a great deal of

interest it seens strange and unfortunate to treat these as homogeneous and

 largely unobservable disturbance terms. - Of course these could be modeled

explicitly, but at great cost in complexity.


       Another quite different approach has been adopted by Coe et al. (1982),

Coe (1978), Rainwater (1982) and others. They look at the fraction of persons

who are poor by some definition overa fixed time frame——typically eight or

ten years. One can tabulate what fraction of persons were poor for say ten

out of ten years, or five out of ten or one out of ten. The approach is very

simple to use——it need involve no more than simple tabulation. Changing

family   structures cause no problans. The unit    of  analysis is typically the
individual   and his poverty status   at any point in time and the poverty status
of   his or her family at that time. For purposes of tabulation it does not

matter if poverty status changes because family structure changed or because

income of a family changed.


       The approach also has some of the appeal of methods based more explicitly

on permanent income notions, because those who were transitorily poor will

seamingly show up as people with very little poverty over the period, those

who have very low permanent income will be poor for most of the period, and

those whose incomes fluctuate back and forth across the poverty line will be

the intermediate group.




                                        —5—
     But in this case again, no attention is focused on the events which lead

people into and out of poverty. It is very difficult to trace processes

whereby persons may gradually or suddenly escape from poverty. Perhaps even

more importantly this method can leave a very misleading impression of the

dynamics of poverty. Consider an extreme example.


     Suppose all poverty occurs in spells lasting exactly ten years. If we

were to ask what fraction of all persons who were poor over a ten year survey

period   were poor the entire time, only those people who happened to begin
their spell in the first year of the survey would be counted. Those who began
spells   in the year prior or year after the survey began would have nine year

episodes in the survey. Those who began nine years before or after the survey

started would have one year episodes. Thus even though all spells lasted

exactly ten years, because completed spells cannot be observed in the survey,

one will find that roughly equal proportions of people were poor for one

survey year, two survey years and so forth. Obviously any conclusion that

only a small fraction of poor persons remained in poverty for a long time

would be quite misleading.


     We propose instead to model spells of poverty. While we acknowledge and

address the problems caused by the crossing of an artificial threshold1, we

think a spell approach provides a simple and compact way to understand the

dynamics of poverty. An enormous advantage of using spells is the fact      that
information   can be summarized in a highly comprehensible manner. Indeed




1. It is worth noting that nearly all logit or probit models use an artificial
threshold to model behavior.



                                      —6—
Lillard and Willis and many others impose the artificial poverty line on their

structurally estimated income dynamics, and report durations of spells and the

probability of moving from poverty. All we propose is to examine those issues

directly.


     Other researchers have looked at movoments into and out of poverty, both

to estimate the amount of movement and to examine the characteristics of those

who do and do not move. Hill (1981) and Levy (1977) have calculated exit

probabilities for those who enter and exit from poverty. Boskin and Nold

(1975), Hutchins (1981), Plotnick (1983), and Wiseman (1976) have explored

movements on and off of welfare.


     We follow this line of research, and extend it in three ways: by looking

at a variety of distributions, by allowing for duration dependent exit

probabilities, and by identifying beginning and ending events. None of the

research that we know of has reported the full set of distributions that are

important for understanding the dynamics of poverty: completed spell

distributions for people beginning a spell of poverty and for those poor at a

point in time; and the uncompleted spell distribution for people poor at a

point in time. The importance of the distinctions between these distributions

has been emphasized by several scholars. Kaitz (1970), Salant (1977), Clark

and Suamers (1979) and Akerloff and Main (1982), for example, have pointed out

that while most people who become unemployed are in that state for only a

short period of time, the bulk of unemployment is long term. As we explain in

our next section, we believe these distinctions are important for

understanding poverty as well.




                                     —7—
       Moreover, little of the research on flows into and out of poverty ha!

looked explicitly at differences in exit probabilities by time in poverty.

Levy (1977) reported no differences in exit probabilities over time, but his

analysis included all the people poor in his beginning year,   regardless   of bow

long   they had been poor before being observed. It is thus not a clear

representation of what happens over the course of a spell of poverty. Much of

the research on movements on and off of welfare, for example Plotnick's (1983)

event history analysis, as well as Hutchins (1981) and Wiseman (1976) assumes

constant exit probabilities. It's worth noting that a permanent income type

model predicts that exit probabilities will decline with duration (because

those who are temporarily poor will leave early, leaving behind those who will

never exit.)


       Finally, there has been little research on the events associated with

movements into and out of poverty. Levy (1977) and Gottschal.k (1982), for

example, dismiss the importance of family composition changes, noting that

most people do not change their family composition very often and that most

income changes are not associated with family compositions changes. While

this is true generally, we do not believe it is so true for the poverty

population, especially looking over rather long periods of time, and   thus   deal

with it here as an important topic for empirical investigation. A key

innovation of this study is our characterization of the events which lead to

the beginnings and endings of spells of poverty.




                                     —8—
Me thodo logy




      The ideal methodology for examining durations of spells of poverty and

the characteristics of spells of various lengths would utilize an extremely

large data set covering a very long period of time. With such a data set1 one

could simply tabulate the actual distribution of completed spells for people

who began a spell in some previous year long in the past. One could also

tabulate the distribution of completed spells for those people poor at some

point of time in the past.


      Unfortunately, such a data set does not exist. The data we used, from

the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, are the best available for examining

poverty dynamics, since data collection has been going on since 1968, since

the original study design oversampled low income households and thus generated

reasonable sample sizes, and since detailed income data were collected each

year.2 We had, however, only ten years of usable data for studying poverty

dynamics. To make full use of the data, our analyses are based on exit

probabilities tabulated from the data, which were then used to derive the

various distributions we report.


     Our basic methodology for estimating the durations of spells of poverty

has three parts. We first identify "spells"——continuous periods during which

income falls below the poverty line. We then calculate exit probabilities (or




2. The P5Th is described in detail in Survey Research Center, 1983.



                                    —9—
hazard functions, or death rates) by year, and then use exit probabilities to

generate distributions of spell lengths for new         spells,   and for completed and

uncompleted spells observed at a point in time.


        Definition j spells. We first defined poverty in each given year as

income below a needs standard calculated on the basis of household size.           We

included all cash transfers in the definition of income but excluded in—kind

transfers as is done in the standard poverty definitions. The PSID provides a

need standard that is essentially equivalent to that used by the Census Bureau

and 0MB    in   calculating poverty. Rowever,     largely   because the P5W finds more

income than the Current Population Survey, the reported poverty rate is lower

in PSID data. In order to make our figures comparable to the published

figures we inflated the needs standard by 1.25. Using the uninflated

definition changes our results very little. It leaves us with slightly

smaller sample sizes and slightly shorter spells of poverty.


       In all of our tabulations we excluded persons who began a spell of

poverty after they turned 65. The PSID tape we used has one unfortunate

feature:   persons who die at some point in the sample period are excluded from
the sample even for the years when they were alive, It was impossible for us
to track people who ended a spell of poverty when they died. Thus we used the
over   65 exclusion.


       Normally, we defined a spell of poverty as beginning in the first year

that income was below the poverty line after having been above it, and as

ending when income was above the poverty line after having been below. The
probl     aswe    have noted already is that unlike ployment or even welfare



                                       —   10 —
use, poverty is not a clear cut state. The poverty line is an arbitrarily

defined concept, and small "random" changes in income can move people across

the line, creating a "spell" even though no change of any significance to the

individual involved has occurred. Moreover, any sort of measursnent error can

cause a false beginning or end.


      Yet the spell concept has so many advantages that we chose to make some

simple adjustments for pure randomness or measurenent error. One year spells

either into or out of poverty were eliminated if they either began or ended

with an income change that was less than one half the needs standard. No

spell lasting more than one year was affected. This adjustment had very

little impact on the number of people ever poor. We reduced the number of

persons who were ever—poor in our sample by only 5.5 percent by eliminating

these short (one year) spells of poverty. It did help to reduce the number of

multiple spells ong the ever—poor. Without the adjustment, 36 percent of

the ever—poor had multiple spells over the nine—year sample period, while with

the adjustment 21 percent did.


      Calculation of exit probabilities. The exit probabilities reported in

our various tables were calculated by combining years of data from the PSID.

We used data on all spells for which we observed beginnings, whether or not we

also observed endings. The exit probabilities are based on beginnings and

continuations summed over all years. For example, the exit probability for

the first year of a spell is based on data for all the spells of poverty that

began between 1970 and 1978. (Data limitations and several features of our

methodology precluded the use of 1968 and 1969 data.) The exit probability

for the second year is based on all the spells for which a second year was




                                    — 11 —
 observed: such spells could have begun in any year between 1970 and 1977.


      This procedure means that the sample sizes for calculating exit

 probabilities for the first several years are quite large. After that, they

 become smaller and less reliable. Because we have only eight years of data

 that are usable for calculating poverty spells in the panel study, we can only

 calculate exit probabilities for eight years. Obviously some spells last

 longer than that, so we need estimates of exit probabilities in later years in

 order to calculate realistic distributions. We assumed that the exit

probabilities for years nine and beyond were stable and approximately equal to

the calculated exit probabilties for years six through eight. We also

assumed, primarily for ease of calculation, that no spells lasted longer than

30 years.


      Beginning and ending events. For all spells for which we observed a

beginning or an ending, we attenpted to identify a beginning or ending event.

We first looked for a significant family structure change——defined as a case

where the head of household changed——within the past two years.3 If such a

family structure change had occurred, we associated the beginning or ending to

that event. Although other factors may have simultaneously changed which

accounted for a family's movnent into or out of poverty, we felt that the

change of headshjp is significant enough to warrant its special treatment.

Indeed many behavioral changes which might account for a higher or lower level

of family income may be the direct result of the headahip change as in the




3. Because family structure is defined at the time of the survey whereas
income is reported f or the previous year, it is possible that income changes
would not show up until the year after a family atructure change is observed.



                                    — 12 —
case where a family breakup forces a woman to quit working.


        In families where there had been no headship change, we determined

whether the change in the income/needs ratio was more influenced by the income

numerator or by the needs denominator. Needs dominated changes were rare and

they were typically brought about by the birth of children or by the departure

of members from th! household. The ranaining changes were income changes. To

further classify these we looked to see which component of family income     -




changed the most: head's earnings1 wife's earnings, others' earnings, or

transfer income.




Exit Probabilities



        Table 1 displays the exit probabilities derived from the PSID, the sample

sizes and standard errors. It is clear that the longer a person has been

poor, the less likely it is that he or she will escape poverty. The

probability of exiting poverty declines as time in the poverty spell

increases. If a person is in the first year of a spell of poverty, the odds

of exiting are 0.41. If she is in the fourth year, however, the odds of

exiting have fallen to 0.16. These declines could come about for either of two

reasons. One possibility is that poverty itself makes it more difficult to

leave. Long spells of poverty may, for example, make it increasingly

difficult to get the kind of jobs that generate income above the poverty

line.


        A seéànd possibility is that declining exit probabilities are simply a




                                      — 13 —
                          TABLE 1
             Poverty Spell Exit Probabilities
             Sample Sizes, and Standard Errors
                by Length of Spell to Date



Length of Spell           Exit            Standard     Sample
    to Date            Probability         Error        Size

   1 year                0.410             0.010        4754

   2 years               0.297            0.011         2852

   3 years               0.247            0.013         1781

   4 years               0.162            0.013         1179
   5 years               0.132            0.017          780

   6 years               0.146            0.020          521

   7 years               0.070            0.013          364

   8 years              0.143             0.038          288
9—29 years              0.150*                          ——



  30 years              1.000*



     * Value assumed


     Probabilities and standard errors are derived from
     the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and are weighted.




                                 — 14 —
result of the heterogeneity of the poverty population. People who are

"long—termers"   may be different in various ways from people who are poor only
a short tine. Their exit probabilities are always low, no matter how long or
short   a time they have been poor. As time goes on, people with these

long—termer characteristics make up a larger and larger proportion of the

poverty population. An interpertation consistent with the permanent income

context would be that those with tanporarily low incomes are gradually

selected out leaving only those who are permanently poor. Without imposing

functional form assumptions on these data it is virtually impossible to

decompose the extent to which declines in exit probabilities reflect

heterogeneity or "duration dependence".


        One important conclusion which follows directly from these exit

probabilities is that persons who have been poor for three years are far less

likely to escape poverty. Some 59 percent of those persons just beginning a

spell of poverty will exit within two years. But only 27 percent of those who

have been poor for three years will escape within the next two.


        With these exit probabilities, we can say   quite a bit   more about the

dynamics of poverty. As we noted earlier, however, in order to make such

calculations exit probabilities had to be assumed for years beyond the maximum

eight years we could observe. We chose to use .15 in all our calculations.

This number seems extremely conservative to us. The true probabilities are

below .15 in the fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth years of spells. And it is

reasonable to believe that these probabilities continue to fall. If so, the

results we report would be even more dramatic.




                                      — 15 —
Calculation of Distributions



         If the probability that a person who has been poor for t years will not

be poor in the next year is given by the exit probability p(t), then three

important distribuEions are easily derived.


         Let D(t) describe the fraction of people who have spells which last

exactly t years. Then


              D(l)p(l)
                         t— 1

   (1)        D(t)p(t)Il—E D(j)1      for t>l
                         jl
                    where T is maximum length of spells


The first term in equation (1) is simply the exit probability, the

second is the fraction surviving to year t—l.


         The distribution of completed spells at a point in time is also

relatively easy to derive provided one assuaes a no growth steady state. If

F(t) gives the fraction of all persons on the progr at a point in time who

will be poor for exactly t years. then


   (2)        F(t)etD(t)/!jD(j)
                        is'

     Finally     the distribution of uncompleted spells for persons poor at a

point in tine, G(t), is derived by calculating the fraction of persons who

began spells t years earlier who would still be on the progr (and




                                       — 16 —
 renormalizing) assuming a steady state.4

                   t—l         s—i
    (3)     CCt)n[l—ED(j)J/!Ii—D(k)]
                   j1 s1 k=l
      These three distributions offer considerable insights into the

 persistence of poverty.




The Persistence of Poverty




      Just how long does poverty (or unemployment or welfare receipt or

employment) last? The answer depends on how the question is asked. More

specifically, the answer depends on whether we are interested in the group of

people who ever enter poverty or the group that is poor at a point in tine. A

non—poverty example can help make the point.


      Consider the situation in a typical hospital. Most of the persons

admitted in any year will require only a very short spell of hospitalization.

But a few of the newly admitted patients are chronically ill and will have

extended stays in the hospital. If we ask what proportion of all admissions

are people who are chronically ill1 the answer is relatively few. On the

other hand, if we ask what fraction of the hospital's beds at any one time are

occupied by the chronically ill, the answer is much larger. The reason is




4. The time period is somewhat tore troublesome in calculating uncompleted
spell distributions. Because spells can begin at any time throughout a year.
t represents the fraction which have lasted between t—l and t years. This
fact is important in calculating the mean duration of uncompleted spells, but
it causes no real confusion otherwise.



                                     — 17 —
simple. Although the chroncially ill account for only a small fraction of all

admissions, because they stay so long they end up being a sizable part of the

population in the hospital and they consume a sizable chunk of the hospital's

beds and other resources.


      The same basic lesson applies to poverty. Only a small fraction of those

who enter poverty in sny given year will be chronically poor. But people who

will have long spells of poverty represent a sizable portion of the group we

label "the poor" st any one point in time.


      The point comes out vividly in the distributions in Table 2, which are

all derived from the exit probabilities reported in the previous table.

Column 1 corresponds to admissions in our hospital example. It shows the

prospective distribution of completed spells of poverty for those just

beginning a spell; i.e., for those who were not poor (or not born) last year

but who are poor this year. Here we see that most spells of poverty are

indeed quite short. Nearly 40 percent end within one year and two—thirds are

over within three years. Only 15 percent last longer than eight years.


      Column 2 reports the distribution of completed spells for persons who are

poor at a particular point in time, assuming the number and distribution of

new spells is constant over time.5 It is comparable to reporting prospective

completed hospital stays for all those now in the hospital as opposed to those




5. This assumption of no—growth steady state is not unreasonable for the
period of time we are looking at. The number of beginnings of spells of
poverty in the PSID sample was relatively constant from 1968 to 1979. The
poverty rate for the general population, as reported by the Current Population
Reports, yes 12.8 percent in 1968 and 13.0 percent in 1979, with year to year
differences mostly reflecting the business cycle.



                                    — 18 —
                          TABLE 2
             Distributions of Completed and Uncompleted
              Spells of Poverty for Non—Elderly Persons



                   PERSONS              PERSONS POOR AT
                  BEGINNING             A POINT IN TIME*
     SPELL         A SPELL
    LENGTH
      IN             (1)               (2)             (3)
    YEARS         completed       completed        uncompleted
                    spell           spell             spell
              distribution      distribution      distribution


       1             41.1               9.7            23.6

      2              17.5               8.3            13.9

      3              10.2               7.2             9.8

      4               5.1              4.8              7.4

      5               3.4              4.1             6.2

      6               3.3              4.7             5.3

      7               1.4              2.2             4.6
      8               2.6              4.9             4.2

 OVER 8              15.4              54.2           25.1

             ——
—TOTAL;             100.0           100.0             100.0

 Average              4.2              11.0            5.5




Table derived from exit probabilities reported on TABLE 1
*   Distributions   derived assuming no growth steady state




                              — 19 —
 who have just been admitted. These results suggest that fully 60 percent of

 those who would be identified as the poor in a cross—sectional survey are in

 the midst of a spell of poverty which will last eight years or more.


         Just as in the hospital example where the chronically ill are only a

 small part of those admitted to the hospital but
                                                    represent a large portion of

 the patients in the hospital at any time, those who will be chronically poor

are but a small fraction of those entering poverty but a large part of the

poor at any time. The long term poor account for a very large portion of all

the person—years of poverty. Most people who slip into poverty are quite

successful in getting out. But precisely because this is true1 the people who

escape quickly account for only a small fraction of all poverty and a small

fraction of the poor at any point in time.


        This dual nature of the poverty population can easily be missed if one

looks only at the distribution of new spells or of those who are ever poor.

Another tempting distribution can also be quite misleading. Since it can be

difficult even with existing longitudinal data sources to collect reliable

information on completed spell lengths, one might choose instead to report the

length of time those in poverty in some year have been poor up to that time
The distribution of uncompleted spells of poverty for the poor at a point in
time   are reported in Coltmin 3.


       The uncompleted spell durations do have some interest1 but they must not




6. The uncompleted spell distribution is quite commonly reported for
unemployment   and welfare receipt. It is less cotton in the poverty
literature.

                                      —   20   —
be treated as being equivalent to completed durations. We cannot conclude

from column 3 that because only 25 percent of poor persons have been poor for

more than    eight   years that only one quarter of those in poverty will be poor

over  eight years. That would be comparable to observing the age distribution
at a point in time and concluding that only 12 percent of the current
population   will live past age 65.


        Thus it is not appropriate to conclude that the poor——poor in the sense

that they would be identified as poor in a particular year——are a group that

has generally brief stays in poverty. Host people who are ever poor have

short spells. Host people who are just beginning a spell of poverty will have

a short spell. But the bulk of those poor at a point in time and the bulk of

the person—years of poverty are accounted for by the long term poor. And

these long term poor almost certainly consume the overwhelming majority of the

resources devoted to aiding the poor. Let us now turn to the events which are

associated with movients into and out of poverty.




Beginning Events



        Table 3 shows our basic findings on the beginnings of spells of poverty

among the non—elderly, by family status at the beginning of the spell and by

beginning type. This table shows distributions for those just beginning a

spell of poverty. Later, we report distributions of beginning types for those

poor at a point in time along with durations by beginning type. The table

shows   that male heads with children, their wives and their children accounted



                                         —   21 —
                                    TABLE 3
                        Beginning Types by Family Relationship
                             in First Year of Poverty Spell



                                   MEMBERS OF FAMILIES WITH CHILDREN

BEGINNING TYPE:           ALL
Primary Reason          PERSONS           MALE HEADED         FEMALE HEADED
for Beginning
                    -
                                  Heads    Wives Children Heads Children
Earnings of
Head Fell                 36.8     56.1     56.8    51.1      14.2    13.4

Earnings of
Wife Fell                  6.5     11.5     11.2    10.5

Earnings of
Others Fell                6.9      5.9      4.7        3.6   10.9    14.2
Unearned
Income Fell                6.2      5.4      6.1        5.1    5.6     6.9

Needs/Poverty
Level Rose                 6.0      9.9      6.9        7.7    4.8     4.8
Child* Became
Read or Wife              15.6     11.3     11.6         ——
                                                              19.6
Wife Became
Female Read                4.8       ——      2.7         ——   44.9
Child of Male Head
Became Child
of Female Head             6.5      ——        ——        1.6     ——    41.2
Child Was Born
Into Poverty              10.5      ——              20.2        ——
                                              ——
                                                                      19.5



PERCENT OF
ALL BEGINNINGS          100.0       9.3      9.5    29.2       6.5    14.7




*   Includes   child and grandchild and other relative of head



                                      — 22
                               TABLE 3 Continued
                     Beginning Types by Family Relationship
                          in First Year of Poverty Spell




                     MARRIED COUPLES      SINGLE HEADS
BEGINNING TYPE:      WITH NO CHILDREN   WITH NO CHILDREN       OTHER
Primary Reason                                                RELATIVE
for Beginning                                                 OF HEAD
                      Heads   Wives       Males   Females
Earnings of
Head    Fell           35.0    36.4       28.6     21.9         10.0

Earnings of
Wife Fell               7.3    11.2        1.6                   3.9

Earnings of
Others Fell             3.1     5.8        0.9      8.7        21.2
Unearned
Income Fell             7.1    10.9        5.0      7.1         3.4
Needs/Poverty
Level Rose              7.2     3.2        3.4      1.9         6.1
Child* Became
Head or Wife           39.7    32.1       60.5     42.0
Wife Became
Female Head                                 ——
                                                   16.7
Child of Male Head
Became Child
of Female Head
Child Was Born
Into Poverty                                                    55.3




PERCENT OF
ALL bEGINNINGS          4.7     6.1        7.1      9.8         3.2


* Includes child and grandchild and other relative of head



                                   -23-
 for about 48 percent of all poverty spell beginnings. Female heads and their

 children began another 21 percent of spells of poverty. Married and unmarried

adults without children account for the remainder. Several interesting

findings emerge.


      A decline in head's earnings was the single largest cause of movement

into poverty in our semple. Thirty—seven percent of all the spells of poverty

whose beginnings we observed began with a decline in the labor income of the

household head. The figure is perhaps significant not because it is large,

rather because it is small. It suggests that one cannot understand the bulk

of poverty simply by understanding fluctuations in earnings of the head.


      As one might expect the significance of head's earnings declines differs

enormously across groups. For male headed households with children, such

changes account for nearly 60 percent of all beginnings. By contrast, only 14

percent of spells for those in female headed families begin when earnings of

the head drop. Adults without children fall in between.


      In addition some 14 percent of all spells of poverty began with changes

in the earnings of wives or other household members, with others somewhat more

important than wives. For male headed families with children, declines in

wives' earnings accounted for 11 percent of transitions into poverty.

Declines in others' earnings, usually adult children, were associated with

another 7 percent of poverty spell beginnings. Among female heads with

children, declines in others' earnings——again, usually adult

children——accounted for about 11 percent of beginnings.


     Thus earnings changes of all sorts account for about half of all spells




                                    -   24 —
of poverty. Another 7 percent are accounted for by changes in unearned

income. This category includes those who lost s variety of benefits (such as

Unemployment   Compensation, Workman's Compensation, disability benefits,
welfare) and   aid from others such as child support or gifts from relatives.

The remainder of poverty beginnings can be traced to family changes of some

sort.



        The transition to a female headed family is an important event
precipitating transitions into poverty, accounting for about 11 percent of all
beginnings   and 65 percent of the beginnings for female beads with children.

Among this latter group, about 45 percent of their poverty spell beginnings

come from marital breakup, a move from being a wife to being a female head,

and another 20 percent from what is most likely unmarried motherhood.7

Another 6 percent of all beginnings are created by a changing need standard

typically caused by the arrival of a new family member.


        A very large fraction of all beginnings for children are births. Over 10

percent of all spells of poverty begin with birth, and 20 percent of all the

spells of poverty of children (in both male and female headed families) begin

this way. Almost half of the spells for "other relatives" begin with births:

these are mostly children who are living with their grandparents.


        Finally a sizable proportion of all spells of poverty begin with the

movanent of a young man   or woman out   of a parent's home into an independent




7. This category includes both women who were formally living independently
who had a è'hild and women who were formerly living in their parents' home who
left along with a child.



                                         — 25 —
household. Nearly 16 percent of all poverty spells began when a child moved

out of home and became a head or a wife or a female head without a child.

This beginning type is most important for unmarried male heads, accounting for

nearly 60 percent of their starts in poverty. It is also a very prominant

event for all the other groups without children. Much of this poverty is

probably the "getting started" phenomenon, no doubt also associated for some

people with getting further education or training, and for others with a

decision that it is better to be poor than to live at home.


     What emerges then is a picture of a rather heterogeneous poor

population. The male headed families most commonly have suffered a fall in

earnings of some sort, though one quarter of the beginnings for this group are

for other reasons. Female headed poverty typically begins when the female

headed family is formed either through separation/divorce or when an unmarried

woman has a child. The poverty patterns for children not surprisingly mirror

those of their families, though a sizable fraction are born into poverty.

Adults without children are an extremely diverse group. Some are clearly

"getting started" after leaving home. Others suffer earnings falls. Still

others are probably older and fluctuations in transfer income are important.




Durations by Beginning Types



      Using the methods based on exit probabilities that are described in

earlier sections, it is possible to estimate the expected durations of spells

of poverty by beginning type. Table 4 presents the results. The table shows




                                     — 26 —
                                   TABLE 4
                          Distribution of Beginning Types
                       and Mean Duration of Completed Spells
                       for Persons Beginning a Spell and for
                          Persons Poor at a Point in Time


                          PERSONS BEGINNING          PERSONS POOR AT
                          A SPELL OF POVERTY        A POINT IN TIME**

                   -                    Mean                      Mean
 BEGINNING TYPE:         Percent      Duration    Percent       Duration
 Primary Reason             of           of          of            of
 for Beginning          Beginnings   Completed   Beginnings    Completed
                                        Spell                     Spell
Earnings of
Head Fell                    36.8%        3.6         31.82         9.7
Earnings of
Wife Fell                     6.5%        3.4          5.32         7.9
Earnings of
Others Fell                   6.9%        4.9          8.12       10.4
Transfer
Income Fell                   6.22        4.1          6.1%       10.6
Needs/Poverty
Level Rose                    6.0%        5.5          7.92       11.3
Child* Became
Head or Wife                 15.6%       2.6          9.72         7.3
Wife Became
Female Head                  4.8%        4.5          5.2%        11.6
Child of Male Head
Became Child
of Female Head               6.5%        5.2 -        8.1%        11.7
Child Was Born
Into Poverty                io.sz        7.0         17.7%       13.4

TOTAL                      100.02        4.2        100.02       11.0
  For all beginning types except earnings of head fell,child
  became bead or wife, and child was born into poverty, exit
  probabilities were assumed constant at .15 starting in the




                                      — 27 —
     sixth year. For all   beginning types exit probabilities are
     assumed constant at   .15 after the 8th year. These assumptions
     will tend to narrow   differences in durations, particularly
     for those poor at a   point in time.
*    Includes   child and grandchild and other relative of head
**
     Assuming no growth steady state




                                       — 28 —
the mean duration of completed spells for persons who are beginning spells of

poverty and for persons poor at a point in time. It also shows the

distribution of beginning types for persons poor at a point in time.


       The table shows that spell durations do indeed differ depending on how

the spell begins. The shortest spells are those which begin when a child

became a head or wife——the "getting started" phenomenon. The average duration

of a spell of poverty which begins this way is less thsn three years. Spells

that begin with declines in heads' and wives' earnings are also relatively

short, with average durations for new spells of 3.6 and 3.4 years. Earnings

falls seem to lead on average to temporary periods of poverty.


       Poverty spells that begin when a woman becomes a fanale head with a child

are longer. The spells that begin for children when their families change

from male to female headed are longer still, with a mean duration for a new

spell of over 5 years and for spells observed at a point in time of about 12

years.8 Spells of poverty that begin with birth are the longest of all,

averaging 7 years for a new spell and nearly 14 years for a spell observed at

a point in time. Children who are born into poverty sean to be faced with an

extranely long period of disadvantage.


       In tabulations not reported here, we also looked at how exit

probabilities and expected spell durations varied by other characteristics.

The most interesting differences were by race. We estimated the average

duration   of a completed new spell for blacks at 6.7 years, compared with 4.0


8.   The difference in average duration between fanale beads and their children
suggeats   that female headed familieS with more children have longer spells.

                                      —   29   —
years for whites. Black children whose spells began with birth had expected

poverty durations of 10.2 years. These strike us as frightening numbers. For

some groups poverty looks quite long term.




Ending Events



     Our analysis of ending events proceeded in exactly the same way as our

analysis of beginnings. The results reported here are for all endings that we

observed, whether or not the spell began within the sample period. Table 5

shows the distribution of observed endings by ending type and by family status

in the last year of the poverty spell.


     Ending types look rather different from beginning types. More spells end

than begin with a change in bead's earnings. Some 38 percent of spells began

with a fall in head's earnings. But over 57 percent of spells ended that

way. For male heads, the high proportion of spells that end by earnings

increases is not surprising, since few other routes out of poverty are open.

In addition, however, a very sizable proportion of female beads with

children——34 percent——escape poverty by working. it is simply not the case

that the only routes out of poverty for women family beads are marriage or

transfers.


     The earnings of wives and other household members are surprisingly

important in moving people out of poverty. A remarkable 23 percent of all the

spells of poverty ended with changes in the earnings of wives or other

household tethers. The behavior of such persons is rarely examined or modeled




                                    — 30   —
                                   TABLE 5
                         Ending Types by Family Relationship
                            in Last Year of Poverty Spell




                                   MEMBERS OF FAMILIES WITH CHILDREN

ENDING TYPE:             ALL
Primary Reason
                    -
                        PERSONS           MALE HEADED          FEMALE HEADED
for Ending
                                  Heads     Wives Cbildren Heads Children

Earnings of
Head Rose                 57.1     69.3     64.4    62.1       33.9     29.0

Earnings of
Wile Rose                  9.0     126       15.1       13.6

Earnings of
Others Rose               14.2     10.3       9.3       15.2    21.8   31.0

Unearned
Income Rose                8.8      3.6       4.8        5.0    15.1    14.7

Needs/Poverty
Level Fell                 2.5      3.9       1.5        1.8     2.1     2.7

Female Read
Became Wife                4.6       ——
                                             4.7          ——
                                                                26.9
Child   of Female
Read Became
Child of Male Head         3.4       —         ——
                                                        2.3       ——    20.9
Child* Became
Read or Wife              0.4        ——        ——       0.0       ——     1.7




PERCENT OF
ALL DiDINGS              100.0     11.2      11.8       30.7     6.3    12.2




* Includes child and grandchild and other relative of head



                                      — 31    —
                              TABLE 5 Continued
                      Ending Types by Family Relationship
                           in Last Year of Poverty Spell




                       MARRIED COUPLES        SINGLE HEADS
ENDING TYPE:           WITH NO CHILDREN     WITH NO CHILDREN          OTHER
Primary Reason                                                       RELATIVE
for Ending                                                           OF HEAD
                         Heads   Wives          Males Females

Earnings of
Head Rose                 68.3    51.7              82.6   54.2        23.2

Earnings of
Wife Rose                 14.7     9.1               3.6                6.4

Earnings of
Others Rose                2.1     3.1               1.6    3.1        50.2

Unearned
Income Rose               11.8    19.0               7.7   13.1        11.3

Needs/Poverty
Level Fell                 3.1     3.2               4.0    3.1         0.9

Female Head
Became Wife                                           —    21   .7

Child of Female
Head Became
Child of Male Head                                                      5.8

Child* Became
Read or Wife                                                            2.2




PERCENT OF
ALL ENDINGS                4.8     6.1               6.0    8.7         2.2




*   Includes   child and grandchild and other relative of head




                                         — 32   —
 in the statistical literature on the dynamics of poverty.9 Yet the so called

 secondary earners are often critical to a family's escape from poverty. For

 female headed families with children, changes in the earnings of others

 (mostly older chldren, we suspect) were especially important, accounting

 themselves    for 22 percent of their movements out of poverty. Some of these
may,   of   course, really be household structure changes——the moving in of a
husband     surrogate who does not get classed as the head, although the P5Th

 tried to classify unmarried persons who lived together as husband and wife as

couples.


       Overall then although earnings changes of some sort account for only half

of all beginnings, they explain 80 percent of all endings. In many respects

this is not surprising. There are many routes into poverty associated with

life cycle events which are essentailly irreversable. Birth is the obvious

example, but the departure of an adolescent child from his or her parents'

household is rarely reversed. Thus except for an increase in transfer

payments of some sort, for most families the only route out of poverty must be

through the earnings of one or more of its members.


       The one exception of course is marriage or remarriage in the case of

female headed families. And marriage is an important toad out of poverty for

peraons in theae families, though, surprisingly perhaps, not as important as

work. For female heads with children, 27 percent of all movements out of

poverty     came through marriage. Similarly 21 percent of children in female


9. The dependence of many poor families on the earnings of people other than
the head, md the dynamic nature of household composition in these families,
has been noted in several anthropological studies, for example Stack (1974).



                                       — 33 —
headed households escape poverty when their mother marries. Overall about 7

percent of all observed spells of poverty were brought to an end this way.


         Transfer payments are not very important in ending spells of poverty,

even for female heads and their children. About 9 percent of all the endings

of spells of poverty that we observed were brought about by increases in

transfer payments. About 15 percent of the movements out of poverty by female

heads    with children were associated with increased transfer payments.

         In   interpreting this   finding it is important to keep two things in mind.
First,    the definition of poverty we used in defining spells is post transfer

poverty, including all cash transfers in the definition of income. This

analysis thus gives us no information on the importance of transfers in making

people who are pre—transfer poor into those who are post—transfer poor. The

second is that spells of poverty affecting the elderly were excluded from this

analysis. We feel certain that Social Security is important in moving some of

those who begin collecting benefits out of poverty.




Conclusions



        In this paper we develop and exploit the notion of spells of poverty,

using exit probabilities to examine the length of time that people are poor

and beginning and ending events to understand why people move into and out of

poverty. We found that most of those who ever become poor will have only a

short stay in poverty. At the same time, the majority of people who are poor

at a given point in time will have very long spells of poverty before they




                                          — 34 —
escape.


        These findings suggest, and others based on welfare use (Bane and

Ellwood, 1983) suggest even more strongly, that most of the people helped by

programs      to aid the economically disadvantaged use them   only briefly. But the

bulk    of   resources almost certainly go to a much smaller group of people who

have very long stays in poverty. The policy dilemmas that this finding poses

are serious indeed. Our current policies are probably quite helpful in

providing short term relief to the temporarily poor, and they may be an

essential part of life for the chronically poor. Unfortunately, the results

also open the possibility that dependency may be a serious problem.


        We also found that a fall in head's earnings explained spell beginning in

only s minority of cases. In nearly half the cases family structure and life

cycle events were associated with the start of a poverty stay. Our research

suggests therefore that models which concentrate only on the earnings dynamics

of household beads will miss a great deal of the dynamics of poverty.


        At the same time we found that increased earnings of all household

members was the overwhelming route out of poverty, and earnings falls did

account for half of beginnings. If effective labor market policies could be

implemented which improved the earnings of those near or below the poverty

line,    it seems likely that they would dampen movements into poverty and hasten
movements out, though obviously the record of current policies is mixed.
Moreover, the substantial role played by "others" in moving families into and

out of poverty implies that this long neglected group deserves some attention,

both in research and policy.




                                         — 35 —
     Finally and perhaps most importantly, our results suggest that the

poverty population is extrenely heterogeneous. Some groups such as youngsters

who are "getting started" have relatively short spells of poverty and may not

merit great concern. But some groups, particularly children and many blacks

often have very long stays in poverty. Some 20 percent of poverty spells of

children begin with birth. When they do, they tend to last for ten years.

The average poor black child today appears to be in the midst of a poverty

spell which will last for almost two decades.


     We believe the spell methodology offers important advantages. Clearly by

using hazard functions and other multivariate techniques, we will be able to

gleen still further information about those factors which influence dynamics.

Yet we believe the straightforward methods exploited here offer the appeal of

simplicity and still provide powerful insights into the dynamics of poverty.




                                    — 36 —
                                    BIBLIOGRAPHY


Akerlof, Geroge A. and Brian G.M. Main, "Unip1oyment Spells and Job Tenures:
      Are They Long? Are They Short? Or, Are They Both?" Xerox, 1982.

Bane, Mary Jo and David Ellwood, "Slipping into and out of Poverty: the
      Dynamics of Spells." Paper presented at Conference on Problens of
      Poverty, Clark University, August 1982.

Boskin, Michael J. and Frederick C. Nold, "A Markov Model of Turnover in Aid
      to Families with Dependent Children." Journal of Human Resources 10
      (fall 1975): 467—481.

Coe, Richard D., "Dependency and Poverty in the Short and Long Run." in Greg
      J. Duncan and James N. Morgan, editors, 5000 Aaerican Families: Patterns
      of Economic Progress, Vol. Vi. Ann Arbor, Michigan: Institute for
      Social Research, 1978.

Coe, Richard D., Greg J. Duncan and Martha S. Hill, "Dynamic Aspects of
      Poverty and Welfare Use in the United States." Paper presented at
      Conference on Problens of Poverty, Clark University, August 1982.

Clark, Xim B. and Lawrence H. Summers, "Labor Force Transitions and
      Unemployment." Working paper, Cambridge, Ma.: National Bureau of
      Economic Research, 1978.

Gottschalk, Peter, tlEarnings Mobility: Permanent Change or Transitory
      Fluctuations?" 1982.

Barrington, Michael. The Other America: Poverty in the United States. New
      York: MacMillan, 1962.

Hill, Martha S., "Some Dynamic Aspects of Poverty." in Martha S. Hill, Daniel
      B. Hill and James N. Morgan, editors. 5000 American Families: Patterns
      of Economic Progress, Vol. IX. Ann Arbor, Michigan: Institute for
      Social Research, 1981.

Hutchins, Robert M., "Entry and Exit Transitions in a Government Transfer
      Program: The Case of Aid to Families with Dependent Children." Journal
      of fl..aan Resources 14 (spring 1981): 218—35.

Kaitz, Hyman B., "Analyzing the Length of Spells of Uneaployment." Monthly
      Labor Review 93 (Novenber 1970): 11—20.

Levy, Frank, "How Big is the American Underclass?" Working Paper #0090—1,
      Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute, 1977.




                                     — 37 —
Lillard, Lee A. and Robert J. Willis, "Dynamic Aspects of Earning Mobility."
      Kconoaetrica 46 (Septanber 1978): 985—1012.

Plotnick, Robert, "Turnover in the APDC Population: An Event History
      Analysis." Journal of Human Resources forthcoming.

Rainwater, Lee, "Persistent and Transitory Poverty: A New Look." Working
      paper #70, Cambridge, Mass.: Joint Center for Urban Studies, 1982.

Salant, Stephen W., "Search Theory and Duration Data: A Theory of Sorts."
       Quarterly Journal of Ecouowics 91 (February 1977): 39—57.

Stack, Carol, All Our   tin.   New York: Harper and Row, 1974.

Survey Research Center, User Guide for the Panel Study of Incoae Dynanics.
      Preliminary draft, Survey Research Center, University of Michigan,
      1983.

U.S. Bureau of the Census, Current Population Reports, Series P—60, No. 134,
      &ney Incoce and Poverty Status of Families and Persons in the United
      States: 1981. (Advance Data from the March 1982 Current Population
      Survey), Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1982.

Wisenan, Michael, "Change and Turnover in a Welfare Population." Working
      Paper #70, Income Dynamics Project, University of California at
      Berkeley, 1976.




                                       — 38   —
