                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     DOES CULTURE AFFECT ECONOMIC OUTCOMES?

                                             Luigi Guiso
                                            Paola Sapienza
                                            Luigi Zingales

                                         Working Paper 11999
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11999


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2006




Luigi Gusio thanks MURST and the EEC, Paola Sapienza the Center for International Econoimcs and
Development at Northwestern University, and Luigi Zingales the Stigler Center at the University of Chicago
for financial support. David Lucca and Piotr Kuszewski provided research assistantship. We greatly
benefitted from the comments of Alberto Alesina, George Akerlof, Gary Becker, Alberto Bisin, Patrick
Bolton, Mick Fishman, Mat Gentzkow, Peter Gourevitch, Jim Hines, Patreicia Ledesma, Adair Morse,
William Ocasio, Francisco Perez-Gonzales, Bruce Sacerdote, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, Tim Taylor,
Michael Waldman, and participants to seminars at the University of Chicago Micro Seminar and Princeton
University. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Luigi Guiso, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Does Culture Affect Economic Outcomes?
Luigi Guiso, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales
NBER Working Paper No. 11999
January 2006
JEL No. Z1, A1

                                            ABSTRACT


Economists have been reluctant to rely on culture as a possible determinant of economic phenomena.
The notion of culture is so broad and the channels through which it can enter the economic discourse
so vague that it is difficult to design testable hypotheses. In this paper we show this does need to be
the case. We introduce a narrower definition of culture that allows for a simple methodology to
develop and test cultural-based explanations. We also present several applications of this
methodology: from the choice to become entrepreneur to that of how much to save, to end with the
political decision on income redistribution.

Paola Sapienza
Finance Department
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
paola-sapienza@northwestern.edu

Luigi Zingales
Harvard University
Littauer Center
Cambridge MA 02138
and NBER
luigi.zingales@chicagogsb.edu
       Until recently, economists have been reluctant to rely on culture as a possible
determinant of economic phenomena. Much of this reluctance stems from the very notion
of culture: it is so broad and the channels through which it can enter the economic
discourse so ubiquitous (and vague) that it is difficult to design testable (i.e., refutable)
hypotheses. Without testable hypotheses, however, there is no role for culture in
economics except perhaps as a selection mechanism among multiple equilibria (Greif,
1994, 2005). In recent years, however, better techniques and more data have made it
possible to identify systematic differences in people’s preferences and beliefs and to
relate them to various measures of cultural legacy. These developments suggest an
approach to introduce cultural-based explanations that can be tested and are able to
substantially enrich our understanding of economic phenomena. This paper summarizes
this approach and its achievement so far, outlining at the end directions for future
research.

       The necessary step to achieve these goals is to define culture in a sufficiently
narrow way that makes it easier to identify a causal link from culture to economic
outcomes. For this reason, we define culture as those customary beliefs and values that
ethnic, religious, and social groups transmit fairly unchanged from generation to
generation. While not comprehensive, this definition focuses on those dimensions of
culture that can impact economic outcomes. In addition, by restricting the potential
channels of influence to two standard ones -beliefs (i.e, priors) and values (i.e,
preferences)-, this definition provides an approach to identify a causal effect from culture
to economic outcomes.
       The first step in this approach is to show a direct impact of culture on
expectations and preferences. Most studies surveyed in this paper use survey data,
although experimental evidence has also been used to establish this connection (like
Henrich et al., 2001; Bornhorst et al., 2005).

       The second step is to show that those beliefs and preferences have an impact on
economic outcomes. In one of the examples we provide in this paper, for instance, we
first show that different religious affiliations and ethnic background are associated with




                                                                                           2
different preferences for redistribution. We then document that different preferences for
redistribution affect actual redistribution in state-level fiscal policy in the U.S.

         To claim a causal link, however, a third step is necessary. All work on culture and
economics faces the problem that causality is likely to go both ways -- from culture to
economics and from economics to culture. The above definition of culture suggests an
answer: to focus only on those dimensions of culture that are inherited by an individual
from previous generations, rather than voluntarily accumulated. As Becker (1996, p. 16)
writes: “Individuals have less control over their culture than over other social capital.
They cannot alter their ethnicity, race or family history, and only with difficulty can they
change their country or religion. Because of the difficulty of changing culture and its low
depreciation rate, culture is largely a ‘given’ to individuals throughout their lifetimes.”
Moreover, religious practices, even when they respond to economic conditions, are
modified over time only at centuries or even millennium frequency (see, for example,
Botticini and Eckstein, 2005). In this spirit, we restrict our attention in this paper to those
cultural aspects like religion and ethnic background that can largely be treated as
invariant over an individual’s lifetime.

         This choice allows us to isolate the cultural component of beliefs and preferences
by instrumenting them with their cultural determinants (for example, when we analyze
the preferences for redistribution we use as instruments religion and ethnicity). This third
and last step is legitimate if culture impacts the economic outcome only through the
channel assumed in the regression. While this condition is unlikely to be met in many
applications, it is in some (e.g., Tabellini, 2005).1

         The advantage of this three-step procedure is that it prevents cultural explanations
from becoming simple ex post rationalizations. By tracing the effect of culture through
the economic channels it is supposed to affect, this approach reduces the risk of spurious
correlations. Its ultimate validity, however, resides in its ability to enhance our
understanding of economic behavior.




1
 This is not the only possible method. Bisin, Topa, and Verdier (2004), for instance, use a structural
estimation approach.


                                                                                                         3
       Restricting the attention to the inherited, slow-moving components of culture
differentiates this approach from the social interaction literature surveyed by Manski
(2000), which focuses on the peer group effects that can be viewed as the fast-moving
component of culture. In treating culture as inherited by individuals, we are not denying
the possibility that long-standing cultural traditions are the result of a society-wide
optimization process (see, for example, the economic analysis of dowries in Botticini and
Siow, 2003), but simply that culture is not continually altered in step with the changes
that individuals experience during their lifetimes. Emigrants from southern, low-trust,
regions in Italy, for instance, tend to carry with them their mistrust to their new locations
(Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales, 2004a). Similarly, people who are raised religiously
exhibit some common beliefs and preferences, even if they reject religion as adults
(Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales, 2003).

       Why do some cultural influences change so slowly (Roland, 2005)? While a full
answer is outside the scope of this work, we conjecture three explanations. First, parents
have a natural tendency to teach their children what they have learned from their own
parents, without a full reassessment of the current optimality of those beliefs (Bisin and
Verdier, 2000). An example of this persistence is the Mursi people’s tradition that women
wear large lip ornaments made of clay that disfigure their lips and force them to remove
some of their frontal teeth. While today’s Mursi have lost the reason for this tradition
(some claim it was introduced to make women less interesting to slave traders; see
Gordon, 2003), it is still maintained to this day. Thus, even if cultural norms were
efficient when they were introduced, they might continue to be taught even after they
have become inefficient (Grusec and Kuczynski, 1997).
       Second, organizations that play a role promoting culture – including state, church,
and academia -- might have a vested interest in promoting the continuation of any beliefs
that provide them with rents. Female infibulations, for instance, is still widespread in
many parts of the world in spite not only of the physical pain imposed on women, but
also of the reduced fertility it engenders (Almroth et al. , 2005) for the power it gives to
men.




                                                                                           4
        Finally, some cultural norms may produce lesser outcomes in terms of economic
output, but greater outcomes in terms of higher fertility, and such norms can become
more widespread in the population despite their economic inefficiency.
        Whatever the explanation for the delayed adjustment process of culture, it enables
us to use deeper aspects of culture like the ethnic origin or the religious denomination as
exogenous variables and thus reduce the risks of the reverse causality problem in
regressions that explore the impact of culture on economic outcomes.

        The next section of this paper provides an abbreviated overview of the historical
debates on the relationship between economics and culture. The following two sections
review the evidence and arguments on how deep aspects of culture like ethnic
background or religion, acting through beliefs or preferences, can affect economic
outcomes. Sometimes the effect of culture goes through both these channels at the same
time, as it is the case for social capital. We discuss this in the last section.


Historical Perspectives on Economics and Culture

The origin of the debate

        Classical economists were comfortable in using cultural explanations for
economic phenomena. Adam Smith viewed his A Theory of Moral Sentiments as an
integral part to the “Wealth of Nations”. And John Stuart Mill regarded cultural
constraints as sometimes more important than even the pursuits of personal interest (see
“System of Logic,”1843, p. 484).

        Karl Marx inverted this direction of causality: rather than culture determining
economic relations, he argued that the underlying technology determines the type of
social structure prevailing and even the dominant culture: the hand-mill produces feudal
society and the steam-mill capitalism. In a famous passage in his preface to “A
Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy,” Marx (1859) writes:

        In the social production of their life, men enter into definite relations that are
        indispensable and independent of their will, relations of production which
        correspond to a definite stage of development of their material productive forces.
        The sum total of these relations of production constitutes the economic structure


                                                                                         5
        of society, the real foundation, on which rise legal and political superstructures
        and to which correspond definite forms of social consciousness. The mode of
        production of material life conditions the social, political and intellectual life
        process in general.2

        Whereas Marx saw religion as a byproduct of production relations, Max Weber
(1905) regarded religion as crucial to the development of capitalism. Any new economic
order – argued Weber – faces initial resistance. Economic incentives are not sufficient to
motivate entrepreneurs to break apart from the pre-existing order. However, Weber
argued that the Protestant Reformation taught that the pursuit of wealth should be
regarded not merely as an advantage, but as a duty. This religious anointment gave the
bourgeoisie the moral strength to subvert the previous order and create a new one, based
on the organization of free wage-earners for the purpose of economic profit.

        An original synthesis between Marx’s view of historical evolution and Weber’s is
provided by Antonio Gramsci. While Marxist, Gramsci recognizes the role played by
culture in history. Power is not merely domain but hegemony, i.e. the ability to influence
society morally and intellectually. In the class struggle, thus, workers can gain consensus
in other social groups by imparting their world view and system of values to other
classes. Cultural hegemony, i.e. the control of the intellectual life of society by purely
cultural means, is crucial to political dominance. Hence, Gramsci (1949) thinks that not
only economic interests but also the dominant culture can explain political outcomes, a
link we are going to study empirically in Section 3.

        Karl Polanyi agreed with Max Weber (1905) that religion was important to the
establishment of markets, but also viewed religion and culture as a factor in moderating
the excesses of the market. In a famous passage, Polanyi, Arensberg, and Pearson (1957,
p. 250) write: “The human economy … is embedded and enmeshed in institutions,
economic and non-economic. The inclusion of the noneconomic is vital. For religion or

2
  Some recent interpreters of Marx caution against an excessively mechanistic interpretation of his view of
the historical process, and point out that even orthodox Marxism reserves a role for culture in human
history and on economic choices (for example, Kolakowski, 1978). Nonetheless, after Marx the problem of
two-way causality between culture and economics was clearly on the table and generated a very active
debate, often with an emphasis on the interaction between culture and institutions.




                                                                                                         6
government may be as important to the structure and functioning of the economy as
monetary institutions or the availability of tools and machines themselves that lighten the
toil of labor.”

Economic Imperialism

        In the decades immediately after World War II, the work of Gramsci and Polanyi
was enormously influential in political science and sociology (see the excellent survey by
DiMaggio, 1994), but fell on deaf ears among economists.

        As economic theory increased its mathematical sophistication and the set of tools
at its disposal expanded, no need was felt to introduce other potential explanatory
variables that, on top, were hard to measure. Not only did economics lose any interest in
its relation with culture, but, as it became more self-confident in its own capabilities, it
moved to explain culture as a mere outcome of economic forces.

        This movement, which is mostly associated with the Chicago school, is very
Marxian in spirit. But there is no trace of class struggle. To the contrary, the Chicago
school pursues a “rational” Marxian agenda, where people beliefs, tastes, and values are
individual or societal’s rational choices and any element of conflict can be resolved
through the price system.

        It is during this period that Muth (1961) and Lucas (1976) endogenize beliefs,
arguing that individuals’ priors should coincide with the objective distribution of the
model. At the same time, Stigler and Becker (1977) endogenize consumers’ preferences,
starting from a common utility and assuming different degree of investment. Finally,
Iannaccone (1988) and Coleman (1990) begin to interpret religious and social norms as
the result of a group-level optimization. This approach spawned a large literature that
endogenizes many cultural aspects. For example, Glaeser, Laibson, and Sacerdote (2002)
extend human capital investment theory to investment in social skills and social
interactions by individuals. In this approach, the returns from investing in local networks
are higher the lower the probability of moving and the greater the number of remaining
years of life span.




                                                                                          7
         In this intellectually coherent body of work, it was very difficult to find any space
for an independent role of culture. In fact, the only possible role is as a coordinating
device, leading societies playing the exact same game to different focal points. This is the
role of culture in Greif (1994, 2005), who explains the different societal organization of
the Genoese and Maghribi traders as the culturally driven response to the same economic
problem.

The non-economists

During this period, while some non traditional economists such as Hirschman continued
to link economic analysis to cultural factors (e.g, Hirschman, 1967), the most interesting
work on the causal effect of culture on economic and political outcomes was undertaken
by non-economists. For space considerations, we will focus here only on the contribution
of a few researchers, who later became particularly influential among economists.

         Banfield     (1958)      is   the    first   to   propose      a    cultural    explanation       for
underdevelopment. In “The Moral Basis of a Backward Society” he attributes the
underdevelopment of southern Italy to the excessive pursuit of narrow self interest by its
inhabitants, a condition he labels “amoral familism.” Following Banfield, Putnam (1993)
provides very interesting evidence of the positive effects of a more altruistic (“civic”)
culture on the quality of political institutions. The national government in Italy
introduced formally identical systems of regional government across the country. As
Putnam shows, in areas that experienced free city states in the Middle Age, the level of
what Putnam calls “social capital” is high and regional governments functioned much
better. In areas that lacked that tradition, regional governments performed very poorly.3
Fukuyama (1995) directly relates trust to economic development. He does not

         3
            The north and the south of Italy differ in many respects: geographically (the South is much more
mountainous), logistically (communications are more difficult in the South), economically (traditionally the
South has been characterized by latifunds cultivated with wheat or used to graze sheep, while the North by
smaller plot cultivated with more value added crops). How can we be sure that this difference across these
regions derives from a distant episode in history and not from all these other factors? Guiso, Sapienza and
Zingales (in progress) try to disentangle these alternative hypotheses. To reduce other confounding effects,
they exploit the differences in history across towns within the center-north of Italy to identify the effect of
the free-city state experience from the rest. They find that several measures of a town’s social capital are
positively related to the length of the city-state experience of that town. This finding confirms Putnam’s
earlier argument, that historical experience carries consequences centuries later.




                                                                                                             8
distinguish, however, between the trust that arises from better institutions (which is often
a consequence of economic development) and the cultural component of trust.

       The explosion of work on economic institutions in the late 1990s and early 2000s
encouraged economists to go beyond formal institutions into informal institutions, which
took them to an explicit consideration of culture. Institutionally-oriented economists like
Landes (1998) emphasized both the links from culture to beliefs and values and from
beliefs and values to economic outcomes, but with an argument presented in a detailed
narrative form rather than with statistical evidence. Landes revisits the fundamental
question of what drives the success of national economies and concludes in favor of
attitudes driven by cultural factors. These cultural factors - thrift, hard work, tenacity,
honesty, and tolerance- contrast with the xenophobia, religious intolerance, bureaucratic
corruption, and state edicts that stifle enterprise. His judgment (p. 516) is that "if we learn
anything from the history of economic development, it is that culture makes all the
difference. (Here Max Weber was right on.)"

Toward a new cultural economics?

The opening through which culture entered the economic discourse was the concept of
trust. Following the political scientists (Banfield, Putnam, Fukuyama), economists
(Knack and Keefer, 1996, La Porta et al., 1997) started to study the economic payoff of
trust. The appealing feature of trust is that it can be thought of as “the subjective
probability with which an agent assesses that another agent or group of agents will
perform a particular action” (Gambetta, 2000), and as such can be easily incorporated
into standard economic models.

         As a cultural variable, however, trust has severe limitations. Trust is not just an
inherited cultural variable. People can develop trust because of the quality of the legal
system or as the result of strategic interactions (Axelrod, 1984). Trust can even be the
result of optimal investment in social capital (Glaeser, Laibson, Sacerdote, 2002).
Moreover, culture can impact economic outcomes through mechanisms other than trust.
Thus, subsequent work tried to establish a more direct link between culture and economic
outcomes.




                                                                                             9
          In what follows we present this work (as well as new evidence) distinguishing
between the two main channels through which culture can affect economic outcomes:
beliefs and preferences. In doing so, we maintain the standard economic assumption that
each individual has one identity and maximizes the utility of this identity. We only
assume that cultural upbringing can affect his priors or the parameters of his utility. A
richer way to capture the effects of culture (but also one that will increase the
endogeneity problem) is to consider the possibility of multiple identities (Akerlof and
Kranton, 2000) and the role of culture in shaping these identities and making one versus
another salient.



2. Culture, Prior Beliefs and Economic Outcomes

          People make many decisions in life in which they lack previous experience: which
college to attend, which profession to undertake, how much to save for retirement. In
these situations, choices must be based on prior beliefs. But how are these prior beliefs
determined? Culture might play a big role here.

          The Effect of Culture on Prior Beliefs

          Economics does not have much to say about priors. In fact, it is standard to
assume that individuals have common priors, not because economists believe it, but
because they must overcome the objection that it would be too easy (and thus vacuous) to
explain economic phenomena on the basis of different priors chosen ad hoc.
          Fortunately, in recent years the growing availability of direct information on
people’s beliefs allows the choice of priors to be based on empirical observation. It is
possible to test, for instance, whether religious and ethnic backgrounds affect people’s
priors.

          In Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2003), we looked at the effect of religion on
trust around the world using the World Values Survey. Our dependent variable is a
dummy equal to 1 if an individual replies “Most people can be trusted” to the question
“Generally speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted or that you have to
be very careful in dealing with people?". The coefficients of interest regard dummy



                                                                                            10
variables for each of the list of religions shown in Figure 1 (where the omitted category is
“no religious affiliation”). The regression also includes demographic controls for health,
gender, age, education, social class, and income as well as country fixed-effects, and
dummy variables for different survey years and a dummy variable equal to 1 if the person
does not believe in God (Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales, 2003, Table 4, offer more
details).

        Being raised religiously raises the level of trust by 2 percent. If a person regularly
attends religious services, the level of trust increases by another 20 percent. This effect
differs across denominations; while Catholic and Protestant have roughly a similar
positive effect, Muslim, Hindu, and Buddhist do not.

        In this paper, we replicate the same exercise within the United States, based on
data from the General Social Survey. Unfortunately, religious classifications in the
General Social Survey are not as detailed as in the World Values Survey (only three
religious denominations are identifiable). The General Social Survey, however, measures
ethnic origin of the respondent’s ancestors and allow us to study whether the culture
transmitted by ancestors migrated from different countries plays a role in the beliefs of
people living in the US. The effect of different religions on trust is similar to our previous
study, albeit not statistically significant. By contrast, the U.S. data shows a strong effect
of ethnic origin (see Figure 2); these effects are computed relative to Americans with
British descendents. Taking the ancestors’ country-of-origin dummies as a group, they
are jointly statistically significant; which implies that the level of trust an American has
toward others depends in part upon where ancestors originated.

        Ancestors’ origin dummies also have a clear pattern: the effect on trust is strong
when ancestors come from countries that today have a higher average level trust. In
Figure 3, we plot the estimated impact of having ancestors from different areas of the
world – again, this is measured vis-a-vis having British ancestors -- against the difference
between the level of trust that prevails today in those areas minus the average level of
trust in Great Britain from the World Values Survey. There is a strong positive
correlation (0.6) between the two. This finding is consistent with the idea that priors have




                                                                                              11
a cultural component, which is transported to the new world and continues to impact
individual beliefs even in the new environment and even several generations later.

        The biggest problem with these correlations is one of causality. In GSZ (2003) we
try to address it in two ways. First, we show that these effects are present even for people
that were raised religiously, independent of whether they continue to profess the faith
afterwards. Since one does not choose his parents or his parents’ religion, the reverse
causality argument does not apply here. Second, we look at one episode in history where
there was a discontinuous change in religious doctrine and study the impact of this on
people beliefs. This change was brought about by the Second Vatican Council, which in
1962 substantially modified Catholic doctrine and teaching. Not only was the use of Latin
in the Mass abolished, but also there was an opening up of dialogue with the other
religious denominations. As a result, Catholics after 1960 received a very different
education from their older peers. If these changes indeed affected the influence of
Catholicism, we should see a difference in the effect of Catholicism on the older versus
the younger generation. To control for generic cohort differences we insert a dummy for
people born after 1960 into the basic regression and then interact this dummy with the
different levels of religiosity of Catholics. Catholics brought up after Vatican II are
indeed more trusting and tolerant. This result it is hard to explain just with the argument
that religion practice responds to secularism, because the dummy for people borne after
1960 should already capture this effect.
       Another potential difficulty with findings of this sort is that it may be difficult to
separate culturally-based beliefs from rational expectations. Suppose that we observe (as
it is indeed the case) that Swedes trust others more. Is this trust culturally driven or is it
the rational prior driven by the different level of trustworthiness prevailing in the country
the interviewed person is living in? In general, it is hard to tell. In some special cases,
however, it is possible to distinguish among the two.

        Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2004b) use Eurobarometer surveys where
individuals from various European countries are asked how much they trust individuals
from all the other European countries. In particular, the data allow us to identify three
components of trust: the average level of trust Swedes have towards others, the average
level of trust citizens of other countries have toward Swedes and an idiosyncratic


                                                                                                 12
component of each match (Swedes and Germans, Swedes and Italian, etc.). Hence, these
data allow us to compare how the Swedish view about Germans differs from other
countries’ view about Germans. We find that this idiosyncratic component of trust
increases when two countries share the same religion and decreases when they have a
long history of wars. It also decreases with the genetic distance between two populations
(a measure not only of somatic similarity, but also of similarity in ancient cultural
aspects).4 This dependence of trust (and thus of a prior belief) on cultural variables
weakens for more educated people, suggesting that education can reduce the role of these
inherited cultural aspects in the formation of priors.

         Another way to show that culture can affect beliefs is to conduct experiments.
Henrich et al. (2001) compare the responses to ultimatum games across different tribes.
In an ultimatum game a player proposes how to divide a sum of money with another
player. If the second player rejects the proposed allocation, neither gets anything. If the
second accepts, the first gets their demand and the second gets the rest. While the
economists’ optimal offer is arbitrarily close to zero, in almost all the experiments people
offer more. Henrich et al. (2001) show that the average offer varies systematically across
tribes (from a minimum of 26% for the Machiguenga tribe in Peru to a maximum of 58%
for the Lamelara tribe in Indonesia) in a way that is correlated with the prevailing
occupation of a tribe. Tribes whose basic subsistence activities required larger economies
of scale and thus higher level of cooperation offered more. On the one hand, these
findings vindicate Marx’s claim that the structure of production determines the beliefs
and more broadly the culture of a society. On the other hand, they suggest that once
culture is formed, it persists and impacts economic relations beyond those which formed
them.

         An even more compelling experiment of the effect of cultural biases on beliefs is
performed by Hoff and Priyanka (2005). They show that caste differences can affect
individual performance by impacting individuals' expectations. When Indian kids were
asked to solve mazes and caste was not publicly revealed, there were no caste differences


4
 In a follow up work, Spolaore and Wacziarg (2005) show that genetic distance is also related with the
difference in income across countries. Consistent with trust being important, they interpret this effect as
cultural differences representing a barrier to the diffusion of innovation.


                                                                                                              13
in performance. But making caste salient created a large and robust caste gap, due to the
fact that low-caste subjects expect that others will judge them prejudicially and this
mistrust undermines motivation.
        When experiments are not feasible, one can still document a cultural bias in
beliefs by showing that differences in beliefs across different culturally-distinguished
groups do not correspond to objective differences in the underlying distribution of
outcomes, but only to perceived differences. Alesina and Glaeser (2004) pioneer this
method by showing that Americans have a very different perception of social mobility
than the Europeans, but this different perception is not matched by the data.5

         The effects of priors on economic outcomes

        Having shown that culture as defined by religion and ethnicity affects beliefs
about trust, we now want to show that these beliefs have an impact on economic
outcomes. As Arrow (1972) wrote, “Virtually every commercial transaction has within
itself an element of trust, certainly any transaction conducted over a period of time.”
Several empirical papers show that the level of trust of a community affects economic
performance (e.g. Knack and Keefer, 1996; Knack and Zak, 2001). These papers report
direct regressions of trust on economic performance but do not dig deeper into the
mechanism through which measured trust is positively correlated with growth or GDP
per capita.

        Trust can affect people’s economic decisions in several ways. Trust is particularly
relevant when transactions involve some unknown counterpart like a buyer or seller of
goods in another country, when the transaction takes place over a period of time rather
than being completed on the spot, and when the legal protection is imperfect.
International trade is then an area where trust should matter. Guiso, Sapienza and
Zingales (2004a) use data on relative trust among European countries to study whether
and how important trust is for international bilateral trade among these countries.
Looking at trade in goods, financial assets, and direct foreign investment, they find that

5
 An alternative interpretation of this fact is provided by Benabou and Tirole (2006). They build a model
where there is complementarity between individual ideological choices. Strong beliefs in the fairness of the
system pays less in a world in which there is strong fiscal redistribution. Hence, the emergence of two
equilibria: an “American” one with low taxes and strong beliefs in fairness and a “European” one with
high takes and lower beliefs in fairness.


                                                                                                         14
trust matters for all these transactions: a country that trusts another more tends to
exchange more goods and financial assets with it, and to engage more in direct
investment. These results hold after controlling for the typical variables the trade
literature has focused on (distance, common borders, commonality of language) as well
as for variables that have been ignored until recently in the trade literature, such as the
differences in legal origin among country pairs. These cultural biases are so rooted that
they affect even the equity portfolio allocation of professional equity funds investors.6

        To show the power of this approach and the pervasive impact of culture in many
economic choices, we carried out some regressions using beliefs about trust to predict
economic outcomes. As a dependent variable we use the choice of whether to become an
entrepreneur. When contracts are incomplete, many deals are made just by shaking
hands, which means relying on trust. An entrepreneur who works in a much unstructured
environment is more exposed to these types of deals. Hence, trustworthy individuals will
have a comparative advantage in becoming entrepreneurs. Since whether an individual
expresses trust is highly correlated with whether that individual is trustworthy (Glaeser
et. al., 2000), we use our measure of trust as a measure of trustworthiness and study its
impact on the probability of becoming an entrepreneur. We measure the choice of being
an entrepreneur with a dummy equal to 1 if the respondent says that he or she is self-
employed in the General Social Survey data and zero otherwise. ‘Trust” is a dummy
variable equal to one if the respondent answered that most people can be trusted in
response to the question: “Generally speaking, would you say that most people can be
trusted or that you can't be too careful in life?” We also use control variables for gender,
race, age and education.

        As Table 1 reports, trust has a positive and statistically significant impact on the
probability of becoming an entrepreneur in an ordinary least squares regression (the



6
  In response to concerns about reverse causality, one can use instrumental variables like the history of
wars between the country pairs, genetic distance, and religious similarity to forecast cultural differences,
and then see how these predicted cultural differences affect economic outcomes. The instrumental variable
approach often increases the predicted impact of culture on economic outcomes. Some examples are
provided in the text below.




                                                                                                        15
probit results are very similar). Trusting others increases the probability of being a self
employed by 1.3 percentage points (14 percent of the sample mean).

       One possible concern with this result is the direction of causality: if success
breeds trust, then a successful entrepreneur might be more trusting, and not the other way
around. To address this problem we use instrumental variables of religion and ethnic
origin. In the two-stage least squares, instrumental variable approach, our first stage is to
treat trust as a dependent variable and use dummy variables for Protestant, Catholic,
Jewish and other religions, as well as a dummies for the ancestors’ country of origin, as
the independent variables. In the second stage, we then plug in the predicted values of
trust for each individual as our regression with entrepreneurship as the dependent
variable. This approach is intended to capture only the component of trust that is driven
by the religious and ethnic background.

       Table 1 shows that the coefficient of trust using this instrumental variables
approach is significantly bigger than the coefficient using the ordinary least squares
approach, suggesting that reverse causality is not a major problem. The remarkable
difference in the size of the coefficients, however, suggests that either our proxy for
trustworthiness is very noisy or that culture might affect the choice of becoming an
entrepreneur also through other channels. For instance, perhaps cultural background
affects attitudes towards risk, which in turn affect the choice to become entrepreneur. In
either case, however, these results support the hypothesis that cultural background plays a
role in important economic choices.

Reduced Form Approach

In many instances direct information about beliefs is not available; hence the researcher
is forced to jump straight from cultural differences to economic outcomes. An example of
work with this weakness is our own paper showing that the level of social capital affects
the use of basic financial instruments, such as writing a check or purchasing of a share
(Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales, 2004a). Similarly, Osili and Paulson (2004) find that U.S.
immigrants from countries with poorer investment protections are more reluctant to buy
shares, consistent with them extrapolating their country-of-origin prior to the new




                                                                                           16
environment.7 Finally, Barro and McCleary (2002, 2003) show that some religious beliefs
(such as beliefs in heaven or hell) have positive impact on economic growth.

         In isolation, this work is less convincing, because it is unable to document the
intermediate step. But it is useful in conjunction with other work, which gives credibility
to the link. For example, by using Dutch micro data Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2005)
show that individual level of trust does indeed affect stock market participation,
validating the channel assumed in the two above papers.

3. Culture, Preferences or Values, and Economic Outcomes

         Through the socialization process, by which it is maintained and transmitted,
culture affects individual’s values. We distinguish between values that influence
economic preferences (such as fertility or labor participation preferences) – which can be
thought of as parameters of a person’s utility function -- and political preferences (such as
preferences for fiscal redistribution). Culture, thus, can affect economic outcomes though
both these channels.

         The effect of culture on economic preferences

The set of preferences economically relevant that can be affected by culture is potentially
very large. Giuliano (2004) shows that living arrangements of US families are affected
not only by economic conditions, but also by cultural heritage (for example the structure
of the family in their country of origin). Similarly, Fernández Olivetti and Fogli (2004)
and Fernández and Fogli (2005) show that cultural heritage affects work and fertility
choices of American women. Finally, Ichino and Maggi (2000) document that in Italy
preferences for shirking on the job are driven by a place of birth, which can be interpreted
as a proxy for the cultural background.
         All these papers, however, take a reduced form approach. In order to document
the preference channel though which culture affects preferences, here we focus on saving
decisions. We documented the link between religion and preference for thriftiness in
Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2003). We infer this preference from the answers to a
question from the World Value Survey: “Here is a list of qualities that children can be

7
 Similarly, Morse and Shive (2004) find that the degree of patriotism of a country (subjective beliefs in
how great your country is) influences its portfolio diversification choices.


                                                                                                            17
encouraged to learn at home. Which, if any, do you consider to be especially important?”
We coded the variable as 1 if the respondent lists as important ‘‘Thrift, saving money and
things.’’ We regress this variable on several dummy variables for various religious
affiliations, with the omitted category being “no religious affiliation.” The regressions
also include controls variables for health, gender, age, education, social class, income, a
dummy variable equal to 1 if a person does not believe in God, country fixed effects,
dummy variables for the year in which the survey was done.

        We found that Catholics are 3.8 percent more likely and Protestants 2.7 percent
more likely than nonreligious people to view teaching thrift to their children as an
important value, and these differences are significant respectively at the 1 and percent
level. The effects of other religions are often larger in magnitude, but not statistically
significant. For example, Buddhists are 7.2 percent more likely to place importance on
teaching thrift than the nonreligious, Hindus are 7.2 percent more likely, and Jewish
respondents are 6.4 percent more likely. The counterexample is that Muslims place
essentially the same value on teaching thrift to children as the non-religious, although this
effect is not statistically significant, either.

        From individual preferences to economic outcomes

        Do these cultural differences in individual preference over the value of teaching
thriftiness have an actual impact on savings across countries? The World Value Survey
has no data on individuals’ savings or consumption; hence we cannot test whether the
preferences over teaching thriftiness affect individual savings decisions directly. Thus,
we turn to national data on saving. In the first column of Table 2, we use the standard
economic specification of saving implied by the life-cycle theory. The dependent variable
is a country’s saving rate, measured as national saving divided by GDP. The explanatory
variables are growth in per capita income, the dependency ratio (that is, the population
above 65 and below 15 divided by the total population), and government savings.8 These
variables all have the sign predicted by the life cycle theory and are statistically
significant: more growth leads to higher savings, more dependency less savings, and

8
  We use the same data as Giavazzi et al. (2000) who also include a dummy variable for whether the
country is an OECD member. When we include this variable, the coefficient on the dummy variable is not
significant and our other results are unchanged, so we do not report these regressions here.


                                                                                                    18
more Government savings leads to more total savings. Together these variables can
explain 58 percent of the cross-country variability in the rate of savings.

       In the second column we insert the percentage of people in each country who says
that it is important to teach thriftiness to children. This proportion enters positively and
significantly. A 10 percentage points increase in the share of people who think thriftiness
is a value to be taught to children is linked to a 1.3 percentage point increase in the
national saving rate. This variable increases the R-squared by 5.5 percentage points.

        A remarkable insight emerges from these findings. The explanatory power of a
cultural explanation for national saving is quite comparable in size to the power of the
celebrated life cycle model. An increase of one standard deviation in the share of people
who think educating children to thriftiness increases the saving rate by 1.8 percentage
point increase in the national saving rate (9 percent of the sample mean). Increasing the
growth rate of income by one standard deviation raises national savings by 1.8 percentage
points, while lowering the dependency ratio by one standard deviation increases national
saving by 3.18 percentage points. This result suggests that to understand cross-country
differences in national savings rates cultural variables are as important as economic ones.

       Again, concerns arise over the possibility of reverse causality. For example,
perhaps people who save a lot also teach this to their children as a rationalization of their
own behavior. Thus, in the first step of the instrumental variables process, we use the
importance of encouraging children to learn thrift as a dependent variable, and use the
proportion of people of the different religious denomination in each country as the
instrumental explanatory variables. This process is meant to capture how much of the
importance of teaching thrift to children can be explained by religious background. We
then take the predicted values of thrift based on the coefficients of the instrumental
variable regression, and insert them back into a regression like the one in the second
column of Table 2. The results are shown in the third column.

       With this instrumental variable approach, the impact of the importance of
teaching thriftiness to children on savings doubles in size, although the statistical




                                                                                          19
significance weakens from the 5 percent to the 10 percent level.9 The large increase in the
estimated coefficient casts some doubt on the validity of the instrument, especially in
light of the low explanatory power of the first stage regression. While using individual
data and controlling for country fixed effects shows that different religion denominations
have a strong impact on the teaching of thriftiness, this impact weakens significantly in
the cross-country regressions. Hence, the IV estimate should be viewed as tentative.

         A similar approach but at the micro level is followed by Knowles and Postlewaite
(2004). By using the PSID, not only do they document that parents’ and children saving
behavior is correlated, but they also show that this behavior is correlated to their stated
preference on planning horizons.

         The effect of culture on political preferences

         Culture can also affect behavior and outcomes through its effect on political
preferences of individuals about what governments should do: for example, how much
government should intrude in economic life, promote competition, regulate the market,
redistribute income, run a social security program, or nationalize certain industries and
businesses.

        Figure 4 shows the impact of religious affiliation on the preferences for
redistribution of American citizens. To identify these preferences we use the following
question contained in the General Social Survey: “Some people think the government in
Washington ought to reduce the income differences between the rich and the poor,
perhaps by raising the taxes of wealthy families or by giving income assistance to the
poor. Others think that the government should not concern itself with reducing this
income differences between the rich and the poor. Here is a card with a scale from 1 to 7.
Think of a score of 1 as meaning that the government ought to reduce the income
differences between rich and poor, and a score of 7 meaning that the government should
not concern itself with reducing income differences. What score comes closest to what



9
  We also carried out estimates using inflation-adjusted national saving rates. The magnitude and statistical
significance of the results remain unchanged.




                                                                                                         20
you feel?” We recoded the answers so that a higher value means that the respondent
agrees that the government should involve itself more in redistribution.

        We used this opinion data as the dependent variable in a regression. The key
independent variables were dummy variables for different religions – Catholic, Jewish,
Protestant, and Others – leaving “no religion and atheists” as the omitted group. As usual
throughout this paper, we included control variables for health, gender, education, and
race. Catholics, Protestant and Jewish respondents all have a more negative attitude
toward redistribution than those with no religion, although the coefficient on Jewish
respondents is not statistically significant. Followers of other religions are more in favor
of redistribution, albeit the effect is not statistically different from zero.

        Figure 5 repeats the same exercise, except instead of using the dummy variables
for religion, in this case we use dummy variables differentiating by the country of origin
of the ancestors. The omitted group is Americans of British origin. Americans with
known African ancestors and generically all African Americans are 20 percent more in
favor of redistribution than the typical American of British origin. Remember, these
results hold true even after controlling for whether the respondent is white, as well as for
the other demographic variables like income, education, gender, age, and health status.
The second group more in favor of redistribution is the American with Canadian origin,
with the Hispanic and the American Indian following close behind. The least in favor of
redistribution are the Japanese Americans, who are less in favor of redistribution than the
British Americans, although this results is not statistically significant.

        One interpretation of these results is that Americans with British, North European
or German ancestors are earlier immigrants. Hence, more generations were raised in the
United States and forged by its culture, absorbing the belief that the success is mostly
determined by individual actions, which makes government intervention highly
undesirable. By contrast, those from other areas are comparatively more open to
redistribution. But whatever the exact interpretation for each region, the country-of-origin
dummies capture many dimensions of the received culture.

        From political preferences to economic outcomes




                                                                                         21
          Will these preferences about redistribution affect the government’s level of
redistributive policies? Some work has investigated this question. Alesina and Glaeser
(2004) document a strong positive correlation between the proportion of people who
believe poverty is society’s fault (or that luck determines income) and that country’s
share of GDP spent in social welfare. However, they attribute these differences in beliefs
to political indoctrination, and do not investigate possible cultural determinants. Alesina
and La Ferrara (2001) rely, as we do, on the General Social Survey and show that those
who express a preference for equal opportunities are more averse to redistributive
policies. They are not concerned, however, with the link between these preferences and
outcomes.10

           To show how cultural determinants of beliefs also affect the actual involvement
of a government in redistributive policies, we use the variation in the degrees of
redistribution across U.S. states. Since indirect taxes like sales taxes tend to be regressive,
while income taxes progressive, we measure engagement in redistribution by taking the
ratio of the share of state government revenues coming from income taxes and the one
coming from sale taxes and other indirect taxes (using data collected by the U.S. Census
Bureau). States that redistribute more should exhibit a higher ratio.

         For our key independent variable, we use the average state responses to two
questions in the General Social Survey. The first two regressions in Table 3 use the
answers to the question that was described in the previous section: it’s the question about
how “some think the government in Washington ought to reduce the income differences
between the rich and the poor …” Since we have annual data but the extent of
redistribution does not vary very much over time we average the data.

         The last two regressions in Table 3 use the answers to a similar question asked
only in 1987: “It is the responsibility of the government to reduce the differences in
income between people with high incomes and those with low incomes.” The variable is
coded 1–5, where a higher number represents stronger preferences for redistribution. We

10
   Alesina and Angeletos (2005) show theoretically that differences in beliefs about social justice lead to
differences in equilibrium redistribution. They also show that different beliefs in what determines
individual incomes (luck or effort) across countries affects the size of social spending in a country, but do
not enquire whether differences in beliefs are driven by culture.



                                                                                                            22
also control for the state GDP per capita, the size of the population living in the state, and
the percentage of population that is below the poverty rate.

       The first and third columns of Table 3 provide our ordinary least squares
estimates. In these regressions, the sign of the coefficient on the preferences variable is
positive, but the effect is not statistically significant in the first column and is only
marginally significant in the second column.

       We then use an instrumental variable approach. To obtain our instruments we
compute the fraction in each state that belong to the various religion denominations and
the fractions whose ancestors come from the 16 sets of countries and areas listed in the
previous table. We then run regressions with the dependent variable as one of our two
measures of the preference for redistribution, to calculate what part of those values can be
attributed to cultural factors. We then take the estimate coefficients from those
regressions to predict the preferences variable, and insert those predicted values into the
regression framework. Using this instrumental variable approach, the estimated
coefficient of the preference for redistribution on actual redistribution becomes much
bigger and is marginally statistically significant. Increasing the intensity of preferences
for redistribution by one standard deviation raises the ratio of direct/indirect taxation by
14 percent of the sample mean in the second column or 20 percent of the sample mean in
the fourth column. The underlying cultural determinants of preferences for redistribution
do seem to have an impact on the amount of redistribution that occurs, although the
statistical significance is somewhat weak.

4. Culture and Institutions

       If culture affects beliefs and values, it can also have an effect on broader political
outcomes. In his study of different Italian regions, Putnam (1993) documents a large
number of positive institutional outcomes associated with higher social capital, like more
efficient health care systems. Social capital, at least as intended by Putnam, can be seen
as a combination of values (people feel a moral duty to go and vote) and beliefs (I expect
to be ostracized by my community if I behave in an un-civic way).

       Another suggestive example is provided by Licht et al. (2004). They focus on
three cultural trade-offs: between embeddedness and autonomy, between hierarchy and


                                                                                           23
egalitarianism, and between mastery and harmony with nature. By using survey
responses of elementary and high school teachers in 53 countries (Schwartz, 1999, 2004),
they document that countries more tilted in favor of autonomy, egalitarianism, and
mastery exhibit higher rule of law, less corruption, and more democratic accountability.
To control for the possibility of reverse causality, Licht et al. (2004) adopt an intriguing
strategy -- they use the grammar of pronouns as an instrumental variable. They argue that
languages which require the explicit use of `I’ or `you’ signals that a person is
highlighted and autonomy is valued. Conversely, languages that allow dropping the
pronoun emphasize the contextualization of the person and thus reflect a more embedded
culture. Thus, they argue that this grammatical difference can serve as an instrument for a
society’s degree of embeddedness or autonomy. While this is only a partial fix (one
instrument for their three endogenous variables), it is potentially a very interesting
strategy to capture long-term characteristics of a country’s culture.11

        Both these papers, however, do not show that the effects of culture on institutions
have an economic payoff. Evidence in this direction is provided by Tabellini (2005). He
measures culture as the “principal component” of four values: trust, beliefs in the
importance of individual effort, generalized morality, and obedience (which he considers
a negative value), which are inferred from questions on the World Values Survey. In this
methodology, the principal component can be understood as a variable underlying these
four values, in such a way that the variance of the culture with these factors is minimized.
He then uses a measure of education and of historical political institutions across 69
European regions as his measure of culture. He finds that the quality of the historical
institutions (such as constraints on the executives) has a positive and statistically
significant effect on today’s social values. He documents that both GDP per capita and
growth are higher in those regions that exhibit higher levels of the “good” cultural values
like trust, beliefs in individual effort, generalized morality, and low obedience. More
importantly, the effect is bigger when he uses an instrumental variable approach and first
predicts the four values with their historical determinants, before carrying out the

11
  La Porta et al. (1999) and Stulz and Williamson (2003), instead, use a reduced-form approach and relate
the religious composition of a country to the quality of its government and the forms of creditors’ law.
Similarly, Muller and Philippon (2005) show that the religion composition affects the quality of labor
relations, which in turn affect corporate ownership concentration.


                                                                                                       24
principal component methodology and creating a culture variable. This evidence strongly
suggests that “better” cultural values do have a large economic payoff.

Conclusion

        Sociologists and anthropologists (e.g., Richerson and Boyd, 2005) have
accumulated a wealth of field evidence on the impact of culture on economic behavior.
As one of many examples, Salamon (1992), documents that in southern Illinois, in spite
of the similarity of environmental conditions, towns inhabited by descendents of German-
Catholic who settled in the 1840s and towns inhabited by descendents of Yankee settlers
from other parts of the United States (mainly Kentucky, Ohio and Indiana) showed
substantial differences in the structure of land ownership, farming practices, choice of
crops, and female fertility. German-Catholics almost never sold their land and had on
average more children, and thus tend to grow crops that are more labor-intensive to
employ their children. Yankees saw farming as a business, bought and sold land more
often, grew less labor-intensive crops such as corn, and had fewer children. Interestingly,
while Yankees were generally more profitable, the German-Catholic model did not
become less prevalent after more than a century, because of the higher fertility of German
Catholics. Not only did culture have an effect, but this effect persisted over time in spite
of its lower profitability.

        In recent years, economists have begun to apply their analytical frameworks and
empirical tools to the issue of culture and economic outcomes. Better techniques and
expanded data have made it possible to identify systematic differences in people’s
preferences. As this paper documents, cultural hypotheses can be rigorously tested and
are economically important for fundamental economic issues like national rates of saving.

        As this research on culture and economic outcomes expands, it raises an exciting
set of questions. How does culture emerge and how does it persist? What roles are played
by production technology, political power, efficiency concerns, and even factors like
hygienic considerations? What determines the persistence of the cultural traits? What is
the interaction between culture and formal institutions? Importing cultural elements will
make economic discourse richer, better able to capture the nuances of the real world, and
ultimately more useful.


                                                                                         25
       References

Alesina, Alberto and George-Marios Angeletos (2005), “Fairness and Redistribution”,
American Economic Review, 95(4): 960-980
Alesina, Alberto and Edward L. Glaeser (2004), Fighting Poverty in the US and Europe,
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Alesina, Alberto and Eliana La Ferrara (2001), “Preferences for Redistribution in the
Land of Opportunities”, NBER WP 8267
Akerlof, George and Rachel E. Kranton, (2000) "Economics and Identity," Quarterly
Journal of Economics CXV(3): 715-733.
Almroth L, Elmusharaf S, El Hadi N, Obeid A, El Sheikh MA, Elfadil SM, Bergström S,
(2005), “Primary infertility after genital mutilation in girlhood in Sudan: a case-control
study” The Lancet - Vol. 366, Issue 9483, 30 July, Pages 385-391
Arrow, Kenneth (1972), ``Gifts and Exchanges", Philosophy and Public Affairs 1: 343-
362.
Axelrod, R. (1984), The Evolution of Cooperation, New York: Basic Books.
Banfield, E. (1958), The Moral Basis of a Backward Society, New York: Free Press.
Barro, Robert J., McCleary, Rachel M., (2002), “Religion and Political Economy in an
International Panel,” National Bureau for Economic Research, Working Paper 8931.
Barro, Robert J., McCleary, Rachel M., (2003) “Religion and Economic Growth,”
American Sociological Review,
Becker Gary (1996), “Preferences and Values,” in Becker Gary (ed.), Accounting for
Taste, Harvard University Press: Cambridge.
Benabou Roland and Jean Tirole (2006), "Belief in a Just World and Redistributive
Politics", Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Bisin, A. and T. Verdier (2000), “Beyond the Melting Pot: Cultural Transmission,
Marriage, and the Evolution of Ethnic and Religious Traits, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, CXV(3), 955-988, 2000.
Bisin, Alberto, G. Topa and T. Verdier (2004), “An Empirical Analysis of Religious
Homogamy and Socialization in the U.S.,” Journal of Political Economy, 112(3), 615-64,
2004.
Bornhorst, Fabian, A. Ichino, Karl Schlag and Eyal Winter, 2005, "Trust and
Trustworthiness Among Europeans: South - North Comparison", European Institute
Working paper.
Botticini Maristella and Zvi Eckstein (2005), “Jewish Occupational Selection: Education,
Restrictions, or Minorities?,” Journal of Economic History, 65 (4):
Botticini, Maristella and Aloysius Siow, (2003), “Why Dowries?”, American Economic
Review 93(4): 1385-98.
Coleman, J. (1990), Foundations of Social Theory, Harvard University Press: Cambridge.


                                                                                        26
DiMaggio, Paul (1994) "Culture and Economy." in Neil Smelser and Richard Swedberg
(eds.), The Handbook of Economic Sociology, Princeton University Press: Princeton.
Fernández, R., A. Fogli, and C. Olivetti (2004), “Mothers and Sons: Preference
Formation and Female Labor Force Dynamics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(4),
1249-1299.
Fernández Raquel and Alessandra Fogli (2005), “Culture: an Empirical Investigation of
Beliefs, Work, and Fertility, NBER WP 11268.
Fukuyama, Francis (1995), Trust: The Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity. Free
Press, New York.
Citation: Gambetta, Diego (2000) “Can We Trust Trust?”, in Gambetta, Diego (ed.)
Trust: Making and Breaking Cooperative Relations, University of Oxford, 213-237.
Giavazzi, Francesco, Tullio Jappelli, Marco Pagano (2000), “Searching for non-
Keynesians effects of fiscal policy,” European Economic Review, vol. 44, 1259-1290,
Giuliano, Paola (2004) “On the Determinants of Living Arrangments in Western Europe:
Does Cultural Origin Matter?” Working paper.
Glaeser, Edward, David Laibson, Josè A. Scheinkman and Christine L. Soutter (2000),
"Measuring Trust," Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(3): 811-846
Glaeser, Edward, David Laibson, and Bruce Sacerdote (2002), “An Economic Approach
to Social Capital," Economic Journal 112: 437-458.
Gordon, Frances Linzee et al. (2003), Ethiopia & Eritrea, Lonely Planet Guide.
Gramsci Antonio (1949), Il materialismo storico e la filosofia di Benedetto Croce,
Einaudi, Torino.
Granovetter, M. (1985) “Economic action and social structure: The problem of
embeddedness,” American Journal of Sociology, 91(3): 481-510.
Greif, Avner, (1994), “Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A Historical and
Theoretical Reflection on Collectivist and Individualist Societies,” Journal of Political
Economy, 102(5): 912-50.
Greif, Avner (2005), Institutions: Theory and History. Comparative and Historical
Institutional Analysis, Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.
Grusec, Joan E. and Leon Kuczynski, (1997), Parenting and children's internalization of
values: a handbook of contemporary theory, New York: Wiley, c1997.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales (2003) “People's Opium? Religion and
Economic Attitudes”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 50(1), pp. 225-82.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales (2004a) “The Role of Social Capital in
Financial Development,” The American Economic Review, 94(3), pp. 526-556.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales (2004b) “Cultural Biases in Economic
Exchange”, NBER WP 11005.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales (2005) “Trusting the Stock Market”
University of Chicago, mimeo.


                                                                                      27
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales (in progress) “Was Putnam right?”
University of Chicago, mimeo.
Henrich, Joseph, Robert Boyd, Sam Bowles, Colin Camerer, Herbert Gintis, Richard
McElreath and Ernst Fehr (2001), “In search of Homo economicus: Experiments in 15
Small-Scale Societies.” American Economic Review, 91(2), 73-79.
Hirschman, Albert O., (1967), Development Projects Observed. Brookings Institution
Hoff, Karla and Pandey, Priyanka (2005), “Belief systems and durable inequalities : an
experimental investigation of Indian caste”, World Bank working paper.
Iannaccone L. (1988) “A Formal model of Church and Sects,” American Journal of
Sociology, 94: 241-268.
Ichino and Maggi (2000) “Work Environment and Individual Background: Explaining
Regional Shirking Differentials in a Large Italian Firm,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 115(3): 1057-1090.
Knack, Stephen and Philip Keefer, (1996), "Does social capital have an economic
payoff?: A cross-country investigation," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(4), pp.
1251.
Knack, Stephen and Paul Zak (2001) “Trust and Growth'', Economic Journal, 111(470):
295-321.
Knowles, J. and A. Postlewaite, 2004, “Do Children Learn to Save from Their Parents,”
University of Pennsylvania Working Paper.
Kolakowski, L. (1978), Main Currents of Marxism, Oxford University Press: Clarendon.
La Porta, Rafael, Lopez de Silanes, Florencio, Shleifer, Andrei, and Vishny, Robert
(1997) “Trust in large organizations,” American Economic Review, 87(2): 333-338.
La Porta, Rafael, Lopez de Silanes, Florencio, Shleifer, Andrei, and Vishny, Robert,
(1999) “The quality of government,” Journal of Law Economics and Organization, 15
(1), 222–279.
Laibson, David (1997), “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 62 (2): 443-77.
Landes, David (1998), The Wealth and Poverty of Nations, Norton & Company Inc., New
York.
Licht, Amir N. Chanan Goldschmidt, and Shalom H. Schwartz, (2004), “Culture Rules:
The Foundations of the Rule of Law and Other Norms of Governance”, Hebrew
University Working paper.
Lucas, Jr., R. E. (1976): “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique,” in K. Brunner, and
A. H. Meltzer (eds.) The Phillips Curve and Labor Markets, vol. 1 of Carnegie
Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 19-46. North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Manski Charles (2000), “Economic Analysis of Social Interactions,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, Vol. 14, No. 3, pp. 115-136.




                                                                                       28
Marx, Karl (1859) A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, International
Publishers, New York, 1979,
Morse, Adair and Sophie Shive (2004), “Patriotism in your Portfolio," working paper,
University of Michigan.
Mill, John Stuart (1843), A System of Logic, Longmans, Green and Co., London, 1956.
Muller, Holger and Thomas Philippon (2005), “Concentrated Ownership and Labor
Relations," NYU working paper
Muth, J. F. (1961), “Rational Expectations and the Theory of Price Movements,”
Econometrica, 29(3), 315—335.
Osili, Okonkwo U. and Anna Paulson (2004), Institutional Quality and Financial Market
Development: Evidence from International Migrants in the U.S, manuscript.
Polanyi, K., C. Arensberg, and H. Pearson (eds) (1957), Trade and Market in the Early
Empires: Economies in History and Theory. Reprinted in 1971 Chicago: Henry Regnery
Company.
Putnam, R. (1993), Making Democracy Work, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Richerson, Peter J. and Robert Boyd (2005) Not By Genes Alone: How Culture
Transformed Human Evolution, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Roland, Gérard (2005), “Understanding Institutional Change:Fast Moving and Slow
Moving Institutions,” Working Paper.
Salamon (1992), Prairie patrimony: Family, farming, and community in the Midwest,
Studies in Rural Culture, University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill.
Spolaore, Enrico and Romain Wacziarg, (2005), “The Diffusion of Development”,
Stanford Working Paper.
Stigler George J. and Gary S. Becker (1977), “De Gustibus Non Est Disputandum,” The
American Economic Review, Vol. 67(2):76-90.
Stulz, Rene M. and Williamson, Rohan, (2003), “Culture, openness, and finance,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 70(3): 313-349.
Schwartz, Shalom H. (1999, “Cultural Value Differences: Some Implications for Work,”
48, Applied Psychology International Review 23.
Schwartz, Shalom H. (2004) “Mapping and Interpreting Cultural Differences around the
World,” in Henk Vinken, Joseph Soeters & Peter Ester (eds.) Comparing Cultures, Brill
Academic Publishers, Leiden.
Tabellini Guido (2005), “Culture and institutions: economic development in the regions
of Europe,” working paper.
Weber, Max (1905), The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, Routledge
Classic, London, 2001.




                                                                                       29
Figure 1
Effect of Religion on Trust

     Religious                                                                                      19.6%


  Raised religiously                         2.6%


    Protestant                                                        9.6%


       Jewish                                               6.4%


      Catholic                                       4.9%


      Muslim                        -0.9%


     Buddhist                       -1.0%


        Hindu                  -5.1%


               -6%            -1%               5%                 10%          15%              20%


                               The patterns denote:
                               Significant                  Not significant
Source: European Values Survey and World Values Survey 1981-1984, 1990-1993, 1995-1997 (ICPSR
2790); Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2003), tables 2 and 4.
Note: The bars represent the effect of religious affiliation on trust in percent of the sample mean of trust
and relatively to “no religious affiliation”. Effects are obtained from a regression where the dependent
variable is “trust in others”, which equals to 1 if participants report that most people can be trusted. Besides
religious affiliation dummies, the regression also includes demographic controls (health, male, age,
education, social class, income; coefficients not reported), a dummy variable equal to 1 if a person does not
believe in God, country fixed effects, and survey-year dummies.




                                                                                                            30
Figure 2
Effect of Ethnic Background on Trust

                                      Japan                                                                           24.7%
                 Norway, Finland, Sweden                                                                           20.7%
                                    Ireland                                                 -3.0%
Germany, Switzerland, Austria, Netherlands                                               -6.5%
                                     China                                               -6.6%
                       France and Belgium                                                -6.6%




                                                                                                                      Ethnic background
                                    Canada                                               -7.2%
              Romania, USSR, Yugoslavia                                         -14.8%
               Hungary, Lithuania, Poland                                      -16.5%
                          Americans others                            -23.4%
              Italy, Spain, Portugal, Greece                         -25.0%
                         Native Americans                        -25.2%
              Philippines and other Asians                       -25.3%
         Mexico, Puerto Rico, West Indies                     -29.6%
                                     Africa          -38.5%
                                      India       -40.8%
                           Afro-Americans -47.1%

                                           -55%     -45%      -35%       -25%       -15%         -5%    5%   15%    25%
                                                                          Percentage of Average Trust


                                      The patterns denote:
                                      Significant                    Not significant

Source: General Social Survey.
Note: The bars represent the effect of different ethnic background on trust in percent of the sample mean of
trust and relatively to “people with ancestors from the Great Britain”, the excluded group. Effects are
obtained from a regression where the dependent variable is “trust in others”, i.e. a dummy variable equal to
one if the respondent answered that most people can be trusted. Besides the ethnic origin dummies, the
regression also includes demographic controls (health, gender, age, education, race), and religious
affiliations (the omitted category is no religion and atheists). To identify the origin of the ancestors we use
the answer to the question “From what countries or part of the world did your ancestors come?” and
grouped together several countries of origin, as listed in the figure.




                                                                                                                                          31
Figure 3
Correlation between Trust of Country of Origin and Trust of Immigrants relative to
Great Britain

                                                                                                                                              0.20



                                                                                                                                              0.15
 Trust of immigrants in US relative to British immigrants in the US




                                                                                                                                                                            Norway, Finland,
                                                                                                                                              0.10                              Sweden



                                                                                                                                              0.05

                                                                                                                    France, Belgium            Japan     Ireland   Canada
                                                                                                                                              0.00
                                                                                                                                                                            China
                                                                      -0.40            -0.30              -0.20              -0.10                0.00             0.10             0.20       0.30   0.40
                                                                                                                            Germany,
                                                                                                  Romania, USSR,       Switzerland, Austria,
                                                                                                                           Netherlands       -0.05
                                                                                                    Yugoslavia
                                                                              Philippines,                      Hungary, Lithuania,
                                                                              other Asians                           Poland
                                                                                                                                              -0.10
                                                                                                                         Italy, Spain,
                                                                                             Mexico, Puerto Rico,      Portugal, Greece
                                                                                                  W. Indies
                                                                                                                                              -0.15
                                                                                                       Africa
                                                                                                                                      India

                                                                                                                                              -0.20



                                                                                                                                              -0.25

                                                                                                 Trust of nationals in country of origin relative to trust level of British nationals


Source: World Values Survey, General Social Survey
Note: On the horizontal axis we report the difference between the average trust of each group of countries
in Figure 2 and the average trust of Great Britain, computed using data from the World Value Survey. On
the vertical axis we report the estimated effect of each ethnic group on trust, as reported in Figure 2.




                                                                                                                                                                                                         32
Figure 4
Religion and Preferences for Redistribution



              Others                                                                                  1.2%




             Catholic                  -4.7%
 Religion




              Jewish       -5.6%




            Protestant -6.0%



                   -6.5%       -5.5%       -4.5%     -3.5%      -2.5%       -1.5%    -0.5%   0.5%     1.5%
                                                      Percentage of Average Effect

                                       The patterns denote:
                                       Significant            Not significant

Source: General Social Survey.
Note: The bars represent estimated effects of various religious affiliations on preference for redistribution
in percent of the average value of the dependent variable and relatively to the “no religious affiliation”, the
excluded group. Effects are obtained from regression estimates where the dependent variable is the answer
to the following question; “Some people think that the government in Washington ought to reduce the
income differences between the rich and the poor, perhaps by raising the taxes of wealthy families or by
giving income assistance to the poor. Others think that the government should not concern itself with
reducing this income difference between the rich and the poor. […] What score between 1 and 7 comes
closest to the way you feel?” A higher number means stronger preferences for redistribution. Besides
religion affiliation dummies the regression also includes demographic controls (health, gender, age,
education, and race).




                                                                                                             33
Figure 5
Ethnic Origin and Preferences for Redistribution




                                             Afro-Americans                                                                        21.1%
                                                       Africa                                                                    20.2%
                                                      Canada                                                        13.0%
                           Mexico, Puerto Rico, West Indies                                                        12.1%
                                           Native Americans                                                 9.7%
                                Philippines and other Asians                                               9.1%
                                                        India                                       6.5%
  Ethnic origin




                                           France or Belgium                                       6.1%
                                 Hungary, Lithuania, Poland                                   5.2%
                                Romania, USSR, Yugoslavia                                     5.0%
                                Italy, Spain, Portugal, Greece                               4.8%
                                                      Ireland                                4.7%
                                            Americans others                                 4.5%
                                                       China                                4.0%
                                   Norway, Finland, Sweden                           2.1%
                  Germany, Switzerland, Austria, Netherlands                         1.6%
                                                        Japan -6.8%

                                                                -9%   -4%       1%            6%            11%            16%   21%
                                                                                  Percentage of Average Effect


                                                  The patterns denote:
                                                  Significant               Not significant

Source: General Social Survey.
Note: The bars represent the effect of ethnic origin on preference for redistribution in percent of the average
sample value of preference for redistribution and relatively to people with ancestors from Great Britain, the
excluded group. Effects are computed from regressions where the left hand side variable is preference for
redistribution. To identify the origin of the ancestors we use the answer to the question “From what
countries or part of the world did your ancestors come?” and grouped together several countries of origin.
Preference for redistribution is the answer to the following question; “Some people think that the
government in Washington ought to reduce the income differences between the rich and the poor, perhaps
by raising the taxes of wealthy families or by giving income assistance to the poor. Others think that the
government should not concern itself with reducing this income difference between the rich and the poor.
[…] What score between 1 and 7 comes closest to the way you feel?” A higher number means stronger
preferences for redistribution. Besides the ethnic origin dummies, the regression includes demographic
controls (health, gender, age, education, and race), religious affiliations (the omitted category is no religion
and atheists) and dummy variables that indicate the origin of the ancestors of the respondent.




                                                                                                                                         34
Table 1
                           Probability of becoming and entrepreneur
                                                                 Self Employed
                                                        OLS           OLS                IV
              Trust                                 0.0151***      0.0167***        0.2380***
                                                      (0.0043)      (0.0046)         (0.0591)
              Respondent is male                    0.0708***      0.0697***        0.0659***
                                                      (0.0040)      (0.0043)         (0.0052)
              Respondent is white                    0.0438***     0.0435***          -0.0037
                                                      (0.0048)      (0.0051)         (0.0141)
              Age of the respondent                  0.0055***     0.0049***        0.0029***
                                                      (0.0007)      (0.0007)         (0.0011)
              Age of the respondent - squared       -0.0000***    -0.0000***        -0.0000**
                                                      (0.0000)      (0.0000)         (0.0000)
              Education                             -0.0096***      -0.0068*       -0.0173***
                                                      (0.0032)      (0.0035)         (0.0048)
              Education squared                     0.0004***      0.0003**         0.0004**
                                                      (0.0001)      (0.0001)         (0.0002)
              Income deciles dummies                     NO           YES               NO
              Observations                             26,326        22,791           17,718

Source: General Social Survey.
Note: The dependent variable is a dummy variable equal to one if the respondent is a self-employed. The
sample is restricted to respondents who report to be employed. ‘Trust” is a dummy variable equal to one if
the respondent answered that most people can be trusted to the question: “Generally speaking, would you
say that most people can be trusted or that you can't be too careful in life?” The regressions also include
demographic controls (gender, age, education, and race). In column (2) the instruments are the religious
denominations and the country of origin of the ancestors. Robust standard errors in parentheses account for
clustering at country level. *** indicate the coefficient is different from zero at the 1% level, ** at the 5%
level, and * at the 10 % level.




                                                                                                          35
Table 2
                                    Effects of culture on savings
                                                                     National savings over GDP
                                                                OLS            OLS              IV
    Do you consider to be especially important                              13.7014**       28.5369*
    to encourage children to learn thrift and savings?                       (5.1744)       (16.0549)
    Real growth rate of per capita GDP                       1.4550***      0.9814**          0.4686
                                                              (0.4188)       (0.4334)        (0.7008)
    Dependency ratio                                        -0.6096***     -0.5741***      -0.5357***
                                                              (0.1621)       (0.1534)        (0.1708)
    Dummy if the country is not an OECD country                0.5561         0.5457          0.5345
                                                              (2.0991)       (1.9788)        (2.1449)
    Government savings (CCG saving: % of GNDI)               0.4199**       0.4377**        0.4569**
                                                              (0.2012)       (0.1898)        (0.2067)
    Observations                                                 53             53              53
    R-squared                                                   0.581          0.636           0.572



Source: World Bank. See Giavazzi, Jappelli,, Pagano (2000) and World Values Survey 1981-1984, 1990-
1993, and 1995-1997 (ICPSR 2790) and The World Christian Database (1990).
Note: The dependent variable is National Savings over GDP. “Important to encourage children to learn
thrift and savings?” is based on the answer to the question: “Here is a list of qualities that children can be
encouraged to learn at home. Which, if any, do you consider to be especially important?” We coded the
variable as 1 if the respondent lists as important ‘‘Thrift, saving money and things’’ and we took the
country’s average response. All the regressions include real growth rate of per capita GDP, a dependency
ratio (the sum of the country’s population over 65 and population under 15 over total population), a dummy
for non OECD countries, and a measure of government savings). In column (3) the instruments are the
percentage of people belonging to various religious denominations in each country. The denominations are
Catholics, Protestants, Orthodox, Jewish, Muslims, Hindus, Buddhists and other affiliations. Standard
errors are reported in parenthesis.*** indicate the coefficient is different from zero at the 1% level, ** at
the 5% level, and * at the 10 % level.




                                                                                                          36
Table 3
                          Effects of culture on income redistribution
                                                            Direct over indirect revenues
                                                     OLS            IV          OLS             IV
       Population living in the state               0.7975        0.8042       0.6882         0.6796
                                                  (0.8119)      (0.8090)      (0.7795)       (0.7575)
       Percentage of population below the        -0.0351*** -0.0359*** -0.0298**            -0.0316**
       poverty rate                               (0.0119)      (0.0125)      (0.0125)       (0.0134)
       Gdp Procapita in the State                  -0.0002       -0.0006       0.0027         0.0019
                                                  (0.0047)      (0.0048)      (0.0058)       (0.0062)
       Should the government reduce               0.4423**      0.4762**
       income differentials? (1-7)                 (0.2075)     (0.2318)
       It is the government responsibility                                    0.4481**      0.6265**
       to reduce differences in income? (1-5)                                 (0.1898)      (0.2340)
       Observations                                   45            45            45           45
       R-squared                                    0.152         0.151         0.176         0.161

Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, Current Population Survey, Annual Social and Economic
Supplements

Note: The dependent variable is the ratio of total State income taxes and the sum of all the state
indirect taxes (sales taxes, taxes on motor vehicles, and other indirect taxes). “Should the government
reduce income differentials” is based on the state average answer to the following question; “Some
people think that the government in Washington ought to reduce the income differences between the
rich and the poor, perhaps by raising the taxes of wealthy families or by giving income assistance to
the poor. Others think that the government should not concern itself with reducing this income
difference between the rich and the poor. […] What score between 1 and 7 comes closest to the way
you feel?” A higher number means stronger preferences for redistribution. We calculated the year-
state average in years 1980, 1983, 1984, 1986, 1987, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991, 1993, 1994, 1996, and
1998, years for which the percentage of population in the state below the poverty rate is available.
The variable “Is it the government responsibility to reduce differences in income?” is based to the
state average answer to the following question “It is the responsibility of the government to reduce
the differences in income between people with high incomes and those with low incomes.” The
question was asked in 1987. The variable is coded 1–5, where a higher number represents stronger
preferences for redistribution. In columns (2) and (4) the instruments are the percentage of people
belonging to various religious denominations in the states and average percentage of people in the
state who has ancestors from each of the origin. Standard errors are reported in parenthesis. ***
indicate the coefficient is different from zero at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10 %
level.




                                                                                                          37
