NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

VALUING CONSUMER PRODUCTS
BY THE TIME SPENT USING THEM:
AN APPLICATION TO THE INTERNET
Austan Goolsbee
Peter J. Klenow
Working Paper 11995
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11995
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2006

This paper was prepared for the AEA Session on "The Roots of Innovation", Boston, Massachusetts, January
8, 2006. We wish to thank Kevin Murphy, Amil Petrin and Joel Waldfogel for helpful comments and Romans
Pancs for superb research assistance. Goolsbee also thanks the National Science Foundation for support. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Austan Goolsbee and Peter J. Klenow. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Valuing Consumer Products by the Time Spent Using Them: An Application to the Internet
Austan Goolsbee and Peter J. Klenow
NBER Working Paper No. 11995
January 2006
JEL No. D6, L0
ABSTRACT
For some goods, the main cost of buying the product is not the price but rather the time it takes to
use them. Only about 0.2% of consumer spending in the U.S., for example, went for Internet access
in 2004 yet time use data indicates that people spend around 10% of their entire leisure time going
online. For such goods, estimating price elasticities with expenditure data can be difficult, and,
therefore, estimated welfare gains highly uncertain. We show that for time-intensive goods like the
Internet, a simple model in which both expenditure and time contribute to consumption can be used
to estimate the consumer gains from a good using just the data on time use and the opportunity cost
of people's time (i.e., the wage). The theory predicts that higher wage internet subscribers should
spend less time online (for non-work reasons) and the degree to which that is true identifies the
elasticity of demand. Based on expenditure and time use data and our elasticity estimate, we
calculate that consumer surplus from the Internet may be around 2% of full-income, or several
thousand dollars per user. This is an order of magnitude larger than what one obtains from a back-ofthe-envelope calculation using data from expenditures.
Austan Goolsbee
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
goolsbee@chicagogsb.edu
Peter J. Klenow
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
klenow@stanford.edu

I. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed a surge in studies using micro data on consumer
demand to estimate the welfare gains that new goods bring to consumers.1 These papers
typically estimate demand curves for a product and use them to impute the consumer
surplus generated from the good. For some goods, however, like watching television or
using the Internet (for fun), direct expenses are miniscule and the main cost of
consumption is the amount of leisure time spent using the product. For such goods,
estimating the price elasticity from expenditures can be quite difficult and thus welfare
calculations highly uncertain.2
In this paper we show that thinking about that distinction can open up new
avenues for estimating welfare. We will focus on the particular case of residential use of
the Internet as our example because it has many of the relevant features: low marginal
costs (zero for people paying a fixed fee per month), almost no cross-sectional variation
in prices (Greenstein and Downes, 2002), a very small share of spending, and time costs
making up the vast majority of the cost of consuming the product.
We show that, by relating the time consumers spend on a good to the opportunity
cost of their time in a simple utility model, we can estimate the demand curve and
compute the consumer surplus from Internet access in a way that is distinctly different
from a conventional calculation based on observed price and expenditure data.

1

Recent examples include Hausman (1999), Petrin (2002a), Nevo (2003), Goolsbee and Petrin (2004) and
papers in Bresnahan and Gordon (1997).
2
The distinction between expenditure and consumption was first analyzed in Becker (1965) but has had
little impact on the analysis of consumer innovations. Petrin (2002b), which uses data on utilization to
improve conventional estimates of consumer welfare, is an exception. Aguiar and Hurst (2005) show the
importance of distinguishing Consumption from Expenditure for understanding behavior over the lifecycle.

2

The model will let the utility function for a good include consumption in the form
of direct expenditures as well as in the form of time. The results suggest that consumer
gains from the Internet (as of January 2005) are quite high, perhaps more than a thousand
dollars per year for the median person. This contrasts sharply with the back of the
envelope calculation one might make using standard data, which would put the value at
less than $100.

I. Model
To account for both time and market spending for a good, we specify utility of the
form
(1.1)

(

θ CIα I L1I−α I

1−1/ σ

)

(

+ (1 − θ) COαO L1O−αO

1−1/ σ

)

,

where CI denotes purchased Internet services and LI the fraction of time devoted to
enjoying the Internet (not work related). For simplicity, all other purchased goods and
services form a composite CO , and LO is the fraction of time spent on the composite. θ
scales the importance of the Internet bundle compared to the composite bundle.
Consumers maximize utility subject to the budget constraint
PI CI + FI + PO CO = W (1 − LI − LO ) ,
where W is the wage and PI and PO are the prices of Internet services and the composite
good, respectively. FI is any fixed fee for subscribing to the Internet in a given period,
whereas PI is any marginal cost of using Internet services. In practice, this is essentially
zero (because Internet costs a flat fee per month).

3

For good j, call the combined Cobb-Douglas consumption Yj and the weighted
averages of the price of market goods and the value of time (i.e., the wage) j. Then
λj =

Pj
αj

αj

W
1− α j

1−α j

, and the optimal choices for people with Internet access are
σ−1

W − FI
W − FI
λI
YI =
and YO =
where Γ =
λ I (1 + Γ)
λ O (1 + 1/ Γ)
λO

1− θ
θ

σ

.

These break down into
Cj =

α j λ jY j
Pj

and L j =

(1 − α j ) λ jY j
W

for good j (either Internet, I, or composite, O).
When the Internet is not available, CI and LI (and thus YI ) are 0 and all
consumption is the composite. Expenditure functions with and without the Internet are
E ( PO , PI , FI , W , u | YI > 0 ) = FI +

λO

(1 + 1/ Γ )

E ( PO ,W , u | YI = 0 ) = λ O

1
σ−1

u
1− θ

u
1− θ
σ
ο−1

σ
ο−1

and

.

Consumer surplus from the Internet, measured as an equivalent variation, will then be:

(1.2)

EV = E ( PO , W , u ( PI , FI , PO , W | YI > 0 ) | YI = 0 ) − W
1/( σ−1)

= W (1 + 1/ Γ )

(1 − FI / W ) − 1

.

As expected, the surplus depends on σ, the elasticity of substitution between the
Internet bundle and the bundle of other goods and services. This is very similar to a
conventional demand analysis. To identify the sensitivity of demand to price, though,

4

would then require variation in prices. Rappoport et. al (2003) argue there is enough
variation to estimate the elasticity of demand and put it at -0.27 for dial-up access and 1.49 for broadband access. The true elasticity σ, however, would be dramatically larger
since the access fees make up only a small part of the full cost of using the Internet
(because of the time component).
An alternative to using Internet Service Provider fees is to use variation in the
opportunity cost of time to estimate the elasticity σ. The theory above predicts that, as
wages rise, people should use the Internet less. How quickly use declines will indicate σ.
Since wages vary a great deal across individuals, this also gives us a chance to identify
the elasticity in a way that is very difficult using only purchase prices.
Using the optimal allocations implies that

(1 − α I )(1 − FI / W ) − LI

(1.3)

LI

= AW (αO −α I )(σ−1)

( PI / α I )α (1 − αO )1−α
( PO / αO )α (1 − α I )1−α
I

A=

where

σ

( σ−1)

O

O

1− θ
θ

.

I

The Internet costs a flat subscription rate so the relevant case is α I = 0 and FI > 0.
Moreover, the fixed cost itself is typically very small relative to full income (0.2% or
less), so that FI / W ≈ 0 . As a result, the left-hand-side of (1.3) is approximately equal to
(1 − LI ) / LI . Taking natural logs of (1.3) yields
(1.4)

ln

1 − LI
LI

≈ ln( A) + (α O − α I )(σ − 1) ln(W ) + σ ln

1−θ

θ

.

The left-hand-side is (the log of) time spent on non-Internet pursuits relative to time spent
on the Internet. Ln(A) is constant across individuals and we will illustrate below that

5

(α O − α I ) is approximately -0.62 so we can directly translate the coefficient from a
regression like (1.4) into an estimate of σ. We envision that the error term in this
regression arises from individual variation in the preference for the Internet good relative
to the composite, from (1.1). Below we will discuss how this variation might affect our
parameter estimate.

II. Data
To assess time spent on the Internet, we use the 2005 Consumer Technographics
data of Forrester Research. This was a mail survey conducted in early of 2005 of more
than 60,000 households and is meant to be nationally representative. More detail about
the Forrester data can be found in Goolsbee and Klenow (2002). The survey includes
demographic and socio-economic information as well as information on how many hours
per week the respondent spends on the Internet for personal reasons (i.e., not for work).
The answers are grouped (e.g., 0 hours, 1-4 hours, 4-8 hours, and so on), and we take the
smallest number for each category, though this proved inconsequential. The average
subscriber spends about 7.7 hours per week on the Internet for personal reasons, or 6.9%
of non-sleep time (assuming 8 hours of sleep per day).
Only 0.21% of consumption spending went for Internet Service Providers in 2004
(from Table 2.4.5U of the NIPA accounts). Scaling this up to account for the 37% of
people that are not online in our data, typical consumption of a subscriber would be
around 0.33%.3 The time share is some 30 times larger than the expenditure share so the
Internet would is an extremely time-intensive type of consumption.

3

Adding computer hardware and software, including video games, the expenditure share is 1.3%.

6

Using the equations above, we can get a plausible value for the time intensity of
the composite good: one minus the ratio of direct expenditures on the good to direct plus
time expenditures (i.e., wage times leisure time spent). By this measure, the time
intensity of the composite would be 0.38 versus a time intensity of the Internet of 1.4 To
compute welfare in our model, we will also use the fact that consumer spending on
Internet access relative to full income (wage income plus the value of leisure time) is
.0012, so that the share of non-sleep time spent online is .069, the share devoted to other
leisure is .574 and the rest, .357, goes to work.
In Table 1 we estimate equation (1.4) and the implied value of σ. The positive
coefficients confirm that those with higher incomes report spending less time on the
Internet. This result may seem surprising given that Internet subscription is concentrated
among higher income people (something our model can produce if FI > 0 and σ is not
too high). But conditional on subscribing, the higher the value of one’s time the less one
uses the Internet. The coefficient of 0.12 in the first row corresponds to a σ of 1.3.
In the second row we tried the same regression using time spent on the Internet
for work-related reasons, which is somewhat outside the control of the consumer and
should not, necessarily, show the pattern of our model. The results indicate that while
higher income people use the Internet less for leisure, this is not true for work.
In row three, we tried including a variety of demographic variables which might
correlate with Internet usage, such as a dummy for whether the respondent has children,
for whether they are single, as well as dummies for educational attainment, gender and

4

This is derived from x = Px Cx / (Px Cx + WLx), dividing numerator and denominator by income, W(1- LI –
LO), and plugging an expenditure share of .0033 for the Internet and .9966 for the composite and using 7.7
hours per week for the Internet, 40 hours for work and the rest of non-sleep time to the composite good.

7

race. The implied σ barely changes. In row four, we add controls for time spent on the
Internet for work-related reasons and dummies for how many years the individual has
had access to the Internet. These variables are positively related to personal use of the
Internet—the more time spent working on the Internet and the more years one has had
Internet access, the more time one spends on the Internet for personal reasons. But
inclusion of these controls does not reduce the relationship of personal Internet usage and
the value of time. The coefficient is actually twice as large as in the baseline case but the
implied σ is 1.6 versus 1.3.
In the fifth row, we allow for income to affect demand for the Internet
independent of the opportunity cost of time (e.g., if Internet content caters to high-income
people) by including dummies for the total value of assets owned as an indicator of nonwage income. Again, σ barely changes.
We will use these demand estimates to calculate surplus from the Internet. Since
we conditioned on subscribers, though, there may be a selection problem in the estimates:
usage of the Internet falls with income but the probability of having Internet access rises
with income. While this could be caused by the existence of a fixed cost of getting
access for the first time, there is also likely to be considerable heterogeneity across
people in their taste for technology. In future work we hope to ground the sign-up and
usage decision in one larger framework. The problem we face here is the absence of
factors correlated with whether a person signs up for Internet access but unrelated to the
amount of time spent using the Internet conditional on access. It is difficult, therefore, to

8

do a Heckman-type selection correction.5 In practice, we are not especially concerned
with selection because our estimate of σ does not vary much when we confine the sample
to people with a college degree that are younger than 50 years old as in the sixth row of
Table 1. The unconditional probability of having Internet access among this group is
almost 95%, so selection is not especially relevant for them.

IV. Welfare
Assuming Internet subscription is at a flat rate with no marginal cost (so FI > 0
and α I =0), the equivalent variation in (1.2) is

1/( σ−1)

EV / W = (1 + 1/ Γ )

(1 − FI / W ) − 1 =

1−

LI
(1 − FI / W )

−1
σ−1

(1 − FI / W ) − 1 .

Each of the variables in the formula can be measured in the data.
As a comparison, take the standard 'triangle' approach to approximating demand
described in Hausman (1999). Here one linearizes the demand curve and estimates the
welfare (as a share of income) as CS=-.5*(expenditure share)/(elasticity of demand).
With an expenditure share of 0.3% and an estimated price elasticity of -.27 or -1.49, this
would be 0.1% to 0.6% of income, or only $50 to $290 at the median income in the
sample. If estimating the price elasticity has problems, however, because of the lack of
variation in prices and the small share of prices in the total cost, this estimate should be
viewed with caution.

5

We tried doing the correction using a dummy variable for whether the person uses a computer at work and
obtained a very similar σ. Since Internet use at work is probably correlated with the preference for the
Internet elsewhere, this doesn't really solve the problem.

9

Our approach uses the estimates of σ from above and the model to compute the
welfare gain. Doing this with the log demand curve will, of course, generate a much
larger total gain since the utility from the first units of consumption are so high. To limit
the importance of that, we can also construct an analogue to Hausman’s methodology by
linearizing the “leisure demand curve” instead of the goods demand curve. The area
underneath the linear leisure demand curve yields an EV as a share of full income of
approximately 0.5*LI/ , where the elasticity of leisure demand, , is σ (1 − LI (1 − FI / W ) ) .

Table 2 gives the surplus, relative to full income, under various values of σ. The
Table shows that linearization would yield surplus of 2% to 3% of full income, and with
log-linear demand substantially larger.6 At the median full income in the sample (actual
income plus the value of leisure time), surplus would be $2,500 to $3,800 in the linear
case.
Thus we are able to get estimates of the welfare gain from the product using only
data on time use. We add two important caveats, however. First, we are valuing leisure
time at the wage. If people value their time less than the wage then the time component
will be reduced and the welfare gains as well.7 The second is that our simple model with
only a composite alternative assumes there are no closer, time-intensive substitutes.
Television would be a potential counter-example. If television and the Internet are very
close substitutes, then our surplus estimate is too large. This same issue arises with
conventional demand curve analysis, and argues that future work should consider a

6

One reason to be wary of the log demand model is that it predicts that virtually all households would
subscribe to the Internet given the low price of doing so. In the data, some 37% of people were not online.
7
If people value their time at some constant fraction of their wage, this would not affect the estimates of σ
which since they were in logs.

10

multinomial setting where people can choose between different uses of their time when
estimating the demand curve for the Internet.8
V. Conclusion
Consumption of every good arguably involves both expenditures and time. The total cost
of some goods, like the Internet, are primarily comprised of time costs rather than monetary costs.
In such cases, estimating conventional price elasticities can be hard and welfare gains from the
products highly uncertain. Using data on the time spent using the Internet and a simple model of
utility, we show that for time intensive goods, one can get a direct estimate of the welfare gains
from consumer products using only the time use data.
Although Internet use illustrates our point nicely, our simple model may overstate the
gains from its availability by treating all other leisure pursuits as equally substitutable with
Internet use. Some activities are liable to be much closer substitutes than others, for example
reading a newspaper or watching TV. Still, given a set of goods and their substitutability, taking
into account the time-intensity of the Internet can amplify its importance. And, as we have done,
one can use variation in the value of time across individuals to estimate the substitutability
between goods which differ in their time-intensity.

8

Such a program is well beyond the scope of this paper, but we did check whether Internet usage varied
systematically with the price of cable television in an area (which changes the relative price of television)
using the data in Goolsbee and Petrin (2004). We found no relationship. As a first pass, this may suggest
the two activities are not such close substitutes.

11

Table 1: Regressions of ln

Coeff.
1. Basic regression
0.121
2. Internet for work (rather than leisure) -0.480
3. Adding demographic controls
0.137
4. Adding Internet at work, yrs. of access 0.239
5. Adding non-wage income
0.113
6. Those with college and < 50 yrs. old
0.176

1 − LI
on lnW
LI
S.E.
(0.021)
(0.066)
(0.015)
(0.017)
(0.015)
(0.035)

R2
0.005
0.042
0.023
0.071
0.026
0.008

N
Implied σ
43,699
1.32
43,362
N/A
38,996
1.36
42,558
1.62
30,693
1.30
8,414
1.46

Notes: The dependent variable is the log ratio of non-Internet time to Internet time as
described in the text. Standard errors are in parentheses. Each regression includes the
additional variables listed in the first column and described in the text.

Table 2: Consumer Surplus from Internet Access Calculated from Time Use Data
(as a % of full income)

σ
1.3
1.6
2

Linear Demand
2.9%
2.3%
1.9%

Log Demand
26.8%
12.5%
7.3%

Notes: Authors' computation using the model in the paper and the data as described in the
text. Full income is total income plus the value of leisure time (where the opportunity
cost is defined as the wage)

12

References
Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst (2005), "Consumption Versus Expenditure," Journal of
Political Economy, October, 113(5), 919-948.
Becker, Gary (1965), "A Theory of the Allocation of Time," Economic Journal, 75 (299):
493-508.
Bresnahan, Timothy and Roger Gordon, eds (1997), The Economics of New Goods.
University of Chicago Press (Chicago, IL).
Downes, Tom and Shane Greenstein (2002), “Universal Access and Local Internet Markets
in the US,” Research Policy, 31 (7): 1035-1052.
Goolsbee, Austan and Peter J. Klenow (2002), "Evidence on Learning and Network
Externalities in the Diffusion of Home Computers," Journal of Law and Economics,
October 2002, Vol XLV (2, part 1), 317-344.
Goolsbee, Austan and Amil Petrin (2004), “The Consumer Gains from Direct Broadcast
Satellites and the Competition with Cable TV,” Econometrica, vol. 72, no. 2: 351-381.
Hausman, Jerry (1999), "Cellular Telephone, New Products and the CPI," Journal of
Business and Economic Statistics; 17(2): 188-94, April.
Nevo, Aviv (2003), “New Products, Quality Changes and Welfare Measures from Estimated
Demand Systems,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 21(1), 43-52.
Petrin, Amil (2002a), “Quantifying the Benefits of New Products: The Case of the Minivan,”
Journal of Political Economy, 110:705-729.
Petrin, Amil (2002b), “Improving Demand and Welfare Estimates with Utilization
Data,” manuscript, University of Chicago, GSB, November.
Rappoport, Paul, Donald Kridel, Lester Taylor, Kevin Duffy-Deno, and James Allemen
(2003), "Residential Demand for Access to the Internet," Chapter 5 in the International
Handbook of Telecommunications Economics, Volume II, ed. G. Madden, Edward Elgar.

13

