NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DEMOCRACY AND DEVELOPMENT:
THE DEVIL IN THE DETAILS
Torsten Persson
Guido Tabellini
Working Paper 11993
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11993
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2006

Prepared for the American Economic Review 2006 Papers and Proceedings. Persson: Institute for
International Economic Studies, Stockholm University. E-mail: torsten.persson@iies.su.se. Web:
http://www.iies.su.se/~perssont/. Tabellini: IGIER, Universita Bocconi. E-mail: guido.tabellini@unibocconi.it. Web: http://www.igier.uni-bocconi.it/tabellini. We thank Tim Besley and Ben Olken for useful
comments, David von Below, Elena Besedina, and Giovanna D’Adda for research assistance and Christina
Lönnblad for editorial assistance. Financial support from the Swedish Research Council, the Tore Browald
Foundation, Bocconi University, the Italian Ministry of University and Research, and CIAR is gratefully
acknowledge. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Torsten Persson and Guido Tabellini. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Growth, Initial Conditions, Law and Speed of Privatization in Transition Countries: 11 Years
Later
Torsten Persson and Guido Tabellini
NBER Working Paper No. 11993
January 2006
JEL No. P0, O1, E0
ABSTRACT
Does democracy promote economic development? We review recent attempts to address this
question, which exploit the within-country variation associated with historical transitions in and out
of democracy. The answer is positive, but depends – in a subtle way – on the details of democratic
reforms. First, democratizations and economic liberalizations in isolation each induce growth
accelerations, but countries liberalizing their economy before extending political rights do better than
those carrying out the opposite sequence. Second, different forms of democratic government and
different electoral systems lead to different fiscal trade policies: this might explain why new
presidential democracies grow faster than new parliamentary democracies. Third, it is important to
distinguish between expected and actual political reforms: expectations of regime change have an
independent effect on growth, and taking expectations into account helps identify a stronger growth
effect of democracy.
Torsten Persson
Institute for International Economic Studies
Stockholm University
S-106 91 Stockholm
SWEDEN
and NBER
torsten.persson@iies.su.se

Richer countries are generally democratic. But this could reflect reverse
causation or omitted variables. Evidence that democratizations yield subsequent economic growth is quite weak. Political regimes may still influence
economic development, but the eﬀects appear diﬃcult to identify from the
within-country variation. A plausible reason for this diﬃculty is that “democracy” is too blunt a concept. Political regimes come in various forms and
are reformed in diﬀerent circumstances. This paper illustrates three specific
instances where the details of democratic reform influence their economic
eﬀects.
Section I zooms in on the interplay between democratizations and economic liberalizations. Both induce accelerations of growth, but the sequence
of reforms is crucial: countries liberalizing their economy before extending
political rights do better. Section II considers diﬀerent forms of democracy.
Specific democratic institutions influence the fiscal and trade policies implemented after democratization, which may explain why presidential democracy leads to faster growth than parliamentary democracy. Section III distinguishes expected and actual political reforms. Taking expectations of regime
change into account helps identify a stronger growth eﬀect of democracy.
We first we clarify our methodology. While political institutions are generally very persistent, they sometimes change suddenly and drastically — as in
many democratizations or coups. Under appropriate identifying assumptions,
such regime changes can be exploited by comparing average performance before and after the event. Our sample has annual observations for about 150
countries and includes about 120 regime changes over the period 1960-2000;
in Section III, we backdate the panel to the mid-1800s, with twice as many

2

regime changes. We classify a country as democratic if the polity2 variable in
the Polity IV data set is strictly positive.1 Per-capita income comes from the
Penn World Tables for 1960-2000 and the Maddison data set for 1850-2000.
We estimate a panel regression:
yi,t − yi,t−1 = βyi,t−1 + φDi,t + ρxi,t + αi + θt +

i,t

,

(1)

where yi,t denotes (log) per capita income in country i and year t, Di,t is
a dummy variable equal to one under democracy, xi,t is a vector of control
variables, αi and θt are country and year fixed eﬀects. Thus, we estimate the
parameter φ by diﬀerence in diﬀerences, where countries changing regime are
the “treated”, and those that do not are the “controls”.
Identification requires that the selection of countries into democracy be
uncorrelated with the country-specific and time-varying growth shock,

i,t .

This allows any correlation between regime selection and the country fixed
eﬀect, αi — e.g., that fast-growing countries more likely become democratic
than slow-growing ones. However, absent any regime change, average growth
in reform countries should (counterfactually) have been the same as in nonreform countries (conditional on xi,t ). A concrete case where we might confound economic and political reforms is the 1990s, when many formerly communist regimes introduced democracy as well as market economy. Therefore,
we include in xi,t a binary indicator for years after 1989 in the former Soviet bloc. We also include indicators for years of wars (current and lagged),
as they are correlated with regime changes and growth. Most specifications
also include dummy variables for continental location (Africa, Asia and Latin
America) and socialist legal origin interacted with year dummy variables. To
reduce serial correlation and allow for convergence, lagged per-capita income
3

is always included.
Circumstances surrounding regime changes diﬀer widely across time and
location, as do the political institutions adopted or abandoned. Thus, the
eﬀects of a crude democracy indicator are likely to diﬀer across observations.
If we neglect this heterogeneity and estimate the average eﬀect of democracy
as in (1),

i,t

also includes the term (φi,t − φ)Di,t , where φi,t is the eﬀect

of democracy in country i and year t. Identification of φ now requires the
heterogeneous reform eﬀect to be uncorrelated with its occurrence. This
assumption fails if countries self-select into democracy based on the growth
eﬀect of regime changes (e.g., Di,t = 1 more likely when φi,t > φ). Below, we
decompose the eﬀects of political reforms according to observable features,
one at a time. Studying the economic outcomes of specific types of reforms
is relevant from a practical point of view, and as a test of specific hypothesis.
This also makes identification of φ more credible by reducing unobserved
heterogeneity; the relative eﬀect of specific reforms can be identified under
weaker assumptions than those needed to identify their average eﬀect φ.

I. Economic liberalization and democracy
This section draws on Giavazzi and Tabellini (2005). In Table 1, we start by
estimating the average eﬀect of democracy on growth, φ in (1). Column 1
suggests that becoming a democracy accelerates growth by 0.75 percentage
points, a large and significant eﬀect (the results are similar with standard
errors clustered by country). With an estimated convergence rate of 6 percent
per year (parameter β in (1)), the long-run eﬀect on income per capita is 12.5
percent. Controlling for years preceding and following the regime change does
not aﬀect the estimate, although growth slows down around the transition.
4

Elias Papaioannou and Gregorios Siourounis (2004) and Dani Rodrik and
Romain Wacziarg (2005) also show that democracy promotes growth.
Democratization is often associated with economic reforms, such as opening the economy to international trade and extending the role of markets.
Sometimes economic liberalization leads democratization, more often it lags
by a few years — perhaps because similar forces push for both kinds of reforms.
Joint economic and political reforms could violate our identifying assumptions, however. Not controlling for economic reforms could bias upwards the
estimated eﬀect of democracy, via positive correlation between Di,t and

i,t

in (1).
We use the same indicator of economic liberalizations as Giavazzi and
Tabellini (the original source is Jeﬀrey Sachs and Andrew Werner, 1995)
to estimate a multiple treatment equation. In column 2, we thus include
both the democracy and liberalization indicators. Both reforms retain a
significant and positive eﬀect on growth, with economic reform having the
stronger eﬀect.
Considering the joint eﬀect of reforms lends additional credibility to the
identifying assumption, but does not address heterogeneity in the sequence
of reforms. Column 3 adds two dummy variables to the regression, which
equal unity when democracy is enacted first or last, respectively, and equal
zero when only one type of reform occurs.2 Countries where economic liberalization preceded democracy include South Korea, Taiwan, Chile and Mexico. The opposite sequence took place in countries as Argentina, Brazil, the
Philippines and Bangladesh.
Enacting only one reform still has a positive and significant eﬀect on

5

growth, similar to those in columns 1 and 2. Moreover, the estimated coeﬃcient of “democracy after liberalization” is positive and significant: the
boost to growth from the two reforms is about 3.5 percent. But “liberalization after democracy” is negative and significant, implying an overall eﬀect
which is barely positive and statistically insignificant. Giavazzi and Tabellini
(2005) show that this finding is very robust. A plausible interpretation is that
young democracies in closed economic environments are more likely bogged
down in redistributive conflict and populist policies, while young democracies
in open economies are forced to pay more attention to economic eﬃciency.
Moreover, opening the economy often goes hand in hand with securing the
protection of property rights and enforcing the rule of law, which may be a
prerequisite for a well-functioning democracy. Naturally, the usual caveats
about identification apply. Naturally, the usual caveats about identification
apply. But if the estimates do uncover a causal eﬀect, reformers of closed
autocracies ought to give priority to economic over political liberalization.

II. Forms of democracy
This section draws on Persson (2005), who studies heterogeneity in the kind
of democratic institutions adopted or abandoned. Political scientists stress
distinctions between diﬀerent electoral rules and diﬀerent forms of government. In our own recent research, we have shown that these constitutional
forms imply systematic diﬀerences in economic policies. Do they also imply
diﬀerent growth eﬀects of becoming a democracy?
Column 1 of Table 2 decomposes the average growth eﬀect of democracy
by adding two binary variables, one for the form of government (presidential
vs. parliamentary), one for the electoral rule (majoritarian vs. proportional).
6

Otherwise, the regression is identical to column 1 of Table 1.3 The coeﬃcient
on democracy now picks up the default eﬀect of becoming a presidential and
majoritarian democracy. A new parliamentary democracy grows 1.5 percentage points less than a new presidential democracy and about 0.5 points less
than a previous autocracy, although the latter estimate is not significantly
diﬀerent from zero. The electoral system has no influence on the growth
eﬀect of democracy.
A possible explanation for these results is induced policy changes. Based
on cross-sectional estimates within a sample of democracies, Persson and
Tabellini (2003, 2004) found that parliamentary and proportional democracies have larger government spending. In column 2, we estimate the eﬀect
on government consumption with the diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence specification in
(1).4 A new majoritarian and presidential democracy cuts government consumption by almost 2 percent of GDP, while a new parliamentary democracy
raises it considerably. The diﬀerence in spending between the two forms of
government is a highly significant 5 percent of GDP. This estimate only
exploits time variation in countries that enter and exit democracy, but is
remarkably similar to our earlier estimates. Proportional rather than majoritarian elections raise spending by 1 percent of GDP. This eﬀect is statistically significant but smaller than our previous cross-sectional estimates,
probably due to the exclusion of transfers (we found that electoral rules have
particularly strong eﬀect on welfare-state spending).
How about other polices? Persson (2005) argues that since parliamentary and proportional democracies seek consensus among broader coalitions
of voters, they should not only have larger government spending, but also less

7

protectionist trade polices. In column 3, we thus estimate the eﬀect on the
liberalization indicator used in Section I. Introducing parliamentary or proportional democracy each raises the probability of a subsequent liberalization
by about 10 percentage points, compared to majoritarian and presidential
democracy.
These policy outcomes may explain the growth eﬀects. A new parliamentary democracy is more prone to pursue economic liberalizations than
a new presidential democracy. But as we saw earlier, liberalizations following democratizations have weaker eﬀects on growth.5 At the same time,
parliamentary democracies raise government consumption much more than
presidential democracies. If this spending binge distorts economic activity,
growth may suﬀer. While the electoral system also shapes policy, the spending binge in proportional democracies is smaller and may not show up in the
growth rate.

III. Expected and actual democracy
This section draws on Persson and Tabellini (2005). If democracy has positive
growth eﬀects it raises the returns to investment. As investment reacts to expectations, both actual and expected regime changes aﬀect growth. Growth
would thus decelerate well before an imminent, and anticipated, coup. This
would contradict our identifying assumption in (1), by creating a negative
correlation between democracy, Di,t , and the growth residual,

i,t ,

and biases

down our estimate of φ — the growth eﬀect of democracy.
Motivated by this observation, Persson and Tabellini (2005) formulate
a theoretical model of economic and political change, where countries stochastically enter and exit from democracy with probabilities influenced by
8

current and lagged income. The probability of regime change also depends
on a country’s “democratic capital”, which shapes the willingness of its citizens to stand up for democracy. Democratic capital accumulates in years of
democracy and in countries with democratic neighbors, but depreciates under autocracy. Identification is achieved by an exclusion restriction derived
in the model, namely that democratic capital has no direct eﬀect on growth
(given all the other controls).
We thus add to (1) the probability of regime change — in the form of
a hazard rate — as estimated by Persson and Tabellini (2005). The growth
equation is consistent with the estimated hazard rate and the sample is now
1850-2000.6 As country and year fixed eﬀects are included, we estimate the
eﬀects of expected democracy entirely from the time variation in the hazard
rate.
The first two columns of Table 3 report the estimated results within
regimes, confining attention to observations under democracy only, or autocracy only. Under democracy, the probability of regime change hurts growth,
consistent with the finding that democracy raises growth. The large negative estimated coeﬃcient reflects the dimension of the estimated hazard rate,
which is typically below 10%, with an average of 3. A fall in the hazard
by 2 percentage points thus raises growth by about 0.5 percentage points.
Similar eﬀects are obtained by replacing growth with investment over the
1960-2000 sample. Under autocracy, the probability of regime change ought
to spur growth. Instead, the coeﬃcient is negative and insignificant. One
interpretation is that we have omitted further heterogeneity, such that democratic reforms fail to boost economic performance in some autocracies.

9

Alternatively, political uncertainty exerts an oﬀsetting negative eﬀect.
In column 3, we study actual as well as expected political regimes in the
full sample, including the democracy dummy plus the probability of autocracy in the current period (also interacted with lagged democracy, allowing
the eﬀect of expectations to diﬀer by regime).7 In addition to the exclusion
restriction for democratic capital, identification relies on the usual identifying assumption —

i,t

uncorrelated with Di,t — now made more credible by

including the probability of autocracy as a regressor. This specification is
demanding, as actual democracy and the probability of autocracy are highly
collinear. Nevertheless, the results support the idea that expected as well as
actual regime changes play a role. Actual democracy now induces a growth
acceleration of over 1 percent. The estimated convergence rate (2.8 percent) implies a long-run income rise of 35 percent. This growth eﬀect is
larger than the benchmark estimate in Table 1. More importantly, it is also
much larger than in the same specification over 150 years of data, where expectations are neglected (see Persson and Tabellini, 2005). Thus, including
expected regime changes indeed brings out a more forceful eﬀect of actual
transitions on growth. The results in this section imply that stable and persistent democracy has a stronger eﬀect on development than democracy per
se.
Taken together, the results in our paper suggest that democracy is indeed too blunt a concept: the devil is in the details. Future theoretical and
empirical work should pay close attention to the heterogeneity of political
reforms.

10

References
[1] Giavazzi, Francesco and Tabellini, Guido. “Economic and Political
Liberalizations.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52, 2005, pp. 12971330.
[2] Papaioannou, Elias, and Siourounis, Gregorios. “Democratization
and Growth.” Mimeo, LBS, 2004.
[3] Persson, Torsten. “Forms of Democracy, Policy and Economic Development.” NBER Working Paper, No. 11171, 2005.
[4] Persson, Torsten and Tabellini, Guido. The Economic Eﬀects of
Constitutions, MIT Press, Cambridge, US, 2003.
[5] Persson, Torsten and Tabellini, Guido. “Constitutional Rules and
Fiscal Policy Outcomes.” American Economic Review 94, 2004, pp. 2546.
[6] Persson, Torsten and Tabellini, Guido. “Democratic Capital: The
Nexus of Political and Economic Change.” Mimeo, IIES, 2005.
[7] Przeworski, Adam, Alvarez, Michael, Cheibub, Jose, and
Limongi, Fernando. Democracy and Development: Political Institutions and Well-Being in the World 1950-1900, Cambridge University
Press, 2000.
[8] Rodrik, Dani and Wacziarg, Romain. "Do Democratic Transitions
Produce Bad Economic Outcomes?." American Economic Review 95,
2005, pp. 50-56.
11

[9] Sachs, Jeﬀrey and Warner, Andrew. “Economic Reform and the
Process of Global Integration.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
1, 1995, pp. 1-118.

12

Notes
1

Large changes in polity2 are generally clustered around 0. Although lower

than that often chosen by political scientists, this threshold more easily captures the eﬀect of discrete political reforms. We discard reforms in the last
three years of the sample, setting to missing the observations of outcomes
after such reforms. At the start of the sample, we only require one available
observation before the reform.
2

To unambiguously identify the sequence, Giavazzi and Tabellini (2005) only

classify episodes that last at least four years as reforms, omitting temporary
changes in political or economic institutions. The variables in column 3 of
Table 1 use this classification, which diﬀers slightly from that in the preceding
columns for a few countries.
3

Table 2 assumes the eﬀect of the form of government and the electoral

system to be additive. The results are robust to relaxing this assumption.
4

While Persson and Tabellini (2003, 2004) use IMF data for central gov-

ernment spending (including transfers), here we use Penn World Tables for
central plus local government consumption, in percent of GDP.
5

Indeed, all countries that first opened the economy, and then democratized,

became presidential democracies, while the opposite sequence is observed for
both forms of government.
6

The specification of the hazard rate includes democratic capital, lagged

per capita income, a dummy variable for war years (current and lagged),
dummy variables for democracy at independence, colonial origin, geographic
location, socialist legal origin, and a linear and quadratic time trend.
7

Adam Przeworski et al (2000) consider the eﬀect of expected regime changes

13

on economic growth in the post war period.

14

Table 1 Effects of political and economic
reforms on economic growth
(1)

(2)

(3)

0.75**
(0.34)

0.81**
(0.33)

0.70*
(0.33)

0.92**
(0.39)

Democracy after
liberalization

1.22***
(0.43)
1.62*
(0.86)

Liberalization after
democracy

-1.71***
(0.62)

Democracy
Liberalization

N. of countries
N. of observations

138
4338

130
4229

130
4229

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses: * significant at
10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Specification
described in text.

Table 2 Forms of democracy, growth and
economic policies
(1)
Growth

(2)
(3)
Government Liberalization
consumption
− 1.87***
(0.54)

− 0.07***
(0.02)

− 1.61***
(0.59)

4.89***
(0.79)

0.11***
(0.04)

Proportional
democracy

0.16
(0.49)

1.15**
(0.49)

0.11***
(0.03)

N. countries
N. observations

138
4338

150
4552

132
4578

Democracy
Parliamentary
democracy

1.00**
(0.51)

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses: * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Specification identical to that
in Table 1, except that lagged income is excluded in cols 2 and 3.

Table 3
growth

Expected democracy, actual democracy and

Hazard rate out of
current regime

(1)
Democracies

(2)
Autocracies

− 20.05***
(5.51)

− 17.85
(11.93)

(3)
Full sample

Democracy

1.04*
(0.62)

Probability of
autocracy

0.47
(0.73)

Prob. of autocracy in
lagged democracy

− 3.42
(2.52)

N. countries
N. observations

107
3656

117
4130

148
8135

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses: significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1% . Control variables: country and year
fixed effects, lagged income, dummy variable for wars and lagged wars,
dummy variable for former socialist countries in Central and Eastern
Europe plus former Soviet Union after 1990. Transition years excluded.

