                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE EFFECTS OF COGNITIVE AND NONCOGNITIVE ABILITIES
               ON LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES AND SOCIAL BEHAVIOR

                                            James J. Heckman
                                               Jora Stixrud
                                              Sergio Urzua

                                          Working Paper 12006
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12006


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2006




This research was supported by NIH Grant R01-HD043411 and a Pew Foundation grant to Heckman. This
paper was presented at a Mark Berger memorial conference, University of Kentucky, October 2004; as on
of the Ely lectures, Johns Hopkins University, April 2005; at University College, Dublin, Ireland, April 2005;
at the Institute for Research on Poverty Workshop, Madison, June 2005 at the Second IZA Prize Conference,
Berlin, Germany, October 2005 and at the Workshop in Public Policy and Economics at the Harris School
of the University of Chicago in September 2005. We also presented it at the AEA annual meeting, Boston,
January 2006. We thank participants for their comments. We thank the editors William Johnson and James
P. Ziliak and two anonymous referees for helpful comments. We also thank Jeff Grogger, Bruce Meyer and
Derek Neal for very helpful comments that led to revisions and clarifications. Supplementary materials are
on our website at jenni.uchicago.edu/noncog. We thank Federico Temerlin and Tae Ho Whang for very
competent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by James J. Heckman, Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Effects of Cognitive and Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social
Behavior
James J. Heckman, Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua
NBER Working Paper No. 12006
January 2006
JEL No. C31

                                          ABSTRACT


This paper established that a low dimensional vector of cognitive and noncognitive skills explains
a variety of labor market and behavioral outcomes. For many dimensions of social performance
cognitive and noncognitive skills are equally important. Our analysis addresses the problems of
measurement error, imperfect proxies, and reverse causality that plague conventional studies of
cognitive and noncognitive skills that regress earnings (and other outcomes) on proxies for skills.
Noncognitive skills strongly influence schooling decisions, and also affect wages given schooling
decisions. Schooling, employment, work experience and choice of occupation are affected by latent
noncognitive and cognitive skills. We study a variety of correlated risky behaviors such as teenage
pregnancy and marriage, smoking, marijuana use, and participation in illegal activities. The same
low dimensional vector of abilities that explains schooling choices, wages, employment, work
experience and choice of occupation explains these behavioral outcomes.

James J. Heckman
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
j-heckman@uchicago.edu

Jora Stixrud
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
stixrud@uchicago.edu

Sergio Urzua
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
surzua@uchicago.edu
1         Introduction

Numerous studies establish that measured cognitive ability is a strong predictor of schooling at-
tainment and wages.1 It also predicts a range of social behaviors.2 Less well investigated is the role

of personal preference and personality traits on economic and social behavior.
        Common sense suggests that personality traits, persistence, motivation and charm matter for

success in life. Marxist economists (Bowles and Gintis, 1976; Edwards, 1976) have produced a
large body of evidence that employers in low skill labor markets value docility, dependability, and

persistence more than cognitive ability or independent thought (see the survey by Bowles, Gintis,
and Osborne, 2001). Sociologists have written extensively about the role of noncognitive skills in

predicting occupational attainment and wages (see the essay by Peter Mueser in Jencks, 1979) and

several studies in the psychology literature have shown the important role of noncognitive skills on

the schooling performance of children and adolescents (Wolfe and Johnson, 1995; Duckworth and

Seligman, 2005).
        This paper presents an analysis of the effects of both cognitive and noncognitive skills on wages,
schooling, work experience, occupational choice and participation in a range of adolescent risky
behaviors. We show that a model with one latent cognitive skill and one latent noncognitive skill

explains a large array of diverse behaviors.
        Our approach differs from previous methods used to address these issues by accounting for

the effects of schooling and family influence on the measurements of the latent skills used in our
empirical analysis. We allow the latent skills to determine measured skills and schooling choices,

and for schooling to determine measured skills.

        We find that both types of latent skills are important in explaining a diverse array of outcomes.

The skills are priced differently in different schooling markets. There are important gender differ-
ences in the effects of these skills but, for most behaviors, both factors play an important role for

both men and women.
        For a variety of dimensions of behavior and for many labor market outcomes, a change in

noncognitive skills from the lowest to the highest level has an effect on behavior comparable or
    1
        See, e.g., the evidence summarized in Cawley, Heckman, and Vytlacil (2001).
    2
        See Herrnstein and Murray (1994).


                                                           2
greater than a corresponding change in cognitive skills. This evidence contradicts the “g” theory of

human behavior espoused by Herrnstein and Murray (1994), Jensen (1998) and others that focuses
on the primacy of cognitive skills in explaining socioeconomic outcomes.
      Our evidence has important implications for the literature on labor market signalling as devel-

oped by Arrow (1973) and Spence (1973). That literature is based on the notion that schooling only
conveys information about a student’s cognitive ability and that smarter persons find it less costly

to complete schooling. Our findings show that schooling signals multiple abilities. This observation

fundamentally alters the predictions of signalling theory.3
      Our approach recognizes that test scores measuring both cognitive and noncognitive abilities

may be fallible. It also recognizes that a person’s schooling and family background at the time

tests are taken affect test scores. Observed ability-wage and ability-schooling relationships may be

consequences of schooling causing measured ability rather than the other way around. Building
on the analysis of Hansen, Heckman, and Mullen (2004), we correct measured test scores for these
problems.

      Our analysis supports the common sense view that noncognitive skills matter. As conjectured
by Marxists economists (Bowles and Gintis, 1976), we find that schooling determines the measures
of noncognitive skills that we study. We find that latent noncognitive skills, corrected for schooling
and family background effects, raise wages through their direct effects on productivity as well

as through their indirect effects on schooling and work experience. Our evidence is consistent
with an emerging body of literature that finds that “psychic costs” (which may be determined by

noncognitive traits) explain why many adolescents who would appear to financially benefit from
schooling do not pursue it (Carneiro and Heckman, 2003; Carneiro, Hansen, and Heckman, 2003;

Cunha, Heckman, and Navarro, 2005b; Heckman, Lochner, and Todd, 2006).

      Our evidence bolsters and interprets the findings of Heckman and Rubinstein (2001) who show

that GEDs (high school dropouts who exam certify as high school equivalents) have the same

achievement test scores as high school graduates who do not go on to college yet they earn, on
average, the wages of dropouts. The poor market performance of GEDs is due to their low levels of

noncognitive skills, which are lower than those of high school dropouts who do not get the GED.
  3
      See Araujo, Gottlieb, and Moreira (2004).


                                                   3
Both cognitive and noncognitive skills are valued in the market. The GED surplus of cognitive

skills is not outweighed by the GED deficit in noncognitive skills
      Carneiro and Heckman (2003), Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov (2006) and Heckman
and Masterov (2004), and the numerous papers they cite, establish that parents play an important

role in producing both the cognitive and noncognitive skills of their children. More able and engaged
parents have greater success in producing both types of skills. Because cognitive and noncognitive

abilities are shaped early in the lifecycle, differences in these abilities are persistent, and both are

crucial to social and economic success, gaps among income and racial groups begin early and persist.
      Evidence from early interventions also motivate our work. Early interventions, such as enriched

childcare centers coupled with home visitations, have been successful in alleviating some of the

initial disadvantages of children born into adverse family environments. The success of these inter-

ventions is not attributable to IQ improvements of children, but rather to their success in boosting
noncognitive skills (Heckman, 2005).
      As an example, the Perry Preschool Program intervened early in the lifecycle of disadvantaged

children. Children were randomly assigned to treatment and control groups and both were followed
to age 40. The program did not boost IQ (see Figure 1) but raised achievement test scores, schooling
and social skills. For example, 66% of the individuals in the treatment group graduated from high
school by age 18 versus only 45% of the control group, 49% of the individuals in the treatment

group performed at or above the lowest 10th percentile in the California Achievement Test (age 14)
versus 15% of the control group, and individuals in the treatment groups are significantly less likely

to get involved in illegal activities before age 40.4 This evidence is consistent with the interpretation
that noncognitive traits matter for successful social performance and that noncognitive traits were

boosted by the program, but not cognitive traits, at least as measured by IQ.

      Our analysis explains the phenomenon of correlated risky behaviors using the same low dimen-

sional model of latent skills that explains wages, employment and schooling attainment. Biglan

(2004) documents that risky behaviors such as antisocial behavior (aggressiveness, violence and
criminality), cigarette smoking, alcohol use and the like are pursued by the same cluster of adoles-

cents. We find that latent cognitive and noncognitive skills explain all of these behaviors and the
  4
      See figures S1A and S1B in our Web Appendix for more evidence on the Perry Program.


                                                       4
observed clustering pattern.

    The plan of this paper is as follows. Section 2 introduces the data used in our analysis and
presents empirical analyses using conventional methods. We reproduce key findings reported in the
previous literature. We then discuss interpretive problems that plague the conventional approach.

Section 3 presents a model of schooling, employment, occupational choice, work experience and
wages generated by latent skills as well as observables. Section 4 extends the model to account for

correlated risky behaviors. Section 5 shows how our econometric model can be interpreted as an

approximation to a lifecycle model. Section 6 discusses how we empirically implement our model.
Section 7 presents our evidence. Section 8 relates our analysis to previous work in the literature.

Section 9 concludes.



2     Some Evidence Using Conventional Approaches

We use data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79). The NLSY data
are standard and widely used. It is the data source for the “g” analysis of Herrnstein and Murray
(1994). It contains panel data on wages, schooling and employment for a cohort of young persons,
age 14 to 21 at their first interview in 1979. This cohort has been followed ever since. Important

for our purposes, the NLSY contains information on cognitive test scores as well as noncognitive
measures. Web Appendix A describes the sampling frame of the data in detail.
    Our analysis of test scores uses five measures of cognitive skills (arithmetic reasoning, word
knowledge, paragraph comprehension, mathematical knowledge, and coding speed) derived from

the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB), which was administered to all sample

participants in 1980 and 1981. A composite score derived from these sections of the test battery

can be used to construct an approximate Armed Forces Qualifications Test (AFQT) score for each
individual. The AFQT is a general measure of trainability and a primary criterion of eligibility

for service in the Armed Forces. It has been used extensively as a measure of cognitive skills in

the literature (see, e.g. Cameron and Heckman, 1998, 2001; Ellwood and Kane, 2000; Heckman,

1995; Neal and Johnson, 1996; Osborne-Groves, 2004). The noncognitive measures available in the
data set are the Rotter Locus of Control Scale which was administered in 1979 and the Rosenberg


                                                5
Self-Esteem Scale which was administered in 1980. The Rotter Scale measures the degree of control

individuals feel they possess over their life and has been commonly used in previous studies analyzing
the role of noncognitive skills on labor outcomes (Osborne-Groves, 2004). The Rosenberg Scale
measures perceptions of self worth. All of these tests are discussed in detail in Web Appendix A.

   This section of the paper presents a standard least squares analysis of the effects of cognitive
and noncognitive skills on wages. We obtain the same qualitative results that have been reported

by previous analysts (see e.g. Jencks, 1979; Osborne-Groves, 2004; Bowles, Gintis, and Osborne,

2001). We use the standardized average of an individual’s five ASVAB components as a measure
of cognitive skills and the standardized average of the person’s scores on the Rotter and Rosenberg

scales as a measure of noncognitive skills. Figure 2 presents the distributions of the cognitive and

noncognitive measures by gender and final schooling level. The distributions of both measures of

skill are ordered by schooling level, with college graduates having the most favorable distribution
of skills and high school dropouts the worst.
   Conditioning on schooling, both cognitive and noncognitive tests predict wages (see Table 1,

the A columns). However, schooling is a choice variable and any convincing analysis must account
for the endogeneity of schooling. Deleting schooling from the wage equation (see Table 1, the B
columns) produces larger estimated effects of both abilities on wages. Removing the conditioning
on schooling solves the problem of endogeneity of schooling in wage equations and produces an

estimate of the net effect of the abilities on wages (their direct effects plus their effects through
schooling).

   Not controlling for schooling, the cognitive ability measure explains 9% of the variance of log
wages. For men, the noncognitive measure explains only 0.9% of the variance. For women, the

corresponding figures are 12.4% and 0.4%. We will show that even though cognitive ability explains

a larger share of wage variance than noncognitive ability, both are important in the sense that

moving persons from the top to the bottom of the ability distribution has similar effects for both

types of abilities.
   This evidence suggests that both noncognitive and cognitive abilities significantly affect wages,

as an entire literature has found (see Jencks, 1979). However, this evidence is not without its

problems. First, we note that there is an important distinction between intelligence tests (i.e., IQ

                                                  6
tests) and achievement tests. Although IQ is fairly well set by age 8, achievement tests have been

demonstrated to be quite malleable. Neal and Johnson (1996) and Hansen, Heckman, and Mullen
(2004) demonstrate that each additional year of schooling increases an individual’s measured AFQT
score by 2 to 4 percentage points, on average. This creates a reverse causality problem. The least

squares estimates reported in Table 1 cannot distinguish whether higher “ability” (as proxied by
our cognitive measure) causes higher wages or whether additional years of schooling cause both

higher measured cognitive scores and higher wages. They likely overstate the contribution of ability

to wages and understate the contribution of schooling to wages.5
       The analysis of Bowles and Gintis (1976) suggests that a similar phenomenon may be at work

for noncognitive skills. They claim that schooling builds traits that are useful in the workplace.

In their language, schooling produces a docile proletariat. In addition, scores on the attitude

scales used to proxy noncognitive ability, as well as the cognitive scores, are likely to be affected
by family background characteristics, and are at best imperfect measures of an individual’s true
noncognitive and cognitive abilities. The least squares estimates reported in Table 1 will be biased

and inconsistent unless the measures used are perfect proxies for cognitive and noncognitive skills.
       Standard IV methods for addressing measurement error and simultaneity in test scores also
require important qualifications. First, the instruments selected for instrumental variables analyses
are often controversial. Second, in a model with heterogeneous responses, it is far from clear how

instrumental variables can solve these problems (Heckman, Urzua, and Vytlacil, 2004; Heckman
and Vytlacil, 2005). The empirical strategy presented in this paper, unlike the IV strategy, is able

to account for the problems of reverse causality and measurement error.6

       We develop an alternative to IV that postulates a low dimensional vector of latent cognitive
and noncognitive abilities that generates measured cognitive and noncognitive test scores and that
   5
     See Carneiro, Heckman, and Masterov (2005).
   6
     Table S1 in our Web Appendix extends the analysis presented in Table 1 to consider other labor market and
behavioral outcomes. It presents estimates of the effects of the measured abilities on schooling, occupational choice,
smoking, drug use, incarceration, participation in illegality (whether an individual participated in any of the following
illegal activities in 1979 or 1980: attempting to “con” someone, taking a vehicle without the owner’s permission,
shoplifting, intentionally damaging another’s property, or using force to obtain things), work experience and pre-
marital pregnancy. These models are estimated using probit analysis and multinomial choice models. At a purely
descriptive level both measured cognitive and noncognitive traits are associated with a variety of behavioral outcomes
for males and females. At issue is whether the relationships in Table S1 have any causal status. The same issue
applies to the results presented in Table 1. Simple IV strategies that might be useful for linear outcome models do
not apply in analyzing the nonlinear (discrete choice/discrete outcome) models analyzed in Table S1.


                                                           7
is the source of dependence not only among test scores, schooling choices, and wages, but also

employment, occupational choice and behavioral outcomes. Controlling for the latent skills solves
the problems of endogeneity and measurement error. Our method extends the LISREL model
of Jöreskog (1977) and the MIMIC model of Jöreskog and Goldberger (1975) to account for the

effects of choice variables (schooling) and background variables on the measurements of cognitive
and noncognitive skills where the schooling, in turn, depends on the latent factors. Our model is a

factor model with endogenous factor loadings. Our methodology is a form of matching where the

match variables that create the conditional independence are unobserved and their distributions
are estimated nonparametrically. Carneiro, Hansen, and Heckman (2003) and Hansen, Heckman,

and Mullen (2004) develop this method. We now present our model.



3     A Model of Schooling, Employment, Work Experience,

      Occupational Choice and Wages Based on Latent Skills

Cognitive and noncognitive skills can affect the endowments of persons, their preferences, their

technology of skill formation (see Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov, 2006), or all three. Thus
they might affect risk preference, time preference, and the efficiency of human capital production
without necessarily being direct determinants of market wages. Cognitive and noncognitive skills
might also raise the productivity of workers, and directly affect wages. Our empirical analysis

suggests that both cognitive and noncognitive skills play multiple roles.
    We postulate the existence of two underlying factors representing latent cognitive and noncogni-
tive ability. Conditioning on the observables, these factors account for all of the dependence across

choices and outcomes. The levels of an individual’s factors may result from some combination

of inherited ability, the quality of the environment provided by her parents, her early efforts and

the effects of any early interventions. We assume that levels of both factors are known by each

individual but not by the researcher, and that they are fixed by the time the individual makes her
schooling and behavior choices.

    Let f C and f N denote the levels of latent cognitive and noncognitive abilities, respectively.



                                                 8
We assume that latent abilities are mutually independent (f C ⊥⊥ f N ), and both determine the

individual’s wage, schooling, employment, work experience and occupational decisions.
       The assumption that one latent factor captures cognitive ability is traditional in the literature
(see e.g. Jensen, 1998). The “g” theory used by Herrnstein and Murray (1994) and many others

is based on it. Heckman (1995) shows that it applies to the NLSY data we use. The assumption
that one latent factor captures noncognitive ability is less traditional. Since there are many aspects

of noncognitive skills – self control, time preference, sociability, and so forth – it is less likely that

one trait captures all aspects of these behaviors.7 Nonetheless, a model with one factor each for
cognitive and noncognitive skills is a useful starting point, and we use it throughout this paper.8

       The assumption of independence between f C and f N is motivated by the evidence presented

in our Web Appendix A.9 Table S3 shows that correlations of test scores within the batteries

of cognitive tests and noncognitive tests are much stronger than they are across cognitive and
noncognitive tests. The cross-correlations weaken further when we condition on family background
variables. We can account for the dependence across cognitive and noncognitive test scores, even

invoking independence between f C and f N , by allowing observables to affect means and factor
loadings. In addition, both factors affect schooling. In our model, the factor loadings in the test
score equations depend on schooling at the time of the test. Therefore, for those who complete
their schooling by the time of the test both latent factors affect both cognitive and noncognitive

tests (albeit in an indirect way). We now present our model for wages.


3.1       An Hedonic Model for Wages and Work Experience

We allow for the possibility that different schooling groups operate in different labor markets. Both

latent abilities and observable variables determine wages in the different schooling markets, and

may be priced differently in different markets. Denote by s the schooling level attained by the
   7
      The evidence in our Web Appendix A, Table S2, argues against the existence of only one latent factor that
summarizes all aspects of noncognitive ability. For cognitive scores, one factor explains 77% of the trace of the
cognitive test score correlation matrix for males. The second factor explains only 9% of the trace. For noncognitive
skills, one factor explains only 31% of the trace of the correlation matrix. The second factor explains 9% of the trace.
    8
      We relax this assumption in work underway.
    9
      See Cunha and Heckman (2003) who relax this assumption in their theoretical model.




                                                           9
individual. Wages are given by a linear-in-the-parameters specification:


                                        C
                        Ys = βY,s XY + αY,s f C + αY,s
                                                   N
                                                       f N + eY,s       for s = 1, . . . , S̄


                                                                                               C
where XY is a vector of observed controls, βY,s is the vector of returns associated with XY , αY,s and
 N
αY,s are the cognitive and noncognitive loadings, respectively, and eY,s represents an idiosyncratic

error term such that eY,s ⊥⊥ (f N , f C , XY ) for s = 1, . . . , S̄. This equation allows for separate prices

for workers of different schooling categories, who operate in different labor markets.

    We estimate a parallel equation for work experience:


                                        C
                        Rs = βR,s XR + αR,s f C + αR,s
                                                   N
                                                       f N + eR,s       for s = 1, . . . , S̄


                                                                                               C
where XR is a vector of observed controls, βR,s is the vector of returns associated with XR , αR,s and
 N
αR,s are the cognitive and noncognitive loadings, respectively, and eR,s represents an idiosyncratic
error term such that eR,s ⊥⊥ (f N , f C , XR ) for s = 1, . . . , S̄.


3.2     The Model for Schooling

Each agent chooses the level of schooling, among S̄ possibilities, that maximizes his benefit. Let

Is represent the net benefit associated with each schooling level s (s = {1, . . . , S̄}) and assume the
following linear-in-the-parameters model for the benefit of schooling level s :


                            Is = βs Xs + αsC f C + αsN f N + es     for s = 1, . . . , S̄                 (1)


where Xs is a vector of observed variables affecting schooling, βs is its associated vector of parame-

ters, αsC and αsN are the parameters (also known as factor loadings) associated with the cognitive and
noncognitive latent abilities, respectively, and es represents an idiosyncratic component assumed to

be independent of f N , f C , and Xs . The individual components {es }S̄s=1 are mutually independent.
All of the dependence across these choices comes through the observable, Xs , and the common

factors f N and f C . The Is solve out the effects of wages and other benefits on the utility associated



                                                        10
with schooling.

       The agent chooses the level of schooling with the highest benefit. Formally,


                                               DS = argmax {Is }                                     (2)
                                                       s∈{1,...,S̄}



where DS denotes the individual’s chosen schooling level. Notice that conditional on Xs (with s =
1, . . . , S̄), equations (1) and (2) produce a standard discrete choice model with a factor structure.10

       The assumption of linearity in the parameters and separability of the factors simplifies the

analysis. In more tightly specified economic models the factors would be nonlinear and nonseparable
as e.g. time preference parameters, risk aversion parameters, human capital production function

parameters and endowment parameters in dynamic models of skill accumulation (see e.g. Cunha,

Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov, 2006; Cunha and Heckman, 2003). We interpret f N and f C as
approximations to the basic parameters of preferences, technology and endowments that generate

the outcomes we study. We discuss a more tightly specified model in Section 5. We next develop
the equation for employment.


3.3        The Model for Employment

Let IE denote the net benefit associated with working and assume a linear-in-the-parameters spec-
ification
                                                     C C    N N
                                       IE = βE XE + αE f + αE f + eE                                 (3)

                 C    N
where βE , XE , αE , αE , and eE are defined as in the schooling model. Then DE = 1(IE > 0)
is a binary variable that equals 1 if the individual is employed and 0 otherwise (where 1 is an

indicator function, 1(A) = 1 if A is true and 1(A) = 0 otherwise). The error term eE is such that
eE ⊥⊥ (f N , f C , XE ).
  10
       See Heckman (1981) where this model was first introduced.




                                                         11
3.4       The Model for Occupational Choice

Let IO denote the latent utility associated with choosing a white collar occupation (where the

alternative is a blue collar occupation). We postulate the following linear model for IO :


                                                  C C    N N
                                    IO = βO XO + αO f + αO f + eO                                             (4)


                 C    N
where βO , XO , αO , αO and eO are defined analogously to the model of equation (3). DO = 1(IO > 0)

is an indicator of choice of white collar occupational status. The error term in equation (4) is such

that eO ⊥⊥ (f N , f C , XO ).

                                 ⊥ eR,s0 ⊥⊥ es00 ⊥
       Further, assume that eY,s ⊥                    ⊥ eO for any schooling levels s, s0 and s00 , and
                                                 ⊥ eE ⊥
that all of the error terms are independent of both factors (f C and f N ) and all the observables (X

variables with subscripts) in our model.


3.5       A Measurement System that Accounts for Simultaneity in Cogni-

          tive and Noncognitive Test Scores

Identification of the model of Sections 3.1–3.4 is established using the strategy developed in Carneiro,

Hansen, and Heckman (2003) and elaborated in Hansen, Heckman, and Mullen (2004) and Heckman
and Navarro (2006). For the sake of brevity, in this paper we summarize their results without
repeating their proofs.11

       Our identification strategy assumes the existence of two sets of measurements (each with at least

two elements), with one set measuring cognitive skills and the other set measuring noncognitive
skills.12 In our case, latent cognitive ability is only allowed to affect scores on cognitive measures,

and latent noncognitive ability is only allowed to affect scores on noncognitive measures.13
       Building on the analysis of Hansen, Heckman, and Mullen (2004), we address the possibility of
  11
     A more technical discussion of aspects of identification is presented in our Web Appendix B.
  12
     We can weaken the number of required measurements if we assume nonnormality of the factors following the
analysis in Bonhomme and Robin (2004) and the discussion in Heckman and Navarro (2006).
  13
     These conditions are sufficient but not necessary. See Carneiro, Hansen, and Heckman (2003, Footnote 18) for
a factor system where all but one test can depend on both factors. Thus if there is one test (e.g. a component of
AFQT like coding speed) that depends on only one factor (“cognitive ability”) all other cognitive and noncognitive
tests can depend on both components.



                                                       12
reverse causality between schooling and cognitive and noncognitive test scores. In the context of

this paper, the problem is likely to arise since our measures of cognitive and noncognitive abilities
were administered to all sample members in 1979 and 1980, when they were between 14 and 22
years of age. Many had finished their schooling. Consequently, the observed measures may not be

fully informative about the latent cognitive and noncognitive skills of the individuals, since they
may be influenced by the schooling level at the date of the test.

       Our procedure allows each individual’s schooling level at the time of the test to affect the

coefficients of the measurement system. Thus, if we denote by sT the schooling level at the time of
the test (sT = 1, . . . , S̄T ), the model for the cognitive measure Ci (i = 1, . . . , nC ) is


           Ci (sT ) = βCi (sT )XC + αCi (sT )f C + eCi (sT ) for i = 1, . . . , nC and sT = 1, . . . , S̄T

                           
where eCi (sT ) ⊥⊥ f C , XC and eCi (sT ) ⊥⊥ eCj (s0T ) for any i, j ∈ {1, . . . , nC } and schooling levels sT

and s0T such that i 6= j for any (sT , s0T ) or sT 6= s0T for any (i, j).14

       Likewise, the model for the noncognitive measure Ni (i = 1, . . . , nN ) is


           Ni (sT ) = βNi (sT )XN + αNi (sT )f N + eNi (sT ) for i = 1, . . . , nN and sT = 1, . . . , S̄T

                          
                ⊥ f N , XN and eNi (sT ) ⊥⊥ eNj (s0T ) for any i, j ∈ {1, . . . , nN } and schooling levels sT
where eNi (sT ) ⊥

and s0T such that i 6= j for any (sT , s0T ) or sT 6= s0T for any (i, j). Again, all error terms (e variables
                                                                            
with subscripts) are mutually independent, independent of f N , f C and all the observable X’s.

       Since there are no intrinsic units for the latent ability measures, one α coefficient devoted to
each ability must be normalized to unity to set the scale of each ability. Therefore, for some

Ci (i = 1, . . . , nC ) in C and Nj (j = 1, . . . , nN ) in N, we set αCi (sT ) = 1 and αNj (s0T ) = 1.

Carneiro, Hansen, and Heckman (2003) establish that these assumptions provide enough structure

to semiparametrically identify the model, including the distributions of the factors and the equation-

specific shocks, provided that the regressors have sufficient support.
       Our assumptions imply that conditional on X variables, the dependence across all measurements,
  14
       Our procedure includes the case where sT is final schooling. See Hansen, Heckman, and Mullen (2004).




                                                         13
choices and outcomes comes through f N and f C . If we control for this dependence, we control for
                                                
the endogeneity in the model.15 If the f N , f C were observed, we could use matching to control
for this dependence. Instead, we assume that the match variables are unobserved, and estimate
their distributions, along with the other parameters of the model.



4        Incorporating Behavioral Outcomes into the Model

Much of the literature estimating the impact of cognitive and noncognitive abilities has focused on

the effects of these abilities on educational and labor market outcomes (e.g. Cameron and Heckman,

2001; Bowles, Gintis, and Osborne, 2001; Osborne-Groves, 2004; Segal, 2005). Herrnstein and

Murray (1994) present evidence on the correlation between levels of cognitive ability and different

dimensions of social behavior (e.g. marriage, out-of-wedlock birth, and crime). They only consider
the predictive power of cognitive ability measures. We use our model to consider the predictive

power of both cognitive and noncognitive measures. We establish that noncognitive factors are
important in explaining numerous labor market outcomes and social behaviors.
       We investigate the effects of both types of latent abilities on individuals’ decisions regarding
teenage pregnancy and marital status and whether or not to smoke daily by age 18, use marijuana

in 1979 or 1980, participate in activities that lead to incarceration by age 30, and participate in
other illegal activities in 1979 or 1980. Our model assumes that each of these decisions is jointly
determined by latent cognitive and noncognitive abilities, as well as by observable variables and
outcome-specific shocks.

       The models that we fit are all in the form of linear-in-parameters index models that generate

discrete outcomes of the sort presented in Section 3. Let Ij be the linear-in-parameters index

for behavior j, with associated vector Xj and coefficient vector βj . Let αjC be the loading on the
cognitive factor and αjN the loading on the noncognitive factor where ej is independent of f C , f N
  15
    Recall that the factor loadings in the measurement equations can depend on schooling at the time of the test
and hence that the dependence is more complicated than in the standard factor analytic model.




                                                      14
and Xj ; f C and f N are independent of Xj . The latent index generating choices is


                                  Ij = βj Xj + αjC f C + αjN f N + ej                                (5)

                                 Dj = 1 (Ij ≥ 0) .                                                   (6)


   We analyze daily smoking, marijuana use, imprisonment, and illegal activities using this frame-

work. We study teenage pregnancy and marriage for women using a multinomial choice model. Let
Ip denote the latent utility associated with the decision p (p = 1 (Single with No Child), 2 (Married

with a Child), 3 (Married with No Child), and 4 (Single with a Child)). We postulate the following

linear-in-parameters model for Ip :


                         Ip = βp Xp + αpC f C + αpN f N + ep   for p = 1, . . . , 4                  (7)


where βp , Xp , αpC , αpN and ep are defined analogously to the previous cases. From (7) we define the

outcome selected by
                                          DP = argmax {Ip }
                                                 p∈{1,...,4}


so that DP denotes the individual’s chosen marital and pregnancy status We assume that the X’s
are independent of f N , f C and the ep ’s. The f N , f C are independent of the ep ’s and the components

of the ep ’s are mutually independent. Again, all of the dependence across equations comes from
the X’s and the factors f N , f C . All distinctly subscripted e variables (across all labor market and

behavioral outcomes) are mutually independent and independent of f C , f N , and all subscripted

X variables. Again, this is a form of matching where the match variables are independent and we

estimate their distribution.




                                                   15
5     Interpreting our Model as an Approximation to an Ex-

      plicit Economic Model

Our statistical model is an approximation to a simple lifecycle model of youth and adult decision
making over horizon T . We now sketch that model. Let consumption and labor supply at period
t be c(t) and l(t), respectively. Consumption is a vector and includes a variety of behaviors, such

as smoking, drug use, etc. Let the vector P (t) denote the market prices of the consumption goods.
Utility is U (c(t), l(t); η) where the η are preference parameters. The agent discounts utility at time

preference rate ρ. Human capital in period t is h(t). It is produced by the human capital production
function
                                               .
                                               h(t) = ϕ (h(t), I(t); τ )

                                                                              .
where the τ are productivity parameters, I(t) is investment at t, and h(t) denotes the rate of change
of the human capital stock. The initial condition is given by h(0). There can be a vector of human

capitals.
    Wages in period t (Y (t)) are given by human capital and productivity traits θ:


                                                   Y (t) = R (h(t); θ) .


Assuming perfect credit markets at interest rate r, the law of motion for assets at period t (A(t)),
given initial condition A(0) and ignoring taxes, is

                               .
                              Ȧ(t) = Y (t)h(t)l(t) − P (t)0 c(t) + rA(t).


The agent maximizes
                                   Z       T
                                               exp(−ρt)U (c(t), l(t); η) dt
                                       0

subject to the laws of motion of assets and human capital.
                                                                                                   
   In this specification, cognitive and noncognitive skills can affect preferences (η = η f C , f N ,
                                                               
ρ = ρ f C , f N ), human capital productivity τ = τ f C , f N       and direct market productivity



                                                            16
                                                                                                        
 θ = θ fC, fN       . They might also affect initial conditions h(0) = h0 f C , f N and A(0) = A0 f C , f N .

       Our econometric model is a linear-in-the-parameters approximation to this general model. In
this paper, we do not estimate relationships for each of the channels through which cognitive and
noncognitive abilities might operate. Noncognitive abilities affect some combination of η, ρ, τ and

θ (market productivity). Cognitive abilities operate through θ as well as some combination of η, ρ,
and τ .16

       An open question, which we plan to address in other work, is the relationship between the

psychologist’s measure of noncognitive skills as elicited from test scores and the fundamental pa-
rameters of risk aversion, time preference and human capital productivity, which can be estimated

from behaviors (see, e.g., Browning, Hansen, and Heckman, 1999). In principle, one can determine

which factors are common across tests and preference parameters. Test scores and behaviors can

be used interchangeably to proxy factors. This task is left for future work.



6        Implementing the Model

We use Bayesian MCMC methods to compute the sample likelihood. Our use of Bayesian methods
is only a computational convenience. Our identification analysis is strictly classical.17 Under our

assumptions, the priors we use are asymptotically irrelevant. Explanatory variables and exclusion
restrictions are reported in Tables 2A and 2B.

       Our empirical model has six schooling levels (S̄ = 6): high school dropout, GED, high school
graduate, some college-no degree, 2-year college degree and 4-year college degree. To facilitate

identification of the educational choice model, we assume that tuition at 2 and 4 year colleges only
  16
                                                                                             
      Cunha and Heckman (2003) estimate a more general model in which the f C , f N evolve over time and are
consequences of investment behavior.
   17
      The analysis in Carneiro, Hansen, and Heckman (2003), Hansen, Heckman, and Mullen (2004), and Heckman and
Navarro (2006), establishes conditions on the support of the regressors that allow for semiparametric identification of
the model. Figure S2 presents evidence on the support conditions for both males and females. It graphs the sample
distributions of probabilities of different schooling attainment levels. For the support conditions for semiparametric
identification to hold, the support of the distribution of each probability should be the unit interval [0, 1]. It is evident
from Figure S2 that this condition is not met, although for 4-year college graduation the condition is nearly satisfied.
This evidence suggests that the empirical results that we generate are identified from the parametric structure of
the model. However, we use robust mixture of normal approximations to the underlying distributions. Varying the
components of the mixtures (adding more components beyond the ones we report) does not change our empirical
estimates. Our estimates are not artifacts of normality assumptions, and relaxing normality is essential in getting a
good fit to the data.



                                                             17
affects the benefits of obtaining those degrees, and that the cost of obtaining the GED only affects

the benefit of obtaining that degree.18 We also assume that local wages and unemployment rates at
age 17 for individuals with each final schooling level (i.e., high school dropouts, high school gradu-
ates, some college and college graduates) partly determine the opportunity cost and expectations of

returns associated with each of the final schooling levels. Family background characteristics, race
and cohort dummies, as well as both factors, are also allowed to affect educational choices.

       Wage equations at age 30 are estimated for individuals of each final schooling level. Race and

ethnicity dummies, cohort dummies, local labor market conditions and region of residence dummies
are included in these equations, as well as the cognitive and noncognitive factors.19 We assume

that, fixing these variables, family background characteristics and childhood residence do not affect

adult wages. The local labor market variables are based on the Bureau of Economic Affairs data

base discussed in Cameron and Heckman (2001), updated for our sample year.
       The employment and occupational choice latent indices are assumed to depend on the same
list of variables that determine adult wages. Family background characteristics, race and cohort

dummies, and both factors, enter in the index functions determining daily smoking, marijuana
use, incarceration, participation in illegal activities and teenage pregnancy. Family background
characteristics, race and cohort dummies, and both factors, also enter the equations determining
work experience by age 30.

       Our theoretical model is static and does not consider the timing of decisions. We analyze smoking
and marital/pregnancy (for women only) decisions as of age 18, marijuana use and participation

in illegal activities in 1979 or 1980,20 and incarceration by age 30 (for men only). Labor market
outcomes and schooling decisions are studied as of age 30.

       Following the analysis in Section (3.5), our cognitive and noncognitive measures are allowed

to depend on the cognitive (f C ) and noncognitive (f N ) factors, respectively. Each equation is
  18
     Exclusions are required for semiparametric identification of the choice equations unless curvature restrictions
are introduced (see Cameron and Heckman, 1998; Heckman and Navarro, 2006). Alternatively, we can invoke a
parametric distributional assumption.
  19
     Estimating the equations separately by race and ethnicity produces some important differences across groups.
We are presenting this evidence in another paper, currently in preparation. We find that noncognitive skills play a
stronger role in explaining gradients in black socioeconomic outcomes than they do for whites (Heckman, Stixrud,
and Urzua, 2006). The current paper allows the means of the unobservables to differ across race and sex groups but
not the other features of the distributions.
  20
     The definition of illegal activities is given at the base of Table 2A.


                                                        18
estimated allowing the highest grade attained at the time of the test to affect means and factor

loadings and includes as controls family background characteristics and cohort dummies.21 Our
cognitive measures are five ASVAB test scores. We use two attitudinal scales, the Rotter Locus of
Control Scale and the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale, as our noncognitive measures. We choose these

measures because of their availability in the NLSY. Ideally, it would be better to use a wider array
of psychological measurements and, as previously noted, to connect them with more conventional

measures of preference parameters in economics.

       As explained in Section (3.5) two normalizations are required to assure identification of the
model. These set the scale of the factors. We normalize the loadings (αCi (sT ), αNj (s0T )) of the

cognitive (f C ) and noncognitive (f N ) factors to be equal to 1 in the equations associated with

coding speed (ASVAB 5) and the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale for individuals in grades 9 to 11 at

the time of the test, respectively.
       The distributions of the unobservables are identified nonparametrically. We do not impose
distributional assumptions on the unobservables. The factors are estimated as three component

mixtures of normals. The uniquenesses (the e) of the wage equations are distributed as three
component mixtures of normals.22 The other uniquenesses are normally distributed. When we
permit them to be non-normal, we do not improve the fit of the model.



7        Evidence from the Model

Estimates of the parameters of the equations of the model are presented in Web Appendix Tables S4-

S20. The model fits the data on wages and other outcomes.23 Overall goodness of fit tests are passed

for all outcome and choice equations.24 The loadings on both cognitive and noncognitive factors

are statistically significant in most equations. Both factors are required to produce a model that
  21
     The schooling levels at test date considered in the estimation of the cognitive measurement system are: grades
9-11, grade 12, 13 to 15 years of schooling and 16 or more years of schooling. For the noncognitive measurement
system the schooling levels are: grades 9-11, grade 12 and 13 or more years of schooling. This difference is due to
the years in which the different tests were administered. See Web Appendix A for details.
  22
     Models for wages with fewer mixture components do not fit the data as well.
  23
     See Figures S3A and S3B at our Web Appendix at jenni.uchicago.edu/noncog.
  24
     See Appendix Tables S21A and S21B for men and women.




                                                        19
passes goodness of fit tests.25 The estimated distributions of the factors are highly non-normal.

Standard normality assumptions would produce seriously biased estimates of the true factors and
force symmetry onto highly asymmetric data.26 We find strong evidence that schooling affects both

measured cognitive ability and measured noncognitive ability.27 The first finding corroborates the
earlier analyses of Neal and Johnson (1996), Hansen, Heckman, and Mullen (2004) and Heckman,

Larenas, and Urzua (2004). The second result is new and corroborates the claims of the Marxist

economists (see e.g. Bowles and Gintis, 1976).

       Because our model is nonlinear and multidimensional, the best way to understand it is to
simulate it. Figure 3 plots the densities of the estimated cognitive and noncognitive factors by

schooling level for men and women. These are to be compared with the densities of the raw test
scores presented in Figure 2. The distributions of f N and f C are clearly non-normal. On the

cognitive factor, the sorting patterns are about the same in Figures 2 and 3 although the shapes are
different. More cognitively able people attain higher levels of education. GEDs are smarter than
dropouts and their distribution of the cognitive trait is very close to that of high school graduates

who do not go on to college.
       Our estimated distribution of noncognitive ability reverses the pattern for dropouts and GEDs
that is found in the raw data reported in Figure 2. Male GEDs have a worse noncognitive abil-
ity distribution than dropouts. For females, dropouts and GEDs have the same distribution of

noncognitive skills. Thus male GEDs are the same or worse than high school dropouts in terms
of noncognitive factors but are better in cognitive terms. This confirms an hypothesis of Heckman

and Rubinstein (2001) that GEDs are smarter than ordinary dropouts but have lower noncognitive
skills.

       Figure 4A summarizes the estimated effects of schooling at the date of the test (sT ) on com-

ponents of the ASVAB for males of average cognitive and noncognitive ability. Since the means
  25
     Table S22 in the web appendix shows that we reject the null hypotheses that either cognitive or noncognitive
factors do not belong in the outcome and choice equations.
  26
     See Web Appendix Table S23 and Figures S4A and S4B.
  27
     For males, the χ2 test for the null that schooling does not affect measured cognitive tests (means and factor
loadings) is 431.65 with 150 degrees of freedom. Hence we reject the null (the critical values are 172.5 (95%), 179.5
(90%)). The χ2 test for the null that schooling does not affect the means and factor loadings of the latent noncognitive
test is 116.53 with 40 degrees of freedom. Hence we reject that hypothesis as well (the critical values are 55.75 (95%),
51.80 (90%)). For females we obtain similar results. Table S24 in the Web Appendix presents these results.



                                                          20
of f N and f C are zero, these figures isolate the effect of schooling on the intercepts of the test

score equations. Schooling raises measured test scores. Figure 4B summarizes, for men, the effect
of schooling at the test date on the noncognitive measures. Schooling raises scores on the Rotter
Scale at lower levels of schooling. For the Rosenberg Scale, scores are raised across all grades of

schooling.28
      Figures 5–25 graphically summarize the main implications of our model for a variety of outcome

measures. We report results for both men and women when there are differences by gender. Other-

wise we only report the results for men, posting the results for women at our Web Appendix. The
structure of these figures is the same across all outcomes. Each figure has three panels. Panel (i)

displays the joint distribution of the outcome reported by deciles of the cognitive and noncognitive

factors, while panels (ii) and (iii) display the marginal effects of one factor holding the effect of the

other factor constant at its mean.
      Mean log hourly wages by decile of cognitive and noncognitive ability for men and women are
displayed in Figures 5A and 5B, respectively. In these figures we display log wage levels as a function

of the factors rather than deciles of wage distributions as a function of the factors. Standard error
bands are presented along with the main graphs. For both men and women, cognitive skills have
about the same effect on wages as noncognitive skills. The effect of noncognitive skills for men
is slightly less strong, as measured by the slope of the log wage-ability decile curve, than it is for

women.
      Figures 5A and 5B display the net effect of increases in the abilities on log wages inclusive of

the direct effect of ability on log wages holding schooling fixed, the effect of ability on schooling
and the generated effect of schooling on log wages. Tables 3A and 3B show that the factor loadings

(hedonic prices) on latent skills vary substantially across schooling levels. Noncognitive traits are

not valued in the labor market for male four year college graduates, although they are for female

college graduates. In most of the educational labor markets, noncognitive factors are valued for

both genders. For men, noncognitive traits are valued more highly in low skill markets. For women,
noncognitive traits are more uniformly valued.
 28
   The results for women are comparable and can be found at jenni.uchicago.edu/noncog. See Figures S5A and
S5B.



                                                   21
   Figures 6–11 show the valuation of each type of skill in different schooling labor markets jointly

(panel (i)) and holding the factor not being studied at its mean level (panels (ii) and (iii)). Panels
(ii) and (iii) also display the proportion of individuals with the indicated level of schooling whose
cognitive (panel (ii)) and noncognitive (panel (iii)) abilities lie in each decile of the distribution.

When the proportions are small, the standard error bands are larger. Across schooling markets
different factors are priced differently. Thus in the male dropout market, the log wage gradient for

cognitive ability is greater than that for noncognitive ability. A similar pattern is found for females.

In the GED market, this pattern is reversed, especially for females. For the high school markets,
the gradients are similar across skills for men and women but the gradients are much steeper for

women.

   For those attending some college, the noncognitive gradients are much steeper than the cognitive

gradients, but again the female noncognitive gradient is much steeper than the male gradient. In
the market for two year college graduates, the gradients are about equally strong across skills and
across sex groups. For males in the four-year college market, noncognitive skills have little marginal

value while cognitive skills have a strong gradient. For females in the four-year college market, both
skills command high marginal prices.
   Figures 12A and 12B display the effects of cognitive and noncognitive skills on employment for
men and women, respectively. For both genders, the gradient on noncognitive skills is greater than

it is for cognitive skills. The pattern is especially pronounced for women.
   The effects of both cognitive and noncognitive ability on employment cumulate over the life-

cycle into effects on work experience. Figures 13A–13D show the effects of both cognitive and
noncognitive ability on work experience for male workers in different educational labor markets.

Except for the market for 4-year college graduates—the highest skill market we study—the gradi-

ent for noncognitive skills is much steeper than for cognitive skills. If anything, the results are more

dramatic for women.

   For both genders, cognitive ability has a slightly larger effect on the choice of white versus blue
collar occupations than noncognitive ability, although both latent abilities are important determi-

nants of this choice. See Figures 14A and 14B.

   We next consider the effects of cognitive and noncognitive abilities on schooling decisions. For

                                                  22
the sake of brevity, we report results for selected schooling levels. We report results for women

when they are different from those of men.
      Figure 15 shows the effects of the latent abilities on the high school dropout decision. Those at
the top of the cognitive ability distribution are very unlikely to drop out. Both types of ability have

strong effects on the dropout decision, but cognitive ability is more important in the sense of the
gradient of the probability of dropout–ability decile curve.29 For the decision to drop out from high

school and attain a GED and not continue on to college, the opposite is the case (see Figure 16). For

a man with cognitive ability in the lowest decile, increasing his noncognitive ability from the lowest
to the highest decile decreases the probability that he will obtain a GED. The cognitive ability –

GED curve is flat. Noncognitive factors play a strong role, with those who have high noncognitive

skills unlikely to attain a GED.

      The effects of both cognitive and noncognitive ability on attaining a high school degree and
stopping there are not monotonic (see Figure 17 for men). At the lowest deciles of both abili-
ties, increasing either ability raises the probability of graduating from high school and obtaining

no further schooling. At higher levels, it decreases the probability as more able people (in both
senses of ability) do not stop their education at high school but go on to attain higher levels of
schooling. Similar phenomena appear for persons who attend (but do not graduate from) college.
See Figures S9 and S10 posted in our Web Appendix.

      The effects of cognitive and noncognitive ability on the probability of graduating from a com-
munity college are weak (see Figure 18). The effects of noncognitive abilities are nonmonotonic.

Figure 19 shows that both cognitive and noncognitive abilities have strong effects on graduating
from a four year college. The gradient of noncognitive ability on the probability of graduating from

a four year college is smaller for women (see Figure S12 in our Web Appendix).

      For daily smoking by age 18, an equivalent decile movement in the noncognitive factor induces

a much larger change in behavior for males than does a change in the cognitive factor. For women,

the opposite is true. See Figures 20A and 20B.
      For men of average cognitive (noncognitive) ability, increasing noncognitive (cognitive) ability

from the lowest to the highest decile decreases their probability of using marijuana. See Figure 21.
 29
      The results for women show a steeper gradient for noncognitive skills (see Figure S6 at our Web Appendix).


                                                         23
Cognitive skills are not strong predictors of marijuana use.

      Figure 22 displays the probability of incarceration by age 30 for males.30 Although both factors
are important, we find that the noncognitive factor induces a much larger change in behavior
than a comparable decile change in the cognitive factor. For males in the lowest decile of the

cognitive distribution, moving from the lowest to the highest decile of the noncognitive distribution
substantially decreases the probability of incarceration. In comparison, taking the same males who

are in the lowest deciles of both distributions and moving them to the highest decile of the cognitive

distribution only slightly decreases their probability of incarceration. Contrary to claims made by
Herrnstein and Murray (1994) and Herrnstein and Wilson (1985), it is noncognitive ability that is

the dominant factor in explaining different rates of participation in crime, and not cognitive ability.

      We also consider the effects of cognitive and noncognitive abilities on participation in illegal

activities. These results are displayed in Figure 23. Again, noncognitive abilities have much stronger
effects in the sense of having a steeper gradient. For women (see our Web Appendix Figure S14)
both gradients are essentially zero.

      Although both factors are important determinants of marital status and pregnancy by age 18,
changing the noncognitive factor has greater effects on behavior. Figure 24 shows the effects of both
types of latent abilities on being single with no child by age 18. Changes in the cognitive factor are
important, but have weaker effects than changes in the noncognitive factor. This evidence illustrates

the importance of noncognitive skills in explaining the chances of a woman being single with no
child. The probability of being a teenage mother is equally responsive to changes in cognitive and

noncognitive skills. See Figure 25. At the highest levels of cognitive and noncognitive skills, the
probability of teenage pregnancy is essentially zero.

      We use Children of NLSY data (CNLSY79) to corroborate some of the findings reported in this

paper. One potential advantage of these data is that they contain very early (age 3–6) measurements

of both cognitive and noncognitive abilities. Such measurements are not affected by later schooling.

A disadvantage of these data is that many of the children are still young and we lack information
on their wages, occupational status and employment at age 30. In addition, the samples are small.

The evidence from the CNLSY data is broadly consistent with the evidence reported in this paper,
 30
      For females, incarceration is not an empirically important phenomenon.


                                                         24
but the parameters are much less precisely estimated. See Table S25 in our Web Appendix.31

       Two latent factors associated with cognitive and noncognitive skills explain a wide array of
teenage and young adult behaviors. Noncognitive abilities play a major role in explaining these
behaviors and they are valued as direct determinants of wages in most educational labor markets.



8        Relationship of Our Work to Previous Research

Early work by Bowles and Gintis (1976) presents evidence suggesting that employers in low skill

markets value docility, dependability, and persistence more than cognitive skills. In a similar vein,

Edwards (1976) shows that dependability and consistency are more valued by blue collar supervisors

than are cognitive ability or independent thought. Klein, Spady, and Weiss (1991) document

that the premium accorded high school graduates compared to high school dropouts in semiskilled
and skilled occupations is due primarily to the higher level of job stability (lower quit rates) and

dependability (lower absenteeism) of high school graduates, and not their greater productivity in
final output. However, they do not present estimates of the effects of noncognitive skills on wages.
Peter Mueser, writing in chapter 5 of Jencks (1979), uses least squares to find that skills such as
industriousness, perseverance, and leadership have statistically significant influences on wages—

comparable to estimated effects of schooling, IQ, and parental socioeconomic status—even after
controlling for standard human capital variables.
       In more recent work, Osborne-Groves (2004) studies the effect of personality and behavioral
traits on the wages of females. Using two data sets and alternative instruments for adult per-

sonality measures, she finds that personality traits such as fatalism, aggression, and withdrawal

have significantly negative effects on wages. She does not control for the effect of schooling on the

measurements she uses.32 Bowles, Gintis, and Osborne (2001) present a model in which incentive-
enhancing preferences that allow employers to induce greater effort at a lower cost (such as a low
  31
     There is an additional problem with these data. Both cognitive and noncognitive abilities change with age.
Cunha and Heckman (2003) model the evolution of both cognitive and noncognitive skills over the lifecycle. Even
IQ is not stable before age 8 (see Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov, 2006). Let at be ability at age t. If
at = λat−1 + bt + εt , where bt is a growth trend and εt is an iid innovation, early measurement of at may be a poor
approximation for the later measurement used in this paper. Thus, while use of early measurements circumvents the
problem of reverse causality, it creates a measurement error problem because at0 (t0 < t) is not the same as at .
  32
     Her instruments include lagged wages, and so are suspect.



                                                        25
time discount rate, a high degree of self-directedness and personal efficacy, a low disutility of effort,

and a tendency of being helpful toward other employees) are rewarded in a competitive labor market
in the form of increased wages. Our evidence supports their analysis because noncognitive traits
raise wages in most labor markets for schooling of different levels.

   Heckman and Rubinstein (2001) use evidence from the General Educational Development (GED)
testing program (an exam-certified alternative high school degree) to demonstrate the quantitative

importance of noncognitive skills. GED recipients have the same cognitive ability as high school

graduates who do not go to college, as measured by the AFQT score. However, once cognitive
ability is controlled for, GED recipients have the same or lower hourly wages as those of high school

dropouts. Their earnings are lower. This pattern would be predicted by our model because GEDs

have lower noncognitive skills than dropouts (see Figure 3) and hence are less likely to be employed

and to acquire work experience, and also have lower levels of a characteristic valued in the labor
market.
   Darity, Goldsmith, and Veum (1997) use the NLSY79 to estimate the effect of Rosenberg and

Rotter scales on wages. They control for the endogeneity of the test scores in wage equations using
an instrumental variables procedure but they do not correct for the endogeneity of schooling in
the wage equation nor do they estimate the distributions of latent ability. However, their reported
estimates qualitatively agree with ours. Elasticities of wage equations with respect to predicted

noncognitive test scores are of comparable magnitudes as elasticities of wage equations with respect
to conventional human capital variables.

   It is quite instructive to compare our results on the effects of cognitive and noncognitive skills
on wages to results from conventional approaches. As discussed in Section 2, the standard approach

of regressing wages on measured test scores suffers from several problems. First, wages are typically

regressed on cognitive and noncognitive test scores, schooling dummies and a set of other controls

(as in Column A in Table 1). This is problematic because schooling is a choice variable and schooling

choices depend on cognitive and noncognitive skills, as we have shown. Removing schooling dummies
solves this source of endogeneity problems and changes the parameters estimated to be net effects

of these skills on wages (as in Column B in Table 1). These net effects do not isolate the effect

of ability on wages. Furthermore, since schooling at the time of the test affects test scores, test

                                                   26
scores are still endogenous in the wage equation. Finally, there is the problem of measurement

error. Test scores are imperfect proxies for latent cognitive and noncognitive abilities because they
are affected by measured characteristics such as family background. Because these problems likely
bias the estimates in different directions, we cannot predict whether OLS estimates will be higher

or lower than those of our model.
       We can simulate our model given the exogenous conditioning variables to predict the test score

that each individual would have received had he been in grades 9-11 at the time he took the test. We

predict test scores by drawing the factors from the population distribution. Using these corrected
test scores in an OLS wage regression alleviates the problem that schooling affects the test score,

but measurement error remains because the test score is not the same as the factor it proxies.

Table 4 displays the (standardized) coefficients from OLS on measured test scores (columns i and

iv), OLS using corrected test scores (ii and v) and the same simulated factor as used to generate
the corrected test score without measurement error.33 We find that estimated returns to ability are
typically much smaller using corrected rather than actual test scores. Endogeneity of test scores

(and reverse causality in the regressions that are not run separately by schooling level) produces
estimates that are generally upward biased. Estimates using the simulated factor are typically
much larger than those using corrected (or even actual) test scores. Measurement error causes a
significant downward bias, that is typically larger than the upward bias due to endogeneity and

reverse causality. This effect is especially pronounced for noncognitive skills.



9        Conclusion

This paper presents new evidence that both cognitive and noncognitive abilities determine social

and economic success. For many dimensions of behavior and for the sense of “importance” adopted

in this paper, noncognitive ability is as important, if not more important, than cognitive ability. Our
findings challenge a pervasive view in the literatures in economics and psychology that cognitive

ability, as measured by test scores, plays a dominant role in explaining personal achievement.

Although cognitive skills explain much more of the variance of (log) wages, their effects on (log)
  33
    The standardized coefficient is obtained by multiplying the original coefficient by the standard deviation of the
variable to which it is associated.

                                                         27
wages (as measured by skill gradients) are similar to the effects of the noncognitive traits. In fact

noncognitive skills are about equally strong in many outcomes and are stronger for some outcomes.
Of course, equal strength in the sense we have used it does not translate into equal cost of changing
these skills.

   A low dimensional model of cognitive and noncognitive abilities explains a diverse array of
outcomes. It explains correlated risky behaviors among youth. Noncognitive ability affects the

acquisition of skills, productivity in the market and a variety of behaviors. Cognitive ability affects

market productivity, skill acquisition and a variety of behaviors. Schooling raises measured cognitive
ability and measured noncognitive ability.

   Our evidence is consistent with an emerging body of literature that establishes the importance

of psychic costs in explaining why many students do not continue their schooling, even though it

is financially rewarding to do so. Cunha, Heckman, and Navarro (2005a,b, 2006) and Cunha and
Heckman (2005)establish that these costs are related to cognitive ability. Our evidence suggests
that noncognitive ability - motivation, persistence and self-esteem - also plays a substantial role,

but we have not, in this paper, linked our measures of noncognitive ability to conventional measures
of time preference, risk aversion and preferences for leisure.
   Our evidence that multiple abilities determine schooling challenges the conventional single skill
signalling model due to Arrow (1973) and Spence (1973). A special challenge is the GED pro-

gram where the credential (the GED test) conveys multiple conflicting signals. GED recipients are
smarter than other high school dropouts but they have lower noncognitive skills. This violates the

standard single crossing property used in conventional signalling theory and requires a substantial
reformulation of that theory. See Araujo, Gottlieb, and Moreira (2004).

   Our demonstration that noncognitive skills are important in explaining a diverse array of be-

haviors helps to explain why early childhood programs, like Headstart and the Perry Preschool

program, are effective. The evidence from these programs indicates that they do not boost IQ

but they raise noncognitive skills and therefore promote success in social and economic life. Our
evidence of gender differentials in the effects of noncognitive skills on certain behaviors goes part

way in explaining the gender differentials found in the Perry Preschool program (Heckman, 2005,

discusses these differentials). The differential effect of Perry on raising female employment at age 27

                                                  28
and on reducing high school dropout rates compared to the male results is consistent with the much

steeper gradient of female employment and dropout rates with respect to changes in noncognitive
skills compared to that of males.




                                               29
References

Araujo, A., D. Gottlieb, and H. Moreira (2004, December). A Model of Mixed Signals with Appli-
  cations to Countersignaling and the GED. Working paper, Sociedade Brasileira de Econometria.

Arrow, K. J. (1973, July). Higher Education as a Filter. Journal of Public Economics 2 (3), 193–216.

Biglan, A. (2004). Helping Adolescents at Risk: Prevention of Multiple Problem Behaviors. New
  York: Guilford Press.

Bonhomme, S. and J.-M. Robin (2004). Nonparametric Identification and Estimation of Indepen-

  dent Factor Models. Unpublished working paper, Sorbonne, Paris.

Bowles, S. and H. Gintis (1976). Schooling in Capitalist America: Educational Reform and the
  Contradictions of Economic Life. New York: Basic Books.

Bowles, S., H. Gintis, and M. Osborne (2001, December). The Determinants of Earnings: A
  Behavioral Approach. Journal of Economic Literature 39 (4), 1137–1176.

Browning, M., L. P. Hansen, and J. J. Heckman (1999, December). Micro Data and General
  Equilibrium Models. In J. B. Taylor and M. Woodford (Eds.), Handbook of Macroeconomics,
  Volume 1A, Chapter 8, pp. 543–633. Elsevier.

Cameron, S. V. and J. J. Heckman (1998, April). Life Cycle Schooling and Dynamic Selection Bias:
  Models and Evidence for Five Cohorts of American Males. Journal of Political Economy 106 (2),

  262–333.

Cameron, S. V. and J. J. Heckman (2001, June). The Dynamics of Educational Attainment for

  Black, Hispanic, and White Males. Journal of Political Economy 109 (3), 455–99.

Carneiro, P., K. Hansen, and J. J. Heckman (2003, May). Estimating Distributions of Treatment

  Effects with an Application to the Returns to Schooling and Measurement of the Effects of

  Uncertainty on College Choice. International Economic Review 44 (2), 361–422. 2001 Lawrence
  R. Klein Lecture.



                                                 30
Carneiro, P. and J. J. Heckman (2003). Human Capital Policy. In J. J. Heckman, A. B. Krueger,

  and B. M. Friedman (Eds.), Inequality in America: What Role for Human Capital Policies?
  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Carneiro, P., J. J. Heckman, and D. V. Masterov (2005, April). Labor Market Discrimination and
  Racial Differences in Pre-Market Factors. Journal of Law and Economics 47 (1), 1–39.

Cawley, J., J. J. Heckman, and E. J. Vytlacil (2001, September). Three Observations on Wages
  and Measured Cognitive Ability. Labour Economics 8 (4), 419–442.

Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2003). The Technology of Skill Formation. Unpublished manuscript,

  University of Chicago, presented at AEA meetings, January, 2003, San Diego, CA and Federal
  Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, October, 2004. Revised May, 2005 for presentation at the Society

  for Economic Dynamics and Control.

Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2005). A Framework for the Analysis of Inequality. Journal of
  Macroeconomics, forthcoming.

Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, L. J. Lochner, and D. V. Masterov (2006). Interpreting the Evidence on
  Life Cycle Skill Formation. In E. A. Hanushek and F. Welch (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics

  of Education. Amsterdam: North-Holland. forthcoming.

Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, and S. Navarro (2005a, August). The Evolution of Earnings Risk in the

  US Economy. Presented at the 9th World Congress of the Econometric Society, London. Previ-

  ously “Separating Heterogeneity from Uncertainty in an Aiyagari-Laitner Economy,” presented
  at the Goldwater Conference on Labor Markets, Arizona State University, March 2004.

Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, and S. Navarro (2005b, April). Separating Uncertainty from Heterogene-

  ity in Life Cycle Earnings, The 2004 Hicks Lecture. Oxford Economic Papers 57 (2), 191–261.

Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, and S. Navarro (2006). Counterfactual Analysis of Inequality and Social
  Mobility. In S. L. Morgan, D. B. Grusky, and G. S. Fields (Eds.), Mobility and Inequality:

  Frontiers of Research from Sociology and Economics, Chapter 4. Palo Alto: Stanford University

  Press. forthcoming.

                                               31
Darity, W. A., A. Goldsmith, and J. Veum (1997, October). The Impact of Psychological and

  Human Capital on Wages. Economic Inquiry 35 (4), 818–829.

Duckworth, A. L. and M. E. P. Seligman (2005, November). Self-Discipline Outdoes IQ in Predicting
  Academic Performance of Adolescents. Psychological Science 16 (12), 939–944.

Edwards, R. C. (1976, Winter). Individual Traits and Organizational Incentives: What Makes a

  “Good” Worker? Journal of Human Resources 11 (1), 51–68.

Ellwood, D. T. and T. J. Kane (2000). Who Is Getting a College Education? Family Background
  and the Growing Gaps in Enrollment. In S. Danziger and J. Waldfogel (Eds.), Securing the Future:

  Investing in Children from Birth to College, pp. 283–324. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Hansen, K. T., J. J. Heckman, and K. J. Mullen (2004, July-August). The Effect of Schooling and

  Ability on Achievement Test Scores. Journal of Econometrics 121 (1-2), 39–98.

Heckman, J. J. (1981). Statistical Models for Discrete Panel Data. In C. Manski and D. McFad-
  den (Eds.), Structural Analysis of Discrete Data with Econometric Applications, pp. 114–178.
  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Heckman, J. J. (1995, October). Lessons from The Bell Curve. Journal of Political Economy 103 (5),
  1091.

Heckman, J. J. (2005). Invited Comments. In L. J. Schweinhart, J. Montie, Z. Xiang, W. S. Barnett,

  C. R. Belfield, and M. Nores (Eds.), Lifetime Effects: The High/Scope Perry Preschool Study
  Through Age 40, pp. 229–233. Ypsilanti, MI: High/Scope Press. Monographs of the High/Scope

  Educational Research Foundation, 14.

Heckman, J. J., M. I. Larenas, and S. Urzua (2004). Accounting for the Effect of Schooling and
  Abilities in the Analysis of Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Achievement Test Scores. Unpublished

  manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.

Heckman, J. J., L. J. Lochner, and P. E. Todd (2006). Earnings Equations and Rates of Return:

  The Mincer Equation and Beyond. In E. A. Hanushek and F. Welch (Eds.), Handbook of the

  Economics of Education. Amsterdam: North-Holland. forthcoming.

                                                32
Heckman, J. J. and D. V. Masterov (2004, September). The Productivity Argument for Investing in

  Young Children. Technical Report Working Paper No. 5, Committee on Economic Development.

Heckman, J. J. and S. Navarro (2006). Dynamic Discrete Choice and Dynamic Treatment Effects.
  Journal of Econometrics, forthcoming.

Heckman, J. J. and Y. Rubinstein (2001, May). The Importance of Noncognitive Skills: Lessons
  from the GED Testing Program. American Economic Review 91 (2), 145–149.

Heckman, J. J., J. Stixrud, and S. Urzua (2006). The Effects of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skills

  on Racial and Ethnic Wage Gaps. Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, Department

  of Economics.

Heckman, J. J., S. Urzua, and E. J. Vytlacil (2004). Understanding Instrumental Variables in

  Models with Essential Heterogeneity. Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, Depart-
  ment of Economics. Review of Economics and Statistics Lecture, 2002. Under review, Review of
  Economics and Statistics.

Heckman, J. J. and E. J. Vytlacil (2005, May). Structural Equations, Treatment Effects and
  Econometric Policy Evaluation. Econometrica 73 (3), 669–738.

Herrnstein, R. J. and C. A. Murray (1994). The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure in

  American Life. New York: Free Press.

Herrnstein, R. J. and J. Q. Wilson (1985). Crime and Human Nature: The Definitive Study of the

  Causes of Crime. New York: Simon and Schuster.

Jencks, C. (1979). Who Gets Ahead? The Determinants of Economic Success in America. New

  York: Basic Books.

Jensen, A. R. (1998). The g Factor: The Science of Mental Ability. Westport, CT: Praeger.

Jöreskog, K. G. (1977). Structural Equations Models in the Social Sciences: Specification, Esti-

  mation and Testing. In P. Krishnaiah (Ed.), Applications of Statistics, pp. 265–287. New York:

  North-Holland.

                                               33
Jöreskog, K. G. and A. S. Goldberger (1975, September). Estimation of a Model with Multiple

  Indicators and Multiple Causes of a Single Latent Variable. Journal of the American Statistical
  Association 70 (351), 631–639.

Klein, R., R. Spady, and A. Weiss (1991, October). Factors Affecting the Output and Quit Propen-

  sities of Production Workers. Review of Economic Studies 58 (5), 929–953.

Neal, D. A. and W. R. Johnson (1996, October). The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-White

  Wage Differences. Journal of Political Economy 104 (5), 869–895.

Osborne-Groves, M. (2004, March). How Important is Your Personality? Labor Market Returns
  to Personality for Women in the US and UK. Unpublished manuscript, Towson University,

  Department of Economics. In press at Journal of Economic Psychology.

Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the Adolescent Self-Image. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University

  Press.

Rotter, J. B. (1966). Generalized Expectancies for Internal versus External Control of Reinforce-
  ment. Washington DC: American Psychological Association.

Segal, C. (2005). Misbehavior, Education, and Labor Market Outcomes. Unpublished Manuscript,

  Stanford University.

Spence, A. M. (1973, August). Job Market Signaling. Quarterly Journal of Economics 87 (3),

  355–374.

Wolfe, R. N. and S. D. Johnson (1995, April). Personality as a Predictor of College Performance.
  Educational And Psychological Measurement 55 (2), 177–185.




                                               34
                          Table 1- Estimated Coefficients from Log Hourly Wage Regressions
                                                                            (a)
                                       NLSY79 - Males and Females at Age 30
                                                                                                              (e)
                                                      Males                                         Females
            (b)
Variables                                      (A)                      (B)                 (A)                    (B)
GED                                           0.017                                       -0.002
                                             (0.048)                                      (0.056)
HS Graduate                                   0.087                                        0.059
                                             (0.035)                                      (0.044)
Some College, No Degree                       0.146                                        0.117
                                             (0.044)                                      (0.052)
2-Year College Degree                         0.215                                        0.233
                                             (0.058)                                      (0.058)
4-Year College Degree                         0.292                                        0.354
                                             (0.046)                                      (0.054)
                    (c)
Cognitive Measure                             0.121                   0.1900               0.169                  0.251
                                             (0.016)                  (0.013)             (0.017)                (0.014)
                        (d)
Noncognitive Measure                          0.042                    0.052               0.028                  0.041
                                             (0.011)                  (0.012)             (0.013)                (0.013)
Constant                                      2.558                    2.690               2.178                  2.288
                                             (0.057)                  (0.050)             (0.063)                (0.052)
Notes: (a) We exclude the oversample of blacks, Hispanics and poor whites, the military sample, and those currently enrolled in
college; (b) The model includes a set of cohort dummies, local labor market conditions (unemployment rate), the region of
residence, and race. Column A presents the estimates obtained from OLS. Column B presents the results from an OLS model
in which the schooling dummies are excluded; (c) The cognitive measure represents the standardized average over the ASVAB
scores (arithmetic reasoning, word knowledge, paragraph comprehension, math knowledge and coding speed); (d) The
noncognitive measure is computed as a (standardized) average of the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale and Rotter Internal-External
Locus of Control Scale. Standard errors in parentheses; (e) For females we also estimate the equations correcting for selection
into the labor force. The results presented in this table are robust to this correction.
                                                                                   Table 2A. Variables in the empirical implementation of the model
                                                                                                          Outcome Equations

                                                                                 Log of Hourly Wage ,
                                                                                                       (a)
                                                                                                                                                     Educational Choice Model (d)                                                     Behavioral Outcomes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (e)

                                                                                  Employment (b) and                                                    (Multinomial Probit)                                                         Work Experience(f) and
                                                                                                 (c)
Variables                                                                     Occupational Choice Models               HS Dropouts GED   HS Graduates Some College, No Degree                 2-yr. degree       4-yr. degree        Fertililty Choice Model (g)
Black (Dummy)                                                                              Yes                              Yes         Yes  Yes                 Yes                              Yes                   -                        Yes
Hispanic (Dummy)                                                                           Yes                              Yes         Yes  Yes                 Yes                              Yes                   -                        Yes
Region of Residence (Dummy Variables)                                                      Yes                               -                -                   -                                 -                   -                         -
Urban Residence (Dummy)                                                                    Yes                               -                -                   -                                 -                   -                         -
Local Unemployment Rate at age 30                                                          Yes                               -                -                   -                                 -                   -                         -
Living in a Urban area at age 14 (Dummy)                                                    -                               Yes         Yes  Yes                 Yes                              Yes                   -                        Yes
Living in the South at age 14 (Dummy)                                                       -                               Yes         Yes  Yes                 Yes                              Yes                   -                        Yes
Family income in 1979                                                                       -                               Yes         Yes  Yes                 Yes                              Yes                   -                        Yes
Broken home at Age 14 (Dummy)                                                               -                               Yes         Yes  Yes                 Yes                              Yes                   -                        Yes
Number of Siblings at Age 17 (Dummy)                                                        -                               Yes         Yes  Yes                 Yes                              Yes                   -                        Yes
Mother's Highest Grade Completed at Age 17                                                  -                               Yes         Yes  Yes                 Yes                              Yes                   -                        Yes
Father's Highest Grade Completed at Age 17                                                  -                               Yes         Yes  Yes                 Yes                              Yes                   -                        Yes
Local Wage of High School Dropouts at Age 17                                                -                               Yes          -    -                   -                                 -                   -                         -
Local Unemployment Rate of High School Dropouts at Age 17                                   -                               Yes          -    -                   -                                 -                   -                         -
Local Wage of High School Graduates at Age 17                                               -                                -           -   Yes                  -                                 -                   -                         -
Local Unemployment Rate of High School Graduates at Age 17                                  -                                -           -   Yes                  -                                 -                   -                         -
Local Wage of Attendees of Some College at Age 17                                           -                                -           -    -                  Yes                                -                   -                         -
Local Unemployment Rate of Attendees of Some College at Age 17                              -                                -           -    -                  Yes                                -                   -                         -
Local Wage for College Graduates at Age 17                                                  -                                -           -    -                   -                                 -                 Yes
Local Unemployment Rate for College Graduates at Age 17                                                                                  -                        -                                 -                 Yes
Tuition at Two Year College at Age 17                                                              -                         -           -    -                   -                               Yes                   -                         -
Tuition at Four Year College at Age 17                                                                                       -           -    -                   -                                 -                 Yes                         -
GED Costs                                                                                          -                         -          Yes   -                   -                                 -                   -                         -
Cohort Dummies                                                                                    Yes                       Yes         Yes  Yes                 Yes                              Yes                   -                        Yes
Factors
                                                               Cognitive Factor                   Yes                       Yes                Yes                     Yes                        Yes                   -                        Yes
                                                           Noncognitive Factor                    Yes                       Yes                Yes                     Yes                        Yes                   -                        Yes
Notes: (a) The log hourly wage model is estimated for six different categories: high school dropouts, GEDs, high school graduates, some college but no degree, 2-year college graduates, and 4-year college graduates. Hourly wages are measured at age 30. (b)
Employment is at age 30. (c) Occupational Choice is White Collar or Blue Collar, conditional on being employed at age 30. (d) The educational choice model is estimated considering six different categories: high school dropouts, GEDs, high school
graduates, some college but no degree, 2-year college graduates, and 4-year college graduates. (e) Four behavioral choices are estimated: whether an individual smokes daily by age 18; whether an individual smoked marijuana in 1979 or 1980; whether an
individual has been incarcerated by age 30 (estimated only for men); and whether an individual participated in any of the following illegal activities in 1979 or 1980: attempting to "con" someone, taking a vehicle without the owner's permission, shoplifting,
intentionally damaging another person's property, or using force to obtain things. (f) Experience is measured as total years of work experience by age 30. (g) The fertility choice model is a multinomial probit. It is estimated only for women and considers four
choices for marital/fertility status by age 18: single with child, single with no child, married with child, and married with no child.
                             Table 2B. Variables in the empirical implementation of the model
                                                     Auxiliary Measures

  Variables                                                  Test Scores (Cognitive Measures (a))      Attitude Scales (Noncognitive Measures(b))
  Black (Dummy)                                                             Yes                                           Yes
  Hispanic (Dummy)                                                          Yes                                           Yes
  Living in a Urban area at age 14 (Dummy)                                  Yes                                           Yes
  Living in the South at age 14 (Dummy)                                     Yes                                           Yes
  Mother's Highest Grade Completed at Age 17                                Yes                                           Yes
  Father's Highest Grade Completed at Age 17                                Yes                                           Yes
  Number of Siblings at Age 17 (Dummy)                                      Yes                                           Yes
  Family income in 1979                                                     Yes                                           Yes
  Broken home (Dummy)                                                       Yes                                           Yes
  Cohort Dummies                                                            Yes                                           Yes
  Factors
                                       Cognitive Factor                      Yes                                            -
                                    Noncognitive Factor                       -                                            Yes

Notes: (a) Test scores are standardized to have within-sample mean 0, variance 1. The included cognitive measures are Arithmetic Reasoning,
Word Knowledge, Paragraph Comprehension, Math Knowledge, and Coding Speed. ; (b) The included noncognitive measures are Rotter Locus of
Control Scale and Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale. The locus of control scale is based on the four-item abbreviated version of the Rotter Internal-
External Locus of Control Scale. This scale is designed to measure the extent to which individuals believe they have control over their lives through
self-motivation or self-determination (internal control) as opposed to the extent that the enviroment controls their lives (external control). The self-
esteem scale is based on the 10-item Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale. This scale describes a degree of approval or disapproval toward oneself. In
both cases, we standardize the test scores to have within-sample mean 0 and variance 1, after taking averages over the respective sets of scales.
     Table 3A. Estimated Coefficients of the Cognitive and Noncognitive Factors for the Log Hourly Wage Model (a), (b),(c ),(d)

                                                     Sample from NLSY79-Males at Age 30


Schooling Level
                                                             Cognitive                                             Noncognitive

                      HS Dropout                                0.113                                                  0.424
                                                               (0.076)                                                (0.092)
                             GED                                0.175                                                  0.357
                                                               (0.107)                                                (0.117)
                     HS Graduate                                0.259                                                  0.360
                                                               (0.041)                                                (0.059)
      Some College, No Degree                                   0.069                                                  0.401
                                                               (0.086)                                                (0.110)
          2-Year College Degree                                 0.039                                                  0.368
                                                               (0.138)                                                (0.209)
          4-Year College Degree                                 0.296                                                 -0.060
                                                               (0.075)                                                (0.175)
Notes: (a) The cognitive measure represents the standardized average over the raw ASVAB scores (arithmetic reasoning, word knowledge, paragraph
comprehension, math knowledge and coding speed); (b) The noncognitive measure is computed as a (standardized) average of the Rosenberg Self-Esteem
Scale and Rotter Internal-External Locus of Control Scale; (c) We exclude the oversample of blacks, Hispanics and poor whites, the military sample, and
those currently enrolled in college. Standard errors in parentheses. (d) The model also includes a set of cohort dummies, local labor market conditions
(unemployment rate), and the region of residence.
     Table 3B. Estimated Coefficients of the Cognitive and Noncognitive Factors for the Log Hourly Wage Model (a), (b),(c ),(d)

                                                    Sample from NLSY79-Females at Age 30


Schooling Level
                                                             Cognitive                                             Noncognitive

                      HS Dropout                                0.322                                                  0.208
                                                               (0.125)                                                (0.103)
                             GED                                0.020                                                  0.242
                                                               (0.137)                                                (0.153)
                     HS Graduate                                0.341                                                  0.564
                                                               (0.049)                                                (0.056)
      Some College, No Degree                                   0.093                                                  0.569
                                                               (0.084)                                                (0.116)
          2-Year College Degree                                 0.206                                                  0.279
                                                               (0.096)                                                (0.145)
          4-Year College Degree                                 0.290                                                  0.379
                                                               (0.066)                                                (0.103)
Notes: (a) The cognitive measure represents the standardized average over the raw ASVAB scores (arithmetic reasoning, word knowledge, paragraph
comprehension, math knowledge and coding speed); (b) The noncognitive measure is computed as a (standardized) average of the Rosenberg Self-Esteem
Scale and Rotter Internal-External Locus of Control Scale; (c) We exclude the oversample of blacks, Hispanics and poor whites, the military sample, and
those currently enrolled in college. Standard errors in parentheses. (d) The model also includes a set of cohort dummies, local labor market conditions
(unemployment rate), and the region of residence.
                                                                                                                                                                                   (a)
                                        Table 4. Standarized OLS Coefficients of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skills from Log Hourly Wage Regressions
                                            by Different Skill Measures: Measured Test Scores, Corrected Test Scores and Latent Abilities (Factors)
                                                                            Sample from the NLSY79--Males at age 30
                                                                                           Cognitive Ability                                                              Noncognitive Ability
Schooling Level                                                          (i)                      (ii)                       (iii)                        (iv)                    (v)                          (vi)
HS Dropout                                                             0.047                    0.019                       0.039                        0.072                  0.023                        0.133
GED                                                                    0.074                    0.068                       0.101                        0.018                  0.056                        0.157
HS Graduate                                                            0.087                    0.064                       0.102                        0.035                  0.016                        0.113
Some College, No Degree                                                -0.018                  -0.012                       0.024                        0.041                   0.03                        0.131
2-Year College Degree                                                   0.04                   -0.047                        0.01                        0.022                  0.056                        0.133
4-Year College Degree                                                   0.12                    0.113                       0.124                        0.054                  -0.002                       -0.005
Overall (Including Schooling Dummies)                                  0.107                    0.066                       0.097                        0.043                  0.021                        0.112
Overall (Excluding Schooling Dummies)                                  0.177                    0.143                       0.134                        0.055                  0.043                        0.135

Notes: All columns display the coefficient on cognitive or noncognitive ability as measured by either an observed test score, a corrected test score or the latent factor in a regression of log hourly wages on the respective
measure and a full set of controls (black and Hispanic dummy variables, a set of cohort dummies, local labor market conditions (unemployment rate), and variables controlling for characteristics of the regions of
residence) by schooling level at age 30 and overall. In columns (i) and (iv) the cognitive measure is the standardized sum of scores on the Arithmetic Reasoning, Word Knowledge, Paragraph Comprehension, Math
Knowledge, and Coding Speed components of the ASVAB and the noncognitive measure is the standardized sum of scores on the Rotter Locus of Control and Rosenberg Self-Esteem scales. In columns (ii) and (v) the
above cognitive and noncognitive test scores are replaced by Corrected Test Scores. These Corrected Test Scores are obtained by using our structural model to predict test scores for each individual had they been in
the test. This procedure requires the value of the latent abilities for each individual (which of course are not available in the NLSY79 sample). We overcome this issue by simulating a sample of 14,400 individuals from
our structural model that combines observable controls from the NLSY79 data and draws of the latent factors. For each individual in this sample we then use the parameters from the estimated test score equations for 9-
11 years of schooling at the time of the test, the individual’s observable controls, and two latent abilities drawn from the estimated factor distributions to construct Corrected Test Scores. The same method is used to
construct the individual wages that are used in this regression. The estimates in Columns (iii) and (vi) are obtained by using simulated latent abilities (the same values used to construct the Correct Test Scores and wages
in columns (ii) and (v)) instead of test scores as cognitive and noncognitive measures in the wage regressions. As before, the wages in this regression are simulated from our model. (a) The standardized coefficient is
obtained by multiplying the original coefficient by the standard deviation of the variable to which it is associated. This allows us to make comparisons across columns.
                                                    Figure 1
                      Perry Preschool Program: IQ, by Age and Treatment Group

     10 0

                          95.5               94.9
      95
                                                             91.3         91.7
      90                                                                                    88.1   87.7
IQ




                                                                          87. 1                                   85
      85                                                     86.3                      86.9        86.8
                                                                                                            84.6
                               83. 3         83.5
               79.6
      80
               78.5
      75
            Entry          4             5               6            7                 8           9             10
                                                                Age
                                       Treatment Group                            Control Group


Source: Perry Preschool Program. IQ measured on the Stanford−Binet Intelligence Scale (Terman & Merrill, 1960).
Test was administered at program entry and each of the ages indicated.
                           Figure 2. Distribution of Test Scores by Gender and Schooling Level
                           A. Cognitive Measure − Males.                                                 B. Cognitive Measure − Females.




                                                                                       .8
         .8




                                                                                       .6
         .6
 Frequency




                                                                               Frequency
                                                                                       .4
         .4




                                                                                       .2
         .2
         0




                                                                                       0
              −4      −2                      0                2          4                 −4      −2                       0                 2                     4
                                           AFQT                                                                           AFQT



                            C. Noncognitive Measure − Males.                                              D. Noncognitive Measure − Females.




                                                                                       .5
                                                                                                                                                   HS Drop.
         .4




                                                                                                                                                   GEDs

                                                                                                                                                   HS Grad.




                                                                                       .4
         .3




                                                                                                                                                   Some College

                                                                                                                                                   2yr Coll. Grad.




                                                                                       .3
 Frequency




                                                                               Frequency
                                                                                                                                                   4yr Coll. Grad.
         .2




                                                                                       .2
         .1




                                                                                       .1
         0




                                                                                       0




              −4      −2                      0                2          4                 −4      −2                       0                 2                     4
                                        Attitude Scale                                                                 Attitude Scale


Notes: The cognitive measure represents the standardized average over the ASVAB scores (arithmetic reasoning, word knowledge, paragraph comprehension, numerical
operations and coding speed). The noncognitive measure is computed as a (standardized) average of the Rosenberg Self−Esteem Scale and Rotter Internal−External
Locus of Control Scale. The schooling levels represent the observed schooling level by age 30 in the NLSY79 sample (See Web Appendix A for details).
                            Figure 3. Distribution of Factors by Gender and Schooling Level
                               A. Cognitive Factor − Males.                                                   B. Cognitive Factor − Females.
         1.25




                                                                                        1.25
         1




                                                                                        1
         .75




                                                                                        .75
 Frequency




                                                                                Frequency
         .5




                                                                                        .5
         .25




                                                                                        .25
         0




                                                                                        0
                −2     −1                     0                1           2                   −2     −1                      0                 1                      2
                                     Non−cognitive Factor                                                            Non−cognitive Factor



                             C. Noncognitive Factor − Males.                                                D. Noncognitive Factor − Females.




                                                                                        1.5
         2




                                                                                                                                                     HS Drop.

                                                                                                                                                     GEDs

                                                                                                                                                     HS Grad.
         1.5




                                                                                                                                                     Some College




                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                     2yr Coll. Grad.
 Frequency




                                                                                Frequency
                                                                                                                                                     4yr Coll. Grad.
         1




                                                                                        .5
         .5
         0




                                                                                        0




                −1    −.5                     0                .5          1                   −1     −.5                     0                 .5                     1
                                     Non−cognitive Factor                                                            Non−cognitive Factor


Notes: The factors are simulated from the estimates of the model. The schooling levels represent the predicted schooling level by age 30. These schooling levels
are obtained from the structure and estimates of the model and our sample of the NLSY79 (See Web Appendix A for details). The simulated data contain 19,600 observations.
                                                               Figure 4A. Effect of schooling on ASVAB Components for person with average ability
                                                                                                                                              with 95% confidence bands−−Males
                                                                        i. Arithmetic Reasoning                                                                                ii. Word Knowledge                                                                                  iii. Paragraph Comprehension
                                                     1.5




                                                                                                                                                                1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.5
 Expected Value of Test Score, Covariates Fixed at Mean




                                                                                                            Expected Value of Test Score, Covariates Fixed at Mean




                                                                                                                                                                                                                Expected Value of Test Score, Covariates Fixed at Mean
                                                     1




                                                                                                                                                                1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                     .5




                                                                                                                                                                .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .5
                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                     −.5




                                                                                                                                                                −.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −.5
                                                           8       10              12             14   16                                                             8   10            12            14   16                                                             8   10                12                14   16
                                                                            Years of schooling                                                                                   Years of schooling                                                                                      Years of schooling



                                                                         iv. Math Knowledge                                                                                     v. Coding Speed
                                                     1.5




                                                                                                                                                                1.5
 Expected Value of Test Score, Covariates Fixed at Mean




                                                                                                            Expected Value of Test Score, Covariates Fixed at Mean
                                                     1




                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                     .5




                                                                                                                                                                .5
                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                     −.5




                                                                                                                                                                −.5




                                                           8       10              12             14   16                                                             8   10            12            14   16
                                                                            Years of schooling                                                                                   Years of schooling


Notes: We standardize the test scores to have within−sample mean 0, variance 1. The model is estimated using the Age 30 NLSY79 Sample (See Web Appendix A
for details).
                                                               Figure 4B. Effect of schooling on Noncognitive scales for person with average ability
                                                                                                              with 95% confidence bands−−Males
                                                                           i. Rotter Locus of Control Scale                                                                                        ii. Rosenberg Self−Esteem Scale
                                                     .8




                                                                                                                                                                                    .8
                                                     .6




                                                                                                                                                                                    .6
 Expected Value of Test Score, Covariates Fixed at Mean




                                                                                                                                Expected Value of Test Score, Covariates Fixed at Mean
                                                     .4




                                                                                                                                                                                    .4
                                                     .2




                                                                                                                                                                                    .2
                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                     −.2




                                                                                                                                                                                    −.2




                                                           8          10                  12                   14          16                                                             8   10                  12                 14   16
                                                                                   Years of schooling                                                                                                      Years of schooling


Notes: The locus of control scale is based on the four−item abbreviated version of the Rotter Internal−External Locus of Control Scale. This scale is designed to
measure the extent to which individuals believe they have control over their lives through self−motivation or self−determination (internal control) as opposed to
the extent that the enviroment controls their lives (external control). The self−esteem scale is based on the 10−item Rosenberg Self−Esteem Scale. This scale
describes a degree of approval or disapproval toward oneself. In both cases, we standardize the test scores to have within−sample mean 0 and variance 1, after
taking averages over the respective sets of scales. The model is estimated using the Age 30 NLSY79 Sample (See Web Appendix A for details).
                                                                                                                               Figure 5A. Mean Log Wages by Age 30 - Males
                                                                                                                            i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factors



                                                                                        3


                                                                                    2.8


                                                                                    2.6
                                                                        Log Wages




                                                                                    2.4


                                                                                    2.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                     2                                                                                                                             8
                                                                                    10          9            8                                                                                    6
                                                                                                                        7    6                                                          4 Decile of Noncognitive
                                                                                                                 Decile of Cognitive
                                                                                                                                     5   4    3     2                     2
                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                    ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                               iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
                                    3                                                                                                                   3
Confidence Interval (2.75-97.5%)




                                   2.8                                                                                                              2.8
        Log Wages and




                                   2.6                                                                                                              2.6

                                   2.4                                                                                                              2.4

                                   2.2                                                                                                              2.2

                                    2                                                                                                                   2
                                                 1        2        3                4       5            6          7       8      9     10                      1         2        3        4        5            6    7        8         9   10
                                                                                                Decile                                                                                                    Decile

                                         Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
                                         The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
                                         decile of the distribution.
                                                                                                                           Figure 5B. Mean Log Wages by Age 30 - Females
                                                                                                                         i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factors


                                                                                                          3




                                                                                                      2.5




                                                                                          Log Wages
                                                                                                          2




                                                                                                      1.5                                                                                              10
                                                                                                       10                                                                                    8
                                                                                                                     8                                                               6
                                                                                                                                  6                                         4 Decile of Noncognitive
                                                                                                                                             4                     2
                                                                                                                  Decile of Cognitive            2
                                                                      ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor
                                                                                                                                                                                iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
                                    3
                                                                                                                                                     3
Confidence Interval (2.75-97.5%)




                                   2.5
        Log Wages and




                                                                                                                                                  2.5


                                    2
                                                                                                                                                     2


                                   1.5
                                                1        2        3        4        5                 6       7          8       9      10        1.5
                                                                                        Decile
                                                                                                                                                               1        2        3       4        5            6    7        8        9   10
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Decile
                                         Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
                                         The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws).
                                                                   Figure 6A. Mean Log Wages of High School Dropouts by Age 30 - Males
                                                                            i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factors




                                                 3.5



                                                  3
                                     Log Wages




                                                 2.5



                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                 10        9                                                                                                                             8
                                                                    8    7                                                                                                    6
                                                                                   6          5         4                                                        4
                                                                                                                3               2               1       2
                                                                             Decile of Cognitive                                                                Decile of Noncognitive



                                      ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                                         iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
            0.4                                                                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                        Log Wages                                                           Log Wages
                                                                                        2.5%-97.5% CI       3.5                                             2.5%-97.5% CI                                           3.5
            0.3                                                                                                                                 0.3

                                                                                                            3                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                    Log Wages




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Log Wages
Frequency




                                                                                                                                    Frequency
            0.2                                                                                                                                 0.2

                                                                                                            2.5                                                                                                     2.5
            0.1                                                                                                                                 0.1

                                                                                                            2                                                                                                       2
             0                                                                                                                                      0
                        1       2            3         4       5     6   7         8      9        10                                                   1   2        3    4       5      6   7        8   9   10
                                                       Decile                                                                                                        Decile
                  Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
                  The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
                  decile of the distribution.
                                                                 Figure 6B. Mean Log Wages of High School Dropouts by Age 30 - Females
                                                                            i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factors



                                               3.5


                                   Log Wages    3


                                               2.5


                                                2


                                               1.5                                                                                                                                              10
                                               10        9                                                                                                                              8
                                                                   8    7                                                                                                    6
                                                                                  6          5         4                                                        4
                                                                                                               3               2               1       2
                                                                            Decile of Cognitive                                                                Decile of Noncognitive


                                    ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                                          iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
            0.4                                                                                                                                0.4
                                                                                       Log Wages                                                           Log Wages
                                                                                       2.5%-97.5% CI       3.5                                             2.5%-97.5% CI                                          3.5
            0.3                                                                                                                                0.3
                                                                                                           3                                                                                                      3
                                                                                                                   Log Wages




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Log Wages
Frequency




                                                                                                                                   Frequency
            0.2                                                                                                                                0.2
                                                                                                           2.5                                                                                                    2.5

            0.1                                                                                            2                                   0.1                                                                2

             0                                                                                             1.5                                     0                                                              1.5
                       1      2            3         4       5      6   7         8      9        10                                                   1   2        3    4       5      6   7        8   9   10
                                                             Decile                                                                                                               Decile
            Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
            The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
            decile of the distribution.
                                                                           Figure 7A. Mean Log Wages of GEDs by Age 30 - Males
                                                                            i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factors




                                                 3.5



                                                  3
                                     Log Wages




                                                 2.5



                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                                 10        9                                                                                                                            8
                                                                   8   7                                                                                                     6
                                                                                 6          5         4                                                         4
                                                                                                              3               2               1       2
                                                                           Decile of Cognitive                                                                 Decile of Noncognitive



                                      ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                                       iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
            0.4                                                                                                                               0.4
                                                                                      Log Wages                                                                                                      Log Wages
                                                                                      2.5%-97.5% CI                                                                                                  2.5%-97.5% CI
                                                                                                          3.5                                                                                                        3.5
            0.3                                                                                                                               0.3

                                                                                                          3                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                                  Log Wages




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Log Wages
Frequency




                                                                                                                                  Frequency
            0.2                                                                                                                               0.2

                                                                                                          2.5                                                                                                        2.5
            0.1                                                                                                                               0.1

                                                                                                          2                                                                                                          2
             0                                                                                                                                    0
                        1       2            3         4       5   6   7         8      9        10                                                   1   2         3    4       5      6   7        8    9     10
                                                       Decile                                                                                                        Decile
                  Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
                  The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
                  decile of the distribution.
                                                                         Figure 7B. Mean Log Wages of GEDs by Age 30 - Females
                                                                            i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factors



                                                  3.5


                                      Log Wages    3


                                                  2.5


                                                   2


                                                  1.5                                                                                                                                             10
                                                  10        9                                                                                                                             8
                                                                    8    7                                                                                                     6
                                                                                   6          5         4                                                         4
                                                                                                                3               2               1       2
                                                                             Decile of Cognitive                                                                 Decile of Noncognitive


                                       ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                                        iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
            0.4                                                                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                        Log Wages                                                                                                      Log Wages
                                                                                        2.5%-97.5% CI       3.5                                                                                        2.5%-97.5% CI   3.5
            0.3                                                                                                                                 0.3
                                                                                                            3                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                                    Log Wages




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Log Wages
Frequency




                                                                                                                                    Frequency
            0.2                                                                                                                                 0.2
                                                                                                            2.5                                                                                                        2.5

            0.1                                                                                             2                                   0.1                                                                    2

             0                                                                                              1.5                                     0                                                                  1.5
                         1       2            3         4       5    6   7         8      9        10                                                   1   2         3    4       5      6   7        8    9     10
                                                                Decile                                                                                                              Decile
                  Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
                  The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
                  decile of the distribution.
                                                                   Figure 8A. Mean Log Wages of High School Graduates by Age 30 - Males
                                                                             i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factors




                                                 3.5



                                                  3
                                     Log Wages




                                                 2.5



                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                 10        9                                                                                                                              8
                                                                    8    7                                                                                                     6
                                                                                   6          5         4                                                         4
                                                                                                                3               2               1       2
                                                                             Decile of Cognitive                                                                 Decile of Noncognitive



                                      ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                                         iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
            0.4                                                                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                        Log Wages                                                           Log Wages
                                                                                        2.5%-97.5% CI       3.5                                             2.5%-97.5% CI                                           3.5
            0.3                                                                                                                                 0.3

                                                                                                            3                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                    Log Wages




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Log Wages
Frequency




                                                                                                                                    Frequency
            0.2                                                                                                                                 0.2

                                                                                                            2.5                                                                                                     2.5
            0.1                                                                                                                                 0.1

                                                                                                            2                                                                                                       2
             0                                                                                                                                      0
                        1       2            3         4       5     6   7         8      9        10                                                   1   2         3    4       5      6   7        8   9   10
                                                       Decile                                                                                                        Decile
                  Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
                  The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
                  decile of the distribution.
                                                                 Figure 8B. Mean Log Wages of High School Graduates by Age 30 - Females
                                                                            i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factors



                                               3.5


                                   Log Wages    3


                                               2.5


                                                2


                                               1.5                                                                                                                                               10
                                               10        9                                                                                                                               8
                                                                   8    7                                                                                                     6
                                                                                  6          5         4                                                         4
                                                                                                               3               2               1       2
                                                                            Decile of Cognitive                                                                 Decile of Noncognitive


                                    ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                                          iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
            0.4                                                                                                                                0.4
                                                                                       Log Wages                                                           Log Wages
                                                                                       2.5%-97.5% CI       3.5                                             2.5%-97.5% CI                                           3.5
            0.3                                                                                                                                0.3
                                                                                                           3                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                   Log Wages




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Log Wages
Frequency




                                                                                                                                   Frequency
            0.2                                                                                                                                0.2
                                                                                                           2.5                                                                                                     2.5

            0.1                                                                                            2                                   0.1                                                                 2

             0                                                                                             1.5                                     0                                                               1.5
                      1       2            3         4       5      6   7         8      9        10                                                   1   2         3    4       5      6   7        8   9   10
                                                     Decile                                                                                                       Decile
            Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
            The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
            decile of the distribution.
                                                                       Figure 9A. Mean Log Wages of Some College Attenders by Age 30 - Males
                                                                            i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factors




                                                 3.5



                                                  3
                                     Log Wages




                                                 2.5



                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                 10        9                                                                                                                              8
                                                                   8     7                                                                                                     6
                                                                                   6          5         4                                                         4
                                                                                                                3               2               1       2
                                                                             Decile of Cognitive                                                                 Decile of Noncognitive



                                      ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                                         iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
            0.4                                                                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                        Log Wages                                                           Log Wages
                                                                                        2.5%-97.5% CI       3.5                                             2.5%-97.5% CI                                           3.5
            0.3                                                                                                                                 0.3

                                                                                                            3                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                    Log Wages




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Log Wages
Frequency




                                                                                                                                    Frequency
            0.2                                                                                                                                 0.2

                                                                                                            2.5                                                                                                     2.5
            0.1                                                                                                                                 0.1

                                                                                                            2                                                                                                       2
             0                                                                                                                                      0
                        1       2            3         4       5   6     7         8      9        10                                                   1   2         3    4       5      6   7        8   9   10
                                                       Decile                                                                                                        Decile
                  Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
                  The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
                  decile of the distribution.
                                                                      Figure 9B. Mean Log Wages of Some College Attenders by Age 30 - Females
                                                                             i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factors



                                               3.5


                                   Log Wages    3


                                               2.5


                                                2


                                               1.5                                                                                                                                                10
                                               10        9                                                                                                                                8
                                                                 8       7                                                                                                     6
                                                                                   6          5         4                                                         4
                                                                                                                3               2               1       2
                                                                             Decile of Cognitive                                                                 Decile of Noncognitive


                                    ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                                           iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
            0.4                                                                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                        Log Wages                                                           Log Wages
                                                                                        2.5%-97.5% CI       3.5                                             2.5%-97.5% CI                                           3.5
            0.3                                                                                                                                 0.3
                                                                                                            3                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                    Log Wages




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Log Wages
Frequency




                                                                                                                                    Frequency
            0.2                                                                                                                                 0.2
                                                                                                            2.5                                                                                                     2.5

            0.1                                                                                             2                                   0.1                                                                 2

             0                                                                                              1.5                                     0                                                               1.5
                       1      2            3         4       5    6      7         8      9        10                                                   1   2         3    4       5      6   7        8   9   10
                                                             Decile                                                                                                                 Decile
             Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
             The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
             decile of the distribution.
                                                                   Figure 10A. Mean Log Wages of 2-yr College Graduates by Age 30 - Males
                                                                            i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factors




                                                 3.5



                                                  3
                                     Log Wages




                                                 2.5



                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                 10        9                                                                                                                              8
                                                                    8    7                                                                                                     6
                                                                                   6          5         4                                                         4
                                                                                                                3               2               1       2
                                                                             Decile of Cognitive                                                                 Decile of Noncognitive



                                      ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                                         iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
            0.4                                                                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                        Log Wages                                                           Log Wages
                                                                                        2.5%-97.5% CI       3.5                                             2.5%-97.5% CI                                           3.5
            0.3                                                                                                                                 0.3

                                                                                                            3                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                    Log Wages




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Log Wages
Frequency




                                                                                                                                    Frequency
            0.2                                                                                                                                 0.2

                                                                                                            2.5                                                                                                     2.5
            0.1                                                                                                                                 0.1

                                                                                                            2                                                                                                       2
             0                                                                                                                                      0
                        1       2            3         4       5     6   7         8      9        10                                                   1   2         3    4       5      6   7        8   9   10
                                                       Decile                                                                                                        Decile
                  Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
                  The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
                  decile of the distribution.
                                                                 Figure 10B. Mean Log Wages of 2-yr College Graduates by Age 30 - Females
                                                                            i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factors



                                               3.5


                                   Log Wages    3


                                               2.5


                                                2


                                               1.5                                                                                                                                               10
                                               10        9                                                                                                                               8
                                                                   8    7                                                                                                     6
                                                                                  6          5         4                                                         4
                                                                                                               3               2               1       2
                                                                            Decile of Cognitive                                                                 Decile of Noncognitive


                                    ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                                          iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
            0.4                                                                                                                                0.4
                                                                                       Log Wages                                                           Log Wages
                                                                                       2.5%-97.5% CI       3.5                                             2.5%-97.5% CI                                           3.5
            0.3                                                                                                                                0.3
                                                                                                           3                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                   Log Wages




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Log Wages
Frequency




                                                                                                                                   Frequency
            0.2                                                                                                                                0.2
                                                                                                           2.5                                                                                                     2.5

            0.1                                                                                            2                                   0.1                                                                 2

             0                                                                                             1.5                                     0                                                               1.5
                       1      2            3         4       5      6   7         8      9        10                                                   1   2         3    4       5      6   7        8   9   10
                                                      Decile                                                                                                       Decile
             Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
             The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
             decile of the distribution.
                                                                   Figure 11A. Mean Log Wages of 4-yr College Graduates by Age 30 - Males
                                                                            i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factors




                                                 3.5



                                                  3
                                     Log Wages




                                                 2.5



                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                 10        9                                                                                                                              8
                                                                    8    7                                                                                                     6
                                                                                   6          5         4                                                         4
                                                                                                                3               2               1       2
                                                                             Decile of Cognitive                                                                 Decile of Noncognitive



                                      ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                                         iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
            0.4                                                                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                        Log Wages                                                           Log Wages
                                                                                        2.5%-97.5% CI       3.5                                             2.5%-97.5% CI                                           3.5
            0.3                                                                                                                                 0.3

                                                                                                            3                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                    Log Wages




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Log Wages
Frequency




                                                                                                                                    Frequency
            0.2                                                                                                                                 0.2

                                                                                                            2.5                                                                                                     2.5
            0.1                                                                                                                                 0.1

                                                                                                            2                                                                                                       2
             0                                                                                                                                      0
                        1       2            3         4       5     6   7         8      9        10                                                   1   2         3    4       5      6   7        8   9   10
                                                       Decile                                                                                                        Decile
                  Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
                  The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
                  decile of the distribution.
                                                                 Figure 11B. Mean Log Wages of 4-yr College Graduates by Age 30 - Females
                                                                            i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factors



                                               3.5


                                   Log Wages    3


                                               2.5


                                                2


                                               1.5                                                                                                                                               10
                                               10        9                                                                                                                               8
                                                                   8    7                                                                                                     6
                                                                                  6          5         4                                                         4
                                                                                                               3               2               1       2
                                                                            Decile of Cognitive                                                                 Decile of Noncognitive


                                    ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                                          iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
            0.4                                                                                                                                0.4
                                                                                       Log Wages                                                           Log Wages
                                                                                       2.5%-97.5% CI       3.5                                             2.5%-97.5% CI                                           3.5
            0.3                                                                                                                                0.3
                                                                                                           3                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                   Log Wages




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Log Wages
Frequency




                                                                                                                                   Frequency
            0.2                                                                                                                                0.2
                                                                                                           2.5                                                                                                     2.5

            0.1                                                                                            2                                   0.1                                                                 2

             0                                                                                             1.5                                     0                                                               1.5
                      1       2            3         4       5      6   7         8      9        10                                                   1   2         3    4       5      6   7        8   9   10
                                                             Decile                                                                                                                Decile
              Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
              The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
              decile of the distribution.
                                                                                                                           Figure 12A. Probability of Employment at Age 30 - Males
                                                                                                                             i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factor



                                                                                         1


                                                                                     0.8


                                                                                     0.6
                                                                       Probability




                                                                                     0.4


                                                                                     0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                      0                                                                                                                           8
                                                                                     10          9            8                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                       7      6                                                       4
                                                                                                                                        5   4    3   2                  2                  Decile of Noncognitive
                                                                                                                  Decile of Cognitive                        1

                                                                     ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                          iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
                                    1                                                                                                                    1
Confidence Interval (2.75-97.5%)




                                   0.8                                                                                                               0.8
        Probability and




                                   0.6                                                                                                               0.6

                                   0.4                                                                                                               0.4

                                   0.2                                                                                                               0.2

                                    0                                                                                                                    0
                                              1        2         3                   4       5            6        7          8     9       10                   1       2        3        4         5            6   7        8           9   10
                                                                                                 Decile                                                                                                  Decile
                                         Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
                                         The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
                                         decile of the distribution.
                                                                                                                       Figure 12B. Probability of Employment at Age 30 - Females
                                                                                                                          i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factor



                                                                                         1


                                                                                     0.8


                                                                                     0.6
                                                                       Probability




                                                                                     0.4


                                                                                     0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                      0                                                                                                                           8
                                                                                     10          9            8                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                       7     6                                                        4
                                                                                                                                        5   4    3   2                  2                  Decile of Noncognitive
                                                                                                                  Decile of Cognitive                        1

                                                                     ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                          iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
                                    1                                                                                                                    1
Confidence Interval (2.75-97.5%)




                                   0.8                                                                                                               0.8
        Probability and




                                   0.6                                                                                                               0.6

                                   0.4                                                                                                               0.4

                                   0.2                                                                                                               0.2

                                    0                                                                                                                    0
                                              1        2         3                   4       5            6        7        8       9       10                   1       2        3        4         5            6   7        8           9   10
                                                                                                 Decile                                                                                                  Decile
                                         Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
                                         The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
                                         decile of the distribution.
                                                               Figure 13A. Mean Work Experience of High School Dropouts by Age 30 - Males
                                                                           i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factors


                                                  20



                                                  15
                            Years of Experience


                                                  10



                                                   5



                                                   0                                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                  10       9                                                                                                                                              8
                                                                   8         7                                                                                                                   6
                                                                                     6             5        4                                                                   4
                                                                                                                    3                         2               1       2
                                                                       Decile of Cognitive                                                                                              Decile of Noncognitive



                            ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                                                                 iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
            0.4                                                                                                 20                                            0.4                                                                      20
                                                                                             Experience                                                                   Experience
                                                                                             2.5%-97.5% CI                                                                2.5%-97.5% CI

            0.3                                                                                                 15                                            0.3                                                                      15
                                                                                                                        Years of Experience




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Years of Experience
Frequency




                                                                                                                                                  Frequency
            0.2                                                                                                 10                                            0.2                                                                      10


            0.1                                                                                                 5                                             0.1                                                                      5


             0                                                                                                  0                                                 0                                                                    0
                  1    2                3              4       5   6         7       8         9       10                                                             1   2         3        4       5     6     7        8   9   10
                                              Decile                                                                                                       Decile
Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
decile of the distribution.
                                                                          Figure 13B. Mean Work Experience of GEDs by Age 30 - Males
                                                                               i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factors


                                                  20



                                                  15
                            Years of Experience


                                                  10



                                                   5



                                                   0                                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                  10       9                                                                                                                                              8
                                                                   8         7                                                                                                                   6
                                                                                     6             5        4                                                                   4
                                                                                                                    3                         2               1       2
                                                                       Decile of Cognitive                                                                                              Decile of Noncognitive



                            ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                                                                 iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
            0.4                                                                                                 20                                            0.4                                                                             20
                                                                                             Experience                                                                                                                       Experience
                                                                                             2.5%-97.5% CI                                                                                                                    2.5%-97.5% CI

            0.3                                                                                                 15                                            0.3                                                                             15
                                                                                                                        Years of Experience




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Years of Experience
Frequency




                                                                                                                                                  Frequency
            0.2                                                                                                 10                                            0.2                                                                             10


            0.1                                                                                                 5                                             0.1                                                                             5


             0                                                                                                  0                                                 0                                                                           0
                  1    2                3              4       5   6         7       8         9       10                                                             1   2         3        4       5     6     7        8    9     10
                                              Decile                                                                                                       Decile
Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
decile of the distribution.
                                                           Figure 13C. Mean Work Experience of High School Graduates by Age 30 - Males
                                                                        i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factors


                                                  20



                                                  15
                            Years of Experience


                                                  10



                                                   5



                                                   0                                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                  10       9                                                                                                                                              8
                                                                   8         7                                                                                                                   6
                                                                                     6             5        4                                                                   4
                                                                                                                    3                         2               1       2
                                                                       Decile of Cognitive                                                                                              Decile of Noncognitive



                            ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                                                                 iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
            0.4                                                                                                 20                                            0.4                                                                      20
                                                                                             Experience                                                                   Experience
                                                                                             2.5%-97.5% CI                                                                2.5%-97.5% CI

            0.3                                                                                                 15                                            0.3                                                                      15
                                                                                                                        Years of Experience




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Years of Experience
Frequency




                                                                                                                                                  Frequency
            0.2                                                                                                 10                                            0.2                                                                      10


            0.1                                                                                                 5                                             0.1                                                                      5


             0                                                                                                  0                                                 0                                                                    0
                  1    2                3              4       5   6         7       8         9       10                                                             1   2         3        4       5     6     7        8   9   10
                                              Decile                                                                                                       Decile
Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
decile of the distribution.
                                                               Figure 13D. Mean Work Experience of 4-yr College Graduates by Age 30 - Males
                                                                           i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factors


                                                  20



                                                  15
                            Years of Experience


                                                  10



                                                   5



                                                   0                                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                  10       9                                                                                                                                              8
                                                                   8         7                                                                                                                   6
                                                                                     6             5        4                                                                   4
                                                                                                                    3                         2               1       2
                                                                       Decile of Cognitive                                                                                              Decile of Noncognitive



                            ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                                                                 iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
            0.4                                                                                                 20                                            0.4                                                                      20
                                                                                             Experience                                                                   Experience
                                                                                             2.5%-97.5% CI                                                                2.5%-97.5% CI

            0.3                                                                                                 15                                            0.3                                                                      15
                                                                                                                        Years of Experience




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Years of Experience
Frequency




                                                                                                                                                  Frequency
            0.2                                                                                                 10                                            0.2                                                                      10


            0.1                                                                                                 5                                             0.1                                                                      5


             0                                                                                                  0                                                 0                                                                    0
                  1    2                3              4       5    6        7       8         9       10                                                             1   2         3        4       5     6     7        8   9   10
                                              Decile                                                                                                       Decile
Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
decile of the distribution.
                                                                                                       Figure 14A. Probability Of Being a White Collar Worker by Age 30 - Males
                                                                                                                i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factor



                                                                                     1


                                                                                    0.8


                                                                                    0.6
                                                                      Probability




                                                                                    0.4


                                                                                    0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                     0                                                                                                                            8
                                                                                    10         9       8                                                                                         6
                                                                                                             7        6                                                               4
                                                                                                                                 5   4    3        2                     2                 Decile of Noncognitive
                                                                                                           Decile of Cognitive                             1

                                                             ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                                  iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
                                    1                                                                                                                  1
Confidence Interval (2.75-97.5%)




                                   0.8                                                                                                             0.8
        Probability and




                                   0.6                                                                                                             0.6

                                   0.4                                                                                                             0.4

                                   0.2                                                                                                             0.2

                                    0                                                                                                                  0
                                                      1               2                            3         4              5                                   1        2        3        4         5            6    7        8          9   10
                                                                                          Decile                                                                                                         Decile
                                         Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
                                         The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
                                         decile of the distribution.
                                                                                                       Figure 14B. Probability Of Being a White Collar Worker by Age 30 - Females
                                                                                                                  i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factor



                                                                                     1


                                                                                    0.8


                                                                                    0.6
                                                                      Probability




                                                                                    0.4


                                                                                    0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                     0                                                                                                                            8
                                                                                    10         9        8                                                                                        6
                                                                                                              7        6                                                              4
                                                                                                                                  5   4   3        2                     2                 Decile of Noncognitive
                                                                                                            Decile of Cognitive                            1

                                                             ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                                  iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
                                    1                                                                                                                  1
Confidence Interval (2.75-97.5%)




                                   0.8                                                                                                             0.8
        Probability and




                                   0.6                                                                                                             0.6

                                   0.4                                                                                                             0.4

                                   0.2                                                                                                             0.2

                                    0                                                                                                                  0
                                                      1               2                            3          4              5                                  1        2        3        4         5            6    7        8          9   10
                                                                                          Decile                                                                                                         Decile
                                         Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
                                         The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
                                         decile of the distribution.
                                                                                                          Figure 15. Probability of Being a High School Dropout by Age 30 - Males
                                                                                                                    i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factors



                                                                                         1


                                                                                     0.8


                                                                                     0.6
                                                                       Probability




                                                                                     0.4


                                                                                     0.2


                                                                                         0
                                                                                             2                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                              4                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                          6                                                            6
                                                                                                                                           8                             8
                                                                                                                     Decile of Cognitive
                                                                                                                                                  10       10                Decile of Noncognitive

                                                                     ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                          iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
                                    1                                                                                                                1
Confidence Interval (2.75-97.5%)




                                   0.8                                                                                                             0.8
        Probability and




                                   0.6                                                                                                             0.6

                                   0.4                                                                                                             0.4

                                   0.2                                                                                                             0.2

                                    0                                                                                                                0
                                              1        2         3                   4       5            6    7     8        9      10                         1        2        3        4        5              6       7   8           9   10
                                                                                                 Decile                                                                                                   Decile
                                         Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
                                         The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
                                         decile of the distribution.
                                                                                                                  Figure 16. Probability of Being a GED by Age 30 - Males
                                                                                                                    i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factors



                                                                                         1


                                                                                     0.8


                                                                                     0.6
                                                                       Probability




                                                                                     0.4


                                                                                     0.2


                                                                                         0
                                                                                             2                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                              4                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                          6                                                            6
                                                                                                                                           8                             8
                                                                                                                     Decile of Cognitive
                                                                                                                                                  10       10                Decile of Noncognitive

                                                                     ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                          iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
                                    1                                                                                                                1
Confidence Interval (2.75-97.5%)




                                   0.8                                                                                                             0.8
        Probability and




                                   0.6                                                                                                             0.6

                                   0.4                                                                                                             0.4

                                   0.2                                                                                                             0.2

                                    0                                                                                                                0
                                              1        2         3                   4       5            6   7      8        9      10                         1        2        3        4        5              6       7   8           9   10
                                                                                                 Decile                                                                                                   Decile
                                         Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
                                         The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
                                         decile of the distribution.
                                                                                                          Figure 17. Probability of Being a High School Graduate by Age 30 - Males
                                                                                                                    i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factors



                                                                                         1


                                                                                     0.8


                                                                                     0.6
                                                                       Probability




                                                                                     0.4


                                                                                     0.2


                                                                                         0
                                                                                             2                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                              4                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                          6                                                            6
                                                                                                                                           8                             8
                                                                                                                     Decile of Cognitive
                                                                                                                                                  10       10                Decile of Noncognitive

                                                                     ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                          iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
                                    1                                                                                                                1
Confidence Interval (2.75-97.5%)




                                   0.8                                                                                                             0.8
        Probability and




                                   0.6                                                                                                             0.6

                                   0.4                                                                                                             0.4

                                   0.2                                                                                                             0.2

                                    0                                                                                                                0
                                              1        2         3                   4       5            6    7     8        9      10                         1        2        3        4        5              6       7   8           9   10
                                                                                                 Decile                                                                                                   Decile
                                         Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
                                         The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
                                         decile of the distribution.
                                                                                                          Figure 18. Probability of Being a 2-yr College Graduate by Age 30 - Males
                                                                                                                     i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factors



                                                                                         1


                                                                                     0.8


                                                                                     0.6
                                                                       Probability




                                                                                     0.4


                                                                                     0.2


                                                                                         0
                                                                                             2                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                               4                                                                                      4
                                                                                                                           6                                                           6
                                                                                                                                            8                            8
                                                                                                                      Decile of Cognitive
                                                                                                                                                  10       10                Decile of Noncognitive

                                                                     ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                          iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
                                    1                                                                                                                1
Confidence Interval (2.75-97.5%)




                                   0.8                                                                                                             0.8
        Probability and




                                   0.6                                                                                                             0.6

                                   0.4                                                                                                             0.4

                                   0.2                                                                                                             0.2

                                    0                                                                                                                0
                                              1        2         3                   4       5            6     7     8        9      10                        1        2        3        4        5              6       7   8           9   10
                                                                                                 Decile                                                                                                   Decile
                                         Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
                                         The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
                                         decile of the distribution.
                                                                                                          Figure 19. Probability of Being a 4-yr College Graduate by Age 30 - Males
                                                                                                                     i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factors



                                                                                         1


                                                                                     0.8


                                                                                     0.6
                                                                       Probability




                                                                                     0.4


                                                                                     0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                      0                                                                                                                           8
                                                                                     10          9            8                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                       7     6                                                        4
                                                                                                                                        5   4    3   2                  2                  Decile of Noncognitive
                                                                                                                  Decile of Cognitive                        1

                                                                     ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                          iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
                                    1                                                                                                                    1
Confidence Interval (2.75-97.5%)




                                   0.8                                                                                                               0.8
        Probability and




                                   0.6                                                                                                               0.6

                                   0.4                                                                                                               0.4

                                   0.2                                                                                                               0.2

                                    0                                                                                                                    0
                                              1        2         3                   4       5            6        7        8       9       10                   1       2        3        4         5            6   7        8           9   10
                                                                                                 Decile                                                                                                  Decile
                                         Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
                                         The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
                                         decile of the distribution.
                                                                                                                  Figure 20A. Probability Of Daily Smoking By Age 18 - Males
                                                                                                                     i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factor



                                                                                         1


                                                                                     0.8


                                                                                     0.6
                                                                       Probability




                                                                                     0.4


                                                                                     0.2


                                                                                         0
                                                                                             2                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                              4                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                           6                                                           6
                                                                                                                                            8                            8
                                                                                                                      Decile of Cognitive
                                                                                                                                                  10       10                Decile of Noncognitive

                                                                     ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                          iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
                                    1                                                                                                                1
Confidence Interval (2.75-97.5%)




                                   0.8                                                                                                             0.8
        Probability and




                                   0.6                                                                                                             0.6

                                   0.4                                                                                                             0.4

                                   0.2                                                                                                             0.2

                                    0                                                                                                                0
                                              1        2         3                   4       5            6   7       8        9      10                        1        2        3        4        5              6       7   8           9   10
                                                                                                 Decile                                                                                                   Decile
                                         Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
                                         The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
                                         decile of the distribution.
                                                                                                                  Figure 20B. Probability Of Daily Smoking By Age 18 - Females
                                                                                                                      i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factor



                                                                                         1


                                                                                     0.8


                                                                                     0.6
                                                                       Probability




                                                                                     0.4


                                                                                     0.2


                                                                                         0
                                                                                             2                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                              4                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                            6                                                          6
                                                                                                                                             8                           8
                                                                                                                       Decile of Cognitive
                                                                                                                                                  10       10                Decile of Noncognitive

                                                                     ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                          iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
                                    1                                                                                                                1
Confidence Interval (2.75-97.5%)




                                   0.8                                                                                                             0.8
        Probability and




                                   0.6                                                                                                             0.6

                                   0.4                                                                                                             0.4

                                   0.2                                                                                                             0.2

                                    0                                                                                                                0
                                              1        2         3                   4       5            6   7        8        9      10                       1        2        3        4        5              6       7   8           9   10
                                                                                                 Decile                                                                                                   Decile
                                         Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
                                         The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
                                         decile of the distribution.
                                                                                                          Figure 21. Probability of Smoking Marijuana during the Year 1979 - Males
                                                                                                                     i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factor



                                                                                         1


                                                                                     0.8


                                                                                     0.6
                                                                       Probability




                                                                                     0.4


                                                                                     0.2


                                                                                         0
                                                                                             2                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                              4                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                          6                                                            6
                                                                                                                                           8                             8
                                                                                                                     Decile of Cognitive
                                                                                                                                                  10       10                Decile of Noncognitive

                                                                     ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                          iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
                                    1                                                                                                                1
Confidence Interval (2.75-97.5%)




                                   0.8                                                                                                             0.8
        Probability and




                                   0.6                                                                                                             0.6

                                   0.4                                                                                                             0.4

                                   0.2                                                                                                             0.2

                                    0                                                                                                                0
                                              1        2         3                   4       5            6    7     8        9      10                         1        2        3        4        5              6       7   8           9   10
                                                                                                 Decile                                                                                                   Decile
                                         Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
                                         The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
                                         decile of the distribution.
                                                                                                              Figure 22. Probability of Incarceration by Age 30 - Males
                                                                                                                      i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factor



                                                                                         1


                                                                                     0.8


                                                                                     0.6
                                                                       Probability




                                                                                     0.4


                                                                                     0.2


                                                                                         0
                                                                                             2                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                4                                                                                     4
                                                                                                                            6                                                          6
                                                                                                                                             8                           8
                                                                                                                       Decile of Cognitive
                                                                                                                                                  10       10                Decile of Noncognitive

                                                                     ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                          iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
                                    1                                                                                                                1
Confidence Interval (2.75-97.5%)




                                   0.8                                                                                                             0.8
        Probability and




                                   0.6                                                                                                             0.6

                                   0.4                                                                                                             0.4

                                   0.2                                                                                                             0.2

                                    0                                                                                                                0
                                              1        2         3                   4       5            6      7     8        9      10                       1        2        3        4        5              6       7   8           9   10
                                                                                                 Decile                                                                                                   Decile
                                         Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
                                         The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
                                         decile of the distribution.
                                                                                             Figure 23. Probability of Participating in Illegal Activities during the Year 1979- Males
                                                                                                             i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factor



                                                                                         1


                                                                                     0.8


                                                                                     0.6
                                                                       Probability




                                                                                     0.4


                                                                                     0.2


                                                                                         0
                                                                                             2                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                              4                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                       6                                                               6
                                                                                                                                        8                                8
                                                                                                                  Decile of Cognitive
                                                                                                                                                  10       10                Decile of Noncognitive

                                                                     ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                          iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
                                    1                                                                                                                1
Confidence Interval (2.75-97.5%)




                                   0.8                                                                                                             0.8
        Probability and




                                   0.6                                                                                                             0.6

                                   0.4                                                                                                             0.4

                                   0.2                                                                                                             0.2

                                    0                                                                                                                0
                                              1        2         3                   4       5            6   7   8        9      10                            1        2        3        4        5              6       7   8           9   10
                                                                                                 Decile                                                                                                   Decile
                                         Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
                                         The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws). Frequency indicates proportion of individuals with the indicated level of education whose abilities lie in the indicated
                                         decile of the distribution.
                                                                                       Figure 24. Probability Of Being Single With No Child at Age 18 - Females
                                                                                            i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factors



                                                                 1


                                                                0.8


                                                                0.6
                                                  Probability




                                                                0.4


                                                                0.2


                                                                 0
                                                                          2                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                       4                                                                                      4
                                                                                                     6                                                           6
                                                                               Decile of Cognitive             8                                   8           Decile of Noncognitive
                                                                                                                             10         10
                                               ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                           iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
               1                                                                                                                1

              0.8                                                                                                             0.8

              0.6                                                                                                             0.6
Probability




              0.4                                                                                                             0.4

              0.2                                                                                                             0.2

               0                                                                                                                0
                    1         2          3             4              5            6       7         8    9         10              1        2         3          4          5             6       7         8   9   10
                                                                          Decile                                                                                                  Decile

                    Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
                    The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws).
                                                                                        Figure 25. Probability Of Being Single With Child at Age 18- Females
                                                                                           i. By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factors



                                                              1


                                                             0.8


                                                             0.6
                                               Probability




                                                             0.4


                                                             0.2


                                                              0
                                                                       2                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                    4                                                                                         4
                                                                                                  6                                                           6
                                                                            Decile of Cognitive             8                                   8           Decile of Noncognitive
                                                                                                                          10         10
                                             ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                          iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
               1                                                                                                             1

              0.8                                                                                                          0.8

              0.6                                                                                                          0.6
Probability




              0.4                                                                                                          0.4

              0.2                                                                                                          0.2

               0                                                                                                             0
                    1      2          3             4              5            6        7        8    9         10              1        2         3          4          5            6       7             8   9   10
                                                                       Decile                                                                                                 Decile

                Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
                The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws).
