NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TYPICALLY UNOBSERVED VARIABLES (TUVS) AND SELECTION INTO PRENATAL INPUTS:
IMPLICATIONS FOR ESTIMATING INFANT HEALTH PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS
Nancy E. Reichman
Hope Corman
Kelly Noonan
Dhaval Dave
Working Paper 12004
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12004

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2006

© 2006 by Nancy E. Reichman, Hope Corman, Kelly Noonan, and Dhaval Dave. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Typically Unobserved Variables (TUVs) and Selection into Prenatal Inputs: Implications for
Estimating Infant Health Production Functions
Nancy E. Reichman, Hope Corman, Kelly Noonan, and Dhaval Dave
NBER Working Paper No. 12004
February 2006, Revised June 2008
JEL No. I1
ABSTRACT
We examine the extent to which infant health production functions are sensitive to model specification
and measurement error. We focus on the importance of typically unobserved but theoretically important
variables (TUVs), other non-standard covariates (NSCs), input reporting, and characterization of infant
health. The TUVs represent wantedness, taste for risky behavior, and maternal health endowment.
The NSCs include father and family structure characteristics. We estimate effects of prenatal drug
use, prenatal cigarette smoking, and first trimester prenatal care on birth weight, low birth weight,
and a measure of abnormal infant health conditions. We compare estimates using self-reported inputs
versus input measures that combine information from medical records and self-reports. We find that
TUVs and NSCs are significantly associated with both inputs and outcomes, but that excluding them
from infant health production functions does not appreciably affect the input estimates. However, using
self-reported inputs leads to overestimated effects of inputs, particularly prenatal care, on outcomes,
and using a direct measure of infant health does not always yield input estimates similar to those when
using birth weight outcomes. The findings have implications for research, data collection, and public
health policy.

Nancy E. Reichman
Kelly Noonan
Robert Wood Johnson Medical School
Department of Economics
University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey
Rider University
97 Paterson St., Room 435
2083 Lawrence Road, Room SWG 306
New Brunswick, NJ 08903
Lawrenceville, NJ 08648
reichmne@umdnj.edu
and NBER
knoonan@rider.edu
Hope Corman
Department of Economics
Dhaval Dave
Rider University
Bentley College
Lawrenceville, NJ 08648-3099
Department of Economics
and NBER
175 Forest Street, AAC 195
corman@rider.edu
Waltham, MA 02452-4705
and NBER
ddave@bentley.edu

Introduction
Poor health at birth, typically operationalized as low birth weight, often leads to
subsequent health and developmental problems, poor school performance, and adverse adult
labor market outcomes (Kaestner and Corman 1995; Conley and Bennett 2000; Matte et al.
2001; Boardman et al. 2002; Conley, Strully and Bennett 2003; Case, Lubotsky and Paxson
2002; and Case, Fertig and Paxson 2005). It also generates substantial costs to health care,
education, and public assistance systems (Chaikind and Corman 1991; Lewit et al. 1995).
Economists and researchers in a variety of other disciplines have long been interested in
estimating the effects of prenatal inputs, such as prenatal care and cigarette smoking, on infant
health outcomes (typically birth weight and infant mortality). Although correlations have been
well established, it is extremely difficult to isolate causal effects because there may be
unobserved “third factors” associated with both inputs and outcomes—a problem often referred
to in the economics literature as endogeneity and in the medical and public health literature as
confounding.1 Another complication is that prenatal care and substance use are often misreported
in birth certificates and household surveys—the two key sources of data used to analyze infant
health (Penrod and Lantz 2000; Reichman and Hade 2001; Harrison, Haaga and Richards 1993).
Such misreporting can result in biased estimates.
Economists have come far in understanding the causal relationships between specific
inputs and birth outcomes, but much more still needs to be learned. Instrumental variables
techniques, in theory, can produce unbiased estimates of the effects of prenatal inputs. In
practice, however, such methods are difficult to implement empirically and often produce

1

Endogeneity refers to a systematic association between the error term in an equation and the independent variable
of interest and is often attributed to unobserved heterogeneity in the context of health production functions. We
therefore use the terms endogeneity and unobserved heterogeneity interchangeably.

2

implausible results. “Natural experiments,” when they arise, provide a useful way of isolating
causal effects, but they rarely allow for the estimation of multiple inputs and may yield estimates
that are not generalizable.2 As a result, standard regression techniques remain an important and
necessary component of a multi-pronged estimation strategy of identifying effects of prenatal
inputs on infant health. As such, it is imperative to understand the biases and limitations of such
methods as well as how those estimates can be improved.
We use a uniquely rich dataset to conduct a comprehensive and systematic analysis of
sources of bias in single-equation infant health production functions. We examine the extent to
which including several theoretically important but typically unobserved variables (representing
wantedness, taste for risky behavior, and maternal health endowment) change the estimated
effects of prenatal inputs on birth outcomes. The economics literature on infant health suggests
that such characteristics are important, but most data sets that are used to analyze the effects of
prenatal inputs on infant health outcomes do not include measures of these factors or contain
poorly measured proxies. We also explore the role of paternal characteristics and other nonstandard covariates. Additionally, given substantial evidence of misreporting of prenatal inputs
by mothers, we compare results using self-reported prenatal inputs to those using input measures
that combine information from survey reports and medical records. Finally, we move beyond
birth weight, which is a marker for poor infant health, by considering a direct measure of infant
health—whether the infant had an abnormal health condition (defined later) at birth.
Specifically, we address the following five research questions: (1) Is a set of typically
unobserved but theoretically important variables and other non-standard covariates significant in
explaining the demand for prenatal inputs (illicit drug use, cigarette smoking, and prenatal care)?

2

See Moffitt (2005) for an excellent discussion of the pros and cons of econometric methods to address unobserved
heterogeneity.

3

(2) Are the typically unobserved variables and other non-standard covariates significantly
associated with infant health outcomes (birth weight, low birth weight, and abnormal infant
conditions)? (3) What are the estimated effects of well-measured prenatal inputs on infant health
outcomes in models that include the typically unobserved variables and other non-standard
covariates? (4) Do the typically unobserved variables have direct effects on infant health
outcomes above and beyond their indirect effects through inputs? (5) How sensitive are the
estimated effects of prenatal inputs on infant health outcomes to the inclusion of the typically
unobserved but theoretically important variables, the inclusion of non-standard covariates, and
the use of prenatal input measures that are not strictly self-reported? The answers to these
questions will help researchers assess potential sources of bias in their analyses, inform future
data collection efforts, and point to where resources may be most effective in improving infant
health.
Background
Empirical studies
Since early work by Rosenzweig and Schultz (1983) and Corman, Joyce and Grossman
(1987), many economists have used instrumental variables techniques to estimate the effects of
prenatal inputs (frequently, prenatal care) on infant health outcomes (frequently, birth weight). In
theory, these models account for the selection of mothers into prenatal care and risky prenatal
behaviors. By examining the differences in the estimated effects of inputs on outcomes in oneand two-stage models, inferences are made about the direction and extent of selection in input
use.
It is difficult to compare estimates of the effects of prenatal care on birth weight across
existing studies because they often use different measures of prenatal care, consider different

4

birth weight outcomes (some examine birth weight in grams while others examine low birth
weight), focus on specific racial groups or other sub-populations, and use different estimation
techniques. Even studies that seemingly should produce similar estimates often produce widely
divergent findings. For example, two of the classic studies in the field used the same measures of
prenatal care (months of delay) and infant health (birth weight) but produced dramatically
different estimates of the effects of prenatal care. Rosenzweig and Schultz (1983) find that each
month of prenatal care delay reduces birth weight by 7 percent, or about 226 grams, while
Grossman and Joyce (1990) find the effect of a one-month delay in care to be -37 grams (and
significant) for blacks and -23 grams (but insignificant) for whites. That is, Rosenzweig and
Schultz find effects that are six to nine times greater than those found by Grossman and Joyce.3
Both of these studies found evidence of unobserved heterogeneity in prenatal care use.
The general lack of consistency across studies may reflect, at least in part, identification
problems that a few recent studies have been able to overcome. Evans and Lien (2005) exploit a
natural experiment as an alternative to estimating instrumental variables models with
price/availability identifiers. They find that prenatal visits do not have a significant effect on
birth weight overall, but that they have a positive effect among mothers early in their
pregnancies. Conway and Deb (2005) find that prenatal care increases birth weight only among
mothers who had “uncomplicated” pregnancies—by about 30-35 grams. The finding of a small
or no overall effect of prenatal care is consistent with findings from a recent descriptive study
with extremely rich data, including many typically unobserved but theoretically important
variables (Reichman and Teitler 2005), and a recent review in the medical literature indicating

3

It is important to note that the two studies used data from different geographical areas and years, included different
sets of covariates, used different estimation techniques, and had different focuses.

5

that few features of prenatal care would be expected to increase birth weight at the aggregate
level (Lu et al. 2003).
Relatively few economic studies have examined the effects of unhealthy prenatal
behaviors, such as cigarette smoking and illicit drug use.4 Lien and Evans (2005) and Noonan et
al. (2007) find that cigarette smoking during pregnancy reduces birth weight by about 180 and
225 grams, respectively. Kaestner, Joyce and Wehbeh (1996) and Noonan et al. (2007) find that
prenatal illicit drug use reduces birth weight by about 180 and 100 grams, respectively.5
Rosenzweig and Schultz (1983) and Lien and Evans (2005) find no evidence of unobserved
heterogeneity in prenatal cigarette smoking.6 Noonan et al. (2007) find a similar result for illicit
drug use.7 Overall, estimates of the effects of smoking and drug use on birth weight are more
consistent across studies than those of prenatal care, and studies using price/availability measures
as identifiers have not found evidence of unobserved heterogeneity in prenatal substance use.
However, the existing literature is small and the findings need to be replicated and further
explored.

4

The medical literature offers clear hypothesized mechanisms by which maternal cigarette smoking decreases birth
weight. It also offers hypothesized mechanisms by which prenatal illicit drug use may reduce birth weight, although
the associations do not appear to be as dose-response specific as that of smoking (Chomitz, Cheung, and Lieberman
1995). Prenatal alcohol use is generally considered a risky behavior and heavy use is associated with fetal alcohol
syndrome, but the theoretical and empirical links between alcohol and birth weight are weak. For this reason, we do
not include prenatal alcohol use in our analysis.
5
For the Kaestner, Joyce and Wehbeh (1999) study, we infer the effect based on their estimate of a 5.7 percent
reduction in birth weight and a mean birth weight of 3,200 grams (a figure from our own data). The authors did not
report the average birth weight in their sample.
6
Rosenzweig and Schultz (1983) use a number of identifiers to predict smoking, including cigarette prices and the
prices and availability of health inputs. Lien and Evans (2005) exploit state variations in cigarette tax hikes to
identify the effects of prenatal smoking. Both compare OLS estimates with two-stage estimates and find the
estimated effects of smoking on birth weight to be very similar across specifications, regardless of functional form.
7
Noonan et al. (2007) use bivariate probit models to estimate the effects of drug use on low birth weight. Using
cocaine prices and future drug use as identifiers, they perform (over)identification tests and find that a singleequation a probit model is appropriate.

6

Typically unobserved but theoretically important variables
In the economic literature, selection into prenatal inputs has generally been attributed to
three sets of factors—wantedness, tastes, and maternal health endowment—that are typically
unobserved. Not including these factors in single-equation infant health production functions
may bias the estimated effects of prenatal inputs. Below, we describe how these factors enter into
the production of infant health.
Following Corman, Joyce, and Grossman (1987) and the theoretical literature on which
they build, parents’ utility can be expressed as a function of consumption goods (C), infant
health (Hi), parents’ health (Hp), tastes, and any other relevant arguments as follows:8
(1)

U=U (C, Hi, Hp, tastes)

Infant health is a function of prenatal inputs (which can be positive, such as prenatal care, or
negative, such as smoking or drug use) as well as the health endowment of the mother (which
reflects Hp and may affect her reproductive efficiency), as shown in the infant health production
function that follows:
(2)

Hi = f (input1, input2, ….inputn, maternal health endowment)

The demand for each input can be expressed as follows:
(3)

Inputi = gi (price and availability of inputi, prices and availability of substitute and
complementary inputs, income, maternal health endowment, tastes, wantedness)

Thus, infant health is an argument in the parent's utility function (Equation 1), and the
parents’ utility maximization is constrained by the process underlying the production of infant
health (Equation 2). Wantedness reflects the relative importance of infant health versus other
factors (e.g., own health) in the parent's utility function and therefore impacts prenatal input use

8

We assume that the parents maximize one (joint) utility function. Others, including Rosenzweig and Schultz
(1983), have assumed an individual (maternal) utility function.

7

(Equation 3) and other investments in infant health that may be unobserved. The maternal health
endowment enters the infant health production directly (through biological processes) and may
also affect infant health indirectly through the use of prenatal inputs (e.g., mothers with poor
health endowments may attempt to offset an expected unfavorable birth outcome by utilizing
more healthy inputs). Maternal risk-taking and time preference (taste for risky behaviors) affect
maternal engagement in risky behaviors (such as smoking and drug use) and investments in own
health, which in turn can impact infant health production directly through the maternal health
endowment (Equation 2) or indirectly through the maternal health endowment or other inputs
(Equation 3). While theory suggests that wantedness, taste for risky behaviors, and maternal
health endowments play important roles in the infant health production process, few studies
directly incorporate such factors and the literature is fragmented. Relevant empirical findings are
discussed below.
Wantedness
Grossman and Joyce (1990) model the decision to continue a pregnancy (rather than
abort) as an endogenous determinant of birth outcomes using data on births and abortions in New
York City. First they estimate the probability of giving birth, controlling for individual
characteristics and availability of family planning and abortion services. They then compute λ,
the inverse of the Mills ratio, for each woman who gave birth (as a proxy for wantedness) and
include λ in a birth weight production function. They find that the coefficient of λ is positive and
significant for black (but not white) women and infer that black women with high levels of
wantedness are more likely than those with low levels to have healthy babies.9 The authors do

9

λ is inversely related to the probability of giving birth (versus aborting). Joyce and Grossman (1990) interpret λ as
a measure of wantedness, as women with a high λ have a low likelihood of continuing the pregnancy but decide to
do so. They infer that women with high λs have a strong unmeasured desire for their babies.

8

not examine the mechanisms through which wantedness would translate to birth outcomes, but
suggest that it likely operates through prenatal care or other inputs.
Joyce and Grossman (1990) extend the Grossman and Joyce study by assessing the
effects of λ on prenatal care use. Using the same data, they find that λ is negatively and
significantly related to prenatal care delay among both blacks and Hispanics. That is, higher
levels of wantedness lead to less delayed care. However, as the authors point out, “(e)arly
prenatal care is but one form of healthy behavior. Pregnant women who initiate care promptly
may eat more nutritiously, suffer less stress, engage in the appropriate exercise, and use fewer
drugs and other potentially harmful substances than women who begin late care” (Grossman and
Joyce 1990, p. 985). The results of Joyce and Grossman (1990) are consistent with findings from
numerous descriptive studies (Weller et al. 1987; Marsiglio and Mott 1988; Altfeld et al. 1997;
Faden, Hanna and Graubard 1997; Kost, Landry and Darroch 1998; Pagnini and Reichman 2000;
Coleman, Reardon and Cougle 2005), most of which use direct retrospective assessments of
wantedness or intention. Collectively, these studies indicate that unwanted or unintended
pregnancy is negatively associated with prenatal care use and positively associated with
unhealthy prenatal behaviors.
Taste for risky behaviors
Recent studies (Bell and Zimmerman 2003; Clarke et al. 1999; Echevarria and Frisbie
2001; Pagnini and Reichman 2000) find that prenatal cigarette smoking, alcohol consumption,
and illicit drug use are associated with inadequate, late, or no prenatal care. These findings are
consistent with, but do not prove, a hypothesis that a taste for risky prenatal behavior leads to
poor prenatal care use. Ogunyemi and Hernandez-Loera (2004) find that mothers who use
cocaine during pregnancy are more likely than those who do not use cocaine to have sexually

9

transmitted diseases (STDs), previous medical problems, obstetric complications, and previous
preterm deliveries. These findings suggest that having an STD during pregnancy may serve as a
proxy for taste for risky behavior.10
Maternal health endowment
Cardiac disease, hypertension, chronic diabetes, and other health conditions are
associated with an increased likelihood of intrauterine growth retardation (Bernabe et al. 2004)
and therefore may affect the mother’s expected birth outcome and her use of prenatal inputs.
Two recent studies examine the effects of maternal mental health on prenatal behavior and infant
health outcomes. Warner (2003) and Conway and Kennedy (2004) find that maternal depression
reduces the likelihood of adequate prenatal care among black, but not white, women. Conway
and Kennedy posit that not only may depression affect birth weight through prenatal behaviors,
but it may also have direct effects on birth weight through the mother’s biochemistry. They find
evidence of direct negative effects for whites, but not blacks, holding prenatal care use constant.
Thus, they find some evidence of both direct and indirect effects of maternal depression on birth
weight.
Input reporting
A potential source of bias in infant health production functions is that prenatal input use
is often misreported. Comparing maternal self-reports, birth certificates, and medical records,
Penrod and Lantz (2000) find that mothers tend to report earlier care than what appears on birth
certificates and that medical records indicate the greatest delay. They also find that women with
adverse birth outcomes tend to over-report early prenatal care and that this reporting bias leads to
underestimates of the effects of early prenatal care on birth weight. Reichman and Hade (2001)

10

STDs also may affect birth outcomes directly (see Goldenberg et al. 1997 for a discussion of hypothesized
medical pathways).

10

examine detailed data from physical examinations, medical records, and interviews and find that
early prenatal care is over-reported in birth certificates. They also find that prenatal cigarette
smoking is underreported in birth certificates and that mothers’ pre-pregnancy health conditions,
which economic theory suggests may be important sources of selection into prenatal inputs, are
substantially underreported in birth certificates. A recent follow-up to the Reichman and Hade
study finds that the reporting of first trimester prenatal care varies by the birth outcome (it is
slightly more likely to be over-reported for low birth weight and preterm births than for normal
birth weight and full-term births), but that the misreporting of prenatal smoking does not vary by
those outcomes (Reichman and Schwartz-Soicher 2007). Kaestner, Joyce and Wehbeh (1996)
find substantial underreporting of illicit drug use when comparing results from drug tests at the
time of the birth to data from New York City birth certificates, and that using self-reported drug
use rather than “actual” drug use overstates the true effect of prenatal drug use on birth weight.
Noonan et al. (2007) also find substantial underreporting of prenatal drug use and that selfreported drug use leads to overestimates of the effects of prenatal drug use on birth weight.
Outcome measurement
A limitation of existing research on infant health production that has received little
attention is the exclusive focus on birth weight and infant mortality. Although birth weight is a
widely used and well-measured index of subsequent morbidity and a valuable outcome in its own
right, it is not a direct measure of infant health. Low birth weight is a strong risk factor for infant
mortality and morbidity among survivors, but many low birth weight children (even the very
lightest) have no serious health problems (Reichman 2005). Thus, using birth weight or low birth
weight to proxy infant health can lead to incorrect inferences about the production of infant

11

health. As far as we know, only one study in the economics literature (Noonan et al. 2007)
examines the production of infant health using direct measures of infant morbidity.
Our contribution
Overall, past research indicates that: (1) estimates of the effects of prenatal care on birth
weight vary widely; (2) studies have found no evidence of unobserved heterogeneity in prenatal
cigarette smoking or drug use, although the existing literature is small; (3) theory and past
empirical research suggest that wantedness, tastes, and maternal health endowment may underlie
selection into prenatal inputs; (4) there is evidence of misreporting of prenatal inputs—in
socially desirable directions—in both birth certificates and surveys; and (5) as far as we know,
only one economic study of infant health production has used a direct measure of infant health as
a complement to birth weight outcomes. The literature is fragmented and no single study has
accounted for the various theorized sources of selection and examined multiple well-measured
inputs and outcomes. We address this gap by using uniquely rich data to explore the extent to
which typically unobserved but theoretically important variables and other non-standard
covariates affect the estimates of three different prenatal inputs on birth weight and a direct
measure of infant health. A comprehensive and systematic analysis of this type is essential for
understanding the relationships between prenatal inputs and infant health, for informing future
research, and ultimately, for designing effective interventions and policies to improve infant
health.
Data
We use data from a recent population-based birth cohort survey that have been linked to
medical records of mother respondents and their babies and to neighborhood characteristics at
the census tract level. The Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing (FFCWB) survey follows a

12

cohort of parents and their newborn children in 20 large U.S. cities (in 15 states). The study was
designed to provide information about the conditions and capabilities of new (mostly unwed)
parents; the nature, determinants, and trajectories of their relationships; and the long-term
consequences for parents and children of welfare reform and other policies. The survey data are
rich in sociodemographic characteristics of both mothers and fathers, and include information on
parents’ relationships and living arrangements.
The FFCWB study consists of a stratified random sample of births in 75 hospitals
between 1998 and 2000. By design, approximately three quarters of the interviewed mothers
were unmarried (births were randomly sampled in each hospital, but once a marital quota was
reached, married mothers were screened out). Face-to-face interviews were conducted with 4898
mothers while they were still in the hospital after giving birth.11 Additional data have been
collected from the hospital medical records (from the birth) for a sub-sample of 3,517 births in
19 cities (in 15 states).12 The medical record data contain information on prenatal substance use
from laboratory tests of the mother or baby and in notes by physicians or social workers;
information on the timing of prenatal care initiation; and detailed measures of the mother’s
health endowment (more information is given below, under “Measures”). Measures of census
tract-level poverty were linked to the data using the mothers’ addresses at the time of the birth.
Follow-up interviews were conducted with mothers when the child was one, three, and five years
old. We use data on the 3,124 non-multiple births that have complete information on all main
analysis variables from the postpartum survey, medical records, and address files. We describe
our measures below and present characteristics of the full sample, the sample of low birth weight
11

Additional background on the research design of the FFCWB study is available in Reichman et al. (2001).
The medical record data collection was ongoing and the analysis sample includes cases that were available at the
time. Access to the hospital medical records generally reflects administrative decisions of the different hospitals
rather than decisions on the part of individual respondents to have their records reviewed.

12

13

(< 2500 grams) births, and the sample of infants with abnormal health conditions (defined later)
in Table 1.
Measures
Unhealthy Inputs: Illicit Drugs and Cigarettes
Arendt et al. (1999) find that using postpartum interviews combined with medical records
was the best way to ascertain illicit substance use during pregnancy. Although the FFCWB
postpartum interview was far less detailed than that used by Arendt et al., we adopt the strategy
of combining responses to a postpartum survey with a review of the mothers’ and infants’
medical records to ascertain both drug use and cigarette smoking during pregnancy. During the
mother’s interview in the hospital after giving birth, she was asked whether she had used any
illicit drugs and whether she had smoked cigarettes during her pregnancy. This information was
combined with detailed information from medical records to create measures of prenatal
substance use, as described below.
Prenatal illicit drug use
The medical records contain information about the mother’s drug use during pregnancy
from laboratory tests of the mother or baby and in notes by physicians, nurses, or social workers.
For some of the births, drug tests on the mother or newborn were administered and the results
recorded in the mother’s or baby’s chart. The drug tests could have taken place at any time
during the pregnancy or post-partum hospital stay. In other cases, it was possible to make a
positive assessment of illicit drug use on the basis of case notes during the course of prenatal
care or ICD-9 codes for drug addiction during pregnancy. Unfortunately, we have no information
on the basis for decisions about whether to test specific mothers and infants for drugs. We do
know that universal screening for newborns is not recommended and that pediatricians have

14

grappled with issues of how to ascertain prenatal drug use and when newborn testing is
appropriate (American Academy of Pediatrics 1995). Pregnant mothers are generally asked about
substance use, often as part of a standardized prenatal screening instrument, and drug tests can be
administered to them (when warranted and with their consent) and to their infants when deemed
appropriate (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2006). The bottom line is that
testing is recommended (for the mother and/or infant) or ordered (for the infant) based on
suspicion of prenatal drug use. Thus, it is possible that the medical records do not identify all
mothers who used drugs.
Of the 3,124 mothers in our sample, 1251 (40%) had results from toxin screens in their
charts. Of these, 172 of those mothers (13.7%) tested positive for cocaine, heroin, marijuana,
other drugs (including amphetamines, methadone, and barbiturates/benziodiazepines) or
unspecified drugs, or a combination of drugs. An additional 138 cases of prenatal drug use were
picked up from notes in various places in the mothers' and babies' charts. Overall, 9.9 percent of
the mothers in our sample had some indication of prenatal drug use recorded in their own or their
baby's chart.
Our measure of prenatal drug use is whether there was any indication of prenatal drug use
from the postpartum interview or medical records (11% of our sample).13 This figure is in the
range presented in a review of sixteen studies by Howell et al. (1999). Not surprisingly given the
evidence of systematic underreporting of drug use in household surveys (Harrison, Haaga, and
Richards 1993), it is higher than the rates found in a national survey that asked individuals
whether they were pregnant, and if they were, whether they had used any illicit drugs in the past
month (3.3%) and whether they had used any hard drugs in the past month (1.1%) (Substance

13

We think it unlikely that mothers who had not used illicit drugs during pregnancy would report in their postpartum
interviews that they had done so.

15

Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration [SAMHSA], 2000).14 Based on our combined
measure, about half of drug-using pregnant women in our sample admitted having used drugs
during pregnancy (Table 1).
Prenatal cigarette smoking
Our measure of prenatal cigarette smoking, whether the mother smoked at all during
pregnancy, also combines maternal postpartum reports with information in the medical records.
The reports of smoking from the two sources differ much less than those of illicit drug use.
Almost one quarter (24%) of the mothers in our sample had smoked cigarettes at some time
during pregnancy according to their medical records or self-reports, while 20 percent reported
that they had smoked at all. Over 80 percent of the mothers who smoked cigarettes according to
our combined measure reported that they had done so (Table 1). The rates of smoking in our
sample are comparable to national estimates, which indicate that 19 percent of pregnant women
report smoking in the past month.15
Healthy Input: Prenatal care
Based on the medical records, 48 percent of the mothers in our sample initiated prenatal
care in the first trimester, 39 percent began care later than the first trimester, and 13 percent had
missing information on when care began. According to mothers’ postpartum reports, 77 percent
of the mothers received prenatal care in the first trimester. We used the medical record
information on the timing of prenatal care initiation (when a date was available) to construct a
14

The SAMHSA data are from the National Household Survey on Drug Abuse for 2000 and, when weighted, are
representative of the U.S. population age 12 and over. The specific computation was for pregnant women age 15 to
44 within the overall sample. http://www.oas.samhsa.gov/nhsda/2kdetailedtabs/Vol_1_Part_4/sect6v1.htm#6.23b .
15
Source: SAMHSA, National Household Survey on Drug Abuse, 2000.
http://www.oas.samhsa.gov/nhsda/2kdetailedtabs/Vol_1_Part_4/sect6v1.htm#6.26b. While our sample is
disproportionately economically disadvantaged, we do not expect the rate of prenatal smoking in our sample to be
higher than that for a national sample, because according to SAMHSA: 1. White women have higher rates of
smoking than black and Hispanic women (and our sample is only 18% white). 2. High school graduates who do not
go on to graduate college are the educational group most likely to smoke (and this group comprises only 31% of our
sample).

16

measure of whether the mother received first trimester care (versus later than that or not at all).
For the mothers with missing information, we used self-reports. According to this measure, 57
percent of the mothers in our sample received first trimester prenatal care. Twenty nine percent
of the mothers who reported that they received first trimester prenatal care were recoded based
on information documented in the medical records that they initiated care later than the first
trimester (not shown).
Typically Unobserved Variables (TUVs)
We include a number of measures, most of which are from the medical records, that
reflect theoretically important but typically unobserved sources of potential selection in prenatal
input use. Below we describe these measures, which we refer to as TUVs, and later (under
“Analytical Framework and Empirical Implementation”) we discuss how each fits into the
economic model of infant health production.
During the postpartum interview, the mother was asked whether she had considered
having an abortion rather than carrying the pregnancy to term. In our sample, almost 30 percent
of the mothers reported that they had considered having an abortion when they found out that
they were pregnant (we code these pregnancies as unwanted).16 Joyce, Kaestner and Korenman
(2002) find considerable disagreement between mother’s prospective and retrospective reports of
pregnancy intendedness, but that the two different assessments yield similar effects of pregnancy
intendedness on late prenatal care, heavy smoking during pregnancy, and low birth weight.
From the mother’s medical record, we used information on infections that are often
transmitted sexually (STDs). Over one quarter (28%) of the mothers in our sample had at least

16

Unfortunately, the women were not asked if the pregnancy was unintended, which would be a more direct
measure of unwantedness. A disadvantage of our measure is that women who had an unintended pregnancy but
would not have considered an abortion for religious or moral reasons would be miscoded. We address this issue
further, to the extent possible, in supplemental analyses.

17

one of the following infections during the first prenatal visit or later in the pregnancy: pelvic
inflammatory disease, syphilis, chlamydia, genital herpes, gonorrhea, human papilloma virus,
hepatitis B, hepatitis C, or human immunodeficiency virus.
We also include information from the medical records on a variety of health conditions in
the mother’s medical history.17 These measures include lung disease (acute or chronic lung
disease or asthma), other pre-existing health conditions (e.g., cardiac disease, chronic diabetes,
hypertension, and liver disease), pre-pregnancy underweight (Body Mass Index less than 18.5),
and pre-pregnancy morbid obesity (Body Mass Index greater than or equal to 39). We also
include a measure of the mother’s mental health endowment. The mother was coded as having a
pre-existing mental illness if there was any documentation of a diagnosed DSM-IV mental
disorder (e.g., depression, anxiety, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, anorexia, suicidality, and
mental retardation) in her medical record.18
Standard Covariates
We include a basic set of demographic variables that are typically available in data sets
that are used to estimate infant health production functions—maternal age (in years), education
(which we code as high school graduate, some college but not graduate, or college graduate—
compared to less than high school), race/ethnicity (non-Hispanic black, Hispanic, or other nonwhite non-Hispanic—compared to non Hispanic white), nativity (whether the mother was
foreign-born), parity (whether it was the mother’s first birth), and marital status (whether the
mother was married to the baby’s father at the time of the birth).
Non-Standard Covariates (NSCs)

17

Except for the wantedness variable, all TUVs were coded from information in the mother’s medical records and
indicate whether there was a history (or current diagnosis) of the given condition. Much of this information was
recorded during the first prenatal visit when the health history was taken.
18
Substance abuse disorders were not included in this measure.

18

We are also able to include a rich set of characteristics of the mother, father, and the
parents’ relationship status that may be related to both input use and infant health but not usually
available in data sets used to estimate infant health production functions. We refer to this set of
measures as non-standard covariates, or NSCs. In particular, recent studies have found paternal
factors to be independent predictors of prenatal input use (Teitler 2001; Sangi-Haghpeykar et al.
2005; Huang and Reid 2006) and infant health (Reichman and Teitler 2006). From the survey,
we include insurance information (whether the birth was covered by Medicaid or other
government program—henceforth referred to as “Medicaid”). From the medical records, we
include the number of previous pregnancies (whether they resulted in live births or not; including
both spontaneous and induced abortions). From the survey, we include whether the mother lived
with both of her parents at age 15, whether she attends religious services at least several times
per month, whether she knew the father at least one year prior to conception, whether the father
had fewer years of education than the mother, whether the father was a different race/ethnicity
than the mother, and whether the father was at least five years older than the mother.19 We also
include the percentage of households in the mother’s census tract with income under the poverty
line.20
Infant Health Outcomes
We estimate infant health production functions for birth weight (in grams) and low birth
weight (< 2500 grams, which represents the standard clinical threshold). Birth weight was
obtained from the medical records. We also estimate production functions for a direct measure of
infant health—whether the infant had a serious abnormal condition (i.e., one that is associated

19

Because of the high correlation between mother’s and father’s age, education, and ethnicity, we use differences
for these variables.
20
In this sample, there is an average of 1.7 births per census tract, with 63 percent of the 1851 tracts containing only
one birth.

19

with both immediate and, quite possibly, longer-term morbidity). The coding was conducted by
an outside pediatric consultant who systematically reviewed the medical record data on infant
conditions, as well as data from the one-year interviews on physical disabilities of the child
(identifying serious conditions that were likely present at birth), and coded all conditions based
on the degree of severity and the likelihood that they were caused by maternal prenatal behavior
(see coding grid and explanation in Appendix Table 1). For this analysis, we exclude
abnormalities for which there is no connection to prenatal behavior or only a very weak
connection. The excluded conditions (e.g., Down Syndrome, congenital heart malformations) are
for the most part random, given that the pregnancy resulted in a live birth.
Empirical Implementation
We assess the sensitivity of the estimated effects of prenatal inputs in infant health
production functions (Equation 3) to the inclusion of typically unobserved but theoretically
important variables, the inclusion of non-standard covariates, and the use of “actual” inputs (that
combine information from medical records and self-reports) rather than exclusively self-reported
inputs. The breadth and scope of our analyses preclude estimating a structural system with three
endogenous inputs—prenatal care, smoking, and illicit drug use. As discussed above, comparing
one- and two-stage structural models, Rosenzweig and Schultz (1983) and Lien and Evans
(2005) found no evidence that single-equation birth weight models produced biased estimates of
the effects of prenatal smoking. Similarly, Noonan et al. (2007), using the same rich data that we
use in the current study and testing the validity of one- versus two-stage structural models, found
no evidence that single-equation models of low birth weight produced biased estimates of the
effects of prenatal drug use.

20

According to Conway and Deb (2005), instrumenting maternal choice variables “strains
an already weakly identified birth weight equation (p. 493).” It is even more problematic when
estimating equations with multiple inputs. Natural experiments are rare, cannot be used to
identify multiple inputs, and may not produce generalizable estimates. Our strategy is to use
well-measured and rich data (including measures of “actual” inputs and theoretically important
sources of heterogeneity) to estimate a set of “gold standard” single-equation models and assess
the plausibility of our results in the light of theory and past research indicating no unobserved
heterogeneity in prenatal smoking or drug use. We do explore the potential endogeneity of
prenatal care, the one input for which past studies have found evidence of unobserved
heterogeneity, in a supplementary two-stage analysis.
Based on the theoretical framework described earlier, we specify equations that reflect
our specific research questions. We consider unwantedness as a taste or preference that should
affect infant health exclusively through the inputs (i.e., it should not have a direct effect on infant
health). The STD measure serves two roles: First, it may reflect a taste for risky behavior, which
could affect outcomes through input demand. Second, it measures a prenatal health condition
that could affect input demand and also have direct effects on infant health. The other five TUVs
(pre-existing lung disease, other pre-existing physical health condition, pre-existing mental
illness, pre-pregnancy underweight, and pre-pregnancy morbidly obese) all reflect the maternal
health endowment and therefore may have both indirect (through inputs) and direct effects on
infant health.
To address our first research question (whether TUVs and NSCs explain the demand for
inputs), we estimate separate demand equations for each input (any illicit drug use, any cigarette
smoking, and first trimester prenatal care) as follows:

21

(3a) Inputi = gi (TUVs, standard covariates, NSCs, city indicators)
Because the inputs (as we construct them) are dichotomous, we estimate probit models.
We use the “actual” measures of inputs for this set of models. The TUVs are measures of tastes
and health endowments, as discussed above. Many of our standard and non-standard covariates
(e.g., education and census tract-level poverty) are proxies for income. We include city
indicators to control for city or state input prices, input availability, and policies. We assess the
joint significance of the TUVs and NSCs in the input demand equations.
To address our second research question (whether TUVs and NSCs are significantly
associated with infant health), we estimate reduced-form production functions for each health
outcome (birth weight, low birth weight, and abnormal conditions) that include the same righthand-side variables as Equation 3a, but not the prenatal inputs:
(2a) Health Outcome = f (TUVs, standard covariates, NSCs, city indicators)
We address our third research question (the effects of prenatal inputs on infant health) by
estimating equations that include “actual” inputs in addition to our rich set of covariates, as
follows:
(2b) Health Outcome = f (“actual” prenatal inputs, TUVs, standard covariates, NSCs,
city indicators)
To the extent that STDs represent a taste for risky behavior, that measure would not
directly enter the health production function. Similarly, unwantedness represents a taste and
would not directly enter the health production. However, tastes are related to input use (Equation
3). If all relevant inputs are not included in the infant health production function, then excluding
tastes could lead to biased estimates of the effects of included prenatal inputs. Therefore, we
include variables reflecting tastes (STDs and unwantedness) in Equation 2b in addition to the
TUVs that measure the maternal health endowment.

22

We use the same set of production functions to address our fourth research question
(whether TUVs are significantly associated with infant health, holding inputs constant). We
assess both the statistical significance of the individual TUVs and their overall contribution to
explanatory power.
Our fifth research question asks about the differential impacts of TUVs, NSCs, and
“actual” input measures on estimates of the effects of prenatal inputs on infant health. To address
this question, we estimate infant health production equations with four different specifications
for each of the three outcome measures (all include standard covariates and city indicators): (A)
The full model using “actual” inputs, TUVs and NSCs (Equation 2b); (B) a model with “actual”
inputs and NSCs but excluding TUVs; (C) a model with “actual” inputs and TUVs but excluding
NSCs; (D) a model with “actual” inputs but excluding both TUVs and NSCs (i.e., using only
typically available covariates). We also estimate Models A through D using self-reported rather
than “actual” inputs. Specification D, which includes employs self-reported inputs, is the most
typically estimated model (except that prenatal drug use is not routinely available), since it
includes covariates and measures that are available in most data sets used to study infant health.
We compare the estimated effects of inputs across models. We consider Model A, which
includes TUVs, NSCs and “actual” rather than self-reported inputs, our operationalized gold
standard.
Results
Our sample is predominately minority and poor (Table 1). Half (49%) of the sample is
black and one third (29%) is Hispanic. Over one-third of the mothers did not complete high
school. Two thirds were on Medicaid at the time of the birth. Ten percent of the infants in the
sample were low birth weight and 12 percent had abnormal health conditions as we have defined

23

them. Of the infants who were low birth weight, 37% had at least one abnormal health condition;
of the infants who were born with an abnormal condition, 27% were low birth weight.
Question 1: Is a set of typically unobserved but theoretically important variables (representing
wantedness, taste for risky behavior, and maternal health endowment) and other non-standard
covariates significant in explaining the demand for prenatal inputs (prenatal care, illicit drug
use, and cigarette smoking)?
Table 2 presents probit results for any prenatal illicit drug use, any prenatal cigarette
smoking, and first trimester prenatal care, respectively. In each cell, the first figure represents the
probit coefficient, the figure in parentheses is the standard error of the probit coefficient, and the
figure in brackets represents the marginal effect. We also report chi-square statistics and p-values
from Wald tests of the joint significance of the TUVs and NSCs.
Unwantedness (as we have measured it, by whether the mother considered having an
abortion), STD during pregnancy, and pre-existing mental illness have strong positive
associations with prenatal drug use,21 and the mother’s education, nativity, marital status,
religious attendance, and the father’s characteristics all have significant associations with
prenatal drug use.22 The unwantedness measure and pre-existing mental illness have large and
highly significant associations with prenatal cigarette smoking: Women who considered having
an abortion were 7 percentage points more likely than those who did not consider having an
abortion to smoke cigarettes during pregnancy, and mothers with pre-existing diagnosed mental
illness were 19 percentage points more likely than those without pre-existing mental illness to
smoke cigarettes during pregnancy. Most standard covariates and NSCs are also associated with
smoking in the expected directions. Notably, Medicaid birth is positively associated with
smoking and negatively associated with first trimester care all else all else (i.e., education,
21

The magnitude of the coefficient of mental illness may seem high, but it is consistent with a “self-medication
hypothesis” discussed by numerous researchers and recently tested by Harris and Edlund (2005).
22
Interestingly, we find that mothers who partner with significantly older but less-educated men of a different
race/ethnicity are the most likely to use substances during pregnancy.

24

marital status, and census-tract poverty) equal, religiosity is a strong negative predictor of drug
use and smoking, and the father characteristics are independently associated with drug use and
smoking.
Mothers who considered abortion were 13 percentage points (about 25%) less likely to
receive first trimester prenatal care than those who did not consider abortion. Mental illness,
which was a strong predictor of smoking and drug use, is not a significant predictor of first
trimester care. However, we find strong evidence for adverse selection into early prenatal care
based on the mother’s physical health endowment. Mothers with pre-existing physical health
conditions other than lung disease were 7 percentage points more likely than those without
conditions to get first trimester care.
Using Wald tests, we assess the joint significance of both the TUVs and the NSCs in the
drug use, cigarette smoking, and first trimester prenatal care models and find that both sets of
factors are significant in explaining each of the three inputs. Overall, the results indicate that: (1)
TUVs and NSCs are strong predictors of prenatal inputs in the expected directions, but the
associations vary by TUV, NSC and input; (2) unwantedness, as characterized by retrospective
reports of having considered an abortion, is a strong predictor of all three inputs; (3) the mother
having a pre-existing physical health problem other than lung disease is an important predictor of
first trimester prenatal care; and (4) pre-existing diagnosed mental illness is a strong predictor of
both prenatal smoking and drug use but not first trimester prenatal care.
Question 2: Are TUVs and NSCs significantly associated with infant health outcomes (birth
weight, low birth weight, and abnormal infant conditions)?
Table 3 shows reduced-form estimates of the effects of each of the TUVs on birth weight,
low birth weight, and abnormal infant conditions. Each estimate reflects the combined indirect
effect of the TUV (via input use) plus the direct effect (if any) on the health outcome. All models

25

include the full set of covariates from Table 2 (TUVs, NSCs, standard covariates, and an
indicator for the city in which the birth took place), although only the TUV estimates are
presented. For birth weight, we estimate Ordinary Least Squares models and present multiple
regression coefficients with robust standard errors in parentheses. For low birth weight and
abnormal conditions, we estimate probit models and present marginal effects calculated at mean
values, with standard errors of the marginal effects in parentheses. We find that the significance
(and sometimes the sign) of the different TUVs varies by outcome.
Although Table 2 indicated that our measure of unwantedness is positively related to
prenatal substance use and negatively associated with first trimester care, Table 3 indicates that
the only outcome with which it is significantly associated is abnormal infant health condition.
STDs are a significant risk factor for abnormal conditions, and pre-existing lung disease and
other health conditions increase the likelihood of low birth weight. Pre-pregnancy morbid
obesity (a relatively rare condition in our sample) is not significantly associated with infant
health outcomes, all else equal, but pre-pregnancy underweight reduces birth weight and
increases the probability of low birth weight. History of mental illness is strongly associated with
both birth weight and low birth weight, in the expected directions.
From the tests at the bottom of Table 2, we find that both the TUVs and NSCs are
significant predictors for all three outcomes.23
Question 3: What are the estimated effects of well-measured prenatal inputs on infant health
outcomes in models with a rich set of covariates, including TUVs and NSCs?
Results from our gold standard infant health production functions are presented in Table
4. These models include the three “actual” inputs, the TUVs, standard covariates, the NSCs, and

23

Because birthweight is a continuous variable, we use F-tests to determine whether the TUVs and NSCs are jointly
significant. Because low birth weight and infant health conditions are dichotomous measures, with models estimated
via probit, we use Wald tests.

26

the city in which the birth took place. We find that prenatal illicit drug use reduces birth weight
by 139 grams, that it increases the likelihood of low birth weight by 4 percentage points, and that
it increases the likelihood of an abnormal infant condition by 6 percentage points. The estimated
effect on low birth weight is very similar to that found by Noonan et al. (2007) in both single
equation probit and bivariate probit models that used the same data on which the current analyses
are based. We find that prenatal cigarette smoking decreases birth weight by 174 grams and
increases the likelihood of low birth weight by 5 percentage points, but that it is unrelated to
abnormal infant conditions. The estimate for birth weight is very similar to those of Rosenzweig
and Schultz (1983) and Lien and Evans (2005), who tested for endogeneity and found that single
equation models produced unbiased estimates. Consistent with a growing number of studies,
including a recent study by Evans and Lien (2005) that exploited a natural experiment, first
trimester care is unrelated to both birth weight and low birth weight. It is also unrelated to
abnormal infant conditions.
Question 4: Do the TUVs have direct effects on infant health outcomes above and beyond the
indirect effects through inputs?
From Table 4, we find evidence of direct associations between TUVs and infant health
outcomes. That is, not only are TUVs strongly related to prenatal input use, but some are also
related to infant health outcomes when holding inputs constant. The strength of the association
depends on the specific TUV and outcome. Even when controlling for the three inputs, we find
that: (1) STDs are strongly related to abnormal infant conditions; (2) maternal physical health
endowments are strongly related to low birth weight; and (3) maternal mental health endowment
is strongly related to low birth weight. In terms of (2), pre-existing physical health conditions
other than lung disease increase the probability of low birth weight, and underweight (possibly
representing nutritional inadequacy) is a strong and significant predictor of birth weight (in the

27

expected direction) but not low birth weight or abnormal infant conditions. For maternal and
physical health endowments, the finding of strong effects on low birth weight but only weak
effects on birth weight indicates that the effects operate at the low tail of the birth weight
distribution, perhaps because of an interactive effect with other risk factors (such as prenatal
inputs or other factors). In other words, if the infant is likely to be low birth weight, the maternal
health conditions may compound that risk, but if the infant is not at high risk for being low birth
weight those same conditions may be much less consequential.
Question 5: How sensitive are the estimated effects of prenatal inputs on infant health outcomes
to the inclusion of TUVs, the inclusion of NSCs, and the use of “actual” measures of prenatal
inputs?
We consider production functions with alternate specifications, allowing us to examine
the extent to which the TUVs and NSCs change the estimated effects of the prenatal inputs and
to compare our results from Table 4 with those from a “typical” model with self-reported inputs
and a standard set of covariates. Panel 1 in Table 5 presents estimates for models that use our
“actual” measures of prenatal inputs that combine information from medical records and selfreports. Panel 2 presents the estimates for a corresponding set of models that use self-reported
rather than “actual” inputs. All models include standard covariates and city indicators. In Panel
1, the first figure in each cell (Model A, which includes the TUVs and NSCs) is identical to the
corresponding figure in Table 4. Model B includes the NSCs but not the TUVs. Model C
includes the TUVs but not the NSCs. Model D includes only the standard covariates (which are
typically available in birth certificates and other data sets used to study the production of infant
health) plus city indicators. Going from Model A through D, the model becomes less specified
(except, perhaps, from B to C) and going from Panel 1 to Panel 2, the inputs are less accurately
measured.

28

Several findings stand out from Table 5: (1) The self-reported input measures have
stronger effects than the “actual” measures, particularly for first trimester care. (2) Both the
TUVs and the NSCs are significant predictors in the health production functions. (3) Including
the TUVs changes the estimated effects of substance use little. (4) Prenatal illicit drug use is
significantly associated with abnormal infant conditions, regardless of specification. (5) First
trimester prenatal care has no association with birth weight, low birth weight, or abnormal infant
conditions, except when the self-reported measure of first trimester care is used (Panel 2). That
is, prenatal care measured from different sources (“actual” versus self-reported) leads to very
different inferences about the effectiveness of prenatal care.
Supplemental Analyses
We conducted a number of supplementary analyses to explore the potential endogeneity
of prenatal care, assess the sensitivity of our results, investigate potential mechanisms, and
explore differences by race.24 Unless indicated otherwise, all sets of supplemental results
correspond to Models A – D in Panel 1 of Table 5, for all three outcomes.
Potential endogeneity of prenatal care
As discussed earlier, previous research has not found evidence of endogeneity of prenatal
cigarette smoking and illicit drug use. That is not the case, however, for prenatal care. To test for
the potential endogeneity of first trimester prenatal care, we estimated a bivariate probit system,
in which low birth weight and first trimester prenatal care were the dependent variables and the
full set of covariates from Table 2 was included. Based on the finding by Currie and Reagan
(2003) that distance to hospital is associated with well-child checkups, we used a measure of
distance to the birth hospital from the mother’s residence (in meters) as an identifier for first
trimester prenatal care. We also used the number of family planning clinics in the mother’s
24

The results from supplementary analyses are not presented, but are available upon request.

29

congressional district as an identifier. Tests revealed that (1) the identifiers were jointly
significant predictors of first trimester care, (2) the identifiers were excludable from the low birth
weight equation25, and (3) the error terms in the prenatal care equation and the low birth weight
equation were not significantly correlated. This provides evidence that our single equation
estimates of the effects of prenatal care on birth outcomes (which indicate no effect) are not
biased.
Sensitivity analyses
We ran models that excluded city indicators, excluded the cases for which the start date
of prenatal care was not available in the medical records, excluded drug use (to make our models
more comparable to those estimated by others), and excluded our measure of unwantedness
(which, as discussed earlier, is the most potentially endogenous of the TUVs). We found that the
results were remarkably insensitive to these alternative specifications. The only difference was
that in the models that excluded prenatal drug use, first trimester care became significant at the
10% level for birth weight; however, the effect was still small—about 35 grams.
Alternative outcome measures
To undertake a preliminary exploration into the mechanisms behind the low birth weight
effects, we estimated models (1) with preterm birth (less than 37 weeks) as the outcome, using
the full sample, and (2) with low birth weight as the outcome, but restricting the sample to full
term births (at least 37 weeks gestation). For (1), the pattern of results was very similar to that for
low birth weight. For (2), the pattern was very similar to that for low birth weight using the full
25

To ensure that our identifiers are excludable from the outcome equation (uncorrelated with low birth weight net
of first trimester care and the other variables in the low birth weight equation), we follow Rashad and Kaestner
(2004) and use a just-identified bivariate probit with the other identifier as a predictor in the low birth weight
equation. We perform Wald tests to determine whether the identifiers are significant in predicting low birth weight.
The results indicate that regardless of which identifier we use to perform the test, the identifiers are not significant
predictors of low birth weight.

30

sample; the only difference was that prenatal drug use was no longer significant in Model A. It
thus appears that, on the whole, the inputs operate through both length of gestation and rate of
fetal growth. However, these mechanisms need to be further explored. Unlike most studies that
rely on self-reported gestational age, the results from this set of supplementary models were
based on a measure of “actual” gestational age from the medical records.
Race-specific models
As mentioned earlier, many researchers estimate race-specific birth outcome production
functions and find differential (larger) impacts of prenatal care on birth weight or low birth
weight for blacks than for whites. We estimated a supplementary set of models and tested for the
validity of pooling non-Hispanic blacks and non-Hispanic whites in our sample. 26 Except in one
case (the model for continuous birth weight as the outcome that included self-reported inputs—
Model D), the production functions of the two racial groups were not significantly different. In
that case, the effect of first trimester care was strong (103 grams) and significant for blacks,
whereas it was small and insignificant (2 grams) for whites. In our gold standard specification
(Model A for “actual” inputs), we found that first trimester prenatal care did not significantly
affect birth weight for whites or blacks and that the magnitudes were similar for the two groups
(24 grams for blacks and 44 grams for whites).

Conclusion
We undertook a comprehensive analysis of sources of bias in infant health production
functions using data from a national urban birth cohort study that oversampled non-marital
births—the dominant clientele of programs designed to improve birth outcomes. The key

26

In these models, we included only non-Hispanic whites and non-Hispanic blacks. Because of small cell sizes, we
did not include city indicators.

31

findings were that: (1) Measures of wantedness, taste for risky behaviors, and maternal health
endowment—which economic theory suggests are important sources of unobserved
heterogeneity—are strongly associated with both prenatal inputs and infant health outcomes, but
excluding them from infant health production functions generally does not bias the estimated
effects of prenatal inputs. The same is true for an additional set of non-standard but potentially
important covariates, including father and family structure characteristics. (2) Self-reported
measures of inputs lead to overestimated effects of smoking, drug use, and prenatal care on birth
weight outcomes. The difference is particularly dramatic for prenatal care; consistent with recent
studies, we found no significant effects of first trimester prenatal care on any infant health
outcome when using our measure of prenatal care that was based primarily on medical records.
(3) Using a direct measure of infant health leads to similar inferences about the effects of
smoking and drug use as when using birth weight outcomes. However, while the effect of
smoking on low birth weight is large, its effect on the likelihood of an abnormal infant health
condition is insignificant.
The results can be used to inform and guide future research on the production of infant
health. In particular, researchers can be more confident in using single-equation models with
self-reported inputs under certain circumstances and may find it compelling to move beyond
birth weight when characterizing infant health. That said, the results must be considered in
context. The effects of drug use may vary by type of substance, and those of both smoking and
drug use are likely to depend on the duration and intensity of use. Similarly, the effects of
prenatal care may vary by quality and intensity of care. Finally, the results for smoking and
prenatal care should not be interpreted to mean that smoking does not harm infants’ health or that
first trimester prenatal care has no beneficial effects. The birth weight effects of smoking may

32

lead to cognitive deficiencies or physical health problems as the child ages. Additionally,
mothers who smoke cigarettes during pregnancy may be likely to smoke postnatally, exposing
the child to second-hand smoke, which can have adverse health consequences. Similarly, early
prenatal care could increase the use of postnatal health-promoting behaviors such as regular
preventive pediatric care. The effects of prenatal behaviors on postnatal health behaviors and
longer-term child health outcomes have been under-explored and represent fertile ground for
future research.
An implication of this study for data collection is that surveys should make efforts to
obtain high quality data on prenatal care and infant health outcomes, perhaps through improved
question wording or through linkages with other sources of data. Such efforts would improve the
estimation of infant health production functions. Another implication is that collecting data on
the typically unobserved but theoretically important variables and non-standard covariates we
examined, while not necessary for improving the precision of infant health production function
estimates, would enhance studies of maternal and infant health more generally as many of these
factors were strongly and independently associated with input demand and birth outcomes.
Additionally, collecting rich data on the quality and intensity of prenatal inputs is a logical next
step.
Finally, this study has broad implications for public health policy. First, the finding that
prenatal drug use has strong deleterious effects on infant health (based on either birth weight or
measured health conditions) suggests that early screening and treatment for substance use during
pregnancy may improve infant health. Second, the findings of small or insignificant effects of
prenatal care suggest that medical and psychosocial care that begins after conception may be too
little too late to improve birth outcomes and that earlier intervention is necessary to achieve that

33

goal. The findings that STDs during pregnancy and pre-existing mental illness are strongly and
independently related to abnormal infant conditions and low birth weight, respectively, suggest
that addressing sexual and mental health issues prior to conception, rather than during the
confines of a pregnancy, may not only enhance the well-being of mothers, but may also improve
the health of their children. More generally, the findings suggest that promoting health and
healthy behaviors in women of reproductive age is needed to improve aggregate birth outcomes
and that interventions to prevent (and treat) drug use and cigarette smoking among girls and
young women may be wise investments.

34

References
Altfeld, S., L. Berman, D. Burton and A. Handler (1997). “Wantedness of Pregnancy and
Prenatal Health Behaviors.” Women & Health 26: 29-43.
American Academy of Pediatrics (1995). “Committee on Substance Abuse, 1994 to 1995
Drug-Exposed Infants.” Pediatrics 96: 364 - 367.
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2006). “ACOG Committee Opinion No.
343: Psychosocial Risk Factors: Perinatal Screening and Intervention.” Obstetrics and
Gynecology 108(2): 469-77.
Arendt, R.E., L.T. Singer, S. Minnes and A. Salvator (1999). “Accuracy in Detecting Prenatal
Drug Exposure.” Journal of Drug Issues 29(2): 203-214.
Bell, J.F. and F.J. Zimmerman (2003). “Selection Bias in Prenatal Care Use by Medicaid
Recipients.” Maternal and Child Health Journal 7(4): 239-252.
Bernabe, J.V., T. Soriano, R. Albaladejo, M. Juarranz, M.E. Calle, D. Martinez and V.
Dominguez-Rojas (2004). “Risk Factors for Low Birth Weight.” European Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynecology and Reproductive Biology 116(1): 3-15.
Boardman, J.D. D.A. Powers, Y.C. Padilla and R.A. Hummer (2002). “Low Birth Weight, Social
Factors, and Developmental Outcomes Among Children in the United States.”
Demography 39(6): 353-68.
Case, A., A. Fertig and C. Paxson (2005). “The Lasting Impact of Childhood Health and
Circumstance.” Journal of Health Economics 24(2): 365-389.
Case, A., D. Lubotsky and C. Paxson (2002). “Socioeconomic Status and Health in Childhood:
The Origins of the Gradient.” American Economic Review 92(5): 1308-1334.
Chaikind, S. and H. Corman (1991). “The Impact of Low Birthweight on Special Education
Costs.” Journal of Health Economics 10(3): 291-311.
Chomitz, V.R., L.W.Y. Cheung and E. Lieberman (1995). “The Role of Lifestyle in Preventing
Low Birth Weight.” The Future of Children 5(1): 121-138.
Clarke, L.L., M.K. Miller, S.L. Albrecht, B. Frentzen and A. Cruz (1999). “The Role of Medical
Problems and Behavioral Risks in Explaining Patterns of Prenatal Care Use Among
High-Risk Women.” Health Services Research 24(1): 145-170.
Coleman, P.K., D.C. Reardon and J.R. Cougle (2005). “Substance Use Among Pregnant Women
in the Context of Previous Reproductive Loss and Desire for Current Pregnancy.” British
Journal of Health Psychology 10(2): 255-268.

35

Conley, D. and N. Bennett (2000). “Is Biology Destiny? Birth Weight and Life Chances.”
American Sociological Review 65: 458-467.
Conley, D., K.W. Strully and N.G. Bennett (2003). The Starting Gate: Birth Weight and Life
Chances. Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA: University of California Press.
Conway, K. and L. DeFelice Kennedy (2004). “Maternal Depression and the Production of
Infant Health.” Southern Economic Journal 71(2): 260-286.
Conway, K. and P. Deb (2005). “Is Prenatal Care Really Ineffective? Or, is the ‘Devil’ in the
Distribution?” Journal of Health Economics 24 (3): 489-513
Corman, H., T.J Joyce and M. Grossman (1987). “Birth Outcome Production Function in
the United States.” Journal of Human Resources 22(3): 339-360.
Corman, H., K. Noonan, N. Reichman and D. Dave (2005). “Demand for Illicit Drugs Among
Pregnant Women.” Advances in Health Economics and Health Services Research 16: 4160.
Currie, J. and P.B. Reagan (2003). “Distance to Hospital and Children’s Use of Preventive Care:
Is Being Closer Better, and for Whom?” Economic Inquiry 41(3): 378-391.
Echevarria, S. and W.P. Frisbie (2001). “Race/Ethnic-Specific Variation in Adequacy of
Prenatal Care Utilization.” Social Forces 80(2): 633-655.
Evans, W.N. and D.S. Lien (2005). “The Benefits of Prenatal Care: Evidence From the PAT Bus
Strike.” Journal of Econometrics 125: 207-239.
Faden, V.B., E. Hanna and B.I. Graubard (1997). “The Effect of Positive and Negative Health
Behavior During Gestation on Pregnancy Outcome.” Journal of Substance Abuse 9:6376.
Goldenberg, R.L, S.P. Cliver, Y. Neggers, R.L. Cooper, M.D. DuBard, R.O. Davis and H.J.
Hoffman (1997). “The Relationship Between Maternal Characteristics and Fetal and
Neonatal Anthropometric Measurements in Women Delivering at Term: A Summary.”
Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand Supplement 165: 8-13.
Grossman, M. and T.J. Joyce (1990). “Unobservables, Pregnancy Resolutions, and Birth Weight
Production Functions in New York City.” Journal of Political Economy 98(5): 983-1007.
Harris, K.M. and M.J. Edlund (2005). “Self-Medication of Mental Health Problems: New
Evidence From a National Survey.” Health Services Research 40(1): 117-137.
Harrison, E.R., J. Haaga and T. Richards (1993). “Self-Reported Drug Use Data: What Do They
Reveal?” American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse 19: 423-441.

36

Howell, E.M., N. Heiser and M. Harrington (1999). “A Review of Recent Findings on Substance
Abuse Treatment for Pregnant Women.” Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment 16(3):
195-219.
Huang, C.-C. and R.J. Reid (2006). “Risk Factors Associated With Alcohol, Cigarette, and Illicit
Drug Use Among Pregnant Women: Evidence From the Fragile Family and Child WellBeing Survey.” Journal of Social Service Research 32(4): 1-22
Joyce, T.J. and M. Grossman (1990). “Pregnancy Wantedness and the Early Initiation of Prenatal
Care.” Demography 27(1): 1-17.
Joyce, T.J., R. Kaestner and S. Korenman (2002). “On the Validity of Retrospective Assessments
of Pregnancy Intention.” Demography 39(1): 199-213.
Kaestner R. and H. Corman (1995). “The Impact of Child Health and Family Inputs on Child
Cognitive Development.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #5257.
Kaestner, R., T.J. Joyce and H. Wehbeh (1996). “The Effect of Maternal Drug Use on Birth
Weight: Measurement Error in Binary Variables.” Economic Inquiry 34:326-352.
Kost, K., D.J. Landry and J.E. Darroch (1998). “The Effects of Pregnancy Planning Status on
Birth Outcomes and Infant Care.” Family Planning Perspectives 30(5): 223-230.
Lewit, E. M., L. S. Baker, H. Corman and P. H. Shiono (1995). “The Direct Cost of Low Birth
Weight,” The Future of Children, 35-56
Lien, D.S. and W.N. Evans (2005). “Estimating the Impact of Large Cigarette Tax Hikes: The
Case of Maternal Smoking and Infant Birth Weight.” Journal of Human Resources 40(2):
373-392.
Lu, M.C., V. Tache, G.R. Alexander, M. Kotelchuck and N. Halfon (2003). “Preventing Low
Birth Weight: Is Prenatal Care the Answer?” Journal of Maternal and Fetal Neonatal
Medicine 13: 362-380.
Marsiglio, W. and F.L. Mott (1988). “Does Wanting to Become Pregnant with a First Child
Affect Subsequent Maternal Behaviors and Infant Birth Weight?” Journal of Marriage
and the Family 50(4): 1023-1036.
Matte, T.D., M. Bresnahan, M.D. Begg and E. Susser (2001). “Influence of Variation in Birth
Weight Within Normal Range and Within Sibships on IQ at Age 7 Years: Cohort Study.”
British Medical Journal 323: 310-14.
Moffitt, R. (2005). “Remarks on the Analysis of Causal Relationships in Population Research.”
Demography 42(1): 91-108.

37

Noonan, K., N.E. Reichman, H. Corman and D. Dave. (2007) “Prenatal Drug Use and the
Production of Infant Health.” Health Economics, 16(4): 361-384.
Ogunyemi, D. and G.E. Hernandez-Loera (2004). “The Impact of Antenatal Cocaine Use on
Maternal Characteristics and Neonatal Outcomes.” The Journal of Maternal-Fetal and
Neonatal Medicine 15: 253-259.
Pagnini, D.L. and N.E. Reichman (2000). “Psychosocial Factors and the Timing of Prenatal Care
Among Women in New Jersey’s HealthStart Program.” Family Planning Perspectives
32(2): 56-64.
Penrod, J.R. and P.M. Lantz (2000). “Measurement Error in Prenatal Care Utilization: Evidence
of Attenuation Bias in the Estimation.” Maternal and Child Health Journal 4(1): 39-52.
Rashad, I. and R. Kaestner (2004). "Teenage Sex, Drugs and Alcohol Use: Problems Identifying
the Cause of Risky Behavior." Journal of Health Economics 23(3): 493-503.
Reichman, N.E. (2005). “Low Birth Weight and School Readiness.” The Future of Children
15(1): 91-116.
Reichman, N.E. and E.M. Hade (2001). “Validation of Birth Certificate Data: A Study of
Women in New Jersey's Health Start Program.” Annals of Epidemiology 11(3): 186-193.
Reichman, N.E. and O. Schwartz-Soicher (2007). “Accuracy of Birth Certificate Data by Risk
Factors and Outcomes: Analysis of Data from New Jersey.” American Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynecology 197(1): 32.e1-32.e8.
Reichman, N.E. and J.O. Teitler (2005). “Timing of Enhanced Prenatal Care and Birth Outcomes
in New Jersey’s HealthStart Program.” Maternal and Child Health Journal 9(2): 151158.
Reichman, N.E. and J.O. Teitler (2006). “Paternal Age as a Risk Factor for Low Birth Weight.”
American Journal of Public Health 96(5): 862-866.
Reichman, N.E., J.O. Teitler, I. Garfinkel, and S. McLanahan (2001). “Fragile Families: Sample
and Design.” Children and Youth Services Review 23(4): 303-326.
Rosenzweig, M.K. and T.P. Schultz (1983). “Estimating a Household Production Function:
Heterogeneity, the Demand for Health Inputs, and Their Effects on Birth Weight.”
Journal of Political Economy 91(5): 723-746.
Sangi-Haghpeykar, H., M. Mehta, S. Posner and A.N. Poindexter (2005). “Paternal Influences on
the Timing of Prenatal Care Among Hispanics.” Maternal and Child Health Journal
9(2): 159-163.

38

Teitler, J.O. (2001). “Father Involvement, Child Health and Maternal Health Behavior.”
Children and Youth Services Review 23(4/5): 403-425.
Visscher, W., M. Feder, A.M. Burns, T.M. Brady, and R.M. Bray (2003). “The Impact of
Smoking and Other Substance Use by Urban Women on the Birthweight of Their
Infants.” Substance Use & Misuse 38(8): 1063–1093.
Warner, G.L. (2003). “The Association Between Maternal Depression and Prenatal Care
Adequacy.” The Review of Black Political Economy: Winter 39-53.
Weller, R.H., I.W. Eberstein and M. Bailey (1987). “Pregnancy Wantedness and Maternal
Behavior During Pregnancy.” Demography 24(3): 407-412

39

Table 1: Characteristics of Full Sample, Low Birth Weight sample, and Sample with Abnormal Infant
Health Conditionsa
Full Sample
Low Birth Weight
Abnormal Infant Health
(N=3124)
(N=321)
Condition
(N=375)
Prenatal Inputs
“Actual” b
Used Illicit Drugs
.11
.24
.19
Smoked Cigarettes
.24
.43
.30
Received First Trimester Prenatal
.57
.53
.53
Care
Self-Reported
Used Illicit Drugs
.06
.15
.11
Smoked Cigarettes
.20
.37
.25
Received First Trimester Prenatal
.77
.53
.53
Care
Typically Unobserved Variables
(TUVs)
Considered Abortion
STD During Pregnancy
Pre-Existing Lung Disease
Other Pre-Existing Physical Health
Condition
Pre-Pregnancy Underweight
Pre-Pregnancy Morbidly Obese
History of Mental Illness
Standard Covariates – Mother
Age (years)
Age Squared
Less Than High Schoolc
High School Graduate
Some College (but not graduate)
College Graduate
Non-Hispanic Whitec
Non-Hispanic Black
Hispanic
Other Race/Ethnicity
Immigrant
First Birth
Married at Time of Birth

.30
.28
.13
.08

.37
.38
.20
.12

.35
.35
.15
.07

.04
.02
.11

.06
.01
.22

.03
.01
.16

24.94
(5.93)
657.30
(326.74)
.36
.31
.23
.09
.18
.49
.29
.04
.16
.37
.23

25.30
(6.52)
682.54
(362.96)
.40
.35
.18
.07
.17
.64
.17
.02
.08
.40
.14

24.88
(6.15)
656.55
(339.15)
.40
.31
.21
.08
.17
.53
.26
.04
.10
.41
.19
Continued on next page

40

Table 1 (cont.)

Non-Standard Covariates (NSCs) Mother
Medicaid Birth
Number of Previous Pregnancies
Lived With Both Parents At Age
15
Attends Religious Services Several
Times Per Month
% Under Poverty in Census Tract
Knew Each Other at Least 12
Months at Time of Conception

NSCs - Father
Less Educated Than Mother
Different Race/Ethnicity Than
Mother
At Least 5 Years Older Than
Mother
Infant Health Outcomes
Birth Weight (grams)
Low Birth Weight (< 2500 grams)
Abnormal Infant Health Condition

Full Sample

Low Birth Weight

Abnormal Infant Health
Condition

.67
.76
(.43)
.41

.81
.76
(.43)
.36

.71
.74
(.44)
.40

.38

.31

.34

.19
(.13)
.84

.21
(.14)
.82

.20
(.14)
.83

.26
.15

.27
.14

.24
.18

.27

.32

.27

3221
(610.90)
.10
.12

1989
(505.57)
1
.37

2923
(884.64)
.27
1

a

For mother’s age and age squared, number of previous pregnancies, % under poverty in census tract, and birth
weight, means and standard deviations are presented. For all other measures, figures are proportions.
b
“Actual” measures combine information from self-reports and medical records, as described in the text.
c
Omitted category in regression models

41

Table 2: Determinants of Demand for Prenatal Inputs a
Illicit Drug Use

Cigarette
Smoking
Probit Coefficient
(Standard Error)
[Marginal Effect]

First Trimester
Prenatal Care

Typically Unobserved Variables (TUVs)

Mother Considered Abortion

.34***
(.11)
[.04]

.26***
(.08)
[.07]

-.33***
(.04)
[-.13]

STD During Pregnancy

.27***
(.09)
[.03]

.09
(.06)
[.02]

.04
(.05)
[.02]

.04
(.08)
[.00]

.05
(.07)
[.01]

-.03
(.08)
[-.01]

-.16
(.08)
[-.02]

-.07
(.09)
[-.02]

.19**
(.08)
[.07]

Pre-Pregnancy Underweight

-.04
(.19)
[-.00]

.15
(.14)
[.04]

-.10
(.16)
[-.04]

Pre-Pregnancy Morbidly Obese

-.41
(.29)
[-.03]

-.43*
(.24)
[-.09]

.16
(.21)
[.06]

1.02***
(.12)
[.21]

.59***
(.08)
[.19]

-.10
(.07)
[-.04]

Age

.06
(.04)
[.01]

.07*
(.03)
[.02]

.12***
(.04)
[.05]

Age Squared

-.00
(.00)
[-.00]

-.00
(.00)
[-.00]

-.00***
(.00)
[-.00]

-.34***
(.07)
[-.04]

-.41***
(.09)
[-.10]

.14**
(.06)
[.06]
Cont’d on next page

Pre-Existing Lung Disease

Other Pre-Existing Physical Health
Condition

History of Mental Illness

Standard Covariates – Mother

High School Graduate

42

Table 2 (cont’d): Determinants of Demand for Prenatal Inputs
Illicit Drug Use

Cigarette
Smoking
Probit Coefficient
(Standard Error)
[Marginal Effect]

First Trimester
Prenatal Care

Standard Covariates - Mother
Some College

-.61***
(.10)
[-.06]

-.64***
(.08)
[-.15]

.14**
(.07)
[.06]

College Graduate

-1.17***
(.23)
[-.07]

-1.17***
(.10)
[-.19]

.43***
(.11)
[.16]

Non-Hispanic Black

.13
(.13)
[.02]

-.63***
(.10)
[-.17]

-.08
(.08)
[-.03]

Hispanic

-.14
(.13)
[-.02]

-.90***
(.13)
[-.20]

-.04
(.08)
[-.02]

Other Non-White Non-Hispanic

.03
(.23)
[.00]

-.36
(.27)
[-.08]

-.43***
(.11)
[-.17]

Immigrant

-.87***
(.21)
[-.07]

-.83***
(.12)
[-.17]

-.03
(.07)
[-.01]

First Birth

.07
(.09)
[.01]

-.04
(.08)
[-.01]

.42***
(.09)
[.16]

-.46***
(.11)
[-.04]

-.39***
(.10)
[-.09]

.31***
(.06)
[.12]

Medicaid Birth

.07
(.10)
[.01]

.14**
(.07)
[.04]

-.13**
(.06)
[-.05]

Lived With Both Parents At Age 15

.06
(.07)
[.01]

-.08
(.05)
[-.02]

.02
(.06)
[.01]
Cont’d on next page

Married at Time of Birth

Non-Standard Covariates (NSCs) – Mother

43

Table 2 (cont’d): Determinants of Demand for Prenatal Inputs
Illicit Drug Use

Cigarette
Smoking
Probit Coefficient
(Standard Error)
[Marginal Effect]

First Trimester
Prenatal Care

.06
(.11)
[.01]

.19*
(.10)
[.05]

.30***
(.09)
[.12]

-.17**
(.08)
[-.02]

-.23***
(.07)
[-.06]

.04
(.07)
[.02]

% Under Poverty in Census Tract

.18
(.22)
[.02]

.31
(.31)
[.08]

-.04
(.15)
[-.01]

Mother Knew Father at Least 12 Months

.01
(.08)
[.00]

-.09
(.06)
[-.03]

-.03
(.07)
[-.01]

Less Educated Than Mother

.31***
(.09)
[.04]

.23***
(.06)
[.06]

-.04
(.04)
[-.02]

Different Race/Ethnicity Than Mother

.18**
(.07)
[.02]

.23**
(.10)
[.07]

.04
(.07)
[.02]

5 Years Older Than Mother

.10***
(.08)
[.01]

.25***
(.05)
[.07]

-.07
(.05)
[-.03]

-830.96
χ2=198.46
P=.00
χ2=43.19
P=.00
χ2=1152.90
P=.00
3124

-1383.39
χ2=142.20
P=.00
χ2=109.47
P=.00
χ2=3175.61
P=.00
3124

-1957.68
χ2=76.71
P=.00
χ2=125.66
P=.00
χ2=2898.54
P=.00
3124

Number of Previous Pregnancies

Attends Religious Services

NSCs – Father

Log-Likelihood
Wald Test (no TUVs)
Wald Test (no NSCs)
Wald Test (no TUVs or NSCs)
N

*** significant at 1% level; ** significant at 5% level; * significant at 10% level
a
“Actual” measures that combine information from self-reports and medical records, as described in the text.
All models include indicators for the city in which the birth took place.

44

Table 3: Reduced-Form Marginal Effects of TUVs on Infant Health Outcomes
Birth Weight
(grams)

Considered Abortion
STD During Pregnancy
Pre-Existing Lung Disease
Other Pre-Existing Physical Health
Condition
Pre-Pregnancy Underweight
Pre-Pregnancy Morbidly Obese
History of Mental Illness

Mean
N
F-test or Wald Test (no TUVs)
F-test or Wald Test (no NSCs)
F-test or Wald Test (no TUVs or
NSCs)

Abnormal Infant Health
Condition

(1)
-.60
(24.91)
-13.17
(26.59)
-31.68
(31.51)
-37.32
(52.72)
-117.03***
(30.25)
91.83
(71.67)
-100.82**
(47.84)

Low Birth
Weight
(< 2500 grams)
(2)
.003
(.01)
.02
(.01)
.03**
(.02)
.04*
(.02)
.05*
(.03)
-.02
(.03)
.06***
(.02)

3221
3122
F7,18=8.99
P=.00
F9,18=7.21
P=.00
F16,18=48.53
P=.00

.10
3124
χ2=99.26
P=.00
χ2=119.89
P=.00
χ2=924.14
P=.00

.12
3101
χ2=55.17
P=.00
χ2=63.89
P=.00
χ2=5208.46
P=.00

(3)
.02*
(.01)
.04**
(.01)
.01
(.02)
-.01
(.02)
-.04
(.03)
-.03
(.05)
.03
(.02)

TUV = typically unobserved variable; NSC = non-standard covariate
*** significant at 1% level; ** significant at 5% level; * significant at 10% level
All models include TUVs, NSCs, standard covariates, and city in which the birth took place.
Birth weight is estimated using Ordinary Least Squares (standard errors in parentheses). Low birth weight and
abnormal conditions are estimated using probit models; the marginal effects are presented with standard errors in
parentheses.

45

Table 4: Infant Health Production Models: Marginal Effects of Inputs and TUVs on Infant Health
Outcomes

Prenatal Illicit Drug Use
Prenatal Cigarette Smoking
First Trimester Prenatal Care
Considered Abortion
STD During Pregnancy
Pre-Existing Lung Disease
Other Pre-Existing Physical Health
Condition
Pre-Pregnancy Underweight
Pre-Pregnancy Morbidly Obese
History of Mental Illness

Mean
N

Birth Weight
(grams)
(1)
-139.26**
(49.70)
-173.56***
(27.83)
17.61
(18.42)
23.35
(26.56)
-2.81
(26.59)
-27.31
(32.81)
-45.43
(52.13)
-108.67**
(30.20)
64.47
(74.48)
- 28.54
(39.50)

Low Birth Weight
(< 2500 grams)
(2)
.04**
(.02)
.05***
(.01)
.00
(.01)
-.00
(.01)
.02
(.01)
.03**
(.02)
.04**
(.02)
.04
(.03)
-.01
(.03)
.04**
(.02)

Abnormal Infant
Health Condition
(3)
.06***
(.02)
.00
(.02)
-.01
(.01)
.02
(.01)
.03***
(.01)
.01
(.02)
-.01
(.02)
-.04
(.03)
-.03
(.05)
.01
(.02)

3221
3122

.10
3124

.12
3101

***Significant at 1% level, **5% level, *10% level
TUV = typically unobserved variable
Birth weight model is estimated using Ordinary Least Squares (standard errors in parentheses). Low birth weight
and abnormal conditions are estimated using probit models; the marginal effects are presented with standard errors
in parentheses. All models include variables from Table 2 plus city indicators.

46

Table 5: Infant Health Production Models: Effects of Prenatal Inputs on Infant Health Outcomes
Birth Weight
Low Birth Weight
Abnormal Infant Health
(grams)
(< 2500 grams)
Condition
Panel 1: “Actual” Inputs
(1)
(2)
(3)
Prenatal Illicit Drug
A
-139.26**
.04**
.06***
Use
B
-144.59**
.05***
.07***
C
-144.05***
.04**
.06***
D
-153.67***
.06***
.07***
Prenatal Cigarette
A
-173.56***
.05***
.00
Smoking
B
-176.35***
.06***
.01
C
-182.07***
.06***
.00
D
-186.06***
.07***
.01
First Trimester Prenatal
A
17.61
.00
-.01
Care
B
15.33
.00
-.01
C
22.23
.00
-.00
D
19.98
.00
-.01
No TUVs
B
F7,18=7.04
χ2=51.99
χ2=26.72
P=.00
P=.00
P=.00
No NSCs
C
F9,18=5.26
χ2=93.53
χ2=27.96
P=.00
P=.00
P=.00
No TUVs or NSCs
D
F16,18=105.15
χ2=2170.72
χ2=1840.29
P=.00
P=.00
P=.00
Panel 2: Self-Reported Inputs
Prenatal Illicit Drug
A
-172.55**
.06**
.07***
Use
B
-175.56**
.07***
.08***
C
-169.58**
.06**
.07***
D
-177.06**
.07***
.07***
Prenatal Cigarette
A
-213.19***
.05***
.01
Smoking
B
-216.47***
.06***
.01
C
-225.29***
.06***
.01
D
-230.29***
.07***
.01
First Trimester Prenatal
A
49.78*
-.02**
-.03**
Care
B
47.95*
-.02**
-.03***
C
53.85*
-.02**
-.03**
D
52.16*
-.02**
-.03**
No TUVs
B
F7,18=7.53
χ2=41.21
χ2=25.32
P=.00
P=.00
P=.00
No NSCs
C
F9,18=5.24
χ2=97.87
χ2=47.62
P=.00
P=.00
P=.00
No TUVs or NSCs
D
F16,18=116.87
χ2=591.38
χ2=1734.68
P=.00
P=.00
P=.00
Mean
3221
.10
.12
N
3122
3124
3101
***Significant at 1% level, **5% level, *10% level
TUV = typically unobserved variable; NSC = non-standard covariate
Each figure represents the marginal effect of an input on an outcome (using Ordinary Least Squares for birth weight
and probit for low birth weight and abnormal condition). In each cell, results are presented from four different model
specifications (all models include standard covariates and city indicators):
Model A: includes TUVs and NSCs
Model B: includes NSCs but not TUVs
Model C: includes TUVs but not NSCs
Model D: includes neither TUVs nor NSCs

47

Appendix: Construction of Abnormal Infant Health Condition Variable

Infant health conditions were recorded in several places in the mothers’ or infants’ hospital
medical records and were also asked about in the mothers’ follow-up surveys.
Medical Records

The abstraction form that was used to collect information from the hospital medical records for
each birth was designed with input from medical consultants. The sections of the form used to
obtain information for the coding of the infant health conditions (“Abnormal Conditions of the
Newborn,” “Newborn Screen Test Results,” “Other Notes Not Collected Elsewhere”) are
attached. Each condition, including those listed in the other (specify) fields, were recorded in a
database that was provided to a pediatric consultant who was instructed to determine whether a
given condition had potential long-term adverse health consequences, and if it did, to code that
condition according to the relevant cell in the 16-square grid (attached). The columns in the grid
pertain to severity of the condition (high, medium, low, unknown) and the rows pertain to
whether the condition is associated with maternal prenatal behavior (likely, possibly, not
associated, not known). For cases with multiple conditions, each potentially long-term condition
was assigned a code.
Survey Question

The survey question that was used (from the mother’s one year follow-up interview) was as
follows:
“Does (CHILD) have any physical disabilities?” (underlining included on survey instrument). If
the respondent answered “yes,” the following was asked “What type of physical disability does
(he/she) have?” with the following response categories (verbatim from survey instrument):
Cerebral palsy, total blindness, partial blindness, total deafness, partial deafness, Down's
syndrome, problem with limbs (specify), and other (specify).
These conditions, including responses to the other (specify) categories, were coded as described
above (using information from the medical records abstractions). However, only conditions that
were likely present at birth (such as Cerebral Palsy or Down Syndrome) were assigned codes.
Variable construction

For this paper, we were interested in identifying coded infant conditions that were not low
severity and that could potentially be related to maternal prenatal behavior. In the grid, the
relevant cells are shaded in gray. We coded cases as having an abnormal infant health condition
if the infant had at least one condition in any of the following cells (regardless of whether that
infant also had a condition in any of the remaining cells): 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 16.

48

ABNORMAL CONDITIONS OF NEWBORN
Respiratory System

Yes (+)

No ( - )

1

0

1

0

1

0

1

0

1

0

1

0

1

0

1

0

1

0

1

0

1

0

1

0

1

0

1

0

1

0

1

0

1

0

1

0

1

0

1

0

1

0

1

0

1

0

1

0

CHI32. Down syndrome (TRI SOMY 21) ...................................................
CHI33. Other
CHI33O. Specify other _______________________________

1

0

1

0

No Abnormal Conditions ............................................................

1

0

CHI6.

Apnea Problems During Nursery Stay...........................................
Assist. ventilation <30 Min. ...........................................................
Assist. ventilation >30 Min. ............................................................
Hyaline Membrane Dis./RDS.........................................................
Meconium Aspiration Syndrome....................................................
Other respiratory condition

CHI6O.

Specify other respiratory condition
_________________________________

CHI1.
CHI2.
CHI3.
CHI4.
CHI5.

Central Nervous System
Hydrocephalus ...............................................................................
CHI9.
CHI10. Microcephalus................................................................................
CHI11. Seizures .........................................................................................
CHI12. Spina bifida/Meningocele ..............................................................
CHI13. Other Central Nervous System
CHI13O. Specify other _________________________________

Gastrointestinal System
CHI14. Hyperbilirubinemia During Nursery Stay (Jaundice) .....................
CHI15. Hernia (Hiatal, Abdominal, Inguinal) ..............................................
CHI20. Other gastrointestinal
CHI20O. Specify other _________________________________

Circulatory System
Cardiac Problems ..........................................................................

CHI21.
CHI22. Heart malformations ......................................................................
CHI23. Other circulatory
CHI23O. Specify other_________________________________

Renal/Genital/Urinary System
CHI24.

Malformed genitalia .......................................................................
Renal agenesis ..............................................................................

CHI25.
CHI26. Other genital urinary tract
CHI26O. Specify other _________________________________

Musculoskeletal/Integumental
CHI27.
CHI28.

Cleft lip/palate ................................................................................
Hip Dysplasia .................................................................................
Club foot ........................................................................................

CHI30.
CHI31. Other musculoskeletal/integumental
CHI31O. Specify other _________________________________

Chromosomal

CHI34.

NEWBORN MISCELLANEOUS
Yes( + )

No ( - )

CHJ9.

Newborn Screen Test(s) Abnormal ...............................................

1

0

CHJ10.

If Newborn Screen Test Abnormal, is abnormality specified?
Specify __________________________________________

1

0

CHJ10O.

CHNOTES2: Other notes not collected elsewhere:

______________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________

50

Coding Grid for Infant Health Conditions
Severity
High

Medium

Low

Unknown

Not Behavior Related

1

2

3

4

Possibly Behavior Related

5

6

7

8

Likely Behavior Related

9

10

11

12

Not Enough Information
To Determine if Behavior
Related

13

14

15

16

Cell
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

Examples of conditions
Microcephalus, renal agenesis, total blindness, Down Syndrome
Malformed genitalia, hydrocephalus, cleft palate
Assisted ventilation < 30 minutes, jaundice during nursery stay
Thick meconium present in amniotic fluid, ear malformation
Cerebral palsy
Uterine growth restriction
Trouble feeding
Circulatory anomaly
Fetal alcohol syndrome
HCV (Hepatitis C)
Candidiasis of skin and nails
NONE
Seizures
Infection/e-coli
Oral thrash
Facial frontal bruising

51

