NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TIME TO EAT:
HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTION
UNDER INCREASING INCOME INEQUALITY
Daniel S. Hamermesh
Working Paper 12002
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12002
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2006

Edward Everett Hale Centennial Professor of Economics, University of Texas at Austin, research associate,
NBER, and program director, IZA. Research support was provided by the U.S. Department of Agriculture
under Cooperative Aggreement 43-3AEM-4-80125. I am indebted to Moshe Buchinsky, Anne Golla, Karen
Hamrick, Susan Himmelweit, Dan Slesnick, Hayden Stewart, Yoram Weiss and particiants at several
conferences and seminars for helpful suggestions, and to Rick Evans and Mark Pocock for research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Daniel S. Hamermesh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Time to Eat: Household Production Under Increasing Income Inequality
Daniel S. Hamermesh
NBER Working Paper No. 12002
January 2006
JEL No. J22, Q11
ABSTRACT
Eating requires the food materials that make up meals and also time devoted to buying food,
preparing meals and eating them, and cleaning up afterwards. Using time-diary and expenditure data
for the U.S. for 1985 and 2003, I examine how income and time prices affect time and goods input
into this household-produced commodity. Focusing on these two years, between which income and
earnings inequality increased, allows examining how household production is affected by changing
economic opportunities. The results demonstrate that both inputs into eating increase with income,
and that higher time prices at a given level of income reduce time inputs. Over this period the goods
intensity of producting this commodity increased, especially at the lower oart of the income
distribution, and the eaverage time input dropped substantially. The results are consistent with
goods-time substitution in eating being relatively difficult and with substitution becoming relatively
more difficult as production expands. This is confirmed by direct estimates using matched time-use
and food spending data on the same households for 2003 and 2004. The findings imply that
projecting food expenditures alone overestimates the amount spent on food in a growing economy.
Daniel S. Hamermesh
Department of Economics
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712-1173
and NBER
hamermes@eco.utexas.edu

I. Introduction
There are two activities that every person must do to survive: Eat and sleep. While the latter is
amenable to economic analysis (see Biddle and Hamermesh, 1990), with the exception of an infrequent
purchase of bedding and mattresses the production of sleep is a decision solely about time use. Not so for
eating: Generating meals requires decisions about money expenditures on the capital required to engage
in this activity and on the non-durable good food itself, as well as about the time spent in obtaining food,
preparing it, consuming it and cleaning up the detritus from the meal. How people combine expenditures
on the goods and time that make up the production of the commodity “eating” is the major focus of this
study, and I will present evidence on these combinations and their changes over the past two decades in
the United States.
Essentially no attention has been paid to analyzing how the production of eating takes place in the
household. The only relevant literature includes Gronau and Hamermesh (2006), who provide measures
of the relative goods intensity of “eating” (and other commodities) in the U.S. and Israel, and Lecocq
(2001), who examines food spending and (only) meal preparation time (from recall data) in France.
Crossley and Lu (2004) study the details of food spending and meal preparation time using two separate
surveys, while Aguiar and Hurst (2005) examine time and goods inputs into eating at a point in time using
data on older Americans from two separate surveys, one of expenditures on goods, the other a time-diary
study. Vernon (2004) has data on food spending and (recall data) on time use for samples of Russian
households in the 1990s. No study tries to combine the spending and time use measures to infer how the
goods-intensity of household production varies with full income.
Because decisions about how to generate “eating” depend on choices about how time is spent in
the activity, and because the value of time differs across individuals (and for the same person at different
times of the day, week, year and lifetime), they are inherently economic. Thus even though we all may
face the same price of the goods that are inputs into “eating,” we will choose different combinations of
goods and time to generate the same amount of “eating” (Becker, 1965) even when our household
incomes are equal. A second purpose here will thus be to analyze how household members’ choices of
the amounts of time and goods to devote to eating are affected by differences in economic incentives.

Gronau’s (1980) pioneering work considered inter alia the role of income in affecting household
production. Given the potential importance of income effects, it seems sensible to examine the dynamics
of this relationship, since arguably the most important change in the American economy (and to a lesser
extent in many other industrialized economies too) in the last quarter century has been the rise in
inequality in earnings and incomes (see e.g., Gottschalk and Smeeding, 2000). Among its many potential
impacts rising income inequality, and the relative changes in time prices that constitute the source of
much of the increased inequality, may also have altered the incentives for generating commodities in the
household, including “eating,” that face people at different points of the distributions of earnings and
incomes. The extent of changes resulting from these changed incentives, and therefore the distributional
impacts of rising inequality on how Americans generate “eating,” is the third central focus of this study.1
In the next Section I provide a brief motivation for the analysis. Section III discusses the large
variety of data sets that are used in this study and outlines ways to overcome a number of complex
estimation problems that are thrown up by difficulties with the available data, including the likely
endogeneity of variations in wages and incomes. Section IV presents the empirical results that shed light
on the first two foci of the study. It also analyzes changes in the inputs into eating over the two decades
from the mid-1980s to the mid-2000s and what they imply about the household production function for
eating.
II. Theoretical Motivation
The discussion of household production for eating is fairly standard and stems directly from
Becker (1965). The typical household chooses to supply its members’ labor to the market, and to use its
remaining time in a variety of activities that it combines with the income generated by its members’ labor
market time and any non-labor income it may receive. Among these activities are those related to eating;
and among the goods purchased are food and the capital necessary to convert that food into meals. Given
the household’s preferences, it will thus determine its utility-maximizing production of the commodity
eating. It will generate demands for time and goods inputs into eating as:
1

Gottschalk and Mayer (2002) examine the general question of how changing household time use affects inferences
about changing inequality by valuing several (recall) measures of time spent in household activities and adding the
total to household income.
2

(1a)

T = T(WM, WF, I; Z);

and
(1b)

X = X(WM, WF, I; Z),

where T is its time input into eating, X its dollar expenditures on food, WM and WF are the husband’s and
wife’s value of time, I is unearned income, and Z is a vector of demographic characteristics that might
shift the demand functions for time and goods. We have written the model for a two-adult household,
since the data require us to use such households in the empirical analyses; but a similar, simpler model
could be written down for a single-adult household.
The economically interesting questions have to do with the expansion paths of the demand for
inputs into eating and their changes as incomes and the prices of time change. The effects of exogenous
changes in the economic variables on the choices of T and X are fairly standard: 1) Because the total
endowment of time is fixed, in (1a) a higher price of time may or may not cause a shift away from using
time in producing eating. The outcome depends on the relative time intensity of eating compared to other
commodities and on the relative substitutability of goods and time in eating. There is some evidence
(Gronau and Hamermesh, 2006) that eating is relatively goods-intensive. If so, as the price of time
increases people would expand their production of eating, although they would surely attempt to do so in
an increasingly goods-intensive way.

As their non-labor income increases, they will expand their

production of eating, perhaps using more time (again, depending on the relatively substitutability of
goods and time in producing this commodity compared to others). In the end the directions of the effects
of WM, WF and I on T depend on a variety of characteristics of the production of eating and of eating
relative to other household-produced commodities; but we do expect that I will have a more positive
effect on T than will WM or WF. 2) For most commodities, including probably eating, increases in
income, whether due to a higher price of time (as reflected in higher wages per hour of market work) or
higher non-labor income will increase total goods expenditures. We thus expect each of the three
economic variables in (1b) to have positive effects on X.

3

III. Data and Measurement Issues
Sadly there are no single data sets that combine information on households’ goods expenditures
and time actually spent (as recorded in time diaries) by all household members in the production of
eating. One data set does make it possible to combine such information for one household member’s time
use and the household’s food spending, and I return to that later. Both for the U.S. and for other countries,
however, we do have detailed consumer expenditure surveys covering large samples of households. We
also have detailed time budgets that typically cover smaller samples. In this study we use the 1985 Time
Use Survey (TUS85) for the United States, a relatively small privately conducted survey that obtained one
day’s time diaries from single individuals and from both spouses in a married household and collected
some demographic information on both spouses and other household members (Robinson and Godbey,
1999). The 1985 Consumer Expenditure Survey (CES85) contains detailed categories of spending as well
as a set of demographic variables that are similar in scope to those included in the TUS85.
Because I am interested in comparing how rising wage and income inequality affects the
production of eating in the household, I estimate the same models on data from 2003, when income
inequality was greater than in 1985.2 The year 2003 is chosen because it is the first year in which the
Bureau of Labor Statistics collected data in the American Time Use Survey (ATUS03), which offers for
that year a sample of one-day time diaries from nearly 21,000 individuals who had recently been Current
Population Survey (CPS) respondents (see Horrigan and Herz, 2005). I analyze these data along with
information on goods expenditures from households in the 2003 Consumer Expenditure Survey (CES03).
Particularly in the TUS85 there are too few single individuals to allow a useful analysis to be conducted,
so I restrict the study to married individuals with spouse present. I further restrict the analyses to married
persons ages 18-64, as I wish to avoid issues related to the well-known unexpectedly large drop that
occurs around the normal retirement age (Hamermesh, 1984).
One of the reasons why there have been so few efforts to estimate household production functions
may be because of the necessity of classifying activities and expenditures into commodities. Any

2

In 1985 the Gini coefficient on household incomes in the U.S. was 0.425, and the 80/20 ratio was 4.25. In 2003 the
same statistics were 0.464 and 4.83.
4

classification is necessarily arbitrary; and the difficulty is exacerbated if we wish to compare household
production across time, since the list of activities included in time diaries I use changed between the two
surveys. I thus arbitrarily classify certain time and expenditure categories as representing inputs into
eating.
The exact classifications used in extracting information from the four samples, the TUS85, the
ATUS03, and the CES85 and CES03, are listed in Appendix Table 1. For the time-use surveys I include
the exact codes identifying the categories treated as constituting food activities. The goal in classifying
activities is to include as time inputs into eating those activities that are described as eating at home and
away from home (including at work), meal preparation and clean-up, and grocery shopping and travel
related to grocery shopping. I thus try to include all time spent at meals no matter where they are taken or
what the purpose. Nonetheless, some people may classify an activity such as drinking at a bar as part of
their leisure activities, so that it may not be and perhaps should not be included as a time input into this
commodity. Because it is not separately classified in both the TUS85 and ATUS03, I do not include travel
to eat away from home, in order to maintain comparability across the two years. Because the TUS85
collected no information on secondary activities (things done simultaneously with the activity that is
reported in the survey), and the ATUS03 only reported secondary childcare activity, there is nothing we
can do about the possibility that food preparation or clean-up might have been done as an activity
secondary to something else and might thus have been under-reported.3
Expenditures on food and alcohol (the latter counted only as half) are the main components of
goods inputs into eating; but I also include spending on small appliances (presumably for the kitchen) and
arbitrarily treat one-third of expenditures on major appliances as inputs into eating (on the assumption
that some of these items represent kitchen appliances such as refrigerators, stoves and dishwashers).
While these classifications are arbitrary, they are identical for all households. Moreover, since in the
3

Evidence from the 1991/92 German Zeitbudgeterhebung, which includes reports of secondary activities, suggests
that this is not a problem. Only 5 percent of all eating time was reported as secondary, far less than the average
incidence of secondary time reported. Cleaning, cooking and shopping (for all items, not just groceries) accounted
for only 9 percent of all secondary activities, less than their representation among primary activities. When people
report eating, shopping, food preparation or clean-up, it is the primary activity, with television-watching, radiolistening or childcare often being secondary to them. The small extent of secondary time spent in the commodity
“eating” suggests that our necessary neglect of it here is unimportant.
5

empirical analysis I shall essentially be differencing patterns of household production across income
levels and across years, so long as the full-income elasticity of demand for the various inputs is constant
across the years much of any misclassifications will be differenced out. Finally, I replicated the analyses
of the determinants of expenditures using only the narrowest CES definition of expenditures on eating,
namely spending on food alone, and found no qualitative differences from the results presented here.
The TUS85 has only extremely broad classifications of household income and spouses’ hourly
earnings. While the ATUS03 provides good information on earnings, good information on incomes is
available for the fewer than one-third of ATUS03 respondents who were also included in the March 2003
CPS Income Supplement.

Even if the data sets had better and more extensive measures of these

economic variables, however, using them would introduce biases into estimates of household production:
An individual’s earnings, and his/her household income, are generated by the wage rate. But the latter in
turn depends on the time that the individual chooses to devote to market work (Biddle and Zarkin, 1989);
and that choice in turn is determined simultaneously with choices of time inputs into producing different
commodities, including eating, in the household. In order to obtain unbiased estimates of the household
production function we must somehow find instrumental variables for the wage and income measures that
are central to the analysis.
Write the estimating equations for time and goods expenditures into eating as:
(2a)

Tit =

Yit +

it,

Xit =

Yit +

it,

and
(2b)

t = 1985, 2003,

where i is an observation (couple), t is a year (1985 or 2003) and Y denotes a vector of economic
variables consisting of the spouses’ wage rates and household income in (2a) and perhaps the same
variables or a subset of them in (2b). There are no satisfactory instruments for the variables in the vector
Y in these data sets. The data sets do, however, provide information on a set of variables Z that are
reasonably viewed as determinants of the Y and as exogenous to goods and time use by adults.
Moreover, information on both the Z and the Y variables is available from other sets of data that also

6

sample randomly from the U.S. population at the same times as the 1985 and 2003 time-use and
expenditure surveys that we use.
I use the Panel Study of Income Dynamics for 1986 (PSID86), which has information on 1985
household net (after federal taxes) income, Y1, to estimate:
(3a)

Y1it = Z1it +

it,

where Z1 is a vector of exogenous variables. I then take the estimates of the vector of parameters * to
create instruments Y1* using the Z1it in the TUS85 and the CES85. Similarly, I use the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics for 2003 (PSID03) to create instruments for net income using the Z1it in the ATUS03
and CES03.4 Included in the vector Z1 are a vector of indicators of the educational attainment of each
spouse, quadratics in each spouse’s age, and the number of children under age 6 and ages 6-17.
For each spouse’s wage rate I estimate:
(3b)

Wjit= Z2jit +

jit,

t = 1985, 2003,

where Wj (j=M,F) is the usual weekly earnings of workers in the Merged Outgoing Rotation Groups of
the 1985 and 2003 CPS. For each married person age 18-64 (the same age group that we use in the main
data sets), the wage is predicted from a vector Z2 describing their education, reported usual weekly hours
and a quadratic in their age. In describing the earnings of married women we account for Gronau’s
(1974) wage selectivity into the labor force by using Heckman’s (1979) two-step method. The
imputations of both net income and hourly earnings using this two-sample instrumental variable approach
(Angrist and Krueger, 1992) circumvent both the potential endogeneity of these variables in the time use
and CES data sets and the absence of good information on earnings and incomes in the TUS85 and on
incomes in the ATUS03.
The absence of information on both time use and goods expenditures in the same sample presents
difficulties for generating estimates of how these are combined to create the commodity eating. We
simply do not observe time and goods expenditures on eating in any particular household. One solution
would be to aggregate the measures in each sample into age-education cell averages. The difficulty with

4

Only information on gross income is available in the PSID03. To derive analog to the data for 1985 I subtract the
standard deduction and personal exemptions from gross income and apply the 2002 tax tables.
7

this solution, at least for 1985 because the TUS85 sample is quite small, is that the cells would either be
very few in number or very sparsely populated. A better solution is to recognize that both the time-use
survey and the CES for each year sample from the same underlying population.

Similarly, the

instruments for income and hourly earnings are also based on the same populations. Each sample’s
imputed values of the variables in the vector Y thus represent unbiased estimates of the underlying
distributions of the variables in the vector. We can thus use them as if they were measuring income and
time prices in the household to which they are imputed and treat the estimates of equations (2) as
reflecting the demands for goods and time inputs into eating.5 To maintain comparability across the two
years, and to allow concentrating on the impacts of changing inequality, we transform the instrumental
estimates into percentile points (so that, for examples, in the TUS85 the household with the median
imputed net income would be assigned a value of 50 for imputed net income, the wife in the household in
the CES03 with an imputed hourly earnings at the 75th percentile of wives’ earnings would be assigned a
value of 75 for this variable, etc.).6
The central estimates are of the equations:
(2a’)

ln(T)it =

’YPit +

it,

ln(X)it =

’YPit +

it,

and
(2b’)

t = 1985, 2003

where the YP are the percentile points of the distributions of imputed net income and hourly earnings
measures.7 The estimated ’ and ’ measure the percentage impacts of one-percentile increases in
household incomes or hourly earnings (time prices) on the representative household’s total time and
goods inputs respectively into the production of eating.
A final difficulty is that, while we have time diaries for both spouses in the TUS85, the ATUS03
only collected a time diary for one household member. For 2003 we thus cannot obtain T simply by
5

These input-demand equations leave out the prices of goods under the assumption that they are identical for all
individuals at a point in time.
6

Appendix Table 2 presents a concordance of all the data sets used in this study.

7

The equations were also estimated with linear forms of the dependent variables with little qualitative difference in
the results.
8

summing up spouses’ time spent on food. Because the ATUS03 households have been in the CPS,
however, we do have information on all the variables Z characterizing ATUS03 respondents and their
spouses that we used to create the instruments for the variables in the vector Y. I thus generate
predictions of food time for husbands and wives on whom the ATUS provides time diaries, with the fitted
values based on each spouse’s age, education, reported weekly hours of market work, race, ethnicity, and
age distribution of children. I then use the same equations to generate fitted values for husbands for
whom no diary is available, and use nearest-neighbor matching on the fitted values to impute the missing
time spent on food for those husbands whose wives provided time diaries. Similarly, I used the fitted
values for wives to impute the missing food time for wives whose husbands’ time diaries are included in
the ATUS03.
IV. Income, Wages and the Production of Eating, 1985 and 2003
A. Some Descriptive Statistics
While the ultimate focus of this study is on the changing relationship between choices of
household production technique and household income and time prices, an initial examination of the raw
amounts of time and goods devoted to generating eating is itself inherently interesting. The final columns
of Table 1 show the means and their standard deviations of various components of time and goods spent
generating eating, and they break the time inputs down into those of the husband and wife. Of the 2880
minutes available to a couple in a day, the average couple spent 332 minutes, roughly 5-1/2 of its 48
available hours, in the activity eating in 1985, and 235 minutes, not quite 4 hours per day, in 2003.
The time input of the median couple is less than the average time input—the distribution is
skewed rightward. In 1985 time spent actually eating meals comprised 47 percent of all time inputs into
generating eating, but it had grown to 58 percent of the total by 2003. Wives’ time accounted for 63
percent of the total time input into eating in 1985, but only 59 percent of time inputs in 2003. Since the
average spouse spends 70 to 80 minutes per day actually eating, with little difference between husbands
and wives, the information on husbands’ and wives’ time inputs shows that husbands spent only 32
percent as much time as wives on shopping/preparation/clean-up in 1985 and only 37 percent as much in

9

2003.
An interesting question is why the total time inputs into eating appear to have declined by nearly
30 percent between 1985 and 2003. One explanation might simply be that the aggregation processes that
created the total eating time measures differ across the two surveys. This is possible, but the basic
categories (see Appendix Table 1) seem very similar. Another possibility is that the survey methods
differed and generated substantial differences in how activities are classified. This too is possible, but it
is hard to believe that something as basic as eating, food shopping, and cooking and cleaning up could be
classified so differently in the two sets of time diaries.
Table 1 shows that the larger decline in time use in this commodity is among wives: Their time
input declined by 31 percent, husbands’ by only 20 percent. The Table also shows that by far the bigger
decline among wives was in the time they spent shopping/cooking/cleaning that is an input into the
production of eating. Food shopping and cleaning-up especially are the kinds of secondary activity (one
for which purchased inputs could be substituted—see Reid, 1934) that yield little utility and for which
technical change has caused market substitutes to decrease in relative price. With rising real incomes
households have become able to purchase market substitutes, which in turn have fallen in price because of
substantial technical improvements (e.g., microwaves, dishwashers, etc., that spread from upper-income
families across the population over this period). The substantial decline could simply reflect optimizing
behavior by households in the face of rising time prices of wives and households’ rising real incomes.
Table 1 also presents the order statistics of time spent on eating. What is intriguing is the great
heterogeneity in the amount of time input into eating: Going from the 10th to the 90th percentile of the
distribution of time that couples spend generating eating involves nearly quadrupling the time input, from
2 hours 40 minutes per day to 9 hours 20 minutes per day for a couple in 1985, and from 1 hour 45
minutes per day to 6 hours 35 minutes per day in 2003. Whether this heterogeneity is related to the
economic determinants that affect inputs into eating is the major focus of this Section.
The average food expenditure of $4,874 for these married couples in the CES85 constituted about
19 percent of their total expenditures, while that of married couples in the CES03 accounts for only 16

10

percent of total expenditures. Like that of time inputs into eating, the distributions of goods spending are
skewed to the right. The Table also breaks food expenditures down into spending on food consumed at
home and that on food consumed away from home. (These figures sum to less than the total expenditure
on goods inputs into eating because the total includes the other food-related purchases, mostly on capital
goods, as Appendix Table 1 shows.) Food consumed away from home constitutes about one-fourth of
total spending on food, and its distribution unsurprisingly exhibits much more inequality than that of food
consumed at home.
Finally, Table 1 lists statistics (means and order statistics) describing total expenditures on all
goods and the share of food spending from the CES85 and CES03 data. Inequality in total expenditures
increased, with the coefficient of variation rising from 0.71 to 0.77 (a smaller increase in inequality of
consumption than the increased income inequality over the same period, thus mirroring the relation of
inequality of expenditures and incomes in the cross section shown by Dynarski et al, 1997). The
increased inequality in total expenditures was concentrated entirely above the median expenditure.
Indeed, while there were essentially no changes in total spending (relative to the median) at the lower
percentiles, the relative change was positive above the median, with the biggest relative increase
occurring at the 95th percentile.8
B. Estimating the Determinants of Goods and Time Inputs
The first step in estimating the demand functions is the creation of the instrumental variables for
household income and the prices of the spouses’ time. I use household net income, thus creating an
instrument for the actual amount of income at a household’s disposal. The results for instrumenting net
income are based on estimating regressions using the PSID86 and PSID03 data and are presented in
Columns (1) and (4) of Appendix Table 3. The estimates make very good sense in light of the vast
literature on income determination. Households’ net incomes rise with education, especially so for
husband’s education (since men’s age-earnings profiles rise more rapidly with education than women’s,

8

This corresponds perfectly to the distribution of changes in inequality in the upper tail of the distribution of men’s
earnings. Data from the Outgoing Rotation Groups of the CPS show that between 1979 and 2003 the 90/50 ratio
rose by 25 log points, but the 95/50 ratio rose by 34 log points.
11

and because wives are less likely to participate in the labor force); they are quadratic in each spouse’s age
(again reflecting the shape of age-earnings profiles); and they are lower if young children are present,
presumably indicating the impact on wives’ labor-force participation.
The equations underlying the creation of instruments for husbands’ and wives’ values of time are
the earnings equations whose estimates are shown in Columns (2), (3), (5) and (6) of Appendix Table 3.
The regressions reported in Columns (2) and (5) are simple log-earnings equations including indicators of
educational attainment, a quadratic in age and hours of work. Those for women also include an auxiliary
selectivity equation in which the probability of working is affected by the presence of pre-school and
young children, who are assumed not to affect earnings directly. The results, and the estimation itself, are
completely standard and merit no further comment.
The results of the imputations in the TUS85, ATUS03 and CES85 and CES03 are presented in
Table 2. For each imputation I present various order statistics and the mean and standard deviation (just
as was done for the distributions of time and goods inputs in the two years in Table 1). Each imputation
was made using the coefficient estimates shown in Appendix Table 3 and each observation’s values of the
vector of variables Z1 and Z2. To standardize the wage rates and avoid endogeneity I assume that hours
of work equal 40 for all observations. (Any number could be chosen, so long as it is identical for all
sample members.)
The distributions of imputed wage rates look fairly standard: Women’s average imputed hourly
wage rates are 64 percent of men’s in 1985 and 77 percent in 2003, reflecting the well-documented
increase in women’s relative wages and approximating fairly closely the actual increase that occurred
(Blau and Kahn, 2004).
The coefficients of variation of imputed net incomes, husband’s wage rates and wife’s wage rates
were 0.28, 0.24 and 0.21 respectively in 1985; in 2003 they are 0.32, 0.33 and 0.25 respectively. All of
them have increased, with the greatest increase in inequality in husband’s imputed earnings. The 50/10
ratio of imputed husband’s hourly wage rates was 1.40 in 1985, but fell to 1.35 in 2003; the 90/50 ratio
rose from 1.42 to 1.50. Since Autor et al (2005) show that the biggest increase in inequality in men’s

12

actual earnings over this period was in the upper part of the distribution of earnings and that wage
inequality in the lower half of the distribution may even have narrowed, the changing inequality in the
distribution of imputed earnings accords with the facts and enhances our confidence in the instrumentalvariables approach used here.
While the distributions of imputed earnings are skewed slightly to the right, the distributions of
net incomes are not skewed rightward. That there is relatively little skewness in all of the distributions of
the imputed variables is the result of the fact that the distributions of returns to the unobservable
determinants of wage rates and incomes, which we cannot account for, are more right-skewed than the
distributions of returns to their observable determinants. Finally, it is comforting to note that the shapes of
the distributions of imputed net income look quite similar across samples within years, as do the
distributions of imputed wage rates.
Columns (1) and (4) in Table 3 show the results of estimating equations (2a’) and (2b’), the
demand functions for the inputs into the household production of eating. These relate time and goods
spending to a household’s position (percentile) in the distributions of imputed household net income and
the spouses’ imputed wage rates. While these are the central equations in the model, in the other columns
I present estimates of the determinants of some of their subcomponents, including husbands’ and wives’
time inputs separately, and goods expenditures on food consumed at home and away from home. All of
the equations include a vector of variables indicating the age distribution of children in the household.
The time-demand equations also include a vector of indicators for the day of the week for which the time
diary was kept.9 That the fractions of variance explained in these equations are not very high is the result
of our excluding idiosyncratic variation in incomes and time prices when we necessarily use imputations
for these for each household.
The estimated parameters in equation (2a’), the demand for time inputs into eating, accord
completely with what we know about the relative time-intensity of the demand for eating. Higher prices
of husbands’ and wives’ time lead them to economize on their time used in producing this commodity,

9

The estimates from the ATUS03 are weighted to account for the over-sampling of weekend days, so that the results
reflect a representative day.
13

although in the estimates for 2003 the coefficients are nowhere nearly significant statistically. Moreover,
we cannot reject the hypothesis that the impacts of equal-percentile increases in their time prices generate
the same impact on the total time input into eating in both years. Holding time prices constant, however,
a movement up the distribution of net incomes increases the time used in generating eating.
In estimating the goods-demand equations I assume that the only economic determinant is the
household’s net income. The results suggest that the demand for food increases with (imputed) net
income, and that the demand for food eaten away from home is much more income elastic than that for
food consumed at home. The income elasticities of total goods expenditure into eating (calculated around
the medians) average about 0.40, quite similar to estimates for food spending in a now-hoary literature
(e.g., Houthakker and Taylor, 1966). The coefficients on income percentiles are smaller in 2003 than in
1985; given that the income distribution widened over this period, that change guarantees that the income
elasticity of demand for food-related goods fell during this period.
One might be concerned that my measure of goods expenditures, which includes more than just
food, may be too broad. I re-estimated the equations in Columns (1) and (4) using narrower measures, the
logarithms of total food expenditures, in each year. The parameter estimates on the percentile of imputed
net income are 0.00590 (s.e. = 0.00017) for 1985, 0.00497 (s.e.=0.00014) for 2003. The estimates are
unsurprisingly smaller than those describing eating expenditures that include part of alcohol and
appliances, but they reproduce the qualitatively similar result that the goods expenditure elasticity is
lower in 2003 than in 1985.
C. Inferring the Household Production Function
One of the major purposes in estimating these demand equations is to examine how the relative
goods intensity of eating varies along the expansion path at a point in time. Figures 1a and 1b show how
the amounts of goods and time used in producing the commodity eating increase as we move up the
income distribution. Treating goods expenditures by the lowest-income household in the sample (at
nearly the 0th percentile of the distribution of imputed net income) as 100, the calculations simply take the
parameter estimates from Column (4) of Table 3 and move up the distribution of incomes by percentiles.

14

The calculation of the indices of demand for time inputs into eating is more complex, as we need
to account for the relationship between income and wage rates, and for the possible correlation of
spouses’ wage rates. To do so I estimate regressions of I on WM, of I on WF and of WF on WM. (Since
these variables are percentiles and thus have the same means and standard deviations, the estimated
dI/dWM = dWM/dI, and similarly for the other two relationships.) We can thus calculate the effect of a
one-percentile increase in a household’s income as:
(4)

’I[1 + dI/dWM + dI/dWM] + ’WM[1 + dWM/dI + dWM/dWM] +
’WF[1 + dWM/dI + dWM/dWM] .

Again letting the index equal 100 at the 0th percentile of income, I apply the changes implicit in (4) as we
move up the distribution of income.
Figure 1a shows that goods spending roughly doubled (increased 101 percent) over the range of
the distribution of (imputed) net incomes in 1985. Time expenditures barely increased as a household
moved up the distribution of imputed net income, rising 10 percent from the bottom to the top of the
distribution. Even though the three correlations that underlie the calculation in (4) are very high, a
general increase in income did increase time spent in producing eating.
The results for 2003 shown in Figure 1b differ substantially from those in Figure 1a. By then the
increase in goods spending as one moved up the (less equal) distribution of net incomes was relatively
smaller, with an increase of only 72 percent. The gradient on time spent in eating was much steeper than
in 1985, however, so that a household at the top of the distribution of imputed income spent nearly 60
percent more time on eating than one at the bottom.10
For both years the figures show that there are positive relationships between imputed net income
and time and goods used in generating eating. While these suggest numerous conclusions (see below),
they ignore the idiosyncratic relationship between time and goods that could exist across different
households. The ATUS03 provides a unique opportunity to examine this idiosyncratic variation, as some
10

If we use the narrower measure, spending only on food, the gradient for 1985 shows an increase of 81 percent
from the lowest to the higher percentile of imputed net income, while that for 2003 shows an increase of 64 percent.
None of the conclusions in this Part is changed in any important way if we base them on the response of this
narrower concept of expenditures on eating.
15

of the respondents in that survey can be linked to the December 2002 CPS in which a Food Security
Supplement was included. That supplement included questions eliciting the amount the respondent’s
household spent on all food last week (the reference week), and the amount usually spent in a week. A
match between the ATUS03 and the December 2002 CPS was possible for 2511 of the 9324 respondents
used in the estimates presented in Table 3. The same measure of time devoted to eating was included;
and for each respondent I calculated annual household spending on food based on the reference-week and
usual weekly expenditures that were reported.
Because the number of matched observations was much smaller than in the other estimates for
2003, I expanded the sample by performing the same match for married couples with both partners
between the ages of 18 and 64 using the 2004 American Time Use Survey and the December 2003 Food
Security Supplement to the CPS. All the variables are defined and calculated as in the match for 2003,
except that, absent a new round of the PSID, net income is imputed for the ATUS04 couples using the
same method that generated imputed incomes in the ATUS03.

This additional year of matched

respondents added another 1674 couples to this data set.
Figures 2 present a view of the relationship between goods and time spending in these households
using these matched data. They show the results of fitting food expenditures, first for reference-week and
then for usual expenditures, to a quadratic in time use after trimming the tails of the distributions of the
time and goods variables. While the confidence bands at the extremes of couples’ time inputs are very
wide, the sample is very sparse there: For 90 percent of the households the logarithm of food time is
between 4.5 and 6, where the confidence bands are much narrower. The relationships implicit in these
figures corroborate the conclusions from the estimation and Figures 1: Those households in which the
couple spends more time in eating-related activities are also those in which more money is spent on food
(where in these data food no longer includes prorated amounts of spending on food-related appliances)..
To separate out the idiosyncratic part of the relationship from the part due to variations in
observables (in imputed net income), in Table 4 I present estimates of equations describing the logarithms
of the expenditure measures (again for the trimmed samples).

16

Columns (1) and (4) of the Table

corroborate the results in Figures 2, as they show positive and nearly statistically significant relationships
between time spent and goods expenditures on food.

Columns (2) and (5) merely replicate the

unsurprising finding in Table 3 that expenditures on food increase with imputed net income. Columns (3)
and (6) show that, even accounting for differences in imputed net incomes, those couples that spend more
time in eating activities also spend more money on food. The idiosyncratic components of goods
spending and time use are positively related. Taken together, Figures 2 and Table 4 suggest that the
implied positive relationship between time and goods spending on eating is not an artifact of our
imputations that necessarily base the relationship only on observables.
With data on the same households’ goods and time inputs into eating we can estimate a simple
formal household-production relationship to infer the ease of substitution between goods and time.
Assuming that the household production function for eating is CES, we can write the relative demand
function as:
(5)
where

ln(X/T) = Constant + ln( WM + [1- ]WF) ,
is the elasticity of substitution between goods and time, and

is the weight on the husband’s

price of time that is implicit in the household’s decisions about goods-time substitution. I estimate (5) by
nonlinear least squares and present the parameter estimates in Columns (4) and (8) of Table 4. We cannot
reject the hypothesis that

= .5—that the household weights both spouses’ prices of time equally in

choosing goods and time inputs. This is an anomalous result, although given that relatively little of the
time input into eating consisted of the wife’s food shopping/cooking/cleaning by 2003, it is less surprising
than it might appear at first glance. Most important, the elasticity of substitution is quite low and
consistently so whether one uses reported reference-week food expenditures or usual food expenditures.
Clearly, this direct evidence on household production suggests that for this particular commodity the
substitution of goods for time is not easy.
In Table 5 I summarize the results underlying Figure 1. The top part of the table shows the real
goods (dollars per year) and time inputs (converted from minutes per day to hours per year to increase
comparability to the annual expenditure measures). It also presents the goods/time ratio at various

17

percentiles of the distribution of imputed net incomes for each year, and it lists the percentage changes in
this ratio over the eighteen-year period. To make the expenditure data comparable across years the
spending data for 1985 are converted by the PCE deflator for food to 2003 dollars.11 The bottom part of
the table lists the same information at the actual means and medians of net incomes, goods spending and
time use. These latter correspond fairly closely to the ratios and changes at the measures of central
tendency based on our calculations of imputed net income and wage rates.
The statistics in Table 1 and the estimates presented in Figures 1 and 2 and in Tables 3 and 4
suggest the following central conclusions:
1. In both 1985 and 2003 both goods expenditures and time inputs into eating rose with
income.
2. Between 1985 and 2003 total time spent in eating fell sharply while goods spending
declined relative to all expenditures and stayed essentially constant in real terms.
3. Consequently, over this period the relative goods intensity of eating rose at the mean
and at all other points of the distribution of net incomes.
4. The relative goods intensity of eating rose most sharply in the lower part of the
distribution of net income, with the rate of increase declining steadily as one moves
up the distribution.
5. The direct evidence for 2003-04 implies that goods and time inputs into eating are
positively correlated within households.
6. The direct evidence also suggests that substitution between goods and time in
producing eating is not easy.
What does this combination of findings tell us about the nature of the household production
function for eating? What minimal reasonable set of inferences about the nature of that production
function is suggested by the results? The two sets of cross-section results match expectations: Those
households with higher full incomes produce this commodity more goods-intensively than those in which
the spouses’ time prices and full incomes are lower. While the results in Table 3 demonstrated that a
higher price of time (especially the wife’s time) leads to substitution against time used in producing

11

Using the CPI Food and Beverages price index lowers the percentage increases in X/T, with the increase at the 5th
percentile of the distribution of imputed income becoming 47.9 percent and that at the 95th percentile becoming -8.3
percent.
18

eating, the positive income effects lead higher-income couples to devote more time to eating (in
combination with their greater goods purchases). This result suggests that it is relatively difficult for
people to substitute goods for time in the production of this commodity compared to the composite of all
other commodities, an inference that is corroborated by the direct estimates for 2003-04. Despite the
common use of the production of eating to illustrate goods-time substitution, it appears that by the early
21st century households had taken advantage of most of the opportunities for such substitution.
The changes in the relative goods-intensity of production across the changing income distribution
are more difficult to reconcile. If, however, the household production function for eating is heterothetic,
and goods-time substitution becomes more difficult moving out along the expansion path, then we would
expect to observe the greater cut in time inputs into eating in lower-income households that we have in
fact seen between 1985 and 2003.

Implicitly the difficulty of substituting goods for time in the

production of the other, composite commodity does not increase as rapidly as production expands.
Higher-income families, which experienced the largest increases in income over this period, thus found it
increasingly difficult to expand the production of this commodity by increasing its goods intensity.
One could also explain the results by technical change in the production of meals (preparation,
shopping and cleaning). Indeed, even the relative decline in time inputs at the lower end of the income
distribution might be explicable if one could demonstrate that there was more rapid time-saving technical
change in the sub-aggregates of those categories that are used particularly by lower-income households.
In the end, both biased technical change and heterothetic production without biased technical change are
consistent with the findings.12
The results on goods used in producing eating suggest a weakening positive relation to net
incomes over this period.

Even though the distribution of income became less equal, the results show

very clearly that that the effect of a one-percentile increase in income diminished over the two decades.
Rising income inequality did not lead to rising inequality in food consumption. However, time inputs

12

Taking an approach outside the theory of household production, one might also interpret the steeper food-time
income gradient as reflecting the conjunction of a positive income elasticity of demand for family time together
(spent eating) and the rise in income inequality. This consumption-based interpretation cannot, however, explain
why the goods-income gradient has become flatter and, indeed, seems inconsistent with it.
19

into eating became more positively correlated with net income over this period, so that changes in the use
of time added to the inequality in the amount of this commodity that was produced. It is thus unclear
whether inequality in production/consumption of the commodity “eating” increased or decreased, since
we can infer the general shape of the production function only for 2003-04 and cannot observe how it
may have changed over the two decade.
VI. Conclusions
In this study I have examined the determinants of the household production function
characterizing eating, a commodity whose production involves using purchased food and some capital
goods in conjunction with time spent preparing the food, eating it and cleaning up afterwards. Particular
attention has been paid to ensuring that the economic variables that determine how different households
produce this commodity are truly exogenous—uncontaminated by the simultaneous determination of time
spent in producing the commodity and time spent in generating earnings. The results show a large
decrease over time in the time inputs into eating—a rise in its goods-intensity. Eating appears to be a
relatively goods-intensive commodity, one in which the substitution of goods for time as incomes and
time prices rise is relatively difficult and becomes even more difficult as more is produced.
Taken together the results in Section IV offer some insights into likely changes in the demand for
goods used in producing the commodity eating as incomes and time prices rise—most important, in the
demand for food. In particular, if, as the findings indicate, goods-time substitution is difficult and
becomes increasingly difficult as production of the commodity expands, we should expect spending on
food to rise even more slowly than a simple consideration of the income elasticity of demand for
expenditures on food would suggest. If the growing inequality in incomes and time prices that we have
observed for the past three decades ceases and even begins to reverse, the cost of substituting services (of
lower-wage workers) for time (by higher-wage consumers) will rise, making it even harder to increase the
goods-time ratio and even less likely that spending on goods that are q-complementary with time in
producing eating will rise.

Taken together, these considerations suggest that Americans’ food

expenditures will rise more slowly than might be indicated by standard forecasts based solely on the

20

demand for goods.
Beginning with Altonji (1986) economists have used spending on food, which is readily available
in household surveys that concentrate on measuring income, such as the PSID, as a proxy to identify
inter-temporal substitution in labor supply. While some difficulties with focusing on food spending
because of its income inelasticity have been pointed out (Attanasio and Weber, 1995), the approach here
shows that the problems go deeper. In particular, because the commodity eating apparently is full-income
inelastic, and because the household production function for eating exhibits less substitutability between
goods and time than is true for household production generally, goods expenditures on food are
systematically related nonlinearly to the prices of time. Using any measure of goods expenditures in this
context will induce biases unless it describes spending on goods that are used in the household production
of a representative commodity.
I have implicitly treated the household in the context of a unitary model of decision-making.
That is undoubtedly a restrictive assumption, as evidence for goods expenditures and time use separately
suggests that their use is often better described by a collective model (Pollak, 2005). A profitable,
although far from trivial extension of this study would consider the joint demand for goods and time in
the context of a model of household production based on collective decision-making.
The exercise conducted here could (and should) be done (with varying amounts of effort) for
other commodities that are produced at home to examine how their production has changed over time and
as distributions of earnings and income have changed. Indeed, one can envision a complete system of
demand and household production equations that defines commodities a priori, accounts for all goods
expenditures and all uses of (non-market) time and examines how each is affected by incomes and time
prices. With the development of a comprehensive and continuing time-use survey in the United States
(the ATUS) there is every reason to begin estimating household production technologies using
methodologies similar to those that have been used for so long in describing the production of goods.

21

REFERENCES
Mark Aguiar and Eric Hurst, “Consumption vs. Expenditure,” Journal of Political Economy, 113 (Oct.
2005): 919-948.
Joseph Altonji, “Intertemporal Substituion in Labor Supply: Evidence from Micro Data,” Journal of
Political Economy, 94 (June 1986): S176-S215.
Joshua Angrist and Alan Krueger, “The Effect of Age at School Entry on Educational Attainment: An
Application of Instrumental Variables with Moments from Two Samples,” Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 87 (June 1992): 328-336.
Orazio Attanasio and Guglielmo Weber, “Is Consumption Growth Consistent with Intertemporal
Optimization? Evidence from the Consumer Expenditure Survey,” Journal of Political Economy,
103 (December 1995): 1121-1157.
David Autor, Lawrence Katz and Melissa Kearney, “Rising Wage Inequality: The Role of Composition
and Prices,” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 11628, 2005.
Gary Becker, “A Theory of the Allocation of Time,” Economic Journal, 75 (September 1965): 493-517.
Jeff Biddle and Daniel Hamermesh, “Sleep and the Allocation of Time,” Journal of Political Economy,
98 (October 1990): 922-43.
Jeff Biddle and Gary Zarkin, “Choice Among Wage-Hours Packages: An Empirical Investigation of Male
Labor Supply,” Journal of Labor Economics, 7 (October 1989): 415-437.
Francine Blau and Lawrence Kahn, “The US Gender Pay Gap in the 1990s,” National Bureau of
Economic Research, Working Paper No. 10853, October 2004.
Thomas Crossley and Yuqian Lu, “Exploring the Returns-to-Scale in Food Preparation,” McMaster
University, Department of Economics, Working Paper 2004-06.
Susan Dynarski and Jonathan Gruber, “Can Families Smooth Variable Earnings,” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, No. 1 (1997): 229-303.
Peter Gottschalk and Timothy Smeeding, “Empirical Evidence on Income Inequality in Industrial
Countries,” in Anthony Atkinson and François Bourgignon, eds., Handbook of Income
Distribution. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2000, pp. 261-307.
Peter Gottschalk and Susan Mayer, “Changes in Home Production and Trends in Economic Inequality,”
in Daniel Cohen, Thomas Piketty and Gilles Saint-Paul, The Economics of Rising Inequalities.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002
Reuben Gronau, “Wage Comparisons—A Selectivity Bias,” Journal of Political Economy, 82 (November
1974): 1119-1143.
-------------------, “Home Production: A Forgotten Industry,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 62
(August 1980): 408-416.
------------------- and Daniel Hamermesh, “Time vs. Goods: The Value of Measuring Household
Technologies,” Review of Income and Wealth, 52 (March 2006), forthcoming.
22

Daniel Hamermesh, “Consumption and Retirement: The Missing Link in the Life Cycle,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 66 (February 1984): 1-7.
-----------------------, “Timing, Togetherness and Time Windfalls,” Journal of Population Economics, 15
(November 2002): 601-623.
James Heckman, “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error,” Econometrica, 47 (January 1979):
153-162.
Michael Horrigan and Diane Herz, “A Study in the Process of Planning, Designing and Executing a
Survey Program: The BLS American Time-Use Survey,” in Daniel Hamermesh and Gerard
Pfann, eds., The Economics of Time Use. Amsterdam: North Holland, 2005.
Hendrik Houthakker and Lester Taylor, Consumer Demand in the United States. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1966.
Sébastien Lecocq, “The Allocation of Time and Goods in Household Activities: A Test of Separability,”
Journal of Population Economics, 14 (2001): 585-97.
Robert Pollak, “Bargaining Power in Marriage: Earnings, Wage Rates and Household Production,”
National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 11239, 2005.
Margaret Reid, Economics of Household Production. London: Chapman and Hall, 1934.
John Robinson and Geoffrey Godbey, Time for Life: The Surprising Ways Americans Use Their Time, 2nd
ed. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1999.
Daniel Slesnick, “Gaining Ground: Poverty in the Postwar United States,” Journal of Political Economy,
101 (Feb. 1993): 1-38.
Victoria Vernon, Household Economies of Scale, Food Consumption and Intra-Household Allocation of
Time, Chapter 3. Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, University of Texas, 2004.

23

Table 1. Statistics Describing Households’ Eating Time and Goods Expenditures, 1985 and 2003
5

Percentile
25
50
75

10

Time (minutes/day), N = 688*:

90

95

Mean Std. Dev.

1985

Total

121

160

224

313

405

559

639

331.8

(154.1)

Husband
Eating

30
20

44
30

70
50

105
70

160
105

233
140

287
180

124.2
81.6

(82.4)
(47.2)

Wife
Eating

50
16

80
25

125
45

193
70

271
95

362
135

416
165

207.7
75.4

(110.6)
(45.8)

Goods (dollars/year), N = 11,418:
Total

$1648

2160

3039

4320

6036

8067

9663

4874

(2868)

Home

$1020

1356

2040

2928

4104

5280

6120

3187

(1648)

Away

$ 0

0

300

666

1200

2400

3000

996

(1178)

Total expenditure $8283 10,382 14,748 21,295 30,985
Relative to
0.389 0.488 0.693 1.000 1.455
Median
Food share
.278
.262
.232
(at percentiles of total expenditure)

Time (minutes/day), N = 9324*:

.196

47,353 61,740
2.224 2.899

26,069 (18634)

.153

.120

.091

.193

(0.099)

2003

Total

80

105

155

225

305

395

455

235.4

(115.4)

Husband total
Eating

10
0

25
15

50
30

90
60

135
95

190
135

230
160

99.6
71.7

(71.6)
(51.5)

Wife total
Eating

25
0

45
15

80
30

130
60

190
90

260
130

315
156

143.8
68.9

(91.4)
(50.1)

Goods (dollars/year), N = 16,596:
Total

$2786

3453

4746

6663

9240

12,473 15,060

7576

(4545)

Home

$2028

2360

3380

4680

6240

8320

9880

5127

(2752)

Away

$0

0

480

1200

2400

4200

5756

1884

(2650)

Total expenditure $16,428 20,198
Relative to
0.386 0.474
Median

28,729 42,599 64,286
0.674 1.000 1.509

Food share
.247 .233
.195
(at percentiles of total expenditure)

.154

*Means are based on time use on a representative day.

.125

98,263 131,119
2.307 3.078
.105

.082

53,847 (41,744)

.162

(0.087)

Table 2. Statistics Describing Imputed Net Income and Prices of Time, 1985 and 2003
5

1985
From TUS85:

10

Percentiles
25
50
75

90

95

Mean Std. Dev.

Imputed
Net income

$21,295 24,781 30,909 40,267 46,923 54,540 58,205

39,433 (11224)

WM

$7.14

7.58

8.42

10.50

12.36

14.96

15.49

10.75

(2.62)

WF

$5.10

5.27

6.07

6.63

7.85

9.31

9.66

6.95

(1.41)

From CES85:
Imputed
Net income

$18,464 23,187 30,101 38,894 46,521 54,673 57,843

38,494 (11897)

WM

$6.89

7.52

8.37

10.55

12.31

14.96

15.49

10.69

(2.67)

WF

$4.92

5.16

5.92

6.63

7.85

9.31

9.61

6.89

(1.44)

2003
From ATUS03:
Imputed
Net income

$36,444 44,162 56,015 72,092 92,928 105,867 110,878

73,570 (23444)

WM

$11.03 12.10

14.42

16.63

22.16

24.46

24.76

17.67

(4.52)

WF

$8.80

11.46

13.19

17.56

18.82

19.00

13.87

(3.40)

From CES03:

9.63

Imputed
Net income

$36,948 43,538 55,713

WM

$11.11 12.10

WF

$8.80

9.27

70,354 92,067 106,542 110,691

72,944 (23237)

14.40

16.30

22.02

24.51

24.76

17.52

(4.51)

11.45

13.01 17.09

18.78

19.00

13.59

(3.33)

Table 3. Regression Estimates, Determinants of Logarithms of Eating Time and Goods
Expenditures, TUS85 (N =688) and CES85 (N=11,418), ATUS03 (N=9324) and CES03 (N=16,596)*
Time (Ln(Minutes))
Total
(1)

Goods (Ln(Expenditures))

Husband

Wife

(2)

(3)

Net income
percentile

0.0108
(0.0025)

0.0066
(0.0029)

WM
percentile

-0.0067
(0.0020)

-0.0048
(0.0028)

WF
percentile

-0.0044
(0.0012)

Adjusted R2

0.0432

1985

0.0028
(0.0017)

Total

Home

Away

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.00702
(0.00018)

0.00439
(0.00020)

0.02032
().00076)

0.1607

0.1153

0.0726

0.00543
(0.00014)

0.00298
(0.00017)

0.02110
().00067)

0.1234

0.0730

0.0631

-0.0031
(0.0016)
0.0207

0.0022

2003
Net income
percentile

0.00204
(0.00051)

0.00183
(0.00043)

WM
percentile

-0.000078
(0.00043)

-0.000035
(0.00043)

WF
percentile

-0.00024
(0.00031)

Adjusted R2

0.0096

0.00197
(0.00031)

-0.00023
(0.00031)
0.0096

0.0097

*Standard errors in parentheses here and in Table 4. The estimating equations all include measures of the number of
children under age 6, and between ages 6 and 17. The equations describing time use also include indicators for the
day of the week on which the time diary was kept.

Figure 1a. Indices of Time and Goods,
1985
250

Index

200
150

Goods
Time

100
50
0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90 100

Income Percentile

Figure 1b. Indices of Time and Goods, 2003
200
180
160

Index

140
120

Goods

100

Time

80
60
40
20
0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Income Percentile

70

80

90

100

8.2

8.4

8.6

8.8

9

Figure 2a. Quadratic Prediction of Reference-week Food Expenditures from
Food Time, Matched ATUS and Food Security Supplement Data

2

3

4
5
lnfoodtimecouplematch
95% CI

6

7

Fitted values

8

8.2

8.4

8.6

8.8

Figure 2b. Quadratic Prediction of Usual Food Expenditures from Food
Time, Matched ATUS and Food Security Supplement Data

2

3

4
5
lnfoodtimecouplematch
95% CI

Fitted values

6

7

Table 4. Regression Estimates, Determinants of Logarithms of Eating Time and Goods
Expenditures, Merged ATUS03 and December 2002 CPS Food Security Supplement, ATUS04 and
December 2003 CPS Food Security Supplement (N=3737)*
Reference-week Food Expenditures
(1)
Ln(Minutes)
Ln(Net income)

Adjusted R2

(2)

0.0376
(0.0194)

(3)

(4)

0.0232
(0.0199)

Usual Food Expenditures
(5)
0.0281
(0.0173)

0.3223 0.3196
(0.0283) (0.0284)

0.0068 0.0388

0.0389

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.0177
(0.0172)
0.2371
(0.0255)

0.2354
(0.0256)

0.181
(0.150)

0.646
(0.191)

0.341
(0.331)

0.316
(0.142)

0.0123

0.0083

0.0301

0.0301

0.0074

*The estimating equations all include measures of the number of children under age 6, and between ages 6 and 17.
The samples are trimmed to remove 2.5 percent tails of eating time and eating expenditures. In Columns (1)-(3) and
(5)-(7) the dependent variable is the logarithm of food expenditures; in Columns (4) and (8) it is the logarithm of the
ratio of food expenditures to time spent on food.

Table 5. Annual Goods (dollars) and Time (hours) Spent on Eating Production, 1985 and 2003, at
Points on the Distributions of Imputed and Actual Household Incomesa
Percentile
and
Year

X

Imputed Income
5th
$4379
1985
4677
2003

T

X/T
($/hour)

Percent
Change
in X/T

1716
1166

2.55
4.05

58.66

10th
1985
2003

4536
4805

1724
1184

2.63
4.07

54.50

25th
1985
2003

5040
5214

1748
1241

2.88
4.11

42.67

50th
1985
2003

6008
5973

1789
1342

3.36
4.20

24.94

75th
1985
2003

7161
6842

1831
1450

3.91
4.28

9.40

90th
1985
2003

7957
7422

1856
1520

4.29
4.33

1.09

95th
1985
2003

8241
7627

1865
1544

4.42
4.35

-1.62

Actual Income
Mean
1985 7767
2003 7576

2018
1432

3.85
5.29

37.48

1904
1369

3.62
4.87

34.63

Median
1985
2003
a

7384
6663

Predicted goods expenditures are all in 2003 dollars using the PCE deflator for food expenditures. Expenditures are
annual, time is annual hours.

Appendix Table 1. Definitions—Eating Time and Goods Expenditure Categories, 1985 and 2003
TIME

TUS85

Activity
Code

Meals at work
Meal preparation; meal clean-up

6
10, 11

Groceries, supermarket shopping for 30
food
Travel related to outside activities 39
prorated by share of outside activities prorated
that are grocery shopping
Meals, snacks at home; meals, snacks 43, 44
away from home

Food
.5*Alcohol
.333*(Major
appliances
appliances)
Small appliances

+

Activity
Code

Eat/drink as part of job
Food & drink preparation, presentation
and clean-up
Grocery shopping; purchasing nongrocery food
Travel to/from grocery store; waiting
associated with shopping prorated by
grocery and non-grocery food shopping
shares in all shopping
Eating and drinking

GOODS

CES85

ATUS03

050202
0202..
070101
070103
070105
prorated;
170701
11….

CES03

Food
.5*Alcohol
miscellaneous .333*(Major
appliances
appliances)
Small appliances

+

miscellaneous

Appendix Table 2. Data Sets Used—Main and for Imputation
MAIN

1985

IMPUTATION

Time Use Survey,
Univ. of Maryland
(TUS85

Currently Population Survey,
Merged Outgoing Rotation
Groups, BLS
(CPS-MORG85)

Consumer Expenditure Survey,
BLS
(CES85)

University of Mchigan Panel
Study of Income Dynamics
(PSID86)
2003

American Time Use Survey,
BLS
(ATUS03)

Currently Population Survey,
Merged Outgoing Rotation
Groups, BLS
(CPS-MORG03)

Consumer Expenditure Survey,
BLS
(CES03)

University of Michigan Panel
Study of Income Dynamics
(PSID03)

ATUS03 and December 2002 CPS
Food Security Supplement
2004
ATUS04 and December 2003 CPS
Food Security Supplement

Currently Population Survey,
Merged Outgoing Rotation
Groups, BLS
(CPS-MORG04)

Appendix Table 3. First-Round Estimates of Net Income and the Price of Husbands’ and Wives’
Time, PSID 1986 and 2003, CPS-MORG 1985 and 2003*
Dep. Var.: Net Income
Husband:
Educ. 9-11

(1)

1985
Ln(WM)
(2)

Ln( WF)
(3)

Net Income

2003
Ln(WM)

Ln(WF)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-6662.60
(521.57)

-0.256
(0.0061)

-8227.00
(6752.42)

-0.208
(0.0065)

Educ. 13-15

3059.69
(516.53)

0.125
(0.0057)

13097.51
(4968.40)

0.106
(0.0053)

Educ. 16

11954.60
(603.24)

0.365
(0.0051)

31353.79
(5313.84)

0.442
(0.0049)

Age

1496.29
(216.61)

0.072
(0.0014)

5226.86
(3014.62)

0.073
(0.0012)

Age2/100

-1602.19
(267.25)

-0.073
(0.0017)

-6592.81
(3170.46)

-0.076
(0.0014)

Wife:
Educ. 9-11

-5189.00
(527.62)

-0.232
(0.0084)

-10494.58
(7358.55)

-0.249
(0.0090)

Educ. 13-15

1147.72
(503.19)

0.172
(0.0060)

-480.73
(4738.68)

0.141
(0.0058)

Educ. 16

7407.11
(639.259)

0.376
(0.0063)

17743.35
(5495.70)

0.470
(0.0055)

Age

1237.46
(217.07)

0.036
(0.0015)

-4005.95
(2960.81)

0.044
(0.0017)

Age2

-1002.24
(272.23)

-0.039
(0.0020)

5668.04
(3238.41)

-0.047
(0.0020)

Usual weekly
hours

0.022
(0,0002)

0.047
(0.0002)

44,655

#Kids<6

-1857.35
(239.28)

#Kids6-17

-1418.71
(188.75)

N=

11,884

59,417

Adj. R2

0.250

0.302

1,891

80,187

0.069

0.448

56,095

*Standard errors in parentheses. The estimates describing net income are based on data from the PSID. The
estimates of male weekly earnings are least-squares coefficients from regressions using CPS-MORG data. Those
describing female weekly earnings are also based on CPS-MORG data and are from a selection model in which the
presence of children ages 0-5 and 6-17 identifies the labor-force participation decision.

