                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              PERVERSE INCENTIVES IN THE
                          MEDICARE PRESCRIPTION DRUG BENEFIT

                                           David McAdams
                                           Michael Schwarz

                                         Working Paper 12008
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12008


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2006




David McAdams at MIT Sloan School of Management, mcadams@mit.edu. Michael Schwarz at UC
Berkeley and NBER, mschwarz@berkeley.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by David McAdams and Michael Schwarz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Perverse Incentives in the Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit
David McAdams and Michael Schwarz
NBER Working Paper No. 12008
January 2006
JEL No. I1

                                              ABSTRACT


We analyze some of the perverse incentives that may arise under the current Medicare prescription
drug benefit design. In particular, risk adjustment for a stand-alone prescription drug benefit creates
perverse incentives for prescription drug plans' coverage decisions and/or pharmaceutical companies'
pricing decisions. This problem is new in that it does not arise with risk adjustment for other types
of health care coverage. For this and other reasons, Medicare's drug benefit requires especially close
regulatory oversight, now and in the future. We also consider a relatively minor change in how the
benefit is financed that could lead to significant changes in how it functions. In particular, if all plans
were required to charge the same premium, there would be less diversity in quality but also less
budgetary uncertainty and less upward pressure on drug prices.

David McAdams
Sloan School of Managment
MIT
mcadams@mit.edu

Michael Schwarz
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics
140 Warren Hall MC 7360
Berkeley, CA 947210-7360
and NBER
mschwarz@berkeley.edu
       Prescription drug plan (PDP) providers for the new Medicare Part D prescription

drug benefit submitted their formularies to regulators at the Centers for Medicare &

Medicaid Services (CMS) by a June 6, 2005 deadline. These providers had spent months

optimizing the structure of their formularies but, after the deadline, CMS notified a num-

ber of plans that their formularies were insufficiently comprehensive. A CMS clarification

stated that ‘all or substantially all’ of the drugs in the antidepressant, antipsychotic, anti-

convulsant, anticancer, immunosuppressant and HIV/AIDS categories” must be covered

by all formularies.1 These plans had less than a week to submit new formularies meeting

these requirements. One former Medicare official was quoted in the New York Times in

June 2005 saying: “Medicare officials are flexing their muscles. They are requiring pre-

scription drug plans to cover more drugs than anyone expected. They are establishing a

gold standard for access to drugs in a number of therapeutic classes” (Pear 2005).

       Even the formulary of Kaiser’s plan – cited as a model of best practice for the

Medicare benefit by Bush administration officials in December 2004 – was unaccept-

able. Kaiser’s commercial formulary only includes two brand names for many therapeu-

tic classes. Offering such a limited formulary allows large drug purchasers to negotiate

substantial discounts by using formulary placement as leverage over pharmaceutical com-

panies (Frank 2001).2 As all formularies are required to cover more drugs, PDP providers
   1
       CMS web site: http://www.cms.hhs.gov/pdps/formularyqafinalmmrevised.pdf (accessed August 5,

2005).
   2
     An insurer’s ability to extract price concessions depends on its ability to move volume to a particular

drug, which itself depends both on the number of drugs on the formulary and the rate of formulary

compliance (Frank 2001). For example, hospital pharmacies that fall under managed care steer large

groups of patients to particular drugs more effectively than more traditional pharmacies. According to

a 2003 Boston Consulting Group report, hospital pharmacies on average receive a 25% discount relative

to retail drug stores.




                                                     2
will be less able to control drug costs.

       Why did CMS require formularies to be more extensive than the existing best prac-

tice? One reason, we argue, is that a limited formulary will tend to harm Medicare

beneficiaries to a much greater extent than the same formulary in an integrated plan like

Kaiser’s. The extent to which formulary restrictions harm beneficiaries depends crucially

on how they are combined with other plan practices. A limited formulary works well

for Kaiser patients because Kaiser doctors are aware of those limitations and usually

prescribe from the formulary. Furthermore, a seamless exceptions process ensures that

medically necessary drugs are covered, even when they are not on the formulary. Since

Medicare Part D is a stand-alone benefit, PDPs may not be able to achieve as high

formulary compliance nor have as much incentive to provide as seamless an exceptions

process.

       This by itself does not explain why CMS intervention was needed. After all, the

Medicare benefit will “give beneficiaries a choice of at least two drug plans that will

cover a comprehensive set of both brand name and generic drugs”.3,4 In a typical market,

consumers’ choices penalize providers of inadequate products. As is well known, however,

the standard logic of competition does not apply to health insurance markets. Since

insurers prefer to attract less costly patients, each insurer has an incentive to offer less

generous coverage than its competitors (at a lower price). In some situations, this can

create a “race to the bottom” in which a competitive insurance market fails to offer
   3
       HHS News, January 21, 2005.
   4
       Some seniors may have other options than this stand-alone benefit. Employers who offer drug

coverage that meets the minimum standard for Medicare’s drug benefit will be given incentive to continue

to offer that coverage. HMOs may combine drug coverage with comprehensive health coverage under

“Medicare Advantage”. Dual Medicare/Medicaid beneficiaries will be automatically enrolled in Medicare

Part D and receive additional subsidies.



                                                   3
any insurance product providing meaningful coverage. Indeed, an unsubsidized market

for stand-alone prescription drug insurance is unlikely to be viable due to the severity

of this problem (Pauly and Zeng 2003). Indeed, private markets have failed to provide

meaningful stand-alone prescription drug coverage for seniors.5

       Three important features distinguish the Medicare drug benefit from private provi-

sion of drug coverage. These differences are essential for creating a viable market for

prescription drug coverage. First, any formulary must meet a set of minimum standards

as mandated in the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act

(MMA) and enforced by CMS. Thus, a race to the bottom would not lead to wholesale

failure of the benefit but simply to all PDPs offering the minimum formulary allowed

by law. Second, the benefit is generously subsidized.6 Medicare will pay 74.5% of to-

tal plan premiums plus 80% of all catastrophic costs. (In 2006, catastrophic costs are

defined as annual drug costs exceeding $5,100.) Overall, the cost of the benefit to the

federal government in 2006 is projected to be over $1750 per beneficiary, or about 68%

of the projected total cost for all drugs that will be consumed by beneficiaries in 2006.7
   5
       With steep premiums and a cap of $3000 for drug reimbursement, even Medigap Plan J provides little

protection from catastrophic costs, yet this is the maximum amount of coverage that an individual senior

can purchase. This led a 1999 National Economic Council study to conclude that the only meaningful

form of private prescription drug coverage is retiree drug coverage, and only 25% of the elderly have this

type of coverage.
   6
     In addition to these direct subsidies, Medicare will bear much of the risk of cost overruns. Medicare

will audit each PDP provider’s “spending target” and cushion 75% of any variation from this target

from 2.5% to 5% and 80% of any variation more than 5%. (For example, if the target is $100 million

but actual spending is $110 million, then Medicare will cut a check for about $5.9 million.)
   7
     The drug expenditures for 2006 are projections taken from Stuart, Briesacher, Shea, et al 2005.

Among all potential Part D enrollees, average annual per senior drug cost in 2006 will be $2,608.

Estimated 14% of enrollees will have catastrophic spending and, among these, average total costs will

be $9,106. On a per senior annual basis, then, government payments due to catastrophic coverage will


                                                     4
Third and perhaps most importantly, the premium subsidy that Medicare pays to PDP

providers is “risk-adjusted.”

    This is not a paper about the various transitional challenges that will loom large

during the benefit’s first months and years. Rather our goal is to identify novel structural

problems that we believe will create perverse incentives that will put long-term upward

pressure on drug prices and downward pressure on drug plan quality. Unfortunately, the

initial plans and prices offered for 2006 coverage are of little use for predicting long-term

trends. Plans’ widely dispersed bids may simply be due to their initial uncertainty about

the extent of competition and about seniors’ demand for drugs at subsidized prices.8

Similarly, prices may be significantly lower than in future years due to switching costs.9


Risk adjustment for prescription drugs: a double-edged sword

Risk adjustment is a common practice among employers who offer their employees a

choice of health insurance options. Each health insurance plan’s payment for providing

coverage is adjusted up or down based on the expected cost of the patients who choose

its plan. This dampens plans’ incentive to discriminate against more costly patients,

reducing the likelihood of a race to the bottom.


       “Risk adjustment is burdensome but is an essential part of implementing a

       drug benefit” – CMS Administrator Mark McClellan (McClellan, Spatz, and
be 80% * ($9,106 - $5,100) * 14% ≈$450. The direct subsidy received by PDPs per beneficiary is about

$1250. As a percentage of total costs, then, Medicare will pay ($1, 250 + $450)/$2, 608 ≈ 65%.
   8
     The cheapest PDP available in Maine for 2006 requires beneficiary contributions of $19.60 per month

while Minnesota’s cheapest plan costs only $1.87 per month.
  9
    Seniors’ confusion and slow enrollment into the benefit suggests that their switching costs between

plans may be high. If so, plans have an incentive to set low prices in the first year and then increase

prices in later years.


                                                   5
         Carney 2000).


       CMS will use a conventional approach for risk-adjustment in which each senior’s

expected next-year drug spending will be predicted on the basis of such observable char-

acteristics as age, sex, new or continuing status in the program, and past medical diag-

noses.10 The subsidy that a PDP provider receives for each senior is then adjusted up or

down to reflect how that senior’s expected total cost differs from the average.

       While widely used and well-understood for traditional health insurance coverage, risk

adjustment for stand-alone prescription drug coverage has received very little attention.

This would be small concern if the lessons learned from comprehensive health insurance

applied to prescription drug coverage. Unfortunately, this is not the case. Indeed, as

we shall argue, risk adjustment methods that work well for traditional health insurance

could be disastrous if used for the Medicare drug benefit.

       More broadly, we argue in general that risk adjustment in the context of stand-alone

prescription drug coverage is a far less robust tool for discouraging discrimination than

in the context of comprehensive health insurance. This is due to two unique features

of prescription drugs. (A) Pharmaceutical companies with drugs still on patent are

protected from competition and hence are monopolists. In contrast, providers of other

medical services are rarely monopolists. (B) PDP providers have far more precise tools

than health insurers for discouraging targeted groups of patients from enrolling in their

plans.

        (A) “Fine” risk adjustment causes upward pressure on drug prices. How much in-

formation about seniors should be used when computing risk-adjusted premiums? In the

context of traditional health insurance, it is best to use as much information as possible,
  10
       CMS has published the diagnosis codes that will be used for risk adjustment. See “CMS-HCC Risk

Adjustment Models” at www.cms.hhs.gov/healthplans/riskadj for details (accessed August 5, 2005).


                                                   6
since then one can better estimate expected future costs (Glazer and McGuire 2000).

This allows for more accurate risk adjustment so that insurers have less incentive to dis-

criminate against any particular group of patients. For instance, pharmacy claims data

can be used to predict future health care expenditures (Zhao, Ash, Ellis, et al 2005).

Such pharmacy claims data would of course also help predict future drug spending. If

this sort of data is used for risk adjustment purposes, however, drug manufacturers may

have a perverse incentive to raise prices.

   Currently, past pharmacy claims data is not available to CMS and hence is not be-

ing used for risk adjustment purposes. In the future, however, risk adjustment based

on pharmacy claims data will be possible. For instance, suppose that Medicare’s risk

adjustment formula were to account for whether each senior is currently prescribed to

Nexium or Prevacid, two of several clinically similar “proton pump inhibitors”. This is

useful information when predicting future drug costs, since these drugs are frequently

taken for chronic conditions, e.g. any senior currently taking Nexium is likely to con-

tinue to do so in the future. AstraZeneca, the manufacturer of Nexium, now has more

incentive to raise its price. After doing so, the risk adjustment formula will predict that

any senior taking Nexium will be more costly than before, and each PDP provider will

receive a larger subsidy from Medicare for such seniors. Consequently, PDP providers

have little incentive to drop Nexium or otherwise encourage seniors to switch to Prevacid,

even if it is significantly less expensive. For this reason, the cost for drugs associated

with chronic illness will skyrocket if risk adjustments are computed using such detailed

drug-level information.

   Of course, this problem is easily solved for drugs like proton pump inhibitors which

have several close substitutes. Rather than using pharmacy claims data at the drug

level, one could code for the class of drug or the illness for which it was prescribed.


                                             7
PDP providers would then have a strong incentive to encourage patients to switch to a

relatively inexpensive drug within the class, and drug manufacturers would have relatively

little incentive to boost prices. Less obvious is how to deal with unique patented drugs

that are closely associated with the treatment of particular medical conditions. The only

way to eliminate a drug manufacturer’s extra incentive to raise prices in this case is to

lump together seniors with a variety of conditions for risk adjustment purposes, i.e. to

use a “coarser” set of information to determine subsidies. Unfortunately, this also has a

serious drawback.

   (B) “Coarse” risk adjustment creates perverse incentives for PDPs. Suppose that

seniors with two somewhat different pre-existing conditions are lumped together and

receive the same risk adjustment. As long as one of these pre-existing conditions is more

costly, all PDP providers will have an incentive to discourage seniors having the more

costly condition from joining their plans. Making matters worse, PDP providers have

an enormous array of instruments at their disposal to make their plans less attractive to

highly targeted groups of seniors. To discourage seniors with a particular pre-existing

condition from subscribing, a PDP provider only needs to move a specific drug onto a

different tier, add that drug to a pre-approval list, and/or tighten its approval process.

   Plans are not allowed to discriminate in this way, but in its formulary guidelines CMS

explains that it identifies discriminatory plans by first searching for “outliers”. If all plans

seek to provide poor quality to the same patients because of coarse risk adjustment, no

plan will be an outlier. For this reason, it is unclear how CMS will be able to detect or

correct systematic discrimination against certain groups of patients.

   CMS’ current approach for dealing with this problem is to impose a high “lowest bar”

for plans. In this way, CMS can limit the extent to which discriminatory practices can

harm groups of seniors with certain pre-existing conditions. “The minimum statutory


                                               8
requirement is that a formulary must include at least two drugs in each approved cate-

gory and class”.11 Indeed, according to CMS formulary guidelines, much more than the

statutory minimum may be required of plans: CMS may insist on inclusion of drugs that

“present unique and important therapeutic advantages” and/or those that are “most

commonly used by the Medicare population”. A variety of checks will also seek “to avoid

drug selection and cost-sharing that discriminate against specific disease groups”.

       Regulating formularies will be a major challenge for CMS. As we have seen, simply

looking for “outliers” will not be sufficient. Monitoring other plan practices such as the

exception procedure will pose another challenge.

       Will exception procedures be as fair as in current best practice? PDP providers are

required by law to set up a procedure for granting exceptions for patients who need a

medication not on the formulary. This is a standard practice in most HMOs. Medi-

care Part D coverage differs importantly from HMO coverage, however, as it offers drug

coverage separately from the rest of health insurance. Consequently, some of the best

practices used by HMOs to control drug costs may be ill-suited for Part D.

       HMOs develop and maintain a reputation for providing a certain standard of care,

but it is unclear if a PDP provider will be able to develop a reputation for offering a

fair exception procedure. Any senior who takes a PDP provider’s reputation for granting

costly exceptions into account is more likely to be a bad risk. For this reason, it might

actually be desirable for a PDP provider to establish a reputation for denying medi-
  11
       “Medicare   Modernization   Act   Final   Guidelines   –   Formularies”,   January   2005,   at

http://www.cms.hhs.gov/pdps/FrmUpldInstGdncMatrl.asp (accessed January 10, 2006).               When

defining drug categories and classes, PDP providers may use their own classification system, but the

system developed for CMS by U.S. Pharmacopeia is a “safe harbor”. See “Medicare Model Guidelines”

at http://www.usp.org/healthcareInfo/mmg (accessed August 5, 2005).




                                                   9
cally necessary exceptions because that could deter unprofitable patients from choosing

its plan. Consequently, market discipline is unlikely to force PDP providers to adopt

reasonable exception rules. The burden of monitoring exception procedures may fall on

the Medicare bureaucracy. Without active pressure from Medicare, PDP’s exception

procedures may deteriorate into automatic denial of most costly requests.


Advantages of a drug benefit with fixed subsidy and premium

Seniors face an important trade-off when selecting a prescription drug plan, since plans

can vary in both price and formulary extensiveness. It might seem that giving seniors

more choice is unambiguously good for them, but this need not be the case. Indeed,

the market might be more capable of delivering a benefit of reasonable quality at an

affordable price if all drug plan premiums were the same.

      More precisely, consider an alternative to the current design in which Medicare’s

subsidy is fixed at the amount budgeted for it by Congress and each beneficiary pays

25.5% of the total premium received by plans.12 (Plans would still be allowed to compete

by offering different formularies, different pharmacy networks, etc.) This relatively minor

change in the way that the benefit is financed would significantly change the way that

the benefit functions. The crucial difference is that the total cost of the benefit in this

alternative is determined ahead of time based on the amount budgeted by Congress.

Under the current design, the total cost of the benefit is determined through the market

by PDPs and, indirectly, by price-setting decisions of pharmaceutical companies.

      Fixing premiums will reduce diversity of PDPs on the quality dimension, but also has

the obvious advantage of insuring that the cost of the benefit does not explode. Under

the current design, prices, premiums, and government liabilities may turn out to be far
 12
      Under the current design, the average beneficiary premium is 25.5% of the average total premium.


                                                  10
higher than currently projected. Fixing premiums could have several other significant

advantages.

(i) Less upward pressure on drug prices. Under our alternative design, seniors pay the

same premium regardless of which plan they choose. To attract seniors, then, all PDPs

will aim to assemble the most generous formulary that is possible within their (fixed)

budgets. This in turn puts pressure on pharmaceutical companies to keep their prices

competitive so that their drugs are covered. In this way, setting the same premium for

all plans even promotes competition among drugs that are not therapeutic substitutes.13

Indeed, if the per person budget of the drug benefit is not sufficient to cover all val-

ued medications, PDPs would face a difficult decision regarding what drugs to leave off

the formulary. Since the least cost-effective drugs are most likely to be excluded, each

pharmaceutical company has less incentive to raise the prices for its drugs.

(ii) Less downward pressure on formulary quality. The 74.5% premium subsidy was

intended to create a self-regulating system in which the size and quality of the benefit

are determined by seniors themselves via their participation in a market. An unintended

drawback of this design, however, is that PDP providers may have more incentive to

discriminate against seniors with high expected drug costs. As we have already discussed

at length, any sensible risk adjustment approach will be imperfect so that some seniors

will be more profitable to PDP providers than others.

       If healthier seniors are more profitable (as one might expect), all plans will have
  13
       Setting the same premium for all plans promotes competition among therapeutic substitute drugs

for a more obvious reason. Given a limited budget, plans will only include the cheapest of these drugs,

so each drug will need to be priced very aggressively not to be excluded. On the other hand, when

seniors compare plans on both price and formulary extensiveness (as now), more expensive plans may

opt to include all drugs from this class regardless of relative prices.



                                                     11
an incentive to offer less generous formularies at lower total premiums, regardless of the

subsidy scheme. When subsidies are set at 74.5% of the national average total premiums,

however, a race to the bottom becomes more likely, in which all plans offer the minimum

formulary allowed by law. To see the point most starkly, suppose that all plans want

to attract “good risks” (very healthiest seniors) who are likely to choose the cheapest

plan. Each PDP provider will therefore attempt to offer a plan whose total premium

equals 74.5% of the national average (with a correspondingly less generous formulary).

When every plan attempts to be cheaper and less comprehensive than the average plan,

the only possible stable outcome is for all plans to offer the minimal coverage allowed

by law. While perhaps counter-intuitive, such extreme race-to-the-bottom behavior has

been well documented in similar economic experiments (Nagel 1995).14

       In contrast, when beneficiary premiums are fixed, any plan that offers a less generous

formulary will become less attractive to all seniors, not just to those who are less healthy.

Indeed, competition among plans could put upward rather than downward pressure on

the quality of the benefit. For this reason, fixing the subsidy and beneficiary premium

could have the extra advantage of decreasing the extent to which CMS will have to

regulate the benefit.


Regulating a stand-alone drug benefit

To anticipate where and why CMS may have to play an active regulatory role, it is

useful to classify restrictions on PDP behavior into “bright-line” versus “fuzzy-line” rules

and “binding” versus “non-binding” rules. A bright-line rule provides a clear test for

determining prohibited conduct. For instance, the requirement that “a formulary must
  14
       In the experiments, each participant guesses a number and is rewarded if his guess is close to three-

quarters of the average guess.



                                                      12
include at least two drugs in each approved category and class” is a bright-line rule.

On the other hand, the requirement that all drugs presenting “unique and important

therapeutic advantages” be included is a fuzzy-line rule. Enforcing bright-line rules

requires minimum regulatory oversight, while verifying compliance with fuzzy-line rules

requires interpretation and discretion.

   A fuzzy-line rule is binding if most participants have an incentive to violate it and/or

negotiate its interpretation with CMS, and non-binding otherwise. PDPs facing binding

fuzzy-line rules will push the envelope as far as they can, and enforcing such rules may

turn CMS into a heavy-handed regulator. To understand what sort of regulator CMS will

likely become, it is important to consider which fuzzy-line rules are likely to be binding.

   The requirement that PDPs must include “drugs most commonly used by the Medi-

care population” might seem straightforward, but it is a fuzzy-line rule since CMS will

likely exercise discretion when applying it. For instance, Nexium is one of the most

frequently used medications. Does this mean that Nexium must be included on every

Medicare formulary? Probably not, since Nexium does not provide “unique and impor-

tant therapeutic advantages”, the other fuzzy-line rule for drug inclusion on formularies.

(Prilosec is virtually clinically indistinguishable from Nexium and likely to be available

in generic form.) As discussed in the introduction, these rules have already been binding

on those offering coverage for 2006, as CMS officials have insisted on more extensive for-

mularies. Unfortunately, by setting minimum requirements for a particular therapeutic

class, CMS increases the upward price pressure for drugs in that class.

   Perhaps the most important binding fuzzy-line rule is the requirement that formu-

laries should not discriminate against specific groups of patients. “Non-discrimination”

in this context is far from being an innocuous platitude. Excluding a drug or setting a

high co-pay discriminates against patients whose doctors prescribe this drug. Congress


                                            13
did not intend to require that all drugs must be covered by all plans. In fact, Congress

required plans to use best private market practices to control costs. Consequently, some

amount of “discrimination” is necessary. It is not obvious when excluding a drug consti-

tutes illegal discrimination. For instance, Avastin (a drug approved to treat metastatic

colon cancer) costs about $50,000 for one year’s supply. On average, Avastin prolongs

life by several months. Does refusal to cover this drug constitute illegal discrimination

against colon cancer patients for whom the drug is the last hope? When PDPs submitted

their formularies, the answer to this question was not clear to all plans. After all bids

with formularies were submitted, CMS extended the deadline for submitting bids and

required “inclusion on all formularies of ‘all or substantially all’ of the drugs in the antide-

pressant, antipsychotic, anticonvulsant, anticancer, immunosuppressant and HIV/AIDS

categories.”15 If all formularies are required to carry a particular drug, we can expect the

price of that drug to explode (Newhouse 2004).16

       We expect the non-discrimination requirement to remain binding in the future. In-

deed, as we have discussed earlier, unique features of stand-alone prescription drug cov-

erage suggest that any sensible risk adjustment mechanism will give PDP providers the

incentive to favor certain groups of patients and not others. (See the section “Risk-

adjustment: a double-edged sword”.)

       The law makes it relatively easy for PDP providers to drop drugs from their formu-
  15
       CMS web site: http://www.cms.hhs.gov/pdps/formularyqafinalmmrevised.pdf (accessed August 5,

2005).
  16
     There are other important reasons why drug manufacturers have additional incentives to raise price

within the Medicare drug benefit. For drugs without close substitutes, the fact that beneficiaries only

pay a fraction c of the cost means that drug manufacturers’ profit-maximizing prices will be 1/c times

as high. For drugs associated with catastrophic spending, c = 5% so this effect would predict prices 20

times as high (Newhouse 2004).




                                                  14
laries or change co-payments.17 While beneficiaries can only change plans once a year, a

PDP provider can drop a drug from its formulary any time after giving thirty days notice

to subscribers. This rule might appear dangerously one-sided, but it is not unusual in

commercial insurance markets.18 The ability of PDPs to change prices after seniors com-

mit to a plan has already become a concern for legislators. During the open enrollment

period, seniors can consult the web-based ‘Medicare Plan Finder’ to learn more about

plans. After entering all of their prescription information, the site provides an estimate

of their annual out-of-pocket costs for every drug plan available in their state. These

estimations are not binding. Consequently, a senior who is locked into a plan for a year

may end up incurring a far greater out of pocket cost than the quote given to him by his

PDP. This possibility led Senator Richard Durbin of Illinois propose a Truth in Pricing

Act that will require PDPs to stick with their original price estimates (unless the price

declines). In a November 29, 2005 letter to congressional colleagues, Senator Durbin

illustrated the need for this law by citing the experience of one of his constituents who is

taking Arthrotec, Fosamax, K-Tabs, Lasix, Prevacid, and Trental: “The Medicare Plan

Finder on November 17, 2005 offered a list of appropriate prescription drug plans, in-

cluding Medicare Rx Rewards Premier, which had an estimated annual cost of $2,691.69.

My staff re-checked the same drug list on the Plan Finder less than a week later, on

November 22, 2005, and found the same plan was then estimated to have an annual cost
  17
       “CMS will accept changes to formulary drugs on a regular basis, within 30 days ... These submit-

ted changes will be reviewed by CMS to ensure that formularies remain nondiscriminatory and meet

other minimum standards”, quoted from “Medicare Modernization Act Final Guidelines – Formularies”,

January 2005.
  18
     We speculate that this provision serves a dual purpose: to prevent insolvency of plans that find

themselves in financial distress and to allow plans to react to sudden changes in drug prices, as after

generic entry.




                                                   15
of $3,844.49, an increase of $1,152.80 from a week before.”. At this time, systematic data

on fluctuations in co-pays is not available. However, significant weekly and even daily

price changes for the same list of drugs were not uncommon during November 2005.

   Additional important binding fuzzy-line rules relate to CMS auditing of plans’ cost

projections. In commercial audits, a financially healthy business typically has little in-

centive to game auditors, since the outcome of the audit has no direct impact on the

bottom line. In contrast, CMS audits plans’ cost projections for the purpose of “risk-

sharing”. Since Medicare will pay up to 80% of any difference if these projections are

wrong, biased projections could have a real and significant impact on a PDP’s bottom

line and on government liabilities. Deciding on permissible methods for producing cost

projections may prove to be a binding fuzzy-line rule since anticipating patients’ needs is

notoriously difficult. Yet another potentially binding fuzzy-line rule related to auditing

is that each PDP’s formulary must result in an average beneficiary co-pay of 25% (when

cumulative annual drug costs are from $250 to $2250). Predicting patients’ response to

formulary incentives is critical for estimating the average co-pay. Yet understanding the

impact of formulary structure on patients’ choices is on the frontier of academic research

(Goldman, Joyce, Escarce, et al 2004, Huskamp, Deverka, Epstein, et al 2003). There is

no standard or generally accepted approach for producing such estimates.

   One is left with a system that, we believe, will require continuous and intense long-

term regulatory oversight of PDP providers at every level, from formulary design to

methods for projecting plan costs.


Conclusion

Where private insurance markets have failed, Medicare may succeed in providing mean-

ingful and sustainable stand-alone prescription drug coverage. Three key features of the

                                            16
Medicare benefit make this possible: the Medicare benefit is subsidized, the premiums

that drug plans receive are “risk-adjusted”, and CMS can impose mandatory minimal

quality standards.

   Both the subsidy and risk adjustment are intended to create a self-regulating mar-

ket, in which the size and quality of the benefit are determined by seniors themselves

via their participation in a market. Our analysis suggests, however, that CMS regula-

tion will ultimately determine the cost and comprehensiveness of the benefit. CMS will

likely exercise its discretion in regulating many aspects of the benefit, from dictating the

comprehensiveness of permissible formularies to closely overseeing exceptions processes.

   Perverse incentives for PDP providers also arise from the fact that Medicare’s pre-

mium subsidy is computed as a percentage of the average total premium. Fixing the

subsidy at the amount that was budgeted by Congress (while allowing plans to compete

on quality) would decrease budgetary uncertainty, could reduce upward price pressure on

drug costs, and could somewhat diminish the need for CMS to play an active regulatory

role.

   Issues with risk adjustment are more fundamental and unavoidable. Risk adjustment

is intended to avert a “race to the bottom” and discrimination against particular groups

of patients. It has proved successful in accomplishing just that in the market for health

insurance. Due to unique features of stand-alone drug coverage, however, PDP providers’

incentives to discriminate against patients with certain pre-existing conditions can not

be eliminated without creating other serious problems. In particular, PDP providers will

have an incentive to discriminate against some groups of patients unless CMS can suf-

ficiently fine-tune its risk adjustment formula. Yet pharmaceutical companies’ incentive

to raise prices becomes stronger as risk adjustment is taken over finer and finer scales.

   In the end, implementation of the benefit will require active regulatory involvement


                                            17
that controls drug prices and/or controls PDP formularies and plan practices. Under-

standably, CMS has had to take an active regulatory role during the benefit’s well-

publicized ‘birth pains’. The point of our analysis is to suggest that CMS will have to

continue to closely regulate the benefit, especially formulary design, for the foreseeable

future.19 Any minimum standard that CMS imposes on formularies, however, will put

additional upward pressure on drug prices. Ultimately, this could jeopardize the drug

benefit’s budgetary viability.



References

Boston Consulting Group (2003): Changing Environment for the U.S. Pharmaceu-

  ticals. BCG, Boston, April.

Frank, R. (2001): “Prescription Drug Prices: Why Do Some Pay More than Others

  Do,” Health Affairs, 20(2), 115–128.

Glazer, J., and T. McGuire (2000): “Optimal Risk Adjustment in Markets with

  Adverse Selection: An Application to Managed Care,” American Economic Review,

  90(4).

Goldman, D., G. Joyce, J. Escarce, J. Pace, M. Solomon, M. Laouri,

  P. Landsman, and S. Teutsch (2004): “Pharmacy Benefits and the Use of Drugs

  by the Chronically Ill,” Journal of the American Medical Association, 291(19), 2344–

  2350.

HHS News (2005): “HHS takes major step to prescription drug benefit,” January 21.
 19
      The law explicitly prohibits CMS from negotiating prices.




                                                   18
Huskamp, H., P. Deverka, A. Epstein, R. Epstein, K. McGuigan, and

  R. Frank (2003): “The Effect of Incentive-Based Formularies on Prescription-Drug

  Utilization and Spending,” New England Journal of Medicine, 349(23), 2224–2232.

McClellan, M., I. D. Spatz, and S. Carney (2000): “Designing A Medicare Pre-

  scription Drug Benefit: Issues, Obstacles, and Opportunities,” Health Affairs, 19(2).

Nagel, R. (1995): “Unraveling in Guessing Games: An Experimental Study,” American

  Economic Review, 85(5), 1313–26.

Newhouse, J. (2004): “How Much Should Medicare Pay For Drugs?,” Health Affairs,

  23(1), 89–102.

Pauly, M., and Y. Zeng (2003): “Adverse Selection and the Challenge to Stand-Alone

  Prescription Drug Insurance,” NBER Working Paper, 9919.

Pear, R. (2005): “Medicare Insists on Wider Choice in Drug Benefits,” New York

  Times, June 15.

Stuart, B., B. A. Briesacher, D. G. Shea, B. Cooper, F. S. Baysac, and

  M. R. Limcangco (2005): “Riding the Rollercoaster: The Ups and Downs In Out-

  of-Pocket Spending Under the Standard Medicare Drug Benefit,” Health Affairs, 24(4).

Zhao, Y., A. S. Ash, R. P. Ellis, J. Z. Ayanian, G. C. Pope, B. Bowen,

  and L. Weyuker (2005): “Predicting pharmacy costs and other medical costs using

  diagnoses and drug claims,” Medical Care, 4, 34–43.




                                          19
