                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     BIAS CORRECTED ESTIMATES OF GED RETURNS

                                         James J. Heckman
                                         Paul A. LaFontaine

                                        Working Paper 12018
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12018


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2006




This project was supported by the Mellon Foundation, the Joyce Foundation, the Pew Foundation and
NICHD R01-34598-03. We thank William Johnson and James Ziliak for helpful comments on the first draft.
We discussed our findings with Barry Hirsch at Trinity University, San Antonio, March 2003. The website
for this paper is http://jenni.uchicago.edu/ged_imputation. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by James J. Heckman and Paul A. LaFontaine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Bias Corrected Estimates of GED Returns
James J. Heckman and Paul A. LaFontaine
NBER Working Paper No. 12018
January 2006
JEL No. C61

                                           ABSTRACT

Using three sources of data, this paper examines the direct economic return to GED certification for

both native and immigrant high school dropouts. One data source – the CPS – is plagued by non-

response and allocation bias from the hot-deck procedure that biases upward the estimated return to

the GED. Correcting for allocation bias and ability bias, there is no direct economic return to GED

certification. An apparent return to GED certification with age found in the raw CPS data is due to

dropouts becoming more skilled over time. These results apply to native born as well as immigrant

populations.

James J. Heckman
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
j-heckman@uchicago.edu

Paul A. LaFontaine
American Bar Foundation
plafonta@yahoo.com
                                             –2–


                                          ABSTRACT


         Using three sources of data, this paper examines the direct economic return
      to GED certification for both native and immigrant high school dropouts. One
      data source – the CPS – is plagued by non-response and allocation bias from
      the hot-deck procedure that biases upward the estimated return to the GED.
      Correcting for allocation bias and ability bias, there is no direct economic return
      to GED certification. An apparent return to GED certification with age found
      in the raw CPS data is due to dropouts becoming more skilled over time. These
      results apply to native born as well as immigrant populations.


      Subject headings: JEL Code: C61



                                     1.    Introduction


    There has been rapid growth in the fraction of persons who achieve high school
certification by means of an equivalency exam rather than through the traditional route
of classroom attendance and high school graduation. The primary vehicle for high school
equivalency certification is the General Educational Development (GED) program. In 1960,
only two percent of all new high school certificates were awarded through equivalency
exams in the United States. By 2001, over twenty percent of all new high school credentials
were produced through GED certification (See Figure 1). This rapid growth in exam
certification occurred despite apparently low direct economic returns to it. Using data from
the National Longitudinal Study of Youth (NLSY), Cameron and Heckman (1993) find
that in terms of their hourly wages, controlling for differences in ability, male exam-certified
high school equivalents are statistically indistinguishable from high school dropouts who
are uncertified. Any differences in wages among exam-certified equivalents and uncertified
                                            –3–


dropouts are completely accounted for by differences in ability. There is no causal effect
of GED certification on wages.2 Cameron and Heckman conclude that whatever economic
return there is to GED certification must come through access to further post-secondary
education and training that certification provides. However, GEDs are much less likely
than ordinary high school graduates to complete two or four year colleges. A large body of
subsequent work, summarized in Boesel, Alsalam, and Smith (1998), confirms that GED
recipients and high school graduates are not equivalent.

       Advocates of the GED testing program raised some potentially valid criticisms of the
Cameron and Heckman analysis following its publication (Murnane, Willett, and Boudett
1999; Boudett, Murnane, and Willett 2000; Jaeger and Clark 2005). First, Cameron and
Heckman only considered labor market outcomes at ages 25 and 28. If GED certification
opens up access to occupations that are closed to high school dropouts then the effect of
certification may not manifest itself until later in the life cycle. A second concern is the
small sample sizes available in the NLSY data. Some argued that it would not be possible
to assess the entire GED program based on a few hundred NLSY participants. Finally,
there may be a disparate impact of the GED program across different race groups or other
subpopulations. For instance, a GED may send a different signal for recent immigrants who
acquire the credential than it does for native born dropouts. This paper addresses these
questions.

       In 1998, the Current Population Monthly Survey (CPS) began distinguishing between
the two types of high school completion statuses. The large sample sizes for various racial
and ethnic groups, as well as the wide range of available ages, appear to make the CPS ideal
for addressing some of the limitations of the Cameron and Heckman analysis. However,
four potentially serious problems and limitations plague the CPS data. First, the CPS

   2
       Later work by Cameron (1994) found similar results for NLSY females.
                                             –4–


contains no measure of ability. Cameron and Heckman found that the GED program is
selective because it is the higher ability dropouts who attain GED certification. Once
differences in ability between GED recipients and uncertified dropouts are accounted for,
wage differentials disappear. Second, as found by Hirsch and Schumacher (2004) in the
context of estimating union-nonunion wage differentials, “match bias” can result from the
CPS method of imputing missing wages. We find that the estimated returns to GED
certification are substantially upward biased because GED respondents who either refuse
or fail to report their wage information are frequently assigned (matched to) the wages of
traditional high school graduates. Third, CPS data show that a large fraction of workers
have no reported earnings because they are unemployed or out of the labor force. Finally,
bias may arise from low and high income earners refusing to report earnings.

    This paper addresses the first three of these problems. We show that when estimation
is performed carefully, the returns to GED certification and other educational estimates
using CPS data are similar to those obtained from other, cleaner, data sources. We find
that GED recipients who do not continue on to college earn the same wages as uncertified
dropouts after correcting for differences in ability. This result applies to both males and
females across the age spectrum. We find no evidence of post-certification life cycle wage
growth attributable to the program. The apparent return to GED certification for older age
groups in the raw data is due to a greater unobserved ability bias for older birth cohorts
rather than from a causal effect of GED certification. After correcting for problems with the
CPS data, the estimated GED-dropout difference in wages is the same in comparable NLSY
and CPS cohorts. The positive wage returns to GED certification found in unadjusted CPS
data arise from unobserved ability bias and improper allocation of GED missing wages.
We also show that ability bias is greater when comparing foreign born GED recipients and
foreign born dropouts. After adjusting for ability, no statistically significant effect of the
GED on wages is discernible for both native and foreign born males and females of all race
                                              –5–


and ethnic groups.

       The plan of this paper is as follows. In section 2, we discuss the CPS and compare
evidence from it with evidence from the NLSY. In section 3, we present ability bias corrected
returns to GED certification. In section 4, we discuss the issues of age and cohort effects
using a variety of data sources. In section 5, we consider GED returns among immigrants.
Section 6 concludes.



              2.   The Importance of Wage Imputation and Non-response


                                       2.1.   CPS Data


       We use the monthly outgoing rotation groups from the CPS for the period January
1998 to December 2003. Our sample consists of civilian males and females age 20-64 who
are either in their fourth or eighth month in the sample. We use a sample of dropouts, GED
recipients and high school graduates who have completed no college along with a sample of
four year degree holders for whom we cannot determine what type of high school certificate
they hold.3 For our wage analysis , we exclude those people who are enrolled in school; are
self-employed; reported their ethnicity as Native American, Aleut, or Eskimo; or had their
education status or years of schooling responses imputed. The self-employed are excluded
because earnings are not available for these individuals. All regressions also exclude those
who earn less than $.50 or more than $200 an hour (in 2000 dollars). Data loss due to these

   3
       Due to the structure of the CPS monthly questionnaire it is not possible to determine
the GED status of those who continue onto college. For this reason our estimates of GED
returns using the CPS are limited to the direct effect of certification on outcomes. These
estimates will be lower than an overall effect inclusive of the indirect effects of post-secondary
training.
                                               –6–


exclusions are listed in Table 1(a). The main exclusions are due to those who are either not
working or are self-employed. For these groups wage data are unavailable. Other sample
restrictions only account for a small fraction of lost data.



                           2.2.   CPS Problems and Limitations


       Due to its large sample size, the long period over which it is collected, and its perceived
quality, the CPS has become the primary data source for understanding a host of important
economic issues, including the U.S. earnings structure, racial wage gaps and returns to
education. The growing non-response to income related questions calls into question the
quality of the data and its comparability across time. Figure 2 shows that prior to 1994
the percentage of those who chose not to report earnings was relatively stable at around
15%. After 1994, earnings non-response rose from a low of 24% in 1995 to nearly 34% in
2003.4 Increasing rates of non-response, greater numbers of workers selectively withdrawing
from the labor force, and the CPS practice of not collecting wage information from the
self-employed, have resulted in substantial fractions of respondents with missing wage data
among certain race, sex and age groups. Table 1(b) reveals that only about 50% of White
and Hispanic males in each outgoing rotation group report earnings due to the combination
of these factors. Wage data for Black males are only available for around 38% of the sample
due to higher rates of income non-response among the employed and higher incidence of

   4
       The dramatic increase in allocation after 1994 is primarily due to the implementation
of the newly redesigned CPS questionnaire. The new questionnaire asks a longer, more
complex series of questions in order to determine weekly wages, and the new data processing
procedures set weekly wages to missing if even one of these questions is met with either a
refusal or “don’t know” response.
                                            –7–


unemployment among this population. The situation is worse for women, due to their lower
labor force participation rates. Unlike the NLSY that surveys each person individually, the
CPS survey is administered by telephone to one person who responds for his or her entire
household. Potentially exacerbating the non-response problem is that the accuracy of the
available wage information may also be questionable. For males, over 60% of the wage
and labor force information is given by a proxy respondent and these respondents may not
be privy to all income related information. The percent of available self-reported wages
is extremely low- around 25% for males and 30% for females. The propensity to report
earnings varies across race groups. In particular, black males and females are 10% more
likely not to report earnings than either their white or Hispanic counterparts.

       Unfortunately, the CPS does not provide enough information to determine the nature
of this response bias. We present some evidence on the severity of this potential bias using
NLSY data. Non-response bias may not be large since our estimates obtained from CPS
data closely track those estimates from cleaner data sources where we can control for this
bias.



                             2.3.   CPS Imputation Strategy


       To avoid computing national statistics based on a sample with a large proportion of
missing data, and in an attempt to correct for possible non-response bias caused by missing
wage data, the CPS allocates missing earnings using a “hot deck” imputation method.
A hot deck assigns the wages of respondents to non-respondents based on a limited set
of demographic, education and occupational characteristics.5 A common practice among

   5
       Currently, the CPS matches non-respondents to respondents in the monthly data based
on the following categories: gender (2), race (2), age (6), occupation (13), hours worked (8),
                                           –8–


researchers is to treat allocated values as observed when using CPS survey data. In a widely
cited paper, Angrist and Krueger (1999) claim that CPS wage allocation is empirically
unimportant. This paper shows that CPS allocation methods and the resulting match bias
are of first order economic importance in estimating returns to GED certification.

    “Match bias”, a phrase due to Hirsch and Schumacher (2004), arises from the limited
number of categories used to impute non-respondent wages. Of particular interest to this
paper, the matching of wage non-respondents to wage respondents is based on only three
levels of educational attainment: high school dropouts, high school graduates with up to but
not including a Bachelors degree, and those with a Bachelors degree and above. Given these
education categories, it is clear that estimated returns for those who graduate high school
and do not attend college will exhibit an upward bias since non-respondents will frequently
be matched to those who complete some college. On the other hand, estimated returns
for those who complete above a Bachelors degree will be biased downward as a result of
non-respondents being assigned the wages of those with only a Bachelors degree. Clearly, all
CPS educational estimates will be affected by this type of educational mismatching within
allocation cells. Bollinger and Hirsch (2005) and Hirsch and Schumacher (2004) present a
more detailed discussion of the CPS hot deck procedure and the resulting bias in estimates
for various educational categories.

    GED allocated wages exhibit a particularly severe form of this type of misallocation
bias since non-respondents who hold GED credentials are frequently assigned the wages
of high school graduates who may have post-secondary education up to but not including
a Bachelors degree. If a wage differential exists between GED recipients and high
school graduates, then this differential will tend to shrink as the proportion of GED
non-respondents increases. As non-response has grown from less than 15% to over 30% in


education (3), and tips and overtime receipt (2).
                                            –9–


recent years, the upward bias in estimated returns to the GED has increased proportionally.

    Table 2(a) shows that for native males the estimated return to GED certification
is overstated by over 35% when CPS allocated wages are included in the sample. After
dropping the allocated wages, the estimated return to GED certification drops from .14
log points to .09. For females, shown in Table 2(b), the bias tends to be generally smaller
in magnitude but is still over 25%. The estimated return decreases from .15 log points to
just under .11 for the full sample of females. As predicted, excluding allocated earners also
decreases estimated returns to high school graduation and college completion. However,
this decrease is not of the same magnitude as is found for GED recipients. The resulting
reduction for the full sample of males is just over 5% for college graduates and just under
12% for high school graduates who did not attend college. The observed effects of CPS
allocation for the female sample are similar. Overall, imputation tends to increase the
estimated college-dropout and high school-dropout wage differentials and leaves the
college-high school differential largely unaffected. The most serious bias is observed in the
GED category. Tables 2(a) and 2(b) show that the returns are different across racial, sex
and ethnic groups although not dramatically so. Returns to certification are always higher
for females compared to males, and minorities have higher returns than whites. Both
Hispanic males and females show the highest returns to GED acquisition among all racial
groups. However, the differences across groups are not dramatic. The largest estimated
difference between pooled and separated race estimates is only .04 log points.

    In order to assess how sensitive these estimates are to non-response and match bias,
we implement a hot deck imputation procedure that differs from the CPS hot deck only in
that it matches using more precisely defined educational groups. This is done both to show
that it is the exclusion of GED status as a match criterion in the CPS hot deck that causes
the match bias and to correct for possible non-response bias in our final estimates.
                                           – 10 –


    We impute wages using the CPS hot deck with an added GED educational category.
In order to account for the uncertainty associated with the imputed wage estimates of
non-respondents, we use the bootstrapping algorithm of Shao and Sitter (1996). This
procedure produces unbiased estimates of standard errors by re-imputing missing wages for
the bootstrap replicates.

    The last columns of Tables 2(a) and 2(b) show that the estimates obtained from either
reallocating wages or dropping those who do not report earnings are nearly identical. This
is entirely consistent with the findings of Hirsch and Schumacher (2004) who show similar
results comparing the wages of union and nonunion workers. This evidence does not prove
the absence of non-response bias but it is strongly suggestive.

    Bollinger and Hirsch (2005) present a detailed description of the CPS allocation
procedure and an analysis of its shortcomings. They also present an analysis of the
implications of census allocations on other outcomes besides wages. The primary focus
of our paper is on estimating the direct effects of GED certification on the wages of
dropouts. CPS imputation bias is only a part of our story but is the main thrust of the
Bollinger-Hirsch analysis.

    We focus on estimating the true return to the GED using a variety of data sets
and methods to adjust for selection effects and ability bias to show that estimated direct
returns to GED certification are very low. For the remainder of this paper we use the most
expedient method of dealing with allocated values—and the one advocated by Bollinger
and Hirsch (2005)—by dropping employed workers who do not report earnings rather than
imputing missing wages. Due to the richer set of conditioning variables available in the
NLSY compared to the CPS, we are able to correct NLSY-based estimates for sample
selection bias due to employment status using both parametric and semiparametric selection
correction models described in more detail in the next section.
                                             – 11 –


                                      3.    Ability Bias


    Even though the exclusion of allocated earners dramatically reduces the size of the
estimated return to a GED credential, the resulting wage relative to the wage of dropouts is
both positive and statistically significant for both males and females across all race groups.
Cameron and Heckman (1993) found that positive returns to GED certification could be
attributed entirely to ability bias. Those who choose to take the GED examination are a
select group from the dropout pool. The distributions of measured ability of the people
who choose to take the GED and those who do not are very different. The CPS data do
not include any measures of ability. Unobserved ability may be driving the observed wage
differences between education categories. Accordingly, we turn to other strategies to control
for ability bias and to richer data sets.



                                     3.1.   NLSY Data


    This section uses the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79) to control
for ability bias. The NLSY is a representative sample of young Americans between the
ages of 14 and 21 at the time of the first interview in 1979. The NLSY is comprised of
3 subsamples: (1) a random sample of 6111 noninstitutionalized civilian youths; (2) a
supplemental sample of 5295 youths designed to oversample civilian Hispanics, blacks,
and economically disadvantaged whites; (3) a sample of 1280 youths who were ages 17–21
as of January 1, 1979, and who were enlisted in the military as of September 30, 1978.
The NLSY collects information on parental background, schooling decisions, labor market
experiences, cognitive test scores..Our sample includes only the random sample and the
black and Hispanic oversamples of the 1979 through 2000 waves. Our wage analysis is
carried out separately for males and females and excludes those who are enrolled in school,
have wages less than $.50 or greater than $200 per hour and those who are self-employed.
                                             – 12 –


                                   3.1.1. Ability Differences


       In 1980, the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB) was administered
to all NLSY respondents, with a completion rate of about 94% for the sample. We use
the AFQT test score as our measure of ability.6 Figure 3 presents the distributions of
AFQT scores by education and race for the NLSY. The differences in ability between GED
recipients and dropouts for both males and females of all races are large and statistically
significant.7 In fact, GED recipients have nearly the same measured ability as high school
graduates who do not continue on to college across all races.



                                      3.2.   Estimation


       In order to determine the importance of ability bias in generating the estimated returns
to GED certification using CPS data, we compare CPS estimates to those obtained in the
NLSY both including and excluding the AFQT score. Tables 3(a) and 3(b) show that the
estimated returns to certification across race groups using NLSY data, for respondents
who are between 20 and 39 years of age, are similar to those obtained from the CPS. The
exception is for black males. For this group the CPS estimate is higher. Returns to GED

   6
       The ASVAB consists of a battery of ten tests: general science, arithmetic reasoning,
word knowledge, paragraph comprehension, numerical operations, coding speed, auto and
shop information, mathematics knowledge, mechanical comprehension, and electronics in-
formation. The Armed Forces Qualification Test (AFQT) is the sum of word knowledge,
arithmetic reasoning, paragraph comprehension, and numeric operations components of the
ASVAB and is a general measure of trainability used by the military for enlistment screening
and job assignment.
   7
       Wilcoxon rank sum tests of stochastic dominance show strong differences.
                                              – 13 –


certification are also positive and, in all but one case, statistically significant across all race
groups using standard significance levels. However, when the AFQT score is controlled for
the estimated GED effect is essentially zero for males. The estimated effect for females
is still slightly positive across all race groups but is always statistically insignificant. All
wage differentials between GED recipients and dropouts can be eliminated by accounting
for ability. The positive estimates of a GED effect obtained in the CPS arise from an
unobserved ability bias that results from high ability dropouts self-selecting into the GED
program. To test the robustness of the NLSY estimates to sample selection bias problems
that may arise from excluding workers on the basis of their labor force status, we estimate
a parametric selection correction model due to Heckman (1979).8 As shown in the last
columns of Tables 3(a) and 3(b), accounting for selective participation in the workforce
does not overturn the conclusion that GEDs are paid the wages of high school dropouts at
the same ability level.

       One method for controlling for unobserved ability is to use fixed effects models.
Although the CPS was not originally intended as a longitudinal data set many researchers
construct two year panels from the 4th and 8th survey months. We exploit this longitudinal
structure in an attempt to correct for ability bias using the CPS sample.

       A number of important caveats need to be given before presenting the estimates based
on a fixed effect analysis. First, the CPS survey follows households and not individuals
from one survey to the next. A person who moves out of a household will not appear in the
next survey. This is of particular importance for our estimation because the sub-population
we are interested in, those who attain a GED between survey rounds, tends to be younger

   8
       At our website, we report estimates based on a semiparametric factor model structure
(based on Carneiro, Hansen, and Heckman 2003). The parametric and semiparametric
estimates agree (see Tables A1–A4).
                                           – 14 –


in age and significantly more likely to move between survey rounds compared to older
individuals. This biases longitudinal samples towards those who are more stable, i.e., do not
move between surveys. Second, changes in GED status could be due to the mismatching
of individuals or errors in reporting education from proxy responses. While every effort
is made to eliminate error due to the first consideration by matching individuals on a
number of demographic characteristics, the second source of error is less easily dealt with.
Because the CPS surveys one member of a household, and he or she responds for the
entire household, changes in the educational status of an individual, particularly their GED
status, occur quite frequently when different members of a household respond. This type of
misreporting may be particularly severe for GED recipients given that a proxy respondent
may be unaware that someone has a GED and because a GED is often assumed to be the
same degree as a regular high school diploma and therefore is frequently reported as such.
Finally, if a person does not report wages or is not working in either the 4th or 8th survey
months, then we cannot use them in the estimation. Using only households with wages
reported in both interviews leads to a small sample of individuals for whom we can estimate
a fixed effect model and the bias inherent in the sample from this exclusion is unknown.

    We present estimates from two longitudinal models using CPS data that attempt
to control for ability bias that plagues OLS estimates. The first model is a standard
fixed effects regression that differences out individual specific effects. The second model
identifies those who obtain a GED any time during the sample period and then enters a
dummy variable into the wage equation indicating whether an individuals is in a pre-GED
attainment state or a post-GED state. Comparing the pre-GED and post-GED coefficients
helps to determine the causal effect of GED certification on wages. No difference in pre-
and post-earnings indicates that the GED effect is zero and that cross-section estimates
seriously overstate the value of a GED. A positive difference in pre- and post-GED earnings
is evidence that supports the claim that the GED has a direct effect on earnings. In
                                            – 15 –


addition, if pre-GED individuals are already earning significantly more than dropouts before
certification, then this is evidence that pre-existing productive factors, such as unmeasured
ability, are driving the higher wage returns of GED recipients and not any true direct effect
of the GED.

    Excluding allocated earners is of particular importance when estimating longitudinal
models in the CPS. Tables 3(c) and 3(d) show that dramatically different conclusions
are reached depending on the treatment of allocated earners. Including allocated earners
results in large differences in earnings pre and post certification for both males and females.
After, dropping allocated earners we find no evidence of a positive treatment effect of the
GED on earnings. GED recipients earn the same in both the pre and post-GED states
and earn more before certification than other dropouts. Fixed effects models strengthen
the conclusion that positive GED returns from cross section estimates are not causal. The
inclusion of allocated earners once again generates an apparently large and statistically
significant positive effect of certification for both males and females. Dropping allocated
observations results in a zero estimated direct effect of certification after controlling for
unobserved individual effects. Estimates from the NLSY sample confirm the conclusions
drawn from the CPS.



      4.   Cohort Versus Age Effects and Further Evidence on Ability Bias


    Proponents of the GED program argue that a GED title may confer little initial benefit
but that after time, GED holders will experience higher wage growth than dropouts who do
not certify. This claim is based on an analogy with the returns to college. In the early years
after completing schooling, college graduate earnings do not exceed those of high school
graduates of a comparable age. In later years, their earnings far exceed the returns to high
school graduates as returns to investment are harvested. If the GED is an investment with
                                              – 16 –


long term yields, we would expect to see higher wage differentials between GED recipients
and high school dropouts at older ages. Tables 4(a) and 4(b) shed light on this question by
estimating the return to GED certification in the CPS by age groups for white males and
females. We focus on whites because the minority samples in NALS and the NLSY are too
small.9 We consider only GED recipients who get no further education in order to estimate
direct effects of certification on wages. For white males, we find evidence that apparently
supports the notion that the GED is an investment. GED recipients in each successive age
category have higher estimated returns to certification. For white females, the pattern of
returns is quite different, being nearly constant across age groups. It is not clear whether
the higher returns to GED certification at older ages are due to age or cohort effects. It is
not possible to answer the age vs. cohort question using cross-sectional data such as the
CPS (see Heckman and Robb 1985). It may be that the acquisition of the GED title causes
the wage differential to increase between male GED recipients and dropouts at older ages
or it may be that older birth cohorts exhibit higher returns due to unobservable differences
in quality between GED recipients and dropouts that are not present in more recent birth
cohorts. Comparing CPS to NLSY data and data from the National Adult Literacy Survey
(NALS) discussed further in Section 4.1, we find that higher estimated returns for older
groups are due to cohort differences and not increased wage growth resulting from GED
acquisition.

       By comparing GED estimates for a cohort comparable to the NLSY cohort in the CPS
to estimates reported by Cameron and Heckman at younger ages, Jaeger and Clark (2005)
claim to find evidence of strong GED life cycle wage growth. They report that estimated

   9
       The estimates for minorities are consistent with those for whites but the cells are small
and the standard errors are large. See Tables A5 and A6 in the table appendix on the website
for these results.
                                             – 17 –


returns to GED certification in the monthly CPS data for the NLSY cohort—those born
between 1957 and 1964—far exceed the estimates reported at age 25 and 28 in Cameron
and Heckman’s analysis. They conclude that by the time GED recipients are in their late
30’s to early 40’s, the GED title has helped them “catch up” to high school graduates and
to far exceed the wage growth exhibited by high school dropouts who do not exam certify.

       Tables 4(a) and 4(b)10 show that this conclusion arises as an artifact of inclusion of
allocated earners in the Clarke and Jaeger samples. We construct an NLSY birth cohort in
the CPS. It is the sample in the CPS survey years 1998-2003 that was born in 1957-1964,
the same years in which the NLSY cohort is born. In 1998 these people are ages 34-41. In
2003 they are 40-46. After excluding those who do not report their earnings, the estimated
GED returns for the NLSY-comparable cohort constructed from the CPS data, are nearly
identical to the estimates obtained from the NLSY when the sample is in their 20’s and
again in their 30’s.

       Both data sources show that GED recipient wage growth is not greater than that
exhibited by high school dropouts. Furthermore, the positive wage differences between
GED recipients and uncertified dropouts is completely accounted for by the inclusion of the
ability measure for males and females of all ages. However, the returns to college remains.
This is clear evidence of investment occurring in college. However, there is no investment
occurring in GED certification.

       Tables 5(a) and 5(b) strengthen this conclusion by comparing male and female
estimates of the CPS-NLSY cohort with cross sectional estimates obtained from the NLSY
sample at ages 25, 28, 30, 35 and 38. We again see that the estimated returns to GED

  10
       The log hourly wage regressions in the NLSY and CPS comparisons include similar
covariates and are based on the same sample restrictions to make the estimates comparable.
                                            – 18 –


certification and high school graduation for this cohort are remarkably similar between the
two data sources and across ages. The estimated GED-dropout difference at ages 35 and
38 are no different than those previously found by Cameron and Heckman at ages 25 and
28. According to official published statistics from the GED testing service, over 75% of
GED recipients acquire the degree before the age of 25. Therefore, the majority of the wage
sample at 35 and 38 have had their diplomas for over 10 years, ample time for any positive
net benefits to accrue. If GED recipients have not shown positive wage growth within ten
years of obtaining the title it is highly unlikely that they will do so later. Both the NLSY
and CPS data strongly reject the hypothesis of post-certification life cycle wage growth
posited by Clarke and Jaeger as well as Murnane, Willett, and Boudett (1999) and Boudett,
Murnane, and Willett (2000) once match bias is accounted for and estimation is performed
on comparable cohorts. Controlling for ability differences in the NLSY data produces no
statistically significant differences in wages between GED recipients and dropouts who do
not certify for both males and females at all ages. It is possible that the differences in wages
between GED recipients, high school graduates and dropouts observed in the CPS can be
completely accounted for by unobserved ability differences as well. Given that the NLSY
cohort shows little life cycle wage growth, it is also plausible that the higher returns to
GED certification seen for older birth cohorts in CPS data are due to a growing difference
in this ability bias between GED recipients and dropouts. Two not necessarily mutually
exclusive possibilities may explain the data. The first is that as the GED program has
expanded rapidly over the last 30 years, the quality of GED recipients may have declined.
Second, the quality of dropouts may have improved. Figure 4 shows that the quality of
dropouts as measured by their years of completed schooling has improved across cohorts
while GED quality has remained roughly constant. Male and female dropouts of all races
have obtained greater levels of schooling while the completed secondary schooling levels of
GEDs are nearly constant across all birth cohorts. The greater schooling attainment of
                                             – 19 –


dropouts may indicate that the skill gap between GED recipients and dropouts is closing
across cohorts or it may be the consequence of social promotion. Both factors may be at
work. We now turn to the National Adult Literacy Survey (NALS) data to explore this
issue further. It provides data on literacy skills of successive cohorts.



                                     4.1.   NALS Data


       The National Assessment of Literacy (NALS) is a decennial survey administered by the
NCES to a random sample of the U.S. adult population to determine their literacy skills.
The 1992 sample used in this section consists of a random sample of 13,600 adults age
16 and over and a state supplement of 11,344 adults. The NALS testing battery consists
of three separate tests designed to measure three types of skills: prose, document, and
quantitative skills. Unlike the CPS, the NALS sample does not ask respondents to report
their hours of work. Therefore all comparisons between CPS and NALS data are based
on weekly wage regressions. These regressions exclude those individuals who: have weekly
wages less than $100 or more than $4000 (2000 dollars); are younger than 20 years of age
or older than 64; or are Aleut, Eskimo or Native American. Controls for central city status,
married with spouse present, year of survey, region of residence, a quadratic in age and race
dummies, where appropriate, are included in each regression.11

  11
       The amount of data lost due to these exclusion restrictions for the NALS sample is
comparable to data loss generated from similar restrictions on the CPS sample.
                                             – 20 –


                                 4.2.   NALS Test Scores


    As measured by the NALS test scores, people who choose to take the GED test are as
capable in their basic cognitive skills as high school graduates and more capable than high
school dropouts who choose not to certify. Figure 5 shows the distributions of total NALS
test scores derived from the average over all three components of the NALS battery, by
race and education status for the native born. The distributions of NALS scores for high
school graduates and GED recipients are nearly identical across all races, while dropouts
have lower scores. In terms of basic literacy skills, the GED exam effectively sorts between
those who pass the exam and those who do not.

    Since the gap in years of schooling completed between dropouts and GED recipients is
narrowing across birth cohorts, we might expect to find the cognitive skill gaps between
the groups to be narrowing as well. Figure 6, which presents NALS score distributions
across different birth cohorts, shows that this is indeed the case. The distributions of scores
for GEDs have remained nearly identical to those of high school graduates across all birth
cohorts for males and females. As dropouts have obtained more years of schooling, their
test score distributions are becoming more similar to GEDs across birth cohorts, but they
are still statistically significantly different, even in the most recent cohort. This pattern of
test scores could produce the cross section finding of greater return to the GED by age
solely as a consequence of diminished selection bias for more recent cohorts. In addition, the
rise in GED certification may be due in part to diminishing participation costs of preparing
for the exam by uncertified dropouts. Whereas passing the GED examination for a 6th
grade dropout in 1950 would have required substantial investment and skill acquisition, the
average dropout from today’s public school system with 10 years of education may require
only minor preparation to pass the exam.
                                             – 21 –


                                      4.3.   Estimation


    The returns to GED certification found in the NALS92 sample for males and females
ages 20–64 closely match those found in the CPS 1998–2003. Tables 6(a) and 6(b) show
that male GED recipients have 6.6% higher weekly wages than dropouts before controlling
for ability. Female GED recipients earn 9.4% more than dropouts. However, these positive
returns to certification are completely eliminated for once we control for the NALS test
score. As with the male NLSY sample, GED recipients earn less than dropouts at the same
level of ability. Once again, this effect is not statistically significant. Female GED recipients
show a small but statistically insignificant positive return to certification adjusting for
ability, much as we saw in the NLSY data. It is evident that not controlling for ability in
CPS data leads to an overestimate of the wage returns to GED certification. All positive
returns to certification can be completely accounted for by selection into the GED program
based on ability. The NALS distribution of test scores across birth cohorts shows that the
ability differential between GED recipients and dropouts is diminishing. In a cross-section,
this results in the pattern of wage returns to the GED across ages that is observed for males
in the CPS. Older age groups show a higher return to certification. This is a spurious age
pattern due solely to a greater ability gap between GEDs and dropouts in earlier cohorts.

    Table 7 makes this point clearly by comparing estimated weekly wage returns in both
the CPS and NALS for two birth cohorts. The first is the pre-NLSY cohort (those born
before 1957 in CPS and NALS), and the second includes the NLSY cohort (those born
1957–1964 in the CPS and NALS) and those born afterwards. Once again, we see the
pattern of higher returns for the older cohort in both the NALS and CPS data. However,
controlling for the NALS test score, across all birth cohorts there is no statistically
distinguishable wage benefit for both male and female GED recipients. The available
evidence suggests that the GED program has always selected the most able from the
                                            – 22 –


dropout pool and that the direct wage benefits across all certification cohorts ranges from
small to non-existent once this selection on ability is accounted for.



                         5.   GED Returns Among Immigrants


    Jaeger and Clark (2005) argue that the GED has an even greater signaling effect for
immigrants than for the native born. Their study does not control for either the cognitive
differences between education groups or the amount of education GED recipients obtain
in their home countries. It is possible that the GED program is even more selective in
the immigrant population than it is for natives, so that only the most able immigrants
with higher skills GED certify. Failure to control for these factors would cause an even
wider disparity between the GED and dropout literacy and cognitive distributions than is
found in native born populations which would result in a higher perceived return for this
sub-population if these differences were not accounted for in estimation. Figure 7 reveals
that the distributions of literacy levels for foreign-born dropouts, GED recipients, and
high school graduates are dramatically different. While GED recipients and high school
graduates are nearly identical in terms of literacy, immigrant dropouts have extremely
low literacy and quantitative skills. In fact, foreign born high school graduates and GED
recipients more closely resemble their native born educational counterparts in literacy than
foreign born dropouts. These vast differences in basic skills among foreign born educational
groups call into question the comparability of wage returns between them, since the types
of jobs available to them will be very different as well. This evidence suggests that it is even
more important to adjust for literacy and cognitive skill differences among the foreign born
than it is for native born populations in order to accurately determine the value of a GED
credential for immigrants.

    Immigrants who take the GED also come into the country with higher levels of
                                            – 23 –


completed schooling in their home countries than immigrants who do not take the GED.
Table 8 shows that GED recipients and high school graduates are far more likely than
dropouts to have attended secondary schooling in their native country. The majority of
immigrant dropouts only complete elementary school or less. Both high school graduates
and GED recipients are also more likely to have been schooled solely in the U.S., as
evidenced by the percentage who did not attend school before arriving in the U.S. GED
recipients also have the highest probability of entering the country having completed
a post-secondary vocational training program. All of these factors point towards the
possibility that the GED program is even more selective for immigrants than it is for natives
and that large wage differences exist between foreign GED recipients and foreign dropouts
before they certify.



                                     5.1.   Estimation


    We now present CPS and NALS estimates of the returns to GED certification among
the foreign born. We estimate the same regression model as was used to analyze the
native-born population except that we also add controls for country of birth, citizenship
status, and cohort of entry into the United States. Table 9 shows that the CPS match bias
that results from matching foreign born non-respondent GED recipients and high school
graduates to native wage donors by the hot deck overstates the value of both degrees by
about .05 log points for males and .06 log points for females. In contrast to the results for
the native born, if we drop the unallocated workers, we cannot reject the hypothesis that
GED certification is equivalent to high school graduation for both males and females using a
10% level of statistical significance as the criterion. The data reject the null hypothesis that
there are no direct wage benefits of obtaining a GED compared to staying in the dropout
state so that there appears to be a positive effect of GED certification over the dropout
                                            – 24 –


state. The positive estimated returns to GED certification among the foreign born in the
CPS appears to be driven by unobserved ability bias. Figure 7 shows that, in the NALS
data, GED recipients and those dropouts who choose not to certify have very different skill
distributions. Table 9 shows that unobserved skill differences account for all differences
between GED recipients and uncertified dropouts and that the positive wage returns to
certification estimated in CPS data are spurious due to selection on ability.

    Another interesting comparison that can be made in the NALS and CPS data is one
between native and foreign born educational groups. See Table 10. Not adjusting for
ability, the ordering in the returns to education between the groups is as expected except
for the ordering for GED recipients. Despite the lower cognitive ability of foreign born GED
recipients, as shown in Figure 7, they earn the same on average as native GED recipients
for both males and females. After adjusting for ability in the NALS data, an interesting
result emerges. Both male and female native dropouts and GED recipients earn less than
their foreign counterparts, although this difference is not always statistically significant.
This finding would not be predicted by a one ability model of earnings. We conjecture that
the foreign born have compensating favorable noncognitive traits such as motivation and
industriousness that offsets their lower cognitive ability levels. A recent paper by Heckman,
Stixrud, and Urzua (2006) finds that both native GED recipients and dropouts have low
noncognitive skills that account for their relatively poor economic and social outcomes. Our
evidence suggests that foreign born GED recipients may differ from native born recipients
in these important traits. These issues are explored more fully in a forthcoming book (see
Heckman and LaFontaine 2006).

    Given the small immigrant sample available in the NALS data, we must be cautious
in drawing any firm conclusions about the value of GED certification among the foreign
born. However, the evidence suggests that those immigrants who choose to GED certify are
                                             – 25 –


very different from those who do not and that any study of the value of GED certification
among this population needs to be able to account for this selection.



                                       6.   Conclusion


    This paper shows the importance of accounting for the CPS hot deck procedure in
order to obtain unbiased estimates of the return to education using CPS data. Misallocation
of non-respondent GED recipients to high school status results in a sizeable overestimate
of the value of GED certification. This bias does not arise from non-response and is more
sizeable among certain populations such as the foreign-born. Correcting for match bias is
important in order to have conceptually comparable estimates of the returns to the GED
across different data sources. Researchers should pay closer attention to how missing wages
are allocated. Alternative allocation procedures may dramatically affect their conclusions.
The importance of this warning is highlighted our finding of a low direct wage returns and
zero life cycle wage growth for GED certification, in contrast to the evidence presented by
Jaeger and Clark (2005) who use a biased sample.

    Our evidence suggests that direct returns to GED certification are low. Selection into
the GED program on the basis of cognitive ability can account for all wage differentials
between those dropouts who do not certify and those who choose to do so. The gap in
cognitive skills appears to be greater for older birth cohorts and it is this greater ability bias
that produces the apparent growth in the return to the GED with age that is found in the
CPS data. No empirically significant life cycle wage growth can be attributed to the GED
title itself. Cognitive ability differences also account for the positive effects found for GED
certification among immigrants in the CPS. This evidence highlights the importance of
using data with a rich set of family background and cognitive variables in order to evaluate
the true impact of social programs. When we control for ability and other person-specific
                                            – 26 –


invariant components using longitudinal models in the CPS, we find no causal effect of the
GED. While CPS data provide a foundation from which to begin an analysis of the GED
program, it cannot be considered a definitive data source. For this reason, we are currently
engaged in a more refined analysis of NLSY data and other data sources, to determine
the treatment effects of GED certification among different groups, and to expand on the
analysis of differences in GED certification across cohorts reported here.

    The available evidence suggests that GED certification for those who do not obtain
post-secondary schooling has little or no direct causal effect on wages among men, women,
older and more recent cohorts, and the foreign born. All measured differences between
GED recipients and dropouts who do not certify can be accounted for by cognitive skill
differences, and these are highly correlated with schooling.

    While the direct benefits of GED certification appear low, there may still be an
economic value to GED certification in opening post-secondary schooling and training
opportunities. We discuss this issue elsewhere (see Heckman and LaFontaine 2006). As
previously noted, from the CPS, we do not know the GED status of those who go on to
attend institutions of higher learning. Thus we cannot use these data to compute option
values from attaining the GED. From the NLSY data, we know that about 40% of the
GEDs go on to college. However, only a small percentage finish two or four year schools.
The GED opens doors to opportunities that are not realized. Overall, 3% of GEDs complete
four year college; 5% complete an Associates degree at a two year college. Those who obtain
vocational skills certificates do so at the same rates as high school dropouts.

    What is true today was true 60 years ago when the GED program first started. There
are no cheap substitutes for classroom instruction and training.
                                         – 27 –


                                   REFERENCES

Angrist, J. D. and A. B. Krueger (1999). Empirical Strategies in Labor Economics. In
      O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (Eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3A, pp.
      1277–1366. New York: North-Holland.

Boesel, D., N. Alsalam, and T. M. Smith (1998). Educational and Labor Market
      Performance of GED Recipients. Washington, DC: U.S. Dept. of Education, Office
      of Educational Research and Improvement, National Library of Education.

Bollinger, C. and B. Hirsch (2005). Match Bias Due to Earnings Imputation: When Does
      It Matter? Journal of Labor Economics, forthcoming.

Boudett, K. P., R. J. Murnane, and J. B. Willett (2000, December). “Second Chance”
      Strategies for Female School Dropouts. Monthly Labor Review 123 (12), 19–32.

Cameron, S. V. (1994). Assessing High School Certification for Women Who Dropout.
      Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.

Cameron, S. V. and J. J. Heckman (1993, January). The Nonequivalence of High School
      Equivalents. Journal of Labor Economics 11 (1, Part 1), 1–47.

Carneiro, P., K. Hansen, and J. J. Heckman (2003, May). Estimating Distributions
      of Treatment Effects with an Application to the Returns to Schooling and
      Measurement of the Effects of Uncertainty on College Choice. International
      Economic Review 44 (2), 361–422. 2001 Lawrence R. Klein Lecture.

Heckman, J. J. (1979, January). Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error.
      Econometrica 47 (1), 153–162.

Heckman, J. J. and P. LaFontaine (2006). America’s Dropout Problem: The GED and the
                                          – 28 –


      Importance of Social and Emotional Skills. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
      Forthcoming.

Heckman, J. J. and R. Robb (1985). Using Longitudinal Data to Estimate Age, Period and
      Cohort Effects in Earnings Equations. In W. M. Mason and S. E. Fienberg (Eds.),
      Cohort Analysis in Social Research: Beyond the Identification Problem. New York:
      Springer-Verlag.

Heckman, J. J., J. Stixrud, and S. Urzua (2006). The Effects of Cognitive and Noncognitive
      Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior. Journal of Labor
      Economics, forthcoming.

Hirsch, B. T. and E. Schumacher (2004, July). Match Bias in Wage Gap Estimates Due to
      Earnings. Journal of Labor Economics 22 (3), 689–722.

Jaeger, D. and M. Clark (2005). Natives, the Foreign-Born, and High School Equivalents:
      New Evidence on the Returns to the GED. Forthcoming in Journal of Population
      Economics.

Murnane, R. J., J. B. Willett, and K. P. Boudett (1999, October). Do Male Dropouts
      Benefit from Obtaining a GED, Postsecondary Education, and Training? Evaluation
      Review 22 (5), 475–502.

Shao, J. and R. R. Sitter (1996, September). Bootstrap for Imputed Survey Data. Journal
      of the American Statistical Association 91 (435), 1278–1288.



    This manuscript was prepared with the AAS LATEX macros v5.0.
                                       Table 1(a): Exclusion Restrictions by Data Source
                                             Native Males                       Native Females                Foreign Males          Foreign Females
                                     CPS        NLSY        NALS         CPS        NLSY        NALS          CPS       NALS          CPS        NALS
Potential Observations             352,858      55,057       5,412     371,222      54,101       7,058      65,004        821       68,688        886
Not Working                         64,302      12,358        872      117,363      19,873       2,306      10,061        109       29,377        354
Working and Enrolled                1,681        1,612        311        2,227       1,862        425         305          60         251          59
Self Employed *                     40,311       3,334         0        21,064       2,107         0         5772          0         2,921          0
Other Race                          3,065          0          30         2,761         0           38         124          …          128          …
Zero Years of Education               385         17           0          280          34          0          886          0          482           0
Imputed Education                     988          0           0          780          0           0          298          0          166           0
Earnings Outliers                     286         130         137         298          81         380          61          26          36          48


Total Observations                 239,400      37,961       4,106     225,517      30,621       3,952      47,295        629       35,174        429
% Not Working                        .182        .224        .161        .316        .367        .327         .155        .133        .428        .400
% Working and Excluded               .170        .111        .096        .112        .105        .168         .139        .117        .105        .194
Note: The total excluded observations is not the sum of the column since many individuals fall into multiple categories. Calculations based on a sample of
employed dropouts, GED recipients and high school graduates with no college plus four year college graduates. The sample ages are: 20-64 for the CPS; 20-
39 for the NLSY; and 20-64 for the NALS.
*It is not possible to determine years of schooling or self employment in the NALS data


                               Table 1(b): Sources and Extent of CPS Missing Wage Data by Race for the Full Sample
                                                                                                                                                                                     Foreign
                                                  White Males                                      Black Males                                   Hispanic Males
                                                                                                                                                                                      Males
                                    20-29       30-39       40-49        50-59       20-29       30-39       40-49       50-59       20-29       30-39       40-49       50-59        20-59
Potential Wage Obs.                 95,928     122,760 140,283 109,744              12,956      14,819      15,032      10,654      21,697      20,714       14,283      8,049        87,019
Unemployed                          4,580        3,529       3,748       2,648       1,311        846         763         392        1,286        884         561         323         3,523
OLF                                 11,003       6,734      10,341      16,999       2,851       1,891       2,663       2,947       2,109       1,366       1,375       1,509        8,696
Self Employed                       4,132       14,577      22,713      19,102        265         749         834         719         611        1,331       1,288        714         8,493
Military                            1,595        2,006        854         221         239         330         114          17         238         154          65           6          493
Non-Response                        21,753      27,912      33,282      24,692       3,384       4,433       4,790       3,087       5,034       4,781       3,367       1,875        21,714


Wage Observations                   52,865      68,002      69,345      46,082       4,906       6,570       5,868       3,492      12,419      12,198       7,627       3,622        44,100
% Reporting Wages                    .551        .554        .494        .420        .379        .443         .390        .328        .572        .589        .534        .450         .507
Proxy Responses                     30,731      37,080      37,766      24,655       1,780       1,794       1,918       1,547       8,046       7,133       4,445       2,110        25158
% Self Reporting Wages               .231        .252        .225        .195        .241        .322         .263        .183        .202        .245        .223        .188         .218
                                                                                                                                                                                     Foreign
                                                 White Females                                    Black Females                                 Hispanic Females
                                                                                                                                                                                     Females
                                    20-29       30-39       40-49        50-59       20-29       30-39       40-49       50-59       20-29       30-39       40-49       50-59        20-59
Potential Wage Obs.                 99,672     128,051 145,846 113,599              17,926      20,086      19,987      13,893      20,726      20,741       15,244      8,826        89359
Unemployed                           3658        3210        3,139       2,006       1,650       1,173        855         341        1,115        966         600         240          3236
OLF                                 21677       28971       28,539      32,172       4,620       3,932       4,389       4,687       7,513       6,786       4,422       3,684        30779
Self Employed                        2727        8900       11,819       9,710        216         515         564         407         276         634         686         441          4540
Military                              188         116         86           11          59          53          31          0           23          10           9           0           49
Non-Response                        18930       23214       30,358      22,277       4,023       5,682       6,047       3,741       3,111       3,295       2,887       1,411        16784


Wage Observations                   52,492      63,640      71,905      47,423       7,358       8,731       8,101       4,717       8,688       9,050       6,640       3,050        33,971
% Reporting Wages                    .527        .497        .493        .417        .410        .435         .405        .340        .419        .436        .436        .346         .380
Proxy Responses                     23,274      19,702      21,934      14,447       2,337       2,114       2,101       1,145       3,981       3,281       2,553       1,259        14983
% Self Reporting Wages               .293        .343        .343        .290        .280        .329         .300        .257        .227        .278        .268        .203         .212
Based on CPS 1998-2003 Monthly outgoing rotation groups. Potential wage obs. are those people in their 4th or 8th month in samples who are in the civilian labor force. These are the individual
for whom wage and job information questions are asked.
                                     Table 2(a): CPS OLS Log Hourly Wage Regressions for Males by Race
                                                   Model (1)                                        Model (2)                                           Model (3)
                                           Including Allocated Earners                      Excluding Allocated Earners                         Rellocating Missing Wages
                                       All       Whites         Blacks Hispanics        All       Whites       Blacks Hispanics           All       Whites      Blacks Hispanics
GED no college                        .137         .135         .146       .163         .088        .083        .105         .117        .086        .080         .092        .109
                                     (.005)       (.006)        (.016)    (.016)       (.006)      (.007)      (.020)       (.018)      (.007)      (.008)       (.021)      (.019)
High School no college                .209         .209         .207       .209         .184        .180        .195         .197        .183        .181         .191        .203
                                     (.003)       (.004)        (.009)    (.010)       (.004)      (.005)      (.012)       (.012)      (.005)      (.005)       (.013)      (.012)
College Graduate                      .571         .570         .584       .591         .540        .534        .590         .573        .546        .540         .585        .584
                                     (.004)       (.004)        (.012)    (.015)       (.004)      (.005)      (.015)       (.017)      (.005)      (.005)       (.017)      (.016)


HS - Dropout                          .209         .209         .207       .209         .184        .180        .195         .197        .183        .181         .191        .203
College - Dropout                     .571         .570         .584       .591         .540        .534        .590         .573        .546        .540         .585        .584
College - HS                          .362         .360         .377       .382         .357        .354        .395         .375        .362        .359         .394        .381


Adjusted R-squared                    .287         .272         .221       .282         .321        .306        .278         .313        .314        .312         .248        .299
Observations                        236666       203012         21182     11824       158314      137892       11868        8100       236666       203012       21182       11824
F-test: Prob>F
GED=Dropout                           .000         .000         .000       .000         .000        .000        .000         .000        .000        .000         .000        .000
GED=HS                                .000         .000         .000       .000         .000        .000        .000         .000        .000        .000         .000        .000
**All dummy variables are defined exclusively. Dropouts are the excluded category. Persons enrolled in school at each age are deleted as are those people who: have wages less
than $.50 or more than $200 an hour (2000 dollars); are self-employed; are not born in the U.S.; are younger than 20 years of age or older than 64; did not complete at least one year
of schooling; are Aleut, Eskimo or Native American; or had their completed schooling or GED status imputed by the CPS. Controls for central city status, married with spouse
present, year of survey, region of residence, a quadratic in age and race, where appropriate, are included in each regression but not shown. Reported standard errors are corrected for
heteroscedacticity and clustering with the Huber-White sandwich estimator except when reimputing wages. Standard errors after reimpuation are calculated using the method
outlined in Shao and Sitter (1998).

                                   Table 2(b): CPS OLS Log Hourly Wage Regressions for Females by Race
                                                   Model (1)                                        Model (2)                                           Model (3)
                                           Including Allocated Earners                      Excluding Allocated Earners                         Rellocating Missing Wages
                                       All       Whites         Blacks Hispanics        All       Whites       Blacks Hispanics           All       Whites      Blacks Hispanics
GED no college                        .150         .140         .174       .196         .110        .102        .121         .157        .108        .099         .117        .144
                                     (.005)       (.006)        (.013)    (.016)       (.006)      (.007)      (.016)       (.018)      (.007)      (.007)       (.015)      (.017)
High School no college                .237         .236         .217       .257         .215        .216        .191         .234        .210        .205         .199        .226
                                     (.003)       (.004)        (.007)    (.010)       (.004)      (.005)      (.009)       (.012)      (.005)      (.005)       (.009)      (.013)
College Graduate                      .673         .666         .712       .708         .647        .639        .698         .700        .639        .629         .689        .683
                                     (.004)       (.004)        (.009)    (.014)       (.004)      (.005)      (.011)       (.016)      (.004)      (.005)       (.010)      (.017)


HS - Dropout                          .237         .236         .217       .257         .215        .216        .191         .234        .210        .205         .199        .226
College - Dropout                     .673         .666         .712       .708         .647        .639        .698         .700        .639        .629         .689        .683
College - HS                          .437         .430         .494       .450         .432        .423        .508         .466        .429        .424         .490        .457


Adjusted R-squared                    .277         .263         .308       .313         .307        .291        .355         .351        .305        .287         .342        .347
Observations                        223046       185465         26160     10866       154742      130817       15716        7815       223046       185465       26160       10866
F-test: Prob>F
GED=Dropout                           .000         .000         .000       .000         .000        .000        .000         .000        .000        .000         .000        .000
GED=HS                                .000         .000         .000       .000         .000        .000        .000         .000        .000        .000         .000        .000
See table 2(a) for sample definitions and regression controls
          Table 3(a): NLSY OLS and Parametric Selection Corrected Hourly Wage Regressions for Males by Race*
                                                    Model (1)                                        Model (2)                                      Model (3)
                                              No selection or AFQT                                Including AFQT                      Controlling for AFQT and Selection**

                                       All       Whites      Blacks Hispanics           All       Whites       Blacks Hispanics          All       Whites       Blacks Hispanics
GED no college                        .065        .068         .049        .092        -.004       -.004        .003        .006        -.008        .004        .000        -.020
                                     (.020)      (.035)       (.030)       (.040)     (.021)      (.034)       (.031)      (.042)      (.021)       (.034)      (.031)      (.044)
High School no college                .131        .165         .080        .140        .044        .071         .026        .032        .035         .065        .029        .001
                                     (.014)      (.021)       (.024)       (.031)     (.015)      (.023)       (.025)      (.032)      (.015)       (.022)      (.024)      (.034)
College Graduate                      .477        .472         .500        .523        .274        .276         .312        .253        .257         .261        .307        .207
                                     (.018)      (.024)       (.037)       (.055)     (.022)      (.031)       (.043)      (.057)      (.022)       (.031)      (.043)      (.057)
AFQT Score                             …           …            …           …          .113        .109         .113        .125        .110         .104        .111        .123
                                       …           …            …           …         (.008)      (.012)       (.015)      (.016)      (.008)       (.012)      (.015)      (.018)


HS - Dropout                          .131        .165         .080        .140        .044        .071         .026        .032        .035         .065        .029        .001
College - Dropout                     .477        .472         .500        .523        .274        .276         .312        .253        .257         .261        .307        .207
College - HS                          .346        .307         .420        .383        .230        .205         .286        .221        .221         .197        .279        .206


Adjusted R-squared                    .303        .299         .261        .212        .331        .324         .296        .250          …           …           …           …
Observations                         33573       18199        9009         6365       32054       17351        8735         5968       36706        19126       11168        6412
F-test: Prob>F
GED=Dropout                           .001        .055         .107        .022        .842        .899         .925        .882        .701         .909        .993        .650
GED=HS                                .000        .004         .257        .219        .010        .018         .390        .516        .021         .053        .284        .605
*All dummy variables are defined exclusively. Dropouts are the excluded category. Persons enrolled in school at each age are deleted as are those people who: have wages less than
$.50 or more than $200 an hour (2000 dollars), are younger than 20 years of age or older than 39, or are self-employed. Controls for central city status, married with spouse present,
year of survey, region of residence, a quadratic in age and race, where appropriate, are included in each regression but not shown. Reported standard errors are corrected for
heteroscedacticity and clustering with the Huber-White sandwich estimator.

**We use a parametric model selection correction model due to Heckman (1979). For both males and females the participation equation includes: race dummies, family income in
1979, mother's and father's education, broken home status at 14, urban status at 14, south at 14, number of siblings, local unemployment rate age and age squared. For the female
model, spouses income, number of children in the household, and dummies for the presence of a baby or toddler in household are also included.

         Table 3(b): NLSY OLS and Parametric Selection Corrected Hourly Wage Regressions for Females by Race

                                                    Model (1)                                        Model (2)                                       Model (3)
                                              No selection or AFQT                                Including AFQT                      Controlling for AFQT and Selection***

                                       All       Whites      Blacks Hispanics           All       Whites       Blacks Hispanics          All       Whites       Blacks Hispanics
GED no college                        .113        .093         .122        .111        .027        .012         .033        .027        .017         .000        .015        .032
                                     (.021)      (.029)       (.039)       (.041)     (.021)      (.030)       (.035)      (.043)      (.021)       (.031)      (.034)      (.045)
High School no college                .225        .199         .248        .247        .130        .123         .141        .123        .101         .096        .107        .116
                                     (.016)      (.023)       (.032)       (.030)     (.016)      (.024)       (.029)      (.034)      (.016)       (.027)      (.028)      (.036)
College Graduate                      .651        .607         .667        .769        .429        .413         .415        .507        .376         .372        .345        .475
                                     (.019)      (.026)       (.037)       (.041)     (.023)      (.032)       (.041)      (.052)      (.023)       (.038)      (.039)      (.054)
AFQT Score                             …           …            …           …          .131        .118         .151        .146        .126         .123        .135        .131
                                       …           …            …           …         (.009)      (.118)       (.016)      (.019)      (.009)       (.012)      (.016)      (.021)


HS - Dropout                          .225        .199         .248        .247        .130        .123         .141        .123        .101         .096        .107        .116
College - Dropout                     .651        .607         .667        .769        .429        .413         .415        .507        .376         .372        .345        .475
College - HS                          .426        .408         .419        .522        .299        .290         .274        .384        .276         .276        .238        .359


Adjusted R-squared                    .309        .298         .312        .307        .339        .323         .349        .349          …           …           …           …
Observations                         28489       16225        7341         4923       27567       15645        7195         4727       42707        22186       12923        7598
F-test: Prob>F
GED=Dropout                           .000        .002         .002        .007        .187        .689         .268        .534        .428         .999        .673        .394
GED=HS                                .000        .000         .000        .001        .000        .000         .001        .013        .000         .001        .002        .049
***See table 3(a) for diuscussion of the selection model and exclusions.
                     Table 3(c): OLS Pre vs. Post GED and Fixed Effects Estimates for CPS and NLSY Males
                       CPS Pre GED vs. Post GED OLS Wage                                         NLSY Pre vs. Post                               NLSY Fixed
                                                            CPS Fixed Effects Wage Regressions**
                                    Regressions*                                                    OLS Wage                                     Effects Wage
                        With Allocations Without Allocations With Allocations Without Allocations Regressions***                                Regressions****
Pre-GED                       .049                .065              …                 …                .056                                             …
                             (.028)              (.032)             …                 …               (.027)                                            …
Post-GED                      .100                .064             .102              .015              .057                                           -.009
                             (.031)              (.035)           (.033)            (.028)            (.021)                                         (.030)
High School no college        .201                .174              …                 …                .142                                             …
                             (.003)              (.004)             …                 …               (.015)                                            …
College Graduate              .562                .529              …                 …                .491                                             …
                             (.003)              (.004)             …                 …               (.019)                                            …

Adjusted R-squared                   .332                     .371                      .086                    .087                     .305        .112
Observations                        234788                   156877                    33305                   22366                    34327       10189
F-test: Prob>F
Pre GED=Dropout                       .086                     .048                      …                        …                      .032         ...
Pre GED=Post GED                      .121                     .973                      …                        …                      .989         …
Post GED = Dropout                    .001                     .061                     .002                     .596                    .006        .754
*See Table 2(a) for sample definitions and regression controls. The only exception is that this sample is between the ages of 16 and 65.
**High school and college graduates are omitted in fixed effects regressions as well as any time invariant contols listed under Table 2(a).
***See Table 3(a) for sample definitions and regression controls. The only exception is that this sample is between the ages of 16 and 39.
****High school and college graduates are omitted in fixed effects regressions as well as any time invariant contols listed under Table 3(a).

                   Table 3(d): OLS Pre vs. Post GED and Fixed Effects Estimates for CPS and NLSY Females
                       CPS Pre GED vs. Post GED OLS Wage                                         NLSY Pre vs. Post                               NLSY Fixed
                                                            CPS Fixed Effects Wage Regressions**
                                    Regressions*                                                    OLS Wage                                     Effects Wage
                        With Allocations Without Allocations With Allocations Without Allocations Regressions***                                Regressions****
Pre-GED                       .013                .022              …                 …                .090                                            …
                             (.026)              (.029)             …                 …               (.031)                                           …
Post-GED                      .109                .044             .065              .002              .134                                           .021
                             (.022)              (.023)           (.032)            (.032)            (.023)                                         (.039)
High School no college        .223                .202              …                 …                .244                                            …
                             (.003)              (.004)             …                 …               (.019)                                           …
College Graduate              .659                .633              …                 …                .663                                            …
                              .003                .004                                                (.022)                                           …
Adjusted R-squared            .306                .337             .022              .037              .307                                           .089
Observations                222320              154010           24654              17258             27646                                           5329
F-test: Prob>F
Pre GED=Dropout               .619                .465              …                 …                .004                                           …
Pre GED=Post GED              .001                .439              …                 …                .136                                           …
Post GED = Dropout            .000                .064             .046              .961              .000                                          .594
*See Table 2(b) for sample definitions and regression controls. The only exception is that this sample is between the ages of 16 and 65.
**High school and college graduates are omitted in fixed effects regressions as well as any time invariant contols listed under Table 2(b).
***See Table 3(b) for sample definitions and regression controls. The only exception is that this sample is between the ages of 16 and 39.
****High school and college graduates are omitted in fixed effects regressions as well as any time invariant contols listed under Table 3(b).
 Table 4(a): CPS-NLSY Comparison- OLS and Selection Corrected Hourly Wage Regressions for White Males
                                                                                   CPS                                                           NLSY
                                                                                                    NLSY                    NLSY
                                                        CPS                       NLSY                                                         AFQT and
                                                                                               Excluding AFQT          Including AFQT
                                                                                  Cohort*                                                       Selection
                                    20-29       30-39         40-49     50-59      34-46       20-29       30-39       20-29       30-39     20-29    30-39
GED no college                       .031        .082         .104      .130        .076        .052        .067       -.031       -.040     -.024    -.031
                                    (.011)      (.013)     (.014)      (.017)      (.014)      (.035)      (.043)      (.035)      (.042)    (.035)   (.042)
High School no college               .112        .173         .234      .220        .195        .152        .206        .057        .062     .047     .057
                                    (.008)      (.008)     (.010)      (.012)      (.009)      (.020)      (.027)      (.022)      (.029)    (.022)   (.029)
College Graduate                     .363        .544         .615      .589        .598        .387        .584        .198        .318     .175     .305
                                    (.009)      (.009)     (.010)      (.012)      (.010)      (.024)      (.030)      (.031)      (.038)    (.031)   (.037)
AFQT Score                            …           …            …          …          …           …           …          .111        .153     .104     .149
                                      …           …            …          …          …           …           …         (.012)      (.015)    (.012)   (.015)


HS - Dropout                         .112        .173         .234      .220        .195        .152        .206        .057        .062     .047     .057
College - Dropout                    .363        .544         .615      .589        .598        .387        .584        .198        .318     .175     .305
College - HS                         .250        .371         .381      .369        .403        .235        .377        .142        .256     .128     .248


Adjusted R-squared                   .246        .283         .267      .228        .294        .214        .278        .244        .317      …        …
Observations                        29120      40190       38916       24418       34184       10625        8284       10180        7930     11795    8501
F-test: Prob>F
GED=Dropout                          .001        .000         .000      .000        .000        .134        .113        .367        .344     .487     .459
GED=HS                               .000        .000         .000      .000        .000        .003        .001        .006        .009     .026     .025
See tables 2(a) and 3(a) for sample defintions and controls.
Paramtric selection model estimates are shown. See table 3(a) for details of the estimation procedure.
*This is a cohort of persons from the CPS in the years 1998-2003 who were born in the years 1957-1964, the birth years of the NLSY cohort.


     Table 4(b): CPS-NLSY Comparison- OLS and Selection Corrected Hourly Wage Regressions for White Females
                                                                                   CPS                                                           NLSY
                                                                                                    NLSY                    NLSY
                                                        CPS                       NLSY                                                         AFQT and
                                                                                               Excluding AFQT          Including AFQT
                                                                                  Cohort*                                                       Selection
                                    20-29       30-39         40-49     50-59      34-46       20-29       30-39       20-29       30-39     20-29    30-39
GED no college                       .095        .102         .119      .105        .108        .084        .119        .011        .011     -.004    -.001
                                    (.013)      (.014)     (.014)      (.018)      (.015)      (.033)      (.044)      (.034)      (.046)    (.034)   (.046)
High School no college               .164        .229         .251      .229        .243        .172        .222        .092        .118     .029     .108
                                    (.009)      (.010)     (.011)      (.011)      (.011)      (.026)      (.033)      (.028)      (.036)    (.027)   (.035)
College Graduate                     .527        .703         .683      .619        .704        .483        .732        .298        .510     .194     .501
                                    (.010)      (.010)     (.011)      (.012)      (.012)      (.029)      (.035)      (.036)      (.044)    (.036)   (.044)
AFQT Score                            …           …            …          …          …           …           …          .126        .142     .120     .151
                                      …           …            …          …          …           …           …         (.013)      (.019)    (.013)   (.018)


HS - Dropout                         .164        .229         .251      .229        .243        .172        .222        .092        .118     .029     .108
College - Dropout                    .527        .703         .683      .619        .704        .483        .732        .298        .510     .194     .501
College - HS                         .363        .474         .432      .391        .461        .310        .510        .207        .393     .165     .393


Adjusted R-squared                   .323        .321         .261      .230        .290        .217        .300        .244        .327      …        …
Observations                        26307      35136       38342       25211       31642        9442        6914        9110        6671     13182    9307
F-test: Prob>F
GED=Dropout                          .000        .000         .000      .000        .000        .010        .007        .738        .811     .899     .991
GED=HS                               .000        .000         .000      .000        .000        .001        .006        .002        .005     .213     .004
See tables 2(a) and 3(a) for sample defintions and controls.
Paramtric selection model estimates are shown. See table 3(a) for details of the estimation procedure.
*This is a cohort of persons from the CPS in the years 1998-2003 who were born in the years 1957-1964, the birth years of the NLSY cohort.
               Table 5(a): CPS-NLSY Comparison- OLS Log Hourly Wage Regressions for Males by Age
                                                                                               CPS
                                             NLSY Excluding AFQT Score                        NLSY                   NLSY Including AFQT Score
                                                                                              Cohort*
                                      25          28          30          35         38        34-46         25          28          30       35       38
GED no college                       .059        .043       .015        .050        .079        .085        -.034      -.037       -.065     -.043    -.084
                                    (.038)      (.035)     (.034)      (.041)      (.061)      (.015)      (.039)      (.038)      (.036)    (.041)   (.062)
High School no college               .170        .141       .161        .157        .194        .208        .059        .044        .056     .029     -.015
                                    (.024)      (.023)     (.024)      (.028)      (.041)      (.010)      (.026)      (.024)      (.025)    (.030)   (.041)
College Graduate                     .373        .443       .496        .650        .714        .611        .134        .235        .269     .382     .333
                                    (.033)      (.029)     (.029)      (.034)      (.048)      (.011)      (.040)      (.035)      (.037)    (.040)   (.053)
AFQT Score                            …           …           …           …          …           …          .134        .124        .133     .149     .192
                                      …           …           …           …          …           …         (.013)      (.013)      (.013)    (.014)   (.019)


HS - Dropout                         .170        .141       .161        .157        .194        .208        .059        .044        .056     .029     -.015
College - Dropout                    .373        .443       .496        .650        .714        .611        .134        .235        .269     .382     .333
College - HS                         .203        .302       .335        .493        .520        .403        .074        .191        .214     .353     .348


Adjusted R-squared                   .168        .229       .258        .314        .358        .308        .207        .269        .294     .352     .415
Observations                        2247        2367        2400        2287        1088       30549        2165        2254        2298     2196     1039
F-test: Prob>F
GED=Dropout                          .119        .217       .650        .219        .193        .000        .390        .330        .067     .287     .173
GED=HS                               .001        .003       .000        .003        .032        .000        .006        .018        .000     .038     .189
See tables 2(a) and 3(a) for sample defintions and controls.
*This is a cohort of persons from the CPS in the years 1998-2003 who were born in the years 1957-1964, the birth years of the NLSY cohort.

              Table 5(b): CPS-NLSY Comparison- OLS Log Hourly Wage Regressions for Females by Age
                                                                                               CPS
                                             NLSY Excluding AFQT Score                        NLSY                   NLSY Including AFQT Score
                                                                                              Cohort*
                                      25          28          30          35         38        34-46         25          28          30       35       38
GED no college                       .096        .117       .109        .114        .149        .107        .014        .007       -.014     .028     .022
                                    (.047)      (.048)     (.048)      (.046)      (.062)      (.015)      (.048)      (.049)      (.049)    (.047)   (.065)
High School no college               .210        .234       .275        .272        .315        .237        .113        .123        .125     .161     .160
                                    (.033)      (.035)     (.034)      (.035)      (.051)      (.011)      (.034)      (.037)      (.036)    (.038)   (.055)
College Graduate                     .489        .640       .728        .799        .858        .700        .277        .417        .432     .573     .570
                                    (.036)      (.039)     (.037)      (.038)      (.062)      (.011)      (.042)      (.048)      (.045)    (.048)   (.073)
AFQT Score                            …           …           …           …          …           …          .137        .142        .180     .142     .146
                                      …           …           …           …          …           …         (.014)      (.016)      (.017)    (.018)   (.023)


HS - Dropout                         .210        .234       .275        .272        .315        .237        .113        .123        .125     .161     .160
College - Dropout                    .489        .640       .728        .799        .858        .700        .277        .417        .432     .573     .570
College - HS                         .279        .405       .452        .527        .543        .463        .164        .294        .307     .412     .411


Adjusted R-squared                   .176        .261       .318        .319        .311        .297        .213        .295        .361     .350     .342
Observations                        1855        1832        1873        1857         913       29452        1803        1782        1812     1800      885
F-test: Prob>F
GED=Dropout                          .041        .014       .025        .013        .017        .000        .765        .879        .783     .554     .733
GED=HS                               .003        .002       .000        .000        .001        .000        .011        .003        .001     .001     .004
See tables 2(a) and 3(a) for sample defintions and controls.
*This is a cohort of persons from the CPS in the years 1998-2003 who were born in the years 1957-1964, the birth years of the NLSY cohort.
                     Table 6(a): NALS-CPS Comparison- OLS Log Weekly Wage Regressions for Males by Race

                                                          CPS                              NALS Excluding Test Score                         NALS Including Test Score

                                       All       Whites       Blacks Hispanics          All       Whites       Blacks Hispanics          All       Whites       Blacks Hispanics
GED no college                        .085         .079         .107       .115        .066        .079         .057        .008        -.022       -.003       -.028        -.079
                                     (.007)       (.007)      (.023)      (.021)      (.043)      (.050)       (.108)      (.138)      (.043)       (.050)      (.110)      (.140)
High School no college                .193         .190         .200       .212        .221        .241         .163        .191        .126         .147        .092        .092
                                     (.004)       (.005)      (.013)      (.013)      (.024)      (.030)       (.046)      (.079)      (.025)       (.031)      (.049)      (.080)
College Graduate                      .577         .571         .616       .619        .658        .664         .688        .639        .441         .443        .514        .407
                                     (.005)       (.005)      (.016)      (.019)      (.026)      (.031)       (.063)      (.091)      (.032)       (.038)      (.076)      (.111)
NALS Score                             …            …           …           …           …            …           …           …          .148         .156        .115        .129
                                       …            …           …           …           …            …           …           …         (.013)       (.016)      (.031)      (.047)


HS - Dropout                          .193         .190         .200       .212        .221        .241         .163        .191        .126         .147        .092        .092
College - Dropout                     .577         .571         .616       .619        .658        .664         .688        .639        .441         .443        .514        .407
College - HS                          .384         .381         .415       .407        .437        .423         .525        .447        .315         .297        .422        .316


Adjusted R-squared                    .316         .301         .261       .303        .389        .352         .354        .316        .407         .371        .371        .337
Observations                        158603       136796       11704        8026        4077        3236         589         245         4077        3236         589          245
F-test: Prob>F
GED=Dropout                           .000         .000         .000       .000        .122        .115         .596        .955        .603         .948        .799        .574
GED=HS                                .000         .000         .000       .000        .000        .000         .314        .182        .000         .001        .264        .215
All dummy variables are defined exclusively. Dropouts are the excluded category. Persons enrolled in school at each age are deleted as are those people who: have weekly wages
less than $100 or more than $4000 (2000 dollars); are not born in the U.S.; are younger than 20 years of age or older than 64; or are Aleut, Eskimo or Native American. Controls for
central city status, married with spouse present, year of survey, region of residence, a quadratic in age and race dummies, where appropriate, are included in each regression but not
shown. Robust standard errors shown.

                   Table 6(b): NALS-CPS Comparison- OLS Log Weekly Wage Regressions for Females by Race

                                                          CPS                              NALS Excluding Test Score                         NALS Including Test Score

                                       All       Whites       Blacks Hispanics          All       Whites       Blacks Hispanics          All       Whites       Blacks Hispanics
GED no college                        .127         .110         .142       .158        .094        .088         .083        .087        .023         .019        .008        .054
                                     (.007)       (.009)      (.020)      (.021)      (.037)      (.047)       (.085)      (.083)      (.037)       (.047)      (.084)      (.086)
High School no college                .241         .234         .235       .266        .229        .215         .252        .233        .158         .149        .179        .192
                                     (.005)       (.006)      (.011)      (.014)      (.023)      (.031)       (.046)      (.067)      (.024)       (.032)      (.046)      (.070)
College Graduate                      .704         .686         .783       .766        .737        .706         .860        .731        .561         .530        .678        .637
                                     (.005)       (.006)      (.013)      (.019)      (.026)      (.033)       (.056)      (.099)      (.032)       (.039)      (.065)      (.119)
NALS Score                             …            …           …           …           …            …           …           …          .145         .154        .135        .064
                                       …            …           …           …           …            …           …           …         (.015)       (.018)      (.029)      (.051)


HS - Dropout                          .241         .234         .235       .266        .229        .215         .252        .233        .158         .149        .179        .192
College - Dropout                     .704         .686         .783       .766        .737        .706         .860        .731        .561         .530        .678        .637
College - HS                          .463         .453         .548       .499        .508        .492         .607        .497        .403         .382        .499        .445


Adjusted R-squared                    .252         .235         .336       .309        .304        .279         .371        .379        .320         .295        .387        .384
Observations                        150841       126097       15272        7577        3952        2950         750         238         3952        2950         750          238
F-test: Prob>F
GED=Dropout                           .000         .000         .000       .000        .011        .059         .330        .295        .528         .671        .927        .533
GED=HS                                .000         .000         .000       .000        .000        .002         .041        .094        .000         .002        .034        .109
See tables 2(a) and 6(a) for sample definitions and regression controls
                       Table 7: NALS-CPS Comparison- OLS Log Weekly Wage Regressions by Cohort of Birth
                                                                NALS Males                                             NALS Females

                                           Males 1940-1956                     Males 1957-1969          Females 1940-1956          Females 1957-1969
                                      CPS        NALS         NALS        CPS      NALS     NALS     CPS      NALS     NALS     CPS      NALS     NALS
GED no college                        .126         .108        .003       .084      .067     .013    .136     .106     .048     .128     .073     -.009
                                     (.013)       (.069)      (.071)      (.011)   (.062)   (.062)   (.013)   (.057)   (.057)   (.012)   (.061)   (.062)
High School no college                .226         .254        .139       .209      .196     .136    .253     .244     .180     .259     .243     .171
                                     (.008)       (.040)      (.043)      (.007)   (.038)   (.038)   (.009)   (.039)   (.041)   (.009)   (.040)   (.040)
College Graduate                      .616         .757        .515       .636      .523     .353    .691     .833     .675     .751     .662     .476
                                     (.009)       (.042)      (.052)      (.008)   (.041)   (.049)   (.010)   (.041)   (.051)   (.009)   (.044)   (.050)
NALS Score                             …            …          .154        …         …       .132     …        …       .121      …        …       .165
                                       …            …         (.020)       …         …      (.023)    …        …       (.024)    …        …       (.025)


HS - Dropout                          .226         .254        .139       .209      .196     .136    .253     .244     .180     .259     .243     .171
College - Dropout                     .616         .757        .515       .636      .523     .353    .691     .833     .675     .751     .662     .476
College - HS                          .390         .503        .376       .427      .327     .217    .438     .589     .495     .491     .419     .305


Adjusted R-squared                    .248         .360        .380       .310      .319     .336    .206     .304     .314     .248     .281     .302
Observations                         51798        1730         1730       61594     1530     1530    53104    1754     1754     55810    1432     1432
F-test: Prob>F
GED=Dropout                           .000         .119        .964       .000      .283     .838    .000     .063     .405     .000     .234     .882
GED=HS                                .000         .019        .030       .000      .022     .027    .000     .007     .009     .000     .002     .001
See tables 2(a) and 6(a) for sample definitions and regression controls
      Table 8: NALS Foreign Years of Schooling Completed Before Entering U.S
                                      Males                    Females
                                    Dropouts        GED          HS       Dropouts        GED           HS
Did not attend school                  .104         .154         .145        .084         .158         .126
Primary (Grades K-3)                   .151         .039         .039        .158         .000         .049
Elementary (Grades 4-8)                .494         .115         .089        .524         .263         .113
Secondary (Grades 9-12)                .223         .577         .648        .197         .474         .635
Vocational Training                    .002         .077         .011        .009         .053         .014
College                                .007         .000         .017        .006         .000         .005
Other                                  .000         .000         .006        .004         .000         .005
NA                                     .019         .039         .045        .018         .053         .054


Observations                            431          26          179          513          38          162


      Table 9: NALS-CPS Comparison- OLS Log Weekly Wage Regressions for the Foreign Born
                          CPS Including    CPS Excluding   NALS Excluding NALS Including
                         Allocated Values Allocated Values    Test Score         Test Score
                         Males Females Males Females Males Females Males Females
GED no college            .186      .157   .134      .090   .109      .086    .012       -.045
                         (.016)    (.018) (.019)    (.020) (.113)    (.112)  (.110)     (.111)
High School no college    .159      .189   .100      .138   .093      .095    -.024      -.049
                         (.006)    (.007) (.007)    (.008) (.057)    (.067)  (.058)     (.070)
College Graduate          .603      .641   .574      .591   .614      .659     .319       .397
                         (.009)    (.009) (.011)    (.012) (.064)    (.071)  (.076)     (.084)
NALS Score                 …         …      …         …      …         …      .155       .153
                           …         …      …         …      …         …     (.024)     (.029)

HS - Dropout                           .159         .189         .100        .138         .093         .095        -.024        -.049
College - Dropout                      .603         .641         .574        .591         .614         .659         .319         .397
College - HS                           .445         .452         .474        .453         .521         .564         .343         .446

Adjusted R-squared                     .337         .309         .376        .325         .508         .350         .540        .391
Observations                          46912        33996        31498       22747          629          429          629         429
F-test: Prob>F
GED=Dropout                            .000         .000         .000        .000         .333         .446         .914        .685
GED=HS                                 .084         .086         .063        .027         .885         .935         .751        .973
In addition to the regression controls listed in Table 6(a), all regressions include additional controls for cohort of entry, world region
of birth, and whether or not the person is a citizen of the U.S.
Table 10: NALS-CPS Comparison- Native vs. Foreign Born
                                           NALS Excluding                             NALS Including
                              CPS
                                              Test Score                                  Test Score
                        Males Females Males Females                                   Males Females
Native Dropouts          .151     .103      .108      .070                             -.055      -.104
                        (.007)   (.008)    (.043)    (.050)                           (.043)     (.052)
Foreign GED              .215     .192      .231      .148                             .069       -.010
                        (.020)   (.020)    (.118)    (.122)                           (.116)     (.121)
Native GED               .235     .229      .171      .170                             -.089      -.080
                        (.008)   (.009)    (.051)    (.057)                           (.054)     (.061)
Foreign High School      .152     .217      .209      .187                              .061       .004
                        (.007)   (.008)    (.057)    (.067)                           (.056)     (.068)
Native High School       .344     .341      .323      .301                              .059       .051
                        (.006)   (.007)    (.041)    (.048)                           (.045)     (.052)
Foreign College Grad     .609     .679      .723      .729                              .393       .425
                        (.012)   (.013)    (.056)    (.067)                           (.060)     (.071)
Native College Grad      .730     .803      .766      .812                              .367       .451
                        (.007)   (.007)    (.042)    (.049)                           (.050)     (.058)
NALS Score                …        …         …         …                               .161        .154
                          …        …         …         …                              (.011)     (.013)

Adjusted R-squared                   .351        .262         .406        .306         .430        .326
Observations                        183759      167142        4735        4412         4735        4412
F-test: Prob>F
N. Dropout=F. Dropout                 .000        .000        .011         .165        .209        .045
N. GED=F. GED                         .316        .062        .612         .859        .154        .566
N. HS =F. HS                          .000        .000        .026         .049        .967        .410
F. GED=N. Dropout                     .000        .000        .290         .514        .205        .428
F. GED=N. HS                          .000        .000        .428         .199        .672        .599
N. GED=F. Dropout                     .000        .000        .001         .003        .098        .187
N. GED=N. Dropout                     .000        .000        .115         .015        .382        .560
Regression controls are as listed in Table 6(a). Foreign dropouts are the excluded category. Allocated
earners are excluded.
                                                               Figure 1:
                        GED Credentials Issued as a Percentage of Public and Private High School Graduates, USA
                                                               1960-2001
          25.0




          20.0




          15.0
Percent




          10.0




           5.0




           0.0
                 1960   1962     1964      1966     1968     1970     1972     1974      1976     1978     1980 1982          1984     1986     1988     1990     1992      1994     1996     1998   2000
                                                                                                             Year
            Note:
            Source: (1) The Department of Education National Center for Education Statistics Digest of Educational Statistics, 2001, and (2) American Council on Education, General Educational
                       Development Testing Service Statistical Report 1989 and 2002
                                                                                 Figure 2:
                                                CPS Monthly Outgoing Rotation Groups Percentage of Allocated Earners, 1979-2003

                                  .40



                                  .35



                                  .30
Percentage of Allocated Earners




                                  .25



                                  .20



                                  .15



                                  .10                                                           Note. - Calculations based on CPS Monthly Outgoing Rotation Groups from 1979-2003. The sample
                                                                                                is restricted to individuals between the ages of 16 and 65 who are members of the civilian labor force,
                                                                                                and are earnings eligible. Allocation flags are unavailable from 1994 to August of 1995. Allocations
                                                                                                from 1989 to 1993 are determined from those who have missing values for unedited weekly earnings
                                  .05
                                                                                                since Census provided allocation flags are unreliable.


                                  .00
                                        1979

                                               1980

                                                      1981

                                                             1982

                                                                    1983

                                                                           1984

                                                                                  1985

                                                                                         1986

                                                                                                  1987

                                                                                                         1988

                                                                                                                1989

                                                                                                                       1990

                                                                                                                                1991

                                                                                                                                       1992

                                                                                                                                              1993

                                                                                                                                                     1995

                                                                                                                                                            1996

                                                                                                                                                                   1997

                                                                                                                                                                          1998

                                                                                                                                                                                 1999

                                                                                                                                                                                        2000

                                                                                                                                                                                               2001

                                                                                                                                                                                                      2002

                                                                                                                                                                                                             2003
                                                                                                                         Year
                                                         Figure 3
                                      Density of NLSY AFQT Scores by Race and Gender
                        White Males                                        Black Males                                  Hispanic Males
          .8
          .6
          .4
          .2
          0
Density




                      White Females                                      Black Females                                 Hispanic Females
          .8
          .6
          .4
          .2
          0




               −4                 0                   4     −4                    0                   4     −4                   0                    4
                                                                           Score
                                                 Dropouts                                GED                              HS
  Dropouts, GED holders and high school graduates without post−secondary education. AFQT is a subset of 4 out of 10 ASVAB tests used by the military for
  enlistment screening and job assignment. It is the summed score from the word knowledge, paragraph comprehension, mathematics knowledge, and arithmetic
  reasoning ASVAB tests.
                                                                              Figure 4:
                                             Average Years of Secondary Schooling for Dropouts and GEDs By Year of Birth
                      11

                     10.5

                      10

                      9.5

                       9
Years of Schooling




                      8.5

                       8

                      7.5

                       7

                      6.5

                       6

                      5.5

                       5
                       1919 1921 1923 1925 1927 1929 1931 1933 1935 1937 1939 1941 1943 1945 1947 1949 1951 1953 1955 1957 1959 1961 1963 1965 1967 1969 1971 1973 1975
                                                                                                                   Year of Birth
                                                                                  All Dropouts                       White Dropouts       Black Dropouts
                                                                                  Hispanic Dropouts                  GEDs

                            Note: The year-of-birth of GED recipients is imputed as the year that they obtained the GED minus 25 years.
                            Source: CPS March Data, 1968-2000; GED Statistical Report (various years)
                                                          Figure 5
                                   Density of NALS Test Scores by Race for the Native Born
                         White Males                                          Black Males                                     Hispanic Males
          1
          .5
          0
Density




                       White Females                                         Black Females                                  Hispanic Females
          1
          .5
          0




               −4                  0                     4     −4                     0                    4     −4                     0      4
                                                                               Score
                                                   Dropouts                                   GED                               HS
  Education categories are dropouts, High School Graduates and GED holders without post−secondary schooling.
  Test scores are the average over the Prose, Document, and Quantitative examinations administered to all NALS respondents.
  This is a measure of basic literacy and computational skills. They have been standardized to mean zero and variance one in the population.
                                                       Figure 6
                            Density of NALS Test Scores by Birth Cohort for the Native Born
               Males 1930−1939                         Males 1940−1949                       Males 1950−1959                       Males 1960−1969
          .8
          .6
          .4
          .2
          0
Density




               Females 1930−1939                      Females 1940−1949                    Females 1950−1959                     Females 1960−1969
          .8
          .6
          .4
          .2
          0




               −4            0              4     −4               0              4     −4              0              4      −4               0     4
                                                                               Score
                                                   Dropouts                                   GED                               HS
  Education categories are dropouts, High School Graduates and GED holders without post−secondary schooling.
  Test scores are the average over the Prose, Document, and Quantitative examinations administered to all NALS respondents.
  This is a measure of basic literacy and computational skills. They have been standardized to mean zero and variance one in the population.
                                                    Figure 7
                    Density of NALS Test Scores for the Foreign and Native Born by Education
                                          Males                                                                       Females
          .8
          .6
Density
          .4
          .2
          0




               −4                               0                                 4     −4                                 0                         4
                                                                               Score
                           Foreign Dropouts                                           Foreign GED                                       Foreign HS
                           Native Dropouts                                            Native GED                                        Native HS
  Education categories are dropouts, High School Graduates and GED holders without post−secondary schooling.
  Test scores are the average over the Prose, Document, and Quantitative examinations administered to all NALS respondents.
  This is a measure of basic literacy and computational skills. They have been standardized to mean zero and variance one in the population.
