NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SURPLUS APPROPRIATION FROM R&D AND HEALTH
CARE TECHNOLOGY ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES
Tomas J. Philipson
Anupam B. Jena
Working Paper 12016
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12016
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2006

Corresponding author: t-philipson@uchicago.edu. We are thankful for comments from seminar participants
at The University of Chicago, Princeton, Berkeley, SUNY Buffalo, the Kiel Institute Conference on New
Technology and National Health Systems, and the NIH-Director conference Biomedical Innovation and the
Economy. Philipson is thankful for financial support from The Milken Institute, Santa Monica, CA. Jena
received fellowship support from the NIH through the University of Chicago Medical Scientist Training
Program. We thank Gary Becker, Angus Deaton, Isaach Ehrlich, and Casey Mulligan for comments, Lisa Lee
and Michael Campsmith (CDC) for providing data, and Jennifer Kates (Kaiser Family Foundation) and
Ruigang Song (CDC) for helpful advice. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Tomas J. Philipson and Anupam B. Jena. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Surplus Appropriation from R&D and Health Care Technology Assessment Procedures
Tomas J. Philipson and Anupam B. Jena
NBER Working Paper No. 12016
January 2006
JEL No. I1
ABSTRACT
Given the rapid growth in health care spending that is often attributed to technological change, many
private and public institutions are grappling with how to best assess and adopt new health care
technologies. The leading technology adoption criteria proposed in theory and used in practice
involve so called "cost-effectiveness" measures. However, little is known about the dynamic
efficiency implications of such criteria, in particular how they influence the R&D investments that
make technologies available in the first place. We argue that such criteria implicitly concern
maximizing consumer surplus, which many times is consistent with maximizing static efficiency
after an innovation has been developed. Dynamic efficiency, however, concerns aligning the social
costs and benefits of R&D and is therefore determined by how much of the social surplus from the
new technology is appropriated as producer surplus. We analyze the relationship between costeffectiveness measures and the degree of surplus appropriation by innovators driving dynamic
efficiency. We illustrate how to estimate the two for the new HIV/AIDS therapies that entered the
market after the late 1980's and find that only 5% of the social surplus is appropriated by innovators.
We show how this finding can be generalized to other existing cost-effectiveness estimates by
deriving how those estimates identify innovator appropriation for a set of studies of over 200 drugs.
We find that these studies implicitly support a low degree of appropriation as well. Despite the high
annual cost of drugs to patients, very low shares of social surplus may go to innovators, which may
imply that cost-effectiveness is too high in a dynamic efficiency sense.
Thomas J. Philipson
Graduate School of Public Policy Studies
The University of Chicago
1155 E 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
t-philipson@uchicago.edu

Anupam B. Jena
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
ajena@uchicago.edu

I. Introduction
Technological change is often argued to be a central force behind the growth in health care
spending.2 Given this rapid growth, criteria used by private and public institutions to value the
increase in health care spending therefore requires a methodology to measure the value of new
health care technologies brought about by R&D investments. There is a long-standing and vast
health economics literature that attempts to assess the value of new technologies by use of so
called cost-effectiveness, cost-utility, or cost-benefit analysis, hereafter referred to collectively as
CE analysis.3 This type of CE analysis has been the major method proposed to evaluate new
inventions and has been argued to be central in managing new technologies, their adoptions, and
their impact on long term health care spending.
Although not explicitly stated as such, we argue that CE criteria are implicitly concerned
with estimating the observed market level of consumer surplus associated with a given
technology. In particular, many technology assessments attempt to quantify the health impacts of
new technologies for patients or health plans by comparing patient benefits with spending at
observed market prices. Examples include cost-effectiveness using spending per quality- or
disability adjusted life years, as is common by public buyers outside the US, or cost-benefit
analysis monetizing mortality reductions through value-of-life estimates, as is common in studies
assessing the gains of increased health care spending. The central theme of such standard CE
assessments performed in practice seems to be to measure consumer surplus or net consumer
benefits. As is the norm in CE practice, technologies are deemed more valuable the larger is the
patient- or health plan benefits above what is spent on them.
However, when new technologies are brought to life from costly R&D, consumer surplus
is a very poor guide to inducing optimal (second-best) R&D investments. Rather, the degree to
which producer surplus captures social surplus, often at the expense of consumer surplus,
becomes the central issue that determines dynamic efficiency. This, of course, is the rationale for
the patent system, which substitutes producer surplus for consumer surplus in order to stimulate
more efficient R&D investment. Therefore, we argue that for the same reason that patents are
preferred even though they lower consumer surplus after technologies are discovered, technology
adoption criteria are preferred that do not only focus on consumer surplus. Put differently, even
though measured levels of CE would be higher without the patent system, since patients or health
plans would spend less to get the same technology, dynamic efficiency would clearly be lowered.
An illustrative case of the dangers of CE criteria may be vaccines, which many times have been
estimated to be extremely cost-effective but for that and other reasons lack any appreciable R&D
investments.4
As consumer surplus or cost-effectiveness determines static efficiency and innovator
appropriation determines dynamic efficiency, we analyze the relationship between the two. In the
case of monopoly R&D, we arrive at the stark implication that many times both dynamic
efficiency and patient health are maximized when CE is minimized. We show how this
implication is altered under public R&D subsidies (such as those by the National Institutes of
Health (NIH) in the US) and competition in R&D (leading to patent racing that may duplicate
R&D efforts).
2

See e.g. Newhouse (1992).
The literature is vast, but for examples, see Weinstein and Stason (1977), Johanneson and Weinstein
(1993), Gold et al. (1996), Meltzer (1997), Drummond et al. (1997), Garber and Phelps (1997), Garber
(2000), Cutler and McClellan (2001), and Cutler (2005).
4
A major concern here has, of course, been product liability issues. See e.g. Manning (1993).
3

2

As the ability of innovators to appropriate the surplus of their innovations is central to
dynamic efficiency, we estimate the degree of appropriation in an illustrative manner for a major
breakthrough in medicine—the new drugs to treat HIV/AIDS that entered the market from the
late 1980’s onwards.5 Our major finding is that innovators captured only 5% of the nearly $1.4
trillion worth of social surplus arising from these new technologies.6 Thus, despite the high
prices of many therapies such as the new HIV drugs, the low degree of appropriation raises
concerns about whether cost-effectiveness is too high in that it induces dynamic inefficiency.
We generalize this finding by deriving why and how the CE results of over 200 studies
on drugs can be implicitly viewed as identifying the degree of innovator appropriation. We derive
conditions under which the measured level of CE of a technology may be used to identify the
share of social surplus appropriated by producers of that technology; the CE of a given
technology reveals information about the cost or demand parameters. When such identification is
feasible, the existing and vast CE literature informs us about the degree of innovator
appropriation. We find that 25% of the interventions considered have estimated levels of
appropriations of less than 7%, while 75% have appropriations less than 25%. Our illustrative
finding for HIV/AIDS drugs suggests their appropriation of social surplus is at the twentieth
percentile of the 200 technologies considered. As complementary evidence, we show that these
estimated levels of innovator appropriation are also consistent with alternative methods of
calculating appropriation based on price reductions after patent expiration and the identifying
assumption of profit-maximization.
The paper may be briefly outlined as follows. Section 2 discusses the relationship
between CE measures and dynamic efficiency. Section 3 presents estimates of the share of social
surplus appropriated by producers of the new HIV/AIDS drugs. Section 4 generalizes these
findings to traditional CE measures reported in the literature. Lastly, section 5 concludes.
II. Technology Assessment and Dynamic versus Static Efficiency
In order to discuss how CE analysis relates to static and dynamic efficiency, for a given output
level q denote the ex-post social surplus of a new technology by w(q). This social surplus can be
divided into a consumer surplus, z(q), and producer surplus (variable profits), π(q), as in:
w(q) = z(q)+ π(q)

(1)

For example, a commonly analyzed case is when price-discrimination is infeasible, in which case
a given output level q induces both profits and consumer surplus according to:

5

This finding builds on and extends work of Philipson and Jena (2005) who argue that HIV/AIDS is an
important case to consider in and of itself, partly because it is perhaps the major disease targeted by public
sector R&D in the US. Public R&D on HIV/AIDS was roughly $2 billion in 2000. Health, in general, is
among the three leading industries into which the government allocates its R&D, the other two being
defense and aero-space. The National Institutes of Health (NIH) is responsible for allocating the vast
majority of the public R&D dollar—in 1999, NIH funding accounted for nearly 81% of public spending on
health R&D. Of the $13.9 billion that the NIH spent on research in that year, nearly $1.8 billion (13%) was
spent on HIV/AIDS (Health, United States, 2002).
6
Our findings relate to an existing literature on the general inability of innovators to capture the social
value of their inventions, see e.g., Mansfield et al. (1977), Mansfield (1985), Levin et al. (1987), Hall
(1996), and Nordhaus (2004).

3

π ( q ) = p ( q ) ⋅ q − c (q )

(2)

q

z (q ) = [ p( y ) − p(q)]dy = g (q) − p(q)q

(3)

0

where p(q) is the inverse demand function, c(q) is the variable cost function which excludes the
fixed cost of R&D, and g(q) is the gross consumer benefit. In the discussion that follows, we
refer to the observed surplus as the surplus which results at the market quantity q. The potential
surplus obtains at the quantity that maximizes w(q)—in the absence of ex-post market
imperfections, this is true at the competitive output.
A. Cost-Effectiveness Criteria
In this standard framework, we argue that typical CE technology evaluation has implicitly
centered on consumer surplus, by focusing on how much patients benefit beyond what is spent on
the technology after it has been developed. Despite the many forms of such criteria developed to
date, their basic goal seems to be to determine whether increased health care spending on new
technologies is justified by “societal”, “health plan”, or “patient” benefits in terms of improved
health. Absent from the discussion has been the effect of such criteria on the behavior of
innovators who make the technologies available in the first place. Although static efficiency is
often enhanced with increases in CE, as it implicitly concerns consumer surplus, these criteria are
less understood in terms of how they relate to dynamic efficiency when the observed level of CE
is the result of rational behavior by market participants.
Common measures of CE ratios relate the (here monetized) patient benefits to observed
spending levels. In the traditional framework, this can be expressed by:

zR =

g
z
= 1+
p⋅q
pq

(4)

This measure (zR) expresses consumer benefits as a ratio to spending, similar to the standard
consumer surplus measure (z) that expresses it as a difference between the two. Ratios are often
estimated through spending per quality- or disability-adjusted life years or through monetized
versions of health benefits, in which the value of life is compared to observed spending levels.
These attempts, however, are implicitly related to the size of consumer surplus, since they
compare consumer benefits to observed spending levels.7 In particular, static technology
assessments in health care commonly rely upon the use of “cost-benefit”, “cost-utility”, or “costeffectiveness” criteria to determine under what circumstances the value (whose units depend on
the measure) of a given technology exceeds what is spent on it. Although it is true that CE

7

The implicit consumer surplus estimation of CE analysis differs from traditional economic analysis—the
latter typically attempts to assess consumer surplus by estimation of demand schedules, by observing
changes in demand during supply-induced price changes. Importantly, the demand curve for a good
summarizes the value to consumers of both its observed and unobserved attributes. On the contrary,
estimates of consumer surplus based on cost-effectiveness or cost-benefit analysis are typically formed
indirectly by monetizing observable consumer benefits, e.g. by use of value of life estimates to estimate the
gross consumer benefit from mortality reductions.

4

analysis concerns the ratio of gross benefit and spending, while consumer surplus concerns their
difference, both change in the same direction with unilateral changes in costs and benefits.
Regarding the estimated CE magnitudes, many empirical studies estimate and document
zR ratios above unity for employed technologies (see e.g. references in Introduction). Yet, it
would be extremely surprising if correctly measured zR ratios were found to be below unity, at
least in a standard market economy. As an illustration, consider a private market for health care
without public or private insurance, as might exist for certain elective surgeries in the US, such as
e.g. plastic surgery. A new plastic surgery technology would have a zR ratio above unity (if
estimated correctly) if individuals bought the product only when their valuation of it exceeded the
price. This, of course, would always be predicted under standard demand analysis. Although this
expected and basic outcome has to be qualified by the presence of private or public insurance, it
is supported by a large existing and growing empirical health economics literature on the costeffectiveness of recent innovations.8
More importantly, the fact that a technology is cost-effective in this way only reveals that
there is a positive consumer surplus. However, a positive consumer surplus is consistent with any
output level, regardless of how high or low it is. Consequently, being cost-effective in this sense
bears no relationship to either static or dynamic efficiency! Even if output is not at the
competitive or monopoly level, consumer surplus is still positive and hence the technology
deemed cost-effective. The problem is that being cost-effective is only necessary but not
sufficient for static or dynamic efficiency.
B. Cost-Effectiveness and Dynamic Efficiency
To consider the dynamic efficiency induced by common health care assessment criteria, one must
consider how such criteria affect efficiency in the presence of technological change driven by
endogenous R&D. Let technological change be characterized by x(r), an increasing,
differentiable, and strictly concave function representing the probability of discovery for a given
level of R&D undertaken, r. The optimal level of R&D that maximizes expected payoffs for any
hypothetical ex-post prize, k, is denoted r(k) and is defined by:

r (k ) = arg max[x(r )k − r ]

(5)

r

Our assumptions about x(r) imply that r(k) is an increasing function so that R&D rises with the
ex-post reward.
Monopoly R&D Investments
First consider the case of a single monopolist investing in R&D who receives a share, a, of the
social surplus w, where 0 a 1. Then, r(a·w) represents the R&D undertaken when those
investing in R&D maximize expected profits. If profits drive R&D investments, the expected
social surplus is:

E (a, w) = x[r (a ⋅ w)] ⋅ w − r (a ⋅ w)

(6)

where w = z + π is the social surplus ex-post. This expression directly highlights the well-known
implication that dynamic efficiency only occurs when those undertaking the costs of R&D have
8

See, for example, Cutler (2004).

5

incentives that are properly aligned with society, which is true when social surplus is entirely
appropriated as profits, i.e. a = 1 (see e.g. Arrow (1961) and Tirole (1988)). In other words, the
key factor driving dynamic inefficiency is that profits (π) are less than social surplus (w). More
importantly, the size of the consumer surplus, focused on by CE criteria, is what drives a wedge
between profits and social surplus and hence leads to under-investment in R&D. Indeed, in this
setting, the dynamically efficient R&D investment is r(w), which is obtained when the entire
social surplus is appropriated as profits.
More generally, for any technology and preferences, the observed profits associated with
a given level of social surplus can be written a·w. The main issue, then, is that a < 1. For
example, when production is characterized by constant returns to scale, it can be shown that
monopolists facing either linear or constant-elasticity demand earn profits that are proportional to
the potential social surplus. Specifically, a = 1/2 in the case of linear demand and a = [( -1)/ )]
under constant elasticity of demand.9,10 In general, if the total social surplus associated with a
technology is w, the size of the under-investment in R&D is r(w)-r(π) = r(w)-r(w-z), which, since
r(.) is an increasing function, rises with the consumer surplus focused on by CE criteria. The fact
that dynamic efficiency is driven by the appropriation of social surplus to innovators implies that
substituting producer surplus for consumer surplus often raises dynamic welfare. This is
analogous to the argument that patents hurt static efficiency but raise dynamic efficiency by
engaging in similar substitution.
The important implication of this is that the CE associated with the ex-post market for a
technology is not clearly and monotonically related to measures of static or dynamic efficiency.
Indeed, in a private market with perfect price discrimination, dynamically efficient R&D occurs
because the innovator captures the entire social surplus. Therefore, the dynamically optimal
allocation of surpluses implies that the consumer surplus should be minimized, as opposed to
maximized under a CE criteria, to enhance dynamic efficiency. In this case, dynamic efficiency
dictates that a technology should just break even ex-post (i.e., zR = 1) and that empirical studies
citing more cost-effective technologies are, in fact, documenting a dynamic inefficiency! Indeed,
as discussed, the underinvestment in R&D from its socially optimal level, r(w) - r(w-z), rises with
how “cost-effective” a technology is assessed to be according to traditional CE analysis. In this
case, the dynamically efficient minimization of CE is a direct implication of the classic problem
of non-appropriation by innovators leading to under-investment in R&D. Importantly, note that
minimization of CE in this context still maximizes patient health (as full demand for the health
care product obtains) though not consumer surplus.
Competitive R&D Investments and Appropriation
There are important instances in which full appropriation of social surplus by producers may not
be dynamically optimal, a primary one being competitive R&D through so-called patent racing.
Since competitive R&D leads to an equilibrium level of R&D that is determined by the average
(rather than marginal) profit associated with entry, non-appropriation may enhance efficiency by
taxing the over-provision of R&D. This may be particularly relevant to the debate over excessive
9

The social surplus implicit in these results is the potential social surplus available to innovators, i.e. the
social surplus that obtains when price is set at its competitive level. This differs from the observed social
surplus available to the monopolist, which obtains when price and quantity are determined by the
monopolist.
10
Interestingly, profits may even exceed the private social surplus (i.e. the gross benefit to consumers net
of costs of production) when there are external effects in consumption. See, for e.g., Philipson, Mechoulan,
and Jena (2006) who discuss R&D under altruism in health care.

6

R&D into so-called “me-too” drugs in the pharmaceutical area. If the total fraction of surplus
appropriated by successful R&D efforts is a, where 0 a 1, the equilibrium level of R&D r is
determined by the zero-profit condition:

x[r ] ⋅ aw = r

(7)

where x(.) is the probability of discovery given the total investment in R&D by all firms, r. Given
this particular form of the R&D process, it is straightforward to show that the optimal level of
appropriation is characterized by11:

a=

x'
[r (a ⋅ w)] ⋅ r (a ⋅ w)
x[r (a ⋅ w)]

(8)

At the optimum, surplus appropriation equals the elasticity of R&D productivity (i.e. the
percentage increase in the probability of discovery given a 1 percent increase in the level of
R&D). Our assumptions on x(.), namely concavity and zero probability of success in the absence
of R&D, imply that the optimal surplus appropriation is less than one—the extent to which this
occurs depends on the nature of R&D productivity, x(.).12
If such patent races lead R&D to be over-provided, our conclusions emphasizing underprovision of R&D under monopoly R&D may be altered. However, there appears to be an almost
universal policy towards subsidizing (as opposed to taxing) R&D, such that most nations have
decided that the forces operating towards over-provision are dominated by those operating
towards under-provision. In light of this, although incentives favoring over-provision may
change the quantitative conclusions of our analysis, the qualitative conclusion that CE criteria
limit already under-provided R&D seems generally applicable to most research areas and
countries.
Public R&D Subsidies and Appropriation
Another important case in which non-full appropriation may be optimal is when publicly funded
R&D comprises a significant portion of total R&D, as is common in US health care through NIH.
Since the dynamically optimal level of total R&D is still r = r(w), the presence of publicly funded
R&D implies that the optimal private R&D (and hence, appropriation) should be lowered
accordingly. More precisely, consider the expected social surplus in the presence of publicly
funded R&D, s, and surplus appropriation, a, where 0 a 1:

E ( s, a, w) = x[ s + r (a ⋅ w)] ⋅ w − s − r (a ⋅ w)

11

(9)

This follows from the zero-profit condition and the FOC for the expected welfare, x’[r(aw)]w = 1.
An interesting case to consider is when R&D productivity is characterized by x(r) = 1 – pr, where 0 p 1.
In this case, one can show that the optimal level of R&D is r* = ln[-1/(w ln(p))]/ln(p) and the optimal
appropriation is a* = -[r* (pr*) (ln(p))]/(1-pr*). For an ex-post surplus of $1 trillion (which we argue is
roughly the case for HIV/AIDS), the optimal appropriation may be as low as 5% (when R&D is very
productive and the optimal R&D is $40 billion) or perhaps as high as 80% (when the optimal R&D is $270
billion). The extent to which appropriation deviates from one depends on the productivity of R&D, as a
lower p implies more productive R&D.
12

7

The probability of discovery is determined by the sum of public and private R&D, the latter being
driven by the appropriation of ex-post surplus by producers. For a given level of subsidization the
optimal appropriation satisfies:

w ⋅ x'
[ s + r (a ⋅ w)] = 1

(10)

which implies s + r(a w) = r(w). Applying the implicit function theorem, this implies that an
increase in the subsidy affects the optimal degree of appropriation according to:

da
−1
=
<0
ds w ⋅ r '(a ⋅ w)

(11)

Hence, appropriation falls with subsidization. In particular, appropriation is unity in the absence
of subsidization and less than unity under a positive subsidy. Put differently, since the marginal
product of private R&D is decreasing in the level of subsidized R&D, private R&D (and hence
appropriation) optimally falls as its public counterpart increases.
III. Surplus Appropriation for the New HIV/AIDS Drugs
The previous discussion highlighted the importance of surplus appropriation by innovators (and
hence low levels of CE) to dynamic efficiency, even if that level of appropriation was not full.
As the ability of innovators to appropriate the potential surplus of their innovations is central to
dynamic efficiency, we illustrate the degree of appropriation for the new drugs to treat HIV/AIDS
that entered the market from the late 1980s onwards. This analysis will then be used to illustrate
how more generally levels of innovator appropriation may be inferred from existing CE estimates
in the literature.
A. Estimates of Gross Consumer Benefits
The value of life induced by new drug therapies is the value of increased survival for all
individuals who choose treatment, relative to a benchmark in which no (or worse) therapies exist.
In a related work, we develop a methodology to value the increases in survival attributable to the
now standard treatments for HIV/AIDS. The thought experiment behind the analysis is the
following. For a hypothetical individual infected in a given year t, we examine how that
individual’s survival under treatment (St) compares to a counterfactual, baseline survival in which
no drugs are available (So).13 We then attach a monetary value to that increased survival and sum
across all infected individuals in that cohort. This process is repeated for each set of cases, cohort
by cohort, since the start of the epidemic and aggregated up.
This approach delivers the potential aggregate value of life induced by treatment, i.e. the
value of life obtained when all infected individuals receive treatment. This implicitly assumes
that at the competitive output, all individuals infected with HIV (i.e. the full incidence) consume
drug therapy. At the competitive output, the ex-post social surplus arising from a technology is
highest and therefore represents the potential surplus available for appropriation. This differs
13

The ideal counterfactual survival in the absence of treatment (So) is the cross-sectional survival of
individuals infected at the start of the epidemic, here taken to be 1980. St is the longitudinal (i.e., lifetime)
survival of individuals infected in year t. The use of longitudinal survival captures the benefit to
individuals infected with HIV prior to 1987 (when drug therapy first became available) who survive until
then and consequently face improved life-expectancy due to treatment.

8

from the observed gross value of life induced by treatment, which depends on the number of
individuals who actually receive treatment.
The aggregate potential gross consumer benefit, g, induced by the new drug consumption
is calculated by multiplying the size (or incidence) of cohort t, nt, by the monetary value of
increased survival and summing over all calendar years. Moreover, the aggregate observed
consumer benefit can be calculated by replacing nt with the number of individuals in that cohort
who actually receive treatment. Formally, the aggregate potential gross consumer benefit is
written as:

g=

2000

β t −1980 n t ⋅ g t

(12)

t =1980

where gt = g(So, St), or the monetary value of increasing survival from the baseline survival So to
the higher future survival faced by cohort t, St. The gain in survival, gt, is calculated using the
infra-marginal valuation formula of Becker et al. (2005).14
To empirically implement the calculation of aggregate potential consumer benefits, we
apply these formulas to published levels of HIV incidence and estimated changes in survival
induced by HIV/AIDS drugs (see Philipson and Jena (2005) for a detailed discussion of the
various data sources and methods used to estimate improvements in survival).15 We estimate that
the average individual infected with HIV experienced an increase in life-expectancy of roughly
15 years since the start of the epidemic, from 19 to 34 years.16 These improvements in survival
are due to increases in both the time to onset of AIDS (after being infected with HIV) and the
period of time alive after a diagnosis of AIDS.
As described earlier, the potential value of improved survival for a given cohort is
computed by multiplying that cohort’s incidence of HIV by the value of increased survival
experienced by a single individual receiving treatment in that cohort. Table 1 presents this value
for several cohorts.

14

The value of an infra-marginal change in survival from So to St under a yearly income yt is determined by
V[yt + et, So] = V[yt, St], where V is the indirect lifetime utility function and et is the yearly compensation
required to make the hypothetical individual indifferent between the two survival frontiers. The lifetime
value for the gain in survival (gt) is calculated by summing the yearly compensation (et) over time,
discounting by the rate of interest and the new survival probability.
15
Importantly, our estimated survival curves are weighted averages across individuals receiving and not
receiving treatment. Thus, for each cohort, the reported survival is lower than survival among only those
receiving treatment, St. We assume our reported curves to be empirical analogs for St and therefore
underestimate the aggregate observed and potential benefits of treatments introduced to date.
16
These figures are consistent with those in the literature (see e.g. Lichtenberg, 2005). To further examine
the robustness of these estimates, we predict the number of individuals alive with HIV/AIDS in 2003,
based on the annual reported incidence of HIV and our estimated survival curves. We then compare this to
the reported number of individuals living with HIV/AIDS in 2003. The predicted and reported figures
differ by only 12,000 people (out of nearly 1 million alive with HIV/AIDS).

9

Table 1: Value of Gains in Survival for HIV Infected Individuals
Value of Survival Gains ($)
Year of HIV
Individual
Aggregate
HIV
Incidence
($)
($ Billion)
Infection
1980
20,000
17,655
0.35
1985
160,000
146,874
23.50
1990
40,000
322,311
12.89
1995
40,000
613,839
24.55
2000
40,000
740,515
29.62
Total Discounted Value
398
All figures are discounted to 1980 and are in year 2000 dollars.
The total discounted value includes all years from 1980 to
2000.
These results demonstrate that the aggregate potential value of improved survival experienced by
all individuals infected with HIV to date has been nearly $400 billion. This, of course, ignores
the value of increasing survival for all individuals who have not contracted HIV yet. To add this
component, we forecast the value to future cohorts of HIV infected individuals by assuming that
all cohorts experience the same aggregate gain in survival gt as the last cohort, 2000. Assuming
that the future incidence of HIV is equivalent to the last period, we calculate the discounted sum
of future gains for individuals infected with HIV in the future. We then add this amount to the
value to date shown above, namely $398 billion. This leads to an aggregate potential value of
increased survival for all past and future cohorts of nearly $1.4 trillion.
The aggregate observed value of improved survival can be calculated from data on the
annual number of individuals in a given cohort who later receive HIV/AIDS drug therapy.
Specifically, if St characterizes the survival of someone infected with HIV in year t who receives
treatment, the aggregate observed consumer benefit for that cohort equals the number of
individuals in that cohort who receive treatment multiplied by the value of increased survival,
g(So, St). We use published data from the HIV Cost and Services Utilization Study (HCSUS) to
approximate the number of individuals in a given cohort receiving treatment. According to the
study, between 60 and 85 percent of HIV infected individuals report some form of anti-retroviral
therapy (Shapiro, et al., 1999).17 Assuming a mid-range estimate of 70%, this implies an
incidence of anti-retroviral consumers equal to 70% of HIV incidence and a corresponding
aggregate observed benefit to all past and future cohorts of $980 billion (i.e., $1.4 trillion*0.7).
B. Producer Surplus
The overall producer surplus obtained from R&D is determined by the present value of producer
surplus to firms producing HIV/AIDS drugs. We apply existing estimates of markups for brandname drugs (as estimated from patent expirations) to approximate variable costs as 15% of sales.
Using estimates of national spending on HIV/AIDS drugs obtained from IMS Health and reported
17

One could use annual data on aggregate sales and market prices to estimate the number of individuals
receiving treatment. However, since the annual market quantity is composed of users from all infected
cohorts, additional assumptions must be made to infer the share of individuals in a given infection-cohort
who ultimately receive drug therapy.

10

by Lichtenberg (2005), this implies lifetime sales of HIV/AIDS drugs of roughly $74 billion with
corresponding profits (variable costs) of $63 billion ($11 billion). These estimates assume future
sales are equivalent to year 2000’s patent-protected sales. If the current level of output is 70% of
the competitive level, the variable cost of production is $16 billion when all infected individuals
are treated.
Using the above figures, we can decompose the total lifetime value of HIV/AIDS drugs
into consumer surplus, producer surplus (profits), and production costs. Recall that we estimated
the total potential value, g, to be nearly $1.4 trillion, discounted to 1980 and in year 2000 dollars.
This is the value that accrues when all infected individuals receive treatment and implies a
potential social surplus of nearly $1.38 trillion ($1.4 trillion - $16 billion). With lifetime profits
of $62.9 billion, producers appropriate only 5% of the potential social surplus available from their
inventions18. We can make similar calculations regarding the share of observed surplus captured
by producers. Recall that the observed surplus is driven by the observed market quantity rather
than the competitive quantity which results if all infected individuals receive treatment. With
observed gross benefits of $980 billion, profits of $62.9 billion, and variable costs of $11.1
billion, consumers capture 7% of the social surplus available at the observed market quantities
(consumer surplus = $906 billion, social surplus = $969 billion).19
IV. Extending the Analysis to Traditional Cost-Effectiveness Studies
Given the low estimated share of social surplus appropriated by producers of HIV/AIDS drugs,
this raises the question of whether producers of similarly CE technologies appropriate comparable
amounts of social surplus. And if so, can these results be generalized to obtain appropriation
estimates that vary with a technology’s observed level of cost-effectiveness? We begin this
section by discussing conditions under which the often estimated CE of a given technology may,
in fact, be used to infer the share of social surplus appropriated by producers of that technology.
Recall from our earlier discussion that the observed ratio of gross benefit to spending, zR,
can be written as g(q)/[p(q)q]. Similarly, the degree of observed surplus appropriation can be
written as (q)/w(q), where w(q) is the observed social surplus associated with a level of output q,
and (q) is the level of profit induced by that quantity. If m(q)=p(q)/[c(q)/q] is the markup above
average costs, it is straightforward to show that for a given level of output, appropriation may be
written as a function of the CE level as in20:

18

It is interesting to note that the small estimated share of social surplus appropriated by investors sheds
important light on the recent growth of alternative funding mechanisms to stimulate HIV/AIDS research,
e.g. through advance purchasing contracts of governments or private foundations. Given that there is a
social surplus above a trillion dollars that is not appropriated by R&D investors, a few billion dollars added
to stimulate innovation, as these public or private contracts seem to provide, seems to pale in comparison to
interventions that would better allow innovators to capture the value of their innovations. Moreover, since
both spending and markups are higher in the US than in the rest of the world (drug sales in the US account
for more than half of worldwide spending) and price controls dominate foreign markets, estimates of
appropriation based on US markets alone over-estimate worldwide appropriation.
19
Our estimated result on appropriation is consistent with observed expenditures on HIV/AIDS drugs. For
example, Lichtenberg (2005) estimates annual drug spending per HIV infected individual in 2001 to be
$9,751 in 2001 dollars, implying a net profit of approximately $8,300 for that individual (assuming variable
costs are 15% of spending, i.e. $1,400). A value of a life year of $100,000 is consistent with existing
estimates and implies an observed surplus appropriation of roughly 8% (e.g. $8,300/($100,000 - $1,400)).
20
To see this, note that (q) = p(q)q – c(q) and w(q) = g(q) – c(q). Substituting zR = g(q)/[p(q)q] into the
expression for w(q) and simplifying the appropriation share ( /w) yields the above result.

11

π (q)
w(q )

=

m(q ) − 1
m( q ) ⋅ z R − 1

(13)

This expression demonstrates that highly cost-effective technologies (those with high zR)
implicitly support low levels of observed surplus appropriation. Moreover, when free-entry is
possible and firms earn zero profits (price = average cost), surplus appropriation is zero. The
general point, then, is that with information on the degree of market power in an industry, one can
use commonly reported CE estimates to infer the degree of appropriation by producers of the
relevant technology.
For the case of HIV/AIDS, calculating the appropriation ratio based on our estimates is
straightforward. First, recall that we estimated observed gross benefits to consumers to be nearly
$980 billion with spending levels of $74 billion. This implies a CE or zR ratio of roughly 13.
Estimates of the average markup can, in turn, be obtained from information on price reductions
after patent expiration, which suggests that average costs are as low as 15% of patented prices.
Put together, the average markup and estimated CE of HIV/AIDS drugs imply a producer
appropriation of observed social surplus of 7%, identical to our directly estimated level of
appropriation.
With more restrictive cost and demand assumptions, even less information is needed to
infer the level of appropriation from CE estimates. Under constant returns to scale and constant
elasticity demand, it can be shown that a technology’s CE alone identifies its elasticity of
demand, which in turns identifies the share of surplus appropriated by the producers of that
technology. These assumptions also allow us to distinguish between appropriation of two types
of surpluses discussed earlier, observed versus potential. To be sure, the observed surplus
(presented in equation 13) is the surplus which obtains at the market quantity. For example, for a
monopoly quantity qm, the appropriation of observed surplus is simply (qm)/w(qm).
Alternatively, the potential surplus is that which results if the market quantity is determined
competitively (q = qc) and hence relates to the total potential surplus available to an innovator.
Importantly, the size of profits relative to the potential social surplus is most relevant to dynamic
policy. For a monopoly quantity qm, the appropriation of potential surplus is (qm)/w(qc). Since
there is a deadweight loss associated with monopoly pricing, the potential surplus from an
innovation exceeds the observed surplus. Consequently, estimates of ‘surplus’ appropriation
based on observed surplus will underestimate the deficiency in appropriation by producers of a
given technology.
More precisely, consider the common model where variable costs exhibit constant
returns, c(y) = cy, and there is a constant elasticity demand curve p(q) = x/q1/ , where > 0 is the
elasticity of demand with respect to price and x is a scale factor that shifts demand outward. If qc
and qm denote the competitive and monopoly output, respectively, the Appendix shows that the
ratio of gross benefit to spending (i.e., zR) under monopoly pricing satisfies:
zR =

g (q m )
p(q m )
ε
=
=
p(q m )q m ε − 1
c

(14)

In other words, a technology’s CE, as described by the ratio of gross benefit to spending, is
directly related to the familiar percentage markup of price over marginal cost. In addition, the

12

share of potential surplus appropriated as profits under optimal monopoly pricing equals the
output expansion due to competition.21 That is,

π (q m )

q
1
= m =
g (qc ) − qc ⋅ c q c
zR

ε

(15)

This interesting result states that, counter-intuitively, the more a monopolist restricts output, as
perhaps estimated by patent expirations, the less of the surplus it is appropriated.22 Note that as
the elasticity approaches unity (below which profits are infinite) from above, the profits,
themselves, rise but as a share of social surplus go to zero.23 This occurs because the nonappropriated consumer surplus rises faster than profits as the elasticity falls. Moreover, as market
power declines and elasticity approaches infinity, the share of social surplus appropriated as
profits tends to roughly 37%.24 Finally, there is a direct negative relationship between costeffectiveness and innovator appropriation.
Under these assumptions, a given estimated CE or zR ratio implies a specific elasticity of
demand, which in turn implies the degree to which a firm appropriates social surplus. In the case
of HIV/AIDS, for which zR is roughly 13, the implied elasticity of demand is around 1.08, which
(according to equation 16) implies a producer share of potential social surplus of 6%. This can be
compared to our directly estimated share of potential surplus appropriation of 5%.25
More generally, the above relationship between CE and surplus appropriation can be used
to infer the share of potential surplus appropriated by those producers whose technologies are
examined in existing CE studies. Figure 1, below, graphs the relationship between surplus
appropriation, cost-effectiveness, and market power (interpreted as a reduction in the elasticity of
demand). As market power decreases, the producer’s share of potential social surplus approaches
slightly more than a third, while zR approaches 1. As described earlier, zR is bounded from below
by unity since individuals only purchase goods for which the benefits exceed the costs.

21

It is straightforward to show that the share of observed surplus appropriated by producers is ( -1)/(2 -1),
which is greater than the potential surplus appropriated.
22
This result may not be unique to this particular demand structure. For a linear demand curve, it is well
known that monopoly output is half the competitive output and that a monopolist always appropriates half
the surplus, so that the surplus condition above holds.
23
It may even be that demand and cost parameters do not affect the share of surplus appropriated by the
producer. This is the case when demand is linear (as often estimated) and there are constant returns to scale
in production, in which case the share appropriated by producers is always two thirds.
24
Note that while ( -1)/ approaches unity as elasticity becomes infinite, [( -1)/ ] does not do the same.
25
Given that the share of observed surplus appropriated by producers is ( -1)/(2 -1), an elasticity of 1.08
(implied by the observed zR of 13 for HIV/AIDS) suggests an observed level of appropriation of 7%,
identical to our directly estimated level.

13

Figure 1: Elasticity of Demand and Producer Shares Implied by CE Estimates
25

0.4

0.35
20

Gross Benefit/Spending

0.3

0.25

15

13

0.2

10

0.15

0.1

Producer Share of Social Surplus

Producer Share

5
0.05

Gross Benefit/Spending
0

0
0

1.08

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Elasticity of Demand

The above figure illustrates how one can potentially use estimates of cost-effectiveness from the
large health economic literature to infer the share of surplus appropriated by producers of the
relevant technology. For example, consider the technologies to treat HIV/AIDS. With an
estimated ratio of gross benefit to spending of roughly 13, this implies an elasticity of demand of
1.08 and a producer share of potential social surplus of a twentieth.
We exemplify this general identification strategy using estimates of cost-effectiveness
from the literature. Neumann et al. (2000) review the cost-effectiveness of more than 200
pharmaceuticals using the established “cost-utility” method which focuses on costs per QALY
gained and therefore concern both the prolongation and quality of life. The authors note that
while no accepted standards exist for how much benefit a technology must confer to be deemed a
“good value,” the range between $50,000 and $100,000 per QALY has been a benchmark for the
US. In the context of our framework, this value (or range) is the gross benefit to consumers of a
technology which leads to an additional quality adjusted year of life. Table 2 presents the
spending required to obtain an additional QALY for several interventions reviewed by the
authors. For example, an intervention with a price of $1,000 that leads to an increase in 0.2
QALYs requires the same spending per QALY as an intervention with a price of $5,000 that
leads to an additional QALY. While the magnitude of gross benefit differs across the two
interventions, the gross benefit per QALY is the same (namely in the range described above).
Thus, assuming the gross benefit arising from an additional quality adjusted year of life is
between $50,000 and $100,000, we can compute estimates of the ratio of gross benefit to
spending per QALY for these interventions, as well as the implied shares of social surplus
appropriated by producers.

14

Table 2: Estimated Producer Share of Potential Social Surplus for Several Cost-Effective
Technologies
Intervention

Spending
zR
per QALY (Gross Benefit/Spending)
($)
$50,000
$100,000
Captopril Therapy
4,000
12.5
25
Hormone
Replacement 12,000
4.2
8.4
Therapy
INH Prophylaxis
18,000
2.8
5.6
Hip Fracture Prevention
34,000
1.5
3.0
Chemotherapy for Breast 58,000
.9
1.8
Cancer

Producer
Surplus

Share

of

$50,000
0.06
0.15

$100,000
0.03
0.09

0.20
0.30
---

0.12
0.19
0.26

Notes: CE and producer share of surplus are presented for two, separate values of an additional quality
adjusted life year. The final intervention has a gross benefit less than cost when gross benefit per QALY
equals $50,000.
Description of Interventions—1) Captopril therapy in patients with myocardial infarction, 2) Hormone
replacement therapy (HRT), 3) Isoniazid (INH) prophylaxis for tuberculosis, 4) Treatment to prevent hip
fracture in patients with osteoporosis, and 5) Chemotherapy for breast cancer. For a more detailed
description, see Neumann et al. (2000).

Table 2 demonstrates that, as illustrated by the case of HIV/AIDS, those technologies deemed to
be extremely cost effective may also result in low surplus appropriation by producers. For
example, the highly cost effective Captopril therapy results in only 3% - 6% of potential social
surplus going to producers.
While Table 2 presents estimates of the producer share of social surplus for only five
interventions, cost-effectiveness estimates from a large, random sample of interventions could be
used to estimate the distribution of producer shares. We use data from over 200 published costutility analyses contained in the Harvard Cost-Effectiveness Analysis (CEA) Registry to estimate
this distribution.26 Including analyses from 1976 to 2001, the Registry reports the spending per
QALY of various interventions compared to benchmark comparator groups. This spending per
QALY can in turn be used to estimate the share of potential social surplus appropriated by the
producer of that technology, as in Table 2 above.27 This can be compared to estimates of the
producer’s actual appropriation, identified by the technology’s CE and average mark-up as in
expression (13) above. The average mark-up is based on our earlier assumption that average costs
are 15% of patented prices. Figure 2 plots the distribution of observed and potential producer
shares for the interventions considered. Because the studies included in the Registry may not be a
random sample of all technologies, however, we can only estimate the distribution of producer
shares conditional on inclusion into the Registry.

26

The Registry is not limited to only pharmaceutical interventions. More detailed information can be
found at: http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/cearegistry/
27
For these calculations, we assume the gross benefit of an additional QALY to be $100,000.
Consequently, we limit our attention to those interventions with published costs of less than $100,000 per
QALY gained.

15

Figure 2: Cumulative Distribution of Actual and Potential Surplus Appropriation
1
0.9

Potential
0.8

Actual

Probability

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

MedianPot
0.1

MedianAct

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Appropriation of Actual and Potential Surplus

Since the constant elasticity of demand assumption predicts a producer appropriation of social
surplus of no more than 37%, all interventions considered in Figure 2 have estimated producer
shares less than this amount. The median intervention requires a spending per QALY of roughly
$19,000, which corresponds to a producer share of potential (actual) social surplus of nearly 13%
(17%).28 Moreover, 25% of the interventions considered have estimated potential appropriations
of less than 7%, while 75% have appropriations less than a fourth. Moreover, 75% of the
interventions have an actual appropriation of less than 40%. If the estimated distribution of
producer shares generalizes to the distribution across all health interventions (i.e., not only those
included in the Registry), our empirical finding for producers of HIV/AIDS drugs suggests their
appropriation of potential social surplus is at the twentieth percentile.
Our estimates of appropriation can be compared to alternative, theory-based methods of
calculating this share. Specifically, given the previously described relationship between the
elasticity of demand and the share of potential social surplus appropriated by innovators, one can
use information on price reductions after patent expiration to estimate patent-protected markups
(Caves et al. (1991).29 These markups identify the elasticity of demand for the patent-protected
drugs and thus the share of surplus allocated to the producer. In particular, the larger is the price
reduction upon patent-expiration, the lower is the elasticity and the smaller is the share of surplus
allocated to the producer. Existing estimates suggest that price reductions are on the magnitude
of 85% percent, implying a demand-elasticity around 1.17. This elasticity implies a producer
share of social surplus of 10%, which is highly related to our major finding that the share of
28

If the gross benefit of an additional QALY is assumed to be $50,000 (rather than $100,000), the median
intervention has an implied producer share of social surplus closer to 20%.
29
Caves, Whinston, and Hurwitz (1991) estimate that with 20 generic competitors, the ratio of prices
between generic- and brand-drugs is roughly 17%. We use the price of generic drugs as an upper bound of
the marginal costs of production.

16

social surplus appropriated by R&D investors in this area is, in fact, quite low. This is true even
though prices for these drugs are high, presumably due to the inelastic nature of demand.
V. Concluding Remarks and Future Research
We argued that popular technology assessment criteria in health care going under the
rubric of “cost-effectiveness” are often implicitly concerned with maximizing the observed level
of consumer surplus, which is many times consistent with maximizing static efficiency after an
innovation has been developed. Dynamic efficiency, however, aligns the social costs and benefits
of R&D and is therefore determined by the how much of the social surplus from a new
technology is appropriated by innovators. For the case of HIV/AIDS, our earlier estimates
suggested that producers appropriated only 5% of the social surplus arising from new drug
therapies. Given the low degree of appropriation by producers of the highly cost-effective
HIV/AIDS therapies, we showed how other CE estimates in the literature could be related to the
standard framework—our main finding was that these CE estimates implicitly support a low
degree of surplus appropriation by producers, comparable to our directly measured estimates for
HIV/AIDS. Despite the high annual costs of these drugs to patients, the low share of social
surplus going to innovators raises concerns about advocating cost-effectiveness criteria that
would further reduce appropriation share, and hence further reduce dynamic efficiency.
In addressing why producer surplus is so small, and why the CE of therapies may be
inefficiently high, it seems natural to suggest that this is ultimately due to a lack of profits and
market power. This is potentially due to prices being held down by: 1) the threat of public
regulation if pharmaceutical companies raise prices, or 2) patents that are weakly enforced or too
narrowly defined to allow patent-protected monopolies to raise price appropriately. However,
even with free pricing and nearly-inelastic demand, the share of social surplus allocated to
producers may be small. This is most easily illustrated by the constant elasticity case, in which a
producer share of social surplus of 5% is consistent with monopoly pricing under a demand curve
that is almost as inelastic as it can be, = 1.08, as an elasticity below unity, of course, leads to
infinite profits. In fact, we showed that higher prices (such as those of HIV/AIDS drugs) induced
by lower elasticities of demand often lead to less surplus captured by inventors. Put differently,
even though profits, of course, rise as the elasticity of demand falls, many times the share of
social surplus appropriated by the monopolist falls. This occurs because the non-appropriated
consumer surplus rises faster than profits as the elasticity falls.
It is important to stress that arguments about the difference between static and dynamic
efficiency are a different matter than whether prices used for calculating spending in CE analysis
reflect costs of production in general, and average costs of production (reflecting R&D costs), in
particular. Under traditional CE analysis, even if one could measure costs perfectly, and did not
need to approximate unobserved costs by observed prices, one would be concerned with the
wrong measure, total ex-post surplus. This is because the division of the surplus is what matters
for dynamic R&D policy, as opposed to only the total surplus which is relevant for static policy.
In particular, this holds true whether the costs represented are marginal or average costs, the latter
potentially including fixed costs such as R&D. In both cases, the division of social surplus is
ignored but is what drives optimal R&D policy.
Several issues may be important in generalizing our conclusions and are therefore
suitable for future research. The first concerns the interpretation of CE analysis in a nonmonopoly context; the field of “industrial organization of technology adoption” needs to be better
understood. Another concern is the effect of altruism, which seemingly motivates much of public

17

financing, on optimal technology adoption and the efficient form of surplus appropriation.30 A
third concerns the effect of ex-post inefficiencies such as moral hazard. Fourth, the impact of the
joint demand of physicians and patients on observed levels of CE must be examined further.
Fifth, the effect of improved treatment on disease prevalence, whether through increased lifeexpectancies among infected individuals or increased risky behavior (due to lower costs of
infection induced by treatment) among non-infected individuals, must be considered (see e.g.
Philipson (2000)). Sixth, the role of public funding, comprising almost half of US medical R&D
spending, on the optimal degree of appropriation is not well understood. While much basic
research in the US is financed by tax-payers (mainly through the NIH), little analysis exists on the
implications of that for optimal appropriation.31
Our analysis and evidence, if they generalize to other technologies, suggest that
interventions aimed at raising innovator appropriation may be desirable even though full
appropriation may not be. This would lead to lower observed levels of cost-effectiveness for
these technologies as traditionally measured from market prices, but would raise efficiency by not
unduly sacrificing the health and well being of future patient populations for the benefit of current
ones.

30

Philipson, Mechoulan, and Jena (2006) discuss optimal technology assessment in the presence of
altruism that motivates public health care delivery, in general, and R&D into third-world diseases, in
particular.
31
The discrimination between public and private funding may be mitigated by private expenditures towards
the licensing of publicly-funded discoveries.

18

References
Arrow, Kenneth, “Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Research for Invention,” in The Rate
and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social Factors,” E. R. Nelson,
Princeton University Press, 1961.
Becker, Gary S., Philipson, Tomas, Soares, Rodrigo, “The Quantity and Quality of Life and the
Evolution of World Inequality,” American Economic Review, 2005, Vol. 95, pp. 277291.
Caves, R., Whinston, M., Hurwitz, M., “Patent Expiration, Entry, and Competition in the U.S.
Pharmaceutical Industry,” Brookings Paper on Microeconomic Activity,
Microeconomics, 1991, pp. 1-66.
Cutler, David M., Your Money or Your Life: Strong Medicine for America’s Health Care
System, Oxford University Press, New York, New York, 2004.
Cutler, David M., and Richardson, Elizabeth, “The Value of Health: 1970-1990,” American
Economic Review, 1998, Vol. 88, pp. 97-100.
Cutler, David M., and McClellan, Mark, “Is Technological Change in Medicine Worth It?,”
Health Affairs, 2001, Vol. 20, pp. 11-29.
Duggan, Mark, and Evans, William, “The Impact of HIV Antiviral Treatments: Evidence for
California'
s Medicaid Population,” Working Paper, 2005.
Drummond, M.F., O’Brien, B., Stoddart, G.L, and Torrance, G.W., Methods for the Economic
Evaluation of Health care Programmes, Oxford University Press, 1997.
Health, United States; National Center for Health Statistics with Chartbook on Trends in the
Health of Americans, Hyattsville, MD, 2002.
Garber, Alan M. and Phelps, Charles E., "Economic Foundations of Cost-Effectiveness
Analysis," Journal of Health Economics, 1997, Vol. 16, pp. 1-32.
Garber, Alan M., “Advances in Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of Health Interventions,” NBER
Working Paper 7198, 1999.
Gold, M.R., Siegel, J.E., Russell, L.B., and Weinstein, M.C., Cost-Effectiveness in Health and
Medicine, Oxford University Press, 1996.
Griliches, Zvi. R&D and Productivity: The Econometric Evidence, University of Chicago Press,
1998.
Hall, Bronwyn H., “The Private and Social Returns to Research and Development,” Technology,
R&D, and the Economy, ed. B. Smith and C. Barfield, Brookings Institution/American
Enterprise Institute, 1996.
Johannesson, M., and Weinstein, M.C., “On the Decision Rules of Cost-Effectiveness Analysis,”
Journal of Health Economics, 1993, Vol. 12, pp. 459-467.

19

Kates, J., and Wilson, A. “Medicaid & HIV/AIDS,” Pub. 7172, Henry J. Kaiser Family
Foundation, 2004.
Lakdawalla, Darius, and Philipson, Tomas J.,” Intellectual Property and Non-Price
Discrimination,” University of Chicago, Department of Economics Working Paper, 2005.
Lichtenberg, Frank R., “The Impact of Increased Utilization of HIV Drugs on Longevity and
Medical Expenditure: An Assessment Based on Aggregate U.S. Time-Series Data,”
Working Paper, Columbia Business School, 2005.
Levin, Richard C., Klevorick, Alvin K., Nelson, Richard R., Winter, Sidney G., Gilbert, Richard,
and Griliches, Zvi, “Appropriating the Returns from Industrial Research and
Development,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1987, Vol. 3, pp. 783-831.
Manning, Richard L., “Changing Rules in the Tort Law and the Market for Childhood Vaccines,”
Journal of Law and Economics, 1994, Vol. 37, pp. 247-275.
Mansfield, Edwin, “How Rapidly Does New Technology Leak Out?,” The Journal of Industrial
Economics, 1985, Vol. 34, pp. 217-223.
Mansfield, Edwin, Rapoport, John, Romeo, Anthony, Wagner, Samuel, and Beardsley, George,
“Social and Private Rates of Return from Industrial Innovation,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 1977, Vol. 91, pp. 221-240.
Meltzer, David, "Accounting for Future Costs in Medical Cost-Effectiveness Analysis," Journal
of Health Economics, 1997, Vol. 16, pp. 33-64.
Nordhaus, William D., “Schumpeterian Profits in the American Economy: Theory and
Measurement,” NBER Working Paper, 2004.
Phelps, Charles E., and Parente, Stephen T., "Priority Setting in Medical Technology and Medical
Practice Assessment," Medical Care, 1990, Vol. 28, pp. 703-723.
Philipson, T.J., “Economic Epidemiology and Infectious Disease,” Chapter in Handbook of
Health Economics. Edited by J. Newhouse and A. Culyer, Elsevier B.V., North Holland,
2000.
Philipson, T., and Jena, A.B., “Who Benefits from Medical Technologies? Estimates of
Consumer and Producer Surpluses for HIV/AIDS Drugs,” BE Press Forum for Health
Economics and Policy, Forum: Biomedical Research and the Economy, Article 3, 2005.
(Also NBER Working Paper #11810)
Philipson, T., Jena, A.B., and Mechoulan, S., “Intellectual Property & External Consumption
Effects: Generalizations from Pharmaceutical Markets,” NBER Working Paper #11930,
2006.
Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America, PhRMA Annual Membership Survey,
2003.
Neumann, Peter J., Sandberg, Eileen A., Bell, Chaim M., Stone, Patricia W., and Chapman,
Richard H., “Are Pharmaceuticals Cost-Effective? A Review of the Evidence,” Health

20

Affairs, 2000, Vol. 19, pp. 92-109.
Shapiro, Martin F., et al. “Variations in the Care of HIV Infected Adults in the United States,”
Journal of the American Medical Association, 1999, Vol. 281, pp. 2305-2316.
Tirole, Jean. The Theory of Industrial Organization, The MIT Press, 1988.
Weinstein, Milton C., and Manning, Willard G., Jr. "Theoretical Issues in Cost-Effectiveness
Analysis" Journal of Health Economics, 1997, Vol. 16, pp. 121-128.
Weinstein, M.C., and Stason, W.B., “Foundations of Cost-Effectiveness Analysis for Health and
Medical Practices,“ New England Journal of Medicine, 1977, Vol. 296, pp. 716-721.

21

Appendix
Assume a constant elasticity demand function and constant returns to scale as in:

x

p(q) =

q

c(q ) = cq

1/ ε

where > 0 is the elasticity of demand with respect to price, and x is a demand shifter. This
results in an optimal quantity and price of

c ⋅ε
qm =
x ⋅ (ε − 1)

−ε

pm =

c ⋅ε
.
ε −1

The gross consumer benefit g(qm) can be expressed by the following formula:

g=

qm

0

x ⋅ε
p (q )dq =
⋅ (q m )
ε −1

ε −1
ε

.

Similarly, the maximized profit can be written as:

π = p(q m ) ⋅ q m − c ⋅ q m =

c ⋅ qm
.
ε −1

We can now determine the share of profits in potential social surplus, i.e. the social surplus that
obtains in perfect competition with p = c. Specifically,

π (q m )
g (qc ) − qc ⋅ c

=

=

(cq m ) /(ε − 1)
xε
(qc )
ε −1

ε −1
ε

(cq m ) /(ε − 1)

=

− qc ⋅ c

−1

qc

xε
(qc ) ε − c
ε −1

=

(cq m ) /(ε − 1)
xε
qc
ε −1

x
c

ε

−1

ε

−c

(cq m ) /(ε − 1) (cq m ) /(ε − 1) q m
=
=
cε
c
qc
qc
−c
qc
ε −1
ε −1

That is, the share of profits in potential social surplus is equal to the ratio of the monopolist
output to the competitive output. In terms of the exogenous parameters, this simplifies to:

π (q m )
g (qc ) − qc ⋅ c

=

ε −1
ε

ε

Using the above expressions, it is straightforward to derive the ratio of gross benefit to spending,
zR, as well:

zR =

g (q m )
ε
=
p (q m ) q m ε − 1

22

To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.
Number

Author(s)

Title

Date

11971

Mark Gertler
John Leahy

A Phillips Curve With an Ss Foundation

1/06

11972

Joel Waldfogel

The Median Voter and the Median Consumer: Local
Private Goods and Residential Sorting

1/06

11973

Nicolas Magud
Carmen R. Reinhart

Capital Controls: An Evaluation

1/06

11974

James Poterba
Joshua Rauh
Steven Venti
David Wise

Lifecycle Asset Allocation Strategies and the Distribution 1/06
of 401(k) Retirement Wealth

11975

Helen Levy

Health Insurance and the Wage Gap

1/06

11976

Bruce D. Meyer
James X. Sullivan

Consumption, Income, and Material Well-Being After
Welfare Reform

1/06

11977

Anthony T. Lo Sasso
Bruce D. Meyer

The Health Care Safety Net and Crowd-Out of Private
Health Insurance

1/06

11978

Joseph Engelberg
Charles F. Manski
Jared Williams

Comparing the Point Predictions and Subjective Probability1/06
Distributions of Professional Forecasters

11979

James J. Choi
Brigitte C. Madrian
David Laibson

Reducing the Complexity Costs of 401(k) Participation
Through Quick Enrollment™

1/06

11980

Brigitte C. Madrian

The U.S. Health Care System and Labor Markets

1/06

11981

Larry Chavis
Phillip Leslie

Consumer Boycotts: The Impact of the Iraq War
on French Wine Sales in the U.S.

1/06

11982

John J. Donohue III
Justin Wolfers

Uses and Abuses of Empirical Evidence
in the Death Penalty Debate

1/06

11983

Elena Loutskina
Philip E. Strahan

Securitization and the Declining Impact of Bank Finance 1/06
on Loan Supply: Evidence from Mortgage Acceptance Rates

11984

Leora Friedberg
Anthony Webb

Life is Cheap: Using Mortality Bonds to
Hedge Aggregate Mortality Risk

1/06

11985

Lex Borghans
Bas ter Weel
Bruce A. Weinberg

People People: Social Capital and the Labor Market
Outcomes of Underrepresented Groups

1/06

To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.
Number

Author(s)

Title

Date

11986

David H. Autor
Lawrence F. Katz
Melissa S. Kearney

The Polarization of the U.S. Labor Market

1/06

11987

John J. Donohue
Steven D. Levitt

Measurement Error, Legalized Abortion, and the
1/06
Decline in Crime: A Response to Foote and Goetz (2005)

11988

John F. Helliwell
Haifang Huang

How’s Your Government? International Evidence
Linking Good Government and Well-Being

1/06

11989

Justin Wolfers

Diagnosing Discrimination: Stock Returns
and CEO Gender

1/06

11990

Donald S. Kenkel
Dean R. Dillard
Alan D. Mathios

The Roles of High School Completion and GED
Receipt in Smoking and Obesity

1/06

11991

Assaf Razin
Efraim Sadka

Vying for Foreign Direct Investment: A EU-type
Model of Tax Competition

1/06

11992

Joseph Stiglitz

Growth, Initial Conditions, Law and Speed of
Privatization in Transition Countries: 11 Years Later

1/06

11993

Torsten Persson
Guido Tabellini

Growth, Initial Conditions, Law and Speed of Privatization 2/06
in Transition Countries: 11 Years Later

11994

Austan Goolsbee

The Value of Broadband and the Deadweight Loss
of Taxing New Technology

11995

Austan Goolsbee
Peter J. Klenow

Valuing Consumer Products by the Time Spent Using Them:2/06
An Application to the Internet

11996

Ricardo J. Caballero
Emmanuel Farhi
Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas

An Equilibrium Model of “Global Imbalances”
and Low Interest Rates

11997

James D. Adams
J. Roger Clemmons
Paula E. Stephan

How Rapidly Does Science Leak Out?

11998

Phil Oreopoulos
Mark Stabile
Randy Walld
Leslie Roos

Short, Medium, and Long Term Consequences of Poor 2/06
Infant Health: An Analysis Using Siblings and Twins

11999

Luigi Guiso
Paola Sapienza
Luigi Zingales

Does Culture Affect Economic Outcomes?

2/06

2/06

2/06

2/06

To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.
Number

Author(s)

Title

Date

12000

Murray Carlson
Zeigham Khoker
Sheridan Titman

Equilibrium Exhaustible Resource Price Dynamics

2/06

12001

Rosemary J. Avery
Donald S. Kenkel
Dean R. Lillard
Alan D. Mathios

Regulating Advertisements: The Case of
Smoking Cessation Products

2/06

12002

Daniel S. Hamermesh

Time to Eat: Household Production Under
Increasing Income Inequality

2/06

12003

Jeffrey R. Kling

Incarceration Length, Employment, and Earnings

2/06

12004

Nancy E. Reichman
Hope Corman
Kelly Noonan
Dhaval Dave

Typically Unobserved Variables (TUVs) and Selection 2/06
into Prenatal Inputs: Implications for Estimating Infant
Health Production Functions

12005

Joshua Angrist
Aimee Chin
Ricardo Godoy

Is Spanish-Only Schooling Responsible for
the Puerto Rican Language Gap?

2/06

12006

James J. Heckman
Jora Stixrud
Sergio Uzrua

Behavior

2/06

12007

Chul-In Lee
Gary Solon

Trends in Intergenerational Income Mobility

2/06

12008

David McAdams
Michael Schwarz

Perverse Incentives in the Medicare
Prescription Drug Benefit

2/06

12009

John Beshears
James J. Choi
David Laibson
Brigitte C. Madrian

The Importance of Default Options for Retirement
Savings Outcomes: Evidence from the United States

2/06

12010

Rafael Rob
Joel Waldfogel

Piracy on the Silver Screen

2/06

12011

J. Bradford DeLong
Konstantin Magin

A Short Note on the Size of the Dot-Com Bubble

2/06

12012

Judith Chevalier
Fiona Scott Morton

State Casket Sales and Restrictions:
A Pointless Undertaking?

2/06

To order any of these papers in hard copy, see instructions at the end of this list. To subscribe to all NBER
Working Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover.
Number

Author(s)

Title

Date

12013

Patrick Bajari
Han Hong
John Krainer
Denis Nekipelov

Estimating Static Models of Strategic Interaction

2/06

12014

Erica X. N. Li
Dmitry Livdan
Lu Zhang

Optimal Market Timing

2/06

12015

Ravi Jagannathan
Alexey Malakhov
Dmitry Novikov

Do Hot Hands Persist Among Hedge Fund Managers?
An Empirical Evaluation

2/06

12016

Thomas J. Philipson
Anupam B. Jena

Surplus Appropriation from R&D and Health Care
Technology Assessment Procedures

2/06

Copies of the above working papers can be obtained for $10.00 per copy (plus $10.00 per order for shipping for all
locations outside the continental U.S.) to Working Papers, NBER, 1050 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 021385398. Pre-payment is required on all orders and may be made by check or credit card. Checks should be made payable
to the NBER and must be in dollars drawn on a U.S. bank. If paying by credit card, include the cardholder'
s name,
account number, and expiration date. For all orders, please be sure to include your return address and telephone
number. Working papers may also be ordered by telephone (868-3900), fax (617-868-2742), or email
(orders@nber.org).

