                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          DOES TELEVISION ROT YOUR BRAIN?
                       NEW EVIDENCE FROM THE COLEMAN STUDY

                                          Matthew Gentzkow
                                           Jesse M. Shapiro

                                         Working Paper 12021
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12021


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2006




We are grateful to Dominic Brewer, John Collins, Ronald Ehrenberg, Eric Hanushek, and Mary Morris (at
ICPSR) for assistance with Coleman study data, and to Christopher Berry for supplying data on school
quality. Lisa Furchtgott and Jennifer Paniza provided outstanding research assistance. We thank Marianne
Bertrand, Ed Glaeser, Austan Goolsbee, Caroline Hoxby, Larry Katz, Steve Levitt, Ethan Lieber, Kevin M.
Murphy, Emily Oster, Andrei Shleifer, Chad Syverson, Bob Topel, and workshop participants at the
University of Chicago and Harvard University for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Matthew Gentzkow and Jesse M. Shapiro. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Does Television Rot Your Brain? New Evidence from the Coleman Study
Matthew Gentzkow and Jesse M. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 12021
February 2006
JEL No. I21, J13, J24

                                           ABSTRACT

We use heterogeneity in the timing of television's introduction to different local markets to identify
the effect of preschool television exposure on standardized test scores later in life. Our preferred
point estimate indicates that an additional year of preschool television exposure raises average test
scores by about .02 standard deviations. We are able to reject negative effects larger than about .03
standard deviations per year of television exposure. For reading and general knowledge scores, the
positive effects we find are marginally statistically significant, and these effects are largest for
children from households where English is not the primary language, for children whose mothers
have less than a high school education, and for non-white children. To capture more general effects
on human capital, we also study the effect of childhood television exposure on school completion
and subsequent labor market earnings, and again find no evidence of a negative effect.


Matthew Gentzkow
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
gentzkow@chicagogsb.edu

Jesse M. Shapiro
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jmshapir@uchicago.edu
1        Introduction

Television has attracted young viewers since broadcasting began in the 1940s. Concerns about

the eﬀects of television on young children emerged almost immediately, and have been fueled by

a steady stream of academic research showing a negative association between television viewing

and student achievement.1 These findings have made the introduction and diﬀusion of television

a popular explanation for trends such as the decline in average verbal SAT scores during the

1970s (Wirtz et al, 1977; Winn, 2002), and the secular decline in verbal ability across cohorts

(Glenn, 1994). They have contributed to a widespread belief among pediatricians that television

is detrimental to cognitive development and academic achievement (Gentile et al, 2004), and have

provided partial motivation for recent recommendations that young children’s television viewing

time be severely restricted (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2001). Given the important role that

cognitive skills play in individual (Griliches and Mason, 1972) and aggregate (Bishop, 1989) labor

market performance, understanding the cognitive eﬀects of television viewing may have significant

implications for public policy and household behavior.

        In this paper, we identify the eﬀect of childhood exposure to television on cognitive development

by exploiting variation in the year of introduction of television to U.S. cities (Gentzkow, 2006).

Television was introduced to most U.S. cities in the late 1940s and early 1950s, and was adopted

rapidly, especially by families with children. Additionally, survey evidence suggests that young

children who had television in their homes during this period watched as much as three hours of

television per day, considerably more than the time spent listening to the radio for analogous ages

in the 1930s. Finally, evidence from surveys of television ownership suggest that the diﬀusion of

television was broad-based, reaching families in many diﬀerent socioeconomic strata. These facts

make the introduction of television in the United States a unique laboratory in which to study the

eﬀects of television on children.

        To conduct our analysis, we use data from the Coleman study on the test scores of over 300,000
    1
    Recent studies showing negative cross-sectional correlations betweeen measured television viewing and academic
performance include Vandewater et al. (2005) and Borzekowski and Robinson (2005). Recent studies showing
negative correlations between early childhood viewing and later performance include Zimmerman and Christakis
(2005), Hancox, Milne, and Poulton (2005), and Christakis et al. (2004). Zavodny (2006) shows that the apparent
negative eﬀect of television disappears in a panel regression with individual fixed eﬀects. An older literature finds
more mixed results, but reviewers conclude that the overall thrust of the evidence points toward negative eﬀects of
television (Strasburger 1986; Beentjees & Van der Voort 1988; Van Evra 1998).


                                                         2
students ages 11, 14, and 17 (grades 6, 9, and 12) in 1965. These students were born during the

period 1948-1954, just as television was expanding throughout the United States. Since televi-

sion entered diﬀerent U.S. markets at diﬀerent times, diﬀerent students were exposed to diﬀerent

amounts of television as preschoolers. Students in our sample therefore range from those who had

television in their local area throughout their lives (for example, 6th graders whose areas got tele-

vision between 1945 and 1951) to those whose areas only began receiving broadcasts after they

reached age 6 (12th graders whose areas got television in 1954). Because the Coleman sample

includes students of diﬀerent ages within the same television market, we can identify the eﬀects of

television by comparing across cohorts within a given area. This diﬀerences-in-diﬀerences approach

allows us to estimate the eﬀect of television while holding constant fixed characteristics of a locale

that aﬀect test scores and might also be correlated with the timing of television introduction.

   We find strong evidence against the prevailing wisdom that childhood television viewing causes

harm to cognitive or educational development. Our preferred point estimate indicates that an

additional year of preschool television exposure raises average test scores by about .02 standard

deviations. We are able to reject negative eﬀects larger than about .03 standard deviations per

year of television exposure. For reading and general knowledge scores–domains where intuition

and existing evidence suggest that learning from television could be important–we find marginally

statistically significant positive eﬀects.

   A number of specification checks support the identification assumption that the timing of tele-

vision’s entry into diﬀerent markets is uncorrelated with direct determinants of test scores. Most

importantly, controlling for area fixed eﬀects, we find that a student’s childhood exposure to televi-

sion is orthogonal to his or her predetermined demographic characteristics. That is, the within-area,

cross-cohort variation in television exposure that identifies our models does not correlate with de-

mographic variables that would be expected to aﬀect test scores. We also find that the timing of

television introduction was uncorrelated with trends in area school quality, income, and population

density. Thus, although by definition we cannot test that our key exposure measures are orthogonal

to unobservable variation in student ability, we do show that these measures are unrelated to many

observable covariates of exam performance.

   After establishing our results on the average eﬀects of television, we turn to an analysis of


                                                  3
heterogeneity in the eﬀects of television on test scores. The positive eﬀects we find on verbal,

reading, and general knowledge tests are largest for children from households where English is not

the primary language, for children whose mothers have less than a high school education, and for

non-white children. These findings seem most consistent with a model in which the cognitive eﬀects

of television exposure depend on the educational value of the alternative activities that television

crowds out.

   We also find evidence that families in which television has relatively positive eﬀects on learning

allocate more time to viewing, which seems consistent with a rational-choice model in which parents

choose to allow more television viewing in households where television viewing is likely to result in

greater cognitive gains. In this respect, our paper relates to the literature on empirical selection

into behaviors (Roy, 1951; Heckman and Sedlacek, 1985; Heckman, 1996).

   Because television may also have important non-cognitive eﬀects, we also estimate the eﬀects

of television on behavioral and attitudinal outcomes such as time spent on homework and desired

school completion. Additionally, in light of recent evidence (see, e.g., Heckman and Rubinstein,

2001) that non-cognitive skills are valued in the labor market, we test for an impact of childhood

television exposure on subsequent labor market outcomes. Although our estimates for both of these

categories are less precise than the test score measures, we again find no evidence of a negative

eﬀect of television.

   In addition to its obvious relationship with the large literature on the cognitive eﬀects of tele-

vision, this paper contributes to a growing economic literature on the eﬀects of mass media on

political and economic behavior (see, e.g., Djankov, McLiesh, Nenova and Shleifer, 2003; Gentzkow

and Shapiro, 2004 and 2006; Gentzkow 2006; Stromberg, 2004; DellaVigna and Kaplan, 2005).

Although our identification is driven by historical market-level changes and not by contemporary

parental decision-making, our estimates may also inform debates on the eﬀects of parental behaviors

on children’s skill acquisition (e.g., Levitt and Dubner 2005).

   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the history of the

introduction and diﬀusion of television and describes our procedure for collecting data on the

timing of television entry to U.S. markets. Section 3 presents our data, identification strategy, and

results. Section 4 presents an analysis of heterogeneity across students in the cognitive eﬀects of


                                                  4
television. Section 5 shows evidence on the eﬀects of television on non-cognitive skills and labor

market outcomes. Section 6 concludes.



2        The Introduction and Diﬀusion of Television

2.1       The Growth of Commercial Broadcasting

Although television did not achieve rapid growth until after World War II, the basic technology

was already well developed by the late 1930s. The first workable prototypes for television receivers

were made in the early 1920s, the first public demonstration took place in 1923, and numerous

experimental broadcasts were made in the late 1920s. By 1931, 18 experimental stations were

operating in four cities. The first television sets went on sale in 1938 and by 1939 14 companies

were oﬀering sets for sale.2 After several delays, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)

finally licensed television for full-scale commercial broadcasting on July 1, 1941.

        Two unexpected events intervened to delay television’s expansion. The first was World War

II: less than a year after the FCC authorization, the government issued a ban on new television

station construction to preserve materials for the war eﬀort. Although existing stations continued

to broadcast, the total number of sets in use during the war was less than 20,000. After the war,

television grew rapidly. Over 100 new licenses were issued between 1946 and 1948, so that by

1950 half of the country’s population was reached by television signals.3 This growth was again

halted, however, by an FCC-imposed freeze on new television licenses in September 1948. The FCC

had determined that spectrum allocations did not leave suﬃcient space between adjacent markets,

causing excessive interference. The process of redesigning the spectrum allocation took four years,

and it was not until April 1952 that the freeze was lifted and new licenses began to be issued.

        We can look at the pattern of television’s growth in a number of diﬀerent ways. Figure 1 shows

the time path of diﬀusion. In the largest counties, twenty percent had televisions by 1950, and 80

percent had televisions by 1955. Figure 2 shows the number of commercial stations broadcasting:

the post-war expansion, freeze, and subsequent takeoﬀ are clearly visible. Finally, as figure 3
    2
     This section draws primarily on Sterling and Kittross (2001) and Barnouw (1990). For details on the regulatory
process, see also Slotten (2000).
   3
     We consider a county to be reached by television if it is in a Nielsen Designated Market Area that had at least
one station by 1950.


                                                         5
suggests, television penetration was not limited to the highly educated. Television penetration rose

from 8 percent to 82 percent from 1949 to 1955 among those with high school degrees, and from

4 percent to 66 percent among those without. Other demographic groups tend to show a similar

pattern: television diﬀusion was rapid among both whites and non-whites, and among both elderly

and non-elderly Americans.

   The rapid diﬀusion of television was accompanied by extremely high rates of viewership among

television households. In households with television, viewership had already surpassed four and a

half hours per day by 1950 (Television Bureau of Advertising 2003). Critically for our study, children

were among the most enthusiastic early viewers of television. Programs targeted specifically at

children were introduced early, with Howdy Doody making its debut in 1947 and a number of popular

series like Kukla and Ollie, Jamboree Room, and Children’s Matinee on the air by 1948 (Television

January 1948). As early as 1951 there was programming targeted specifically at preschool children

(Barnouw 1990, p. 146). In fact, children’s programs accounted for more time on network television

than any other category in 1950 (Roslow, 1952), and by 1951 advertisers were spending $400,000

per week to reach the children’s market (Television August 1951). Furthermore, children were

frequent viewers of programming primarily targeted at adults–to take one example, I Love Lucy

was ranked the most favored program among elementary-school students in 1952, 1953, and 1954

surveys (Television April 1955).4

   There were no large-scale studies of children’s viewing hours in the 1950s, but a series of small

surveys make clear that intense viewing was common from television’s earliest years. Median daily

viewership in samples of elementary-school children ranged from 2.0 hours per day to 3.7 hours per

day, with the earliest studies showing 3.1 hours per day in 1948 (ages 6-12), 3.7 hours per day in

1950-51 (grades 6-7), 2.7 hours per day in 1951 (elementary ages), 3.3 hours in 1953 (elementary

ages), 3.7 hours in 1954 (grades 4-8), and 3.4 hours in 1955 (elementary ages).5 Direct evidence on

viewing by preschool children in this period is limited, but one survey of families in San Francisco

in 1958 found that weekday viewing averaged 0.7 hours per day for 3-year-olds, 1.6 hours per day

for 4-year-olds, and 2.3 hours per day for 5-year-olds, with weekend viewing on average half an
  4
    A 1960 study found that 40 percent of children’s viewing was devoted to adult programs (Schramm, Lyle, and
Parker 1961, 41).
  5
    See Schramm, Lyle, and Parker (1961) for a review of this evidence.



                                                      6
hour to an hour higher (Schramm, Lyle, and Parker, 1961).

       Finally, two studies from the period suggest that television brought dramatic changes to the

way children allocated their time. First, Maccoby (1951) surveyed 622 children in Boston in 1950

and 1951 and matched children with and without television by age, sex, and socioeconomic status.

The study found that radio listening, movie watching, and reading were substantially lower in

the television group, but also that total media time was greater by approximately an hour and

a half per day.6 The television group went to bed almost half an hour later, spent less time on

homework, and spent more than an hour less time in active play. The second study, conducted in

1959, surveyed children in two similar towns in Western Canada of which only one had television

available (Schramm, Lyle, and Parker 1961, 18). First-grade children in the town with television

watched for an average of an hour and 40 minutes per day. They spent 35 fewer minutes listening

to radio, 33 fewer minutes at play, 13 fewer minutes sleeping, and 20 fewer minutes reading and

watching movies. Sixth grade children showed similar shifts in time allocation and also spent 15

fewer minutes on homework.


2.2      Television Penetration in Local Markets

Our estimation strategy relies on information about the availability of television in U.S. cities

beginning in 1946. We use data from Gentzkow (2006) on the year in which the first television

station appeared in a given market. We define television markets using the Designated Market

Area (DMA) concept designed by Nielsen Media Research (NMR). NMR assign every county in

the US to a television market such that all counties in a given market have a majority of their

measured viewing hours on stations broadcasting from that market. These definitions are based on

viewership as of 2003, rather than in the historical period we are analyzing. However, since the

broadcasting strength of stations is regulated by the FCC to avoid interference with neighboring

markets, the area reached by particular stations has not changed significantly.7 We therefore take

the DMA definitions as a reasonable approximation of the viewing area of stations in the 1950s and
   6
      The observation that the time devoted to television did not simply replace radio is also supported by a number
of studies suggesting that even in the 1930s radio listening averaged little more than an hour per day (Fox Meadow
School PTA 1933; Eisenberg 1936).
    7
      This has been verified by spot-checking the DMA definitions against coverage maps from the 1960s.




                                                         7
60s, and calculate the first year in which a station in the DMA broadcast for at least four months.8

      An examination of historical records suggests two potential sources of endogeneity in the timing

of television’s introduction to a market. First, the FCC prioritized applications for new stations

in such a way as to maximize the number of Americans who could receive a commercial television

signal. Conditional on the quality of existing coverage in a market, the FCC therefore handled

applications to begin broadcasting in order of the market’s total population (Television Digest

1953). Second, since a station’s profitability was determined largely by advertising revenue, which

in turn depends on the spending power of the market’s population, commercial interest in operating

stations in a given market was highly related to the market’s total retail sales or income. In all

of the specifications we report below, we include controls for the natural logarithm of total DMA

population and income as measured in the 1960 Census. As table 1 shows, the variation in the

timing of television introduction left over after controlling for income and population appears to be

largely idiosyncratic. Although our identification strategy will rely only on changes across cohorts

within a given market, rather than diﬀerences across markets, including these controls (interacted

with cohort dummies) will limit the chance that our results will be confounded by unobserved

diﬀerences in cohort or time trends across markets of diﬀerent size or wealth.

      To illustrate the impact of broadcast availability on television ownership, figure 4 shows tele-

vision penetration for DMAs by year of television’s introduction for 1950 using Census data. The

height of each bar is the fraction of households with televisions in all counties that received televi-

sion in the given year. The data reveal a clear distinction between counties that had a television

station in their DMA and those that did not–the average penetration in DMAs whose first station

began broadcasting before 1950 ranges from 8 percent in the 1949 group to over 35 percent in the

1941 group, while the average for groups getting television after 1950 never exceeds 1 percent. This

suggests that the timing of commercial television introduction had a substantial impact on actual

penetration, a fact that will be crucial to our estimation strategy.
  8
    In most cases, we use the date that a station began commercial broadcasts, as regulated by the FCC. The
exceptions are two stations–KTLA in Los Angeles and WTTG in Washington, DC–that began large-scale exper-
imental broadcasts and subsequently converted to become commercial stations. In these cases, we use the stations’
experimental start dates.




                                                       8
3        Estimates of the Eﬀects of Television on Cognitive Development

3.1       Data: The Coleman Study

Our data on test scores will come from the 1966 study Equality of Educational Opportunity, often

informally called the Coleman Report.9 The study includes data on 567,148 students who were

in grades 1, 3, 6, 9, or 12 in 1965. Sampling was conducted through the construction of primary

sampling units (PSUs) consisting of either counties or metropolitan areas. Because racial equality

was a primary focus of the study, nonwhite students were oversampled.

        The surveyors first chose schools with twelfth grades. Then, for each school containing a twelfth

grade, they made an eﬀort to identify the middle and elementary schools that “fed” their students

into the secondary school. Therefore for each student in the sample, the dataset identifies the

school the student is most likely to attend as a twelfth-grader. It is this variable we will employ

when we estimate specifications with “school” fixed eﬀects.

        Each student completed a survey and an exam, both of which were administered in the fall of

1965. We will focus our analysis on sixth, ninth, and twelfth graders because these students’ birth

cohorts (1948-1954) span most of the period during which television was introduced, and because

exam style and format were fairly similar across these diﬀerent grades. Exams for sixth, ninth and

twelfth graders contained sections on word meaning, spatial reasoning, reading, and mathematics;

ninth and twelfth graders completed an additional section on general knowledge. In addition to

information on test scores, we extracted data on demographic characteristics from the student

surveys. We tried to include all characteristics that were available and reasonably comparable

across all three grades.


3.2       Diﬃculties with Correlational Evidence

To consider how correlational estimates of television’s eﬀect might be biased, table 2 presents regres-

sions of both average test scores and self-reported hours of (contemporaneous) television viewing

on demographics. The first half of the table shows coeﬃcients on family background variables, such

as race and education. In almost all of these cases, the eﬀects of these demographic characteristics
    9
   For examples of other studies by economists using data from this study, see Hanushek and Kain (1972) and
Ehrenberg and Brewer (1995).


                                                      9
on television hours are statistically significant and in the opposite direction from their eﬀects on

average test scores. Therefore, we would expect any unobserved variation in these characteristics to

tend to bias an OLS regression of test scores on television viewing towards finding negative eﬀects

of television. The second half of the table shows that measures of durables ownership–a proxy for

family income or wealth–tend to have positive eﬀects on both television viewing and test scores,

controlling for family background. This finding is not surprising since these proxies for wealth are

highly correlated with television ownership, and are probably also highly related to the quality

of the television set available in the household. So an OLS regression of test scores on television

viewing that did not control carefully for family income might find that television has a positive

eﬀect on student performance. This type of bias seems especially likely in contexts where television

ownership is not universal or where quality of sets or programming is likely to be highly variable

with income.

   These estimates suggest that OLS regressions of test scores on television viewership can easily

be subject to upward or downward bias, depending on which household characteristics are measured

well and which are measured poorly by the econometrician. To show this more explicitly, table

3 presents correlational estimates of the eﬀect of television viewing on average test scores, using

alternative sets of controls. As predicted, when we control for family background measures such as

race and education, but not for our wealth proxies, we find an average eﬀect of television viewing

that is positive and highly statistically significant. In contrast, when we include wealth proxies

but not family background controls, the estimated eﬀect becomes large, statistically significant,

and negative. Similar results are present when comparing eﬀects on component test scores under

alternative sets of controls. Eﬀects are in general more positive (or less negative) when we control

for family background and omit wealth controls than when we do the reverse. Indeed, for verbal

and reading scores we again see a strong sign reversal.

   We believe this finding may help to explain why correlational studies of the eﬀects of television

reach highly variable conclusions (Strasburger 1986). Since these studies are only as good as the

controls they employ, and since table 3 shows that omitted variables problems could lead either to

an upward or downward bias of the eﬀects of television, it is not surprising that diﬀerent academic

studies employing diﬀerent econometric specifications reach radically diﬀerent conclusions. In a


                                                10
study that controls carefully for family background but not for income, we would expect to find

positive eﬀects of television. By contrast, controlling carefully for income or wealth but not for

parental education and other background characteristics will lead to a downward bias and findings

of deleterious eﬀects of television.


3.3   Identification Strategy

To illustrate how we will identify the eﬀects of television in our data, suppose that childhood

exposure to television has a negative eﬀect on test scores. Consider two cities, one in which

television was introduced in 1948, the other in which it was introduced in 1951. In the first city,

sixth, ninth, and twelfth graders were all exposed to television throughout childhood. In the second,

sixth and ninth graders had lifetime exposure to television, but twelfth graders only got television

at age 3. We would expect twelfth graders in the second city to perform well relative to sixth and

ninth graders in that city, but we would expect no such pattern in the first city. By diﬀerencing

out the mean test scores by grade from the first city, we can hope to isolate the eﬀects of television

using grade patterns in the second city.

   We will implement this identification strategy using a two-stage least squares (2SLS) procedure,

in which dummies for the year of television introduction interacted with grade are used as instru-

ments for the number of preschool years in which a student’s household had television. Letting

yearsi denote the number of years of preschool television exposure for student i, we can estimate

the following model of test scores yi :


                             yi = ψ (yearsi ) + Xi β + δ g + Wc γ g + μs + εi                     (1)

                        yearsi = Zgc α + Xi β 0 + δ 0g + Wc γ 0g + μ0s + ε0i                      (2)


where Zgc is a vector of dummies for interactions between the television introduction year of city c

and the grade g of the student, Xi is a vector of individual-level demographic characteristics, Wc is

a vector of DMA characteristics (log of income and population), δ g are grade dummies, and μs are

school dummies. By allowing the error εi to be correlated across students within the same DMA,

we can correct our standard errors for the fact that variation in Zgc is at the DMA level, as well as



                                                  11
for the presence of DMA-specific shocks that are common across grades (Moulton, 1990; Bertrand,

Duflo and Mullainathan, 2004).

    The crucial identifying assumption in this model is that, conditional on school dummies (μs ) and

grade dummies (δ g ) and on the interaction between grade dummies and DMA-level characteristics

(Wc γ g ), the interaction between the timing of television introduction and the birth cohort of the

student (Zgc ) is orthogonal to the error term (εi ). Under this assumption, our estimate of the

parameter ψ will be directly interpretable as an estimate of the causal eﬀect of an additional year

of preschool television exposure on test scores yi .

    One practical diﬃculty with implementing model (1) is that the Coleman Study’s question-

naire did not ask students when their households first owned a television. We therefore cannot use

individual-level data on the television exposure variable yearsi to estimate the model. To circum-

vent this problem, we have constructed a predicted value of yearsi using a new dataset of television

penetration statistics by U.S. county for the years 1950-1960. The 1950 and 1960 U.S. Censuses

included a question on television ownership, so for those years we simply use the share of households

owning a television as reported by the Census. For intercensal years, our primary source is Televi-

sion magazine, which used Census data as well as published reports by the Advertising Research

Foundation, A.C. Nielsen, NBC, and CBS, as well as television shipments data, to construct annual

estimates of penetration by county. We use data from Television for the years 1954-1959 and from

the Television Factbook for 1953.10 For years with missing data, we used a linear interpolation (or

extrapolation) from the surrounding years, with a transformation that restricts penetration shares

to fall between 0 and 1.11

    To predict total years of television exposure for each student in the dataset, we assume that

the probability that a student’s household had television in a given year is equal to the share of

households in the student’s 1965 county of residence who had television sets in that year.12 By
  10
     The correlation between Television’s county-level penetration estimates for 1959 and the U.S. Census counts for
1960 is a highly statistically significant 0.64 (p < 0.0001). Given that Television did not yet have access to the Census
reports when producing these figures, this correlation suggests reasonably high reliability.
  11
     In particular, we computed the transformation log (penetration/ (1 − penetration)) and imputed missing values
using a linear interpolation (or extrapolation) of this transformed measure. We then used the inverse function to
re-transform the imputed values to a 0 − 1 scale. This approach amounts to assuming that television diﬀusion follows
an S-shaped logistic process in years with missing data (Griliches, 1957).
  12
     When the Coleman data do not provide information on a student’s county of residence, we use the student’s
Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area of residence in 1965 to estimate television ownership.




                                                           12
summing these probabilities, we can obtain an approximation of the student’s number of years of

preschool television exposure during ages two through six. For example, consider a student born in

1948, and therefore in grade 12 in 1965. Suppose that in 1950 (age two), 10 percent of households

in the student’s county had television, and that 11 percent had it in 1951, 12 percent in 1952, 13

percent in 1953, and 14 percent in 1954 (age six). Then we calculate the student’s expected years of

preschool television exposure as (0.10 + 0.11 + 0.12 + 0.13 + 0.14) = 0.6. We have chosen to ignore

ages below two because there is relatively less information about viewing patterns in those ages,

so we can have comparatively less confidence that children in these ages were actually watching

television in the 1950s. We restrict attention to ages six and below because by age six, essentially

every student in our sample lived in a market in which television broadcasts were available.

    Using an aggregate proxy for television ownership in place of a direct measure of each student’s

true childhood exposure will introduce some measurement error into our key independent variable.

However, for well-known reasons, instrumental variables estimates will still be consistent, provided

the measurement error is classical. Additionally, since our instruments are market-level rather than

individual-level, there should be relatively little loss of power from estimating a first-stage model

using aggregate dependent measures.


3.4      First-stage and Reduced-form Estimates

Before estimating model (1) using two-stage least squares, it will be helpful to examine the first

stage of the model, as well as the reduced-form second stage of the model. Column (1) of table 4

presents estimates of the eﬀect of the timing of television introduction on the number of preschool

years of television exposure, which will serve as the first-stage model (2). We have divided cities

into three categories: those in which television was introduced in 1948 or earlier, those in which it

was introduced from 1949 to 1951, and those that began receiving television broadcasts in 1952 or

later.

    Observe first that, for a given grade, television exposure was lower the later television was

introduced to the student’s city. So, for example, students in grade 9 whose DMAs began receiving

a television signal in 1952 or later were exposed to television for about .8 years less than ninth-

graders whose DMAs received television in 1948 or earlier, and about .5 years less than those whose


                                                 13
DMAs got sometime between 1949 and 1951. A similar pattern is present for students in grade 12.

       Next, note that, holding constant the timing of television’s introduction to a market, twelfth-

graders on average had less preschool television exposure (between the ages of 2 and 6) than ninth

graders, and much less than sixth graders (the omitted category). For example, twelfth-graders in

cities that began receiving a television signal in 1952 or later had television in their homes for about

1.1 years less than sixth-graders in these same DMAs, and about .3 years less than ninth-graders.

This is what we would expect, since twelfth-graders were born in 1948, ninth-graders were born in

1951, and sixth-graders were born in 1954. So in cities receiving television after 1948, ninth-graders

were more likely than twelfth-graders to spend their preschool years in a city in which a television

signal was available, and sixth-graders were almost certain to have grown up with a television in

the household.

       These findings complement the evidence in figure 4 in showing that the timing of broadcast

availability had a substantial impact on television penetration and hence on students’ exposure to

television as young children. The F-test presented in table 4 definitively rejects the null hypothesis

that the grade-timing introductions had no impact on exposure, and each of these interaction terms

is strongly individually significant.13

       The regression in column (1) of the table also serves to illustrate our identification strategy.

The regression includes fixed eﬀects for school and grade, and therefore identifies the eﬀect of

television’s introduction by comparing the relative grade diﬀerentials across markets with diﬀerent

years of introduction. In this way, we can identify models purged of any level diﬀerences across

grades or markets that might impact the outcomes of interest.

       In column (2), we present a reduced-form second-stage estimate of the eﬀect of our instruments

on test scores. We use as our dependent variable the average of the student’s (standardized) scores

on the math, reading, verbal, and spatial reasoning tests. If television exposure exerted a negative

long-term eﬀect on cognitive skills, we would expect the coeﬃcients on the grade-timing interactions

in column (2) to move inversely with the coeﬃcients in column (1). In other words, we would expect

the students who had relatively less childhood television exposure to perform better on standardized

tests. As the column shows, however, we do not see such a pattern. Although students whose areas
  13
   The F-statistic in this first-stage model is suﬃcient to rule out any sizable weak instruments bias (Stock and
Yogo, 2002).


                                                       14
received television in 1949-1951 perform slightly better than those who received it in 1952 or

later, these students perform worse than those whose areas received television in 1948 or sooner.

Additionally, among students whose areas received television in 1949-1951, twelfth graders perform

worse than ninth graders and sixth graders, despite having spent more time without television in

their households.

   An F-test of the null hypothesis that the grade-timing interactions had no eﬀect on test scores

fails to reject at conventional significance levels. Adding demographic controls in columns (3) and

(4) improves the precision of our estimates by explaining a larger share of the variation in test

scores. These more precise estimates show even less evidence of a negative eﬀect of television.

In column (4), where our standard errors are lowest, we find small point estimates on nearly all

interaction terms, and the diﬀerences between these coeﬃcients do not support the hypothesis of a

negative eﬀect of television on test scores.


3.5   Two-stage Least Squares (2SLS) Estimates

The estimates presented above allow us to test for an eﬀect of television without placing any formal

structure on how the introduction of television is related to television ownership. While such a test

is a useful first step in evaluating the eﬀects of the introduction of television, this lack of structure

reduces statistical power, and makes it diﬃcult to interpret the magnitude of the estimates. In this

section, we present estimates of model (1) computed using two-stage least squares. Coeﬃcients in

these models will have a natural interpretation as the causal eﬀect of a year of preschool television

exposure on test scores.

   Table 5 presents our 2SLS estimates. We present results for the average test score as well as

for each individual component score. For each test, we present baseline estimates, estimates with

demographic controls, and estimates with household demographics interacted with a student’s

grade. Adding controls should improve the precision of our estimates by leaving a smaller share of

the overall variation in test scores unexplained.

   The first column shows our estimates of the eﬀect of an additional year of television exposure on

the student’s average test score, expressed in units of standard deviations (by grade). In general, we

find small, statistically insignificant, and positive estimates. That is, if anything, our point estimates


                                                    15
suggest that childhood television exposure improves a student’s test scores. Adding controls tends

to increase the point estimates and, consistent with expectations, decrease the standard errors of

these estimates. In the final specification with demographic controls interacted with grade dummies,

we are able to reject negative eﬀects of television larger than about 0.034 of a standard deviation

per year of exposure.

       In the next column we report the estimated eﬀect of television on mathematics performance.

The point estimates are in general negative and statistically insignificant, and are slightly less

precisely estimated than the estimates in the first column. Again, however, we find no evidence of

a negative eﬀect of television viewing. Turning to spatial reasoning, we find extremely small point

estimates that range from slightly negative to slightly positive depending on the set of controls

used. With our largest set of controls, we find a positive eﬀect of about 0.003 standard deviations,

but our confidence interval begins at −0.07.

       Although there is little reason to expect television to improve mathematical skill, it would not

be surprising to learn that it has some benefits in verbal performance. For example, Rice (1983)

argues that the presentation of verbal information on television is especially conducive to learning

by young children. Rice and Woodsmall (1988) present laboratory evidence that children aged three

and five can learn unfamiliar words from watching television. Our estimates provide some evidence

for this view. Our point estimates on verbal and reading scores are always positive, with the eﬀect

on reading scores reaching nearly 0.06 standard deviations in the final specification. Indeed, this

estimate is marginally statistically significant (p = 0.069). This in turn means that we can rule out

even very small negative eﬀects–our confidence interval in this specification excludes a negative

eﬀect on reading scores of about 0.004 standard deviations.

       Television also exposes young children to a large number of facts, some of which might be

retained into adolescence. Our estimates using students’ general knowledge scores as a dependent

variable support this possibility. We typically find nontrivial positive point estimates of about 0.07

standard deviations per year of television exposure. Although students in the sixth grade were not

administered a general knowledge test, estimates from the contrast of ninth- and twelfth-graders

are precise enough to rule out even very small negative eﬀects on this outcome.14
  14
    The fact that television exposure improves factual knowledge may also partly explain its eﬀect on reading scores,
since some evidence indicates that background knowledge can improve reading comprehension (Langer, 1984), at


                                                         16
    As an important caveat, we note that the eﬀects we estimate are necessarily “local” to the

students whose exposure to television was aﬀected by the introduction of television (Angrist, 2004).

A student whose household would never own a television regardless of whether broadcasts were

available in the area will not be aﬀected by variation in the timing of television signal introduction,

even if the true eﬀect of television exposure on the student is large. So, for example, students from

richer households are likely to have more weight in our two-stage least squares estimates because

these households tended to adopt television more rapidly. In section 4, we provide evidence on the

heterogeneity in treatment eﬀects in the student population and discuss how this heterogeneity is

related to television viewership rates.15


3.6    Specification Checks

Are the instruments correlated with student characteristics?

    The models presented above are valid under the assumption that our instruments Zgc –interactions

between the timing of television introduction and cohort–are orthogonal to the error term εi . Of

course, it is by definition impossible to test this assumption. Some relevant information, however,

can be obtained by asking whether television exposure is correlated with observable demographic

characteristics Xi . Although the absence of such a correlation is not proof of the identifying as-

sumption, it does provide some confidence that unobserved heterogeneity is unlikely to bias our

estimates of the ψ parameter.

    To conduct a test of the orthogonality of our instruments to student demographics, we use the

first-stage model (2) to create a predicted number of years of television exposure for each student.

By regressing this predicted value on a set of demographic characteristics, we can test whether the

variation in television exposure that is due to the timing of television introduction is correlated

with observable student characteristics that might be expected to aﬀect test scores. Because this

predicted exposure measure varies only at the DMA-grade level, we conduct this test on “collapsed”

data, where the demographics are measured as averages for each DMA-grade observation.
least if it is consistent with the information in the test passage (Alvermann, Smith, and Readence, 1985).
  15
     We also present evidence in section 5 that television does not directly aﬀect high-school completion rates. This
makes it unlikely that selection into our 12th-grade sample is directly aﬀected by exposure to television. Of course
the sample of students who continue as far as 12th grade is not random, and our estimates will necessarily be “local”
to this subset of the population.



                                                         17
       The results of this test are presented in appendix table 1. None of the demographics has

a statistically significant correlation with predicted television exposure. Additionally, an F-test

of the joint hypothesis that none of the demographic characteristics is correlated with years of

television exposure fails to reject at any conventional level (p = 0.371). Thus we find no evidence of

a correlation between length of childhood television exposure and observable characteristics.16 This

is true despite the fact that, as the appendix table also shows, these demographic characteristics

are in most cases strong predictors of test scores.17

Are the instruments correlated with teacher characteristics?

       It is possible that local trends in student characteristics are unrelated to the timing of television

introduction but that changes in school resources and teacher quality are correlated with television

entry. This could bias our findings if school resources aﬀect test scores in ways not captured

by student demographic characteristics. To address this issue we have tested whether diﬀerences

in teacher characteristics across grades are correlated with the year of introduction of television,

controlling for DMA characteristics as in our main specifications. To do this, we take advantage of

the fact that the Coleman study collected a set of teacher surveys in addition to student surveys

and test scores. While diﬀerences between teachers of diﬀerent grades in 1965 may not perfectly

capture time trends occurring simultaneously with the introduction of television in the 1950s, these

tests can give us a partial look at whether heterogeneity in school resources is likely to be a source

of bias in our estimates.

       Appendix table 2 presents results of regressions of predicted television exposure by DMA-grade

on the average characteristics of teachers who taught in that grade in 1965. Only one of the

teacher characteristics (number of subjects taught) is statistically significantly related to predicted

television exposure in that grade (p = 0.040). An F-test of the joint significance of the 12 teacher
  16
     This approach allows us to test for a correlation between television introduction and trends across birth cohorts
in household characteristics. Another source of concern might be changes over time in income or other local area
characteristics, that might have aﬀected diﬀerent cohorts diﬀerently. To test for such a bias, we have estimated the
relationship between the timing of the introduction of television and changes in income, population density, and adult
schooling levels by DMA in the 1950s. We find no statistically significant relationship and no consistent direction of
correlation. These findings further support the view that, conditional on our controls, there are no important time
or cohort trends that are correlated with the timing of the introduction of television.
  17
     Results are quite similar when we conduct the test on the individual-level data: we find no evidence of a correlation
between predicted exposure and household characteristics. We have also conducted a parallel exercise in which we
predict each student’s average test score using her demographics, and then use this predicted measure as the dependent
variable in 2SLS analysis paralleling table 5. In this case, we again find no evidence of any correlation between our
instruments and the demographic predictors of test scores.


                                                           18
characteristics fails to reject at conventional significance levels (p = 0.111). Additionally, the signs

of the coeﬃcients suggest no clear pattern of more resources being associated with greater or lesser

television exposure, again supporting the view that there were no systematic cross-grade trends in

teacher quality that were correlated with the timing of the introduction of television.

       As further evidence that television introduction was not correlated with trends in school qual-

ity, appendix table 3 shows regressions of the year of television introduction by U.S. state on

cohort changes in schooling investments, as measured by Card and Krueger (1992). Given Card

and Krueger’s evidence that these measures are correlated with estimated returns to schooling, it

is comforting that we find no evidence of a statistically significant (or even consistently signed)

relationship between television introduction and this vector of school quality changes.18

Sample splits by place of residence in childhood.

       In our calculations thus far we have implicitly assumed that the students in our sample grew up

in the county–or at least the DMA–where they currently reside. Roughly 72 percent of students

report having spent most of their lives in their current locality, with another 13 percent reporting

having spent most of their lives in the same state but in a diﬀerent city or town.19 Given the

breadth of most DMAs, these figures suggest that our assignment of years of television introduction

to sample students will be fairly accurate. However, it is possible to check more directly that our

results are robust to excluding students who report living in a diﬀerent state or country for most

of their lives.

       To do so, we separate students into two categories: those who grew up in their current locality

of residence, or at least in the same state, and those who grew up in another state or country. If the

positive estimates for reading and general knowledge reported in section 3.5 are robust, we would

expect these eﬀects to be stronger for the first group of students. The results, which we present

in appendix table 4, do indeed show more positive eﬀects of television for students who report

growing up in their current state of residence. In almost all cases, we find higher (more positive)

point estimates in the sample of students who grew up in the area than in the sample of students
  18
     The expansion of kindergartens, another important trend in schooling investment, occurred after the television
introduction period we study and is therefore not likely to be a confound in our analysis (Cascio, 2004).
  19
     Follow-up data collected for a limited subsample suggests that students’ responses to the survey question about
where they spent the majority of their lives was accurate in 88 to 98 percent of cases. See appendix section 9.7 of
Coleman (1966).



                                                        19
who didn’t. These findings lend support to the identifying assumptions in the model, and suggest

that the slightly positive eﬀects of television we estimate are not driven by unobserved area-level

characteristics that are correlated with diﬀerences across grades in school achievement.20

Formal specification test.

         Because we have multiple instruments, we can perform a test of overidentifying restrictions as an

additional check on the validity of the instruments. A test using Hansen’s J-statistic (Hansen, 1982;

Hoxby and Paserman, 1998; Baum, Schaﬀer, and Stillman, 2002) cannot reject the null hypothesis

that the instruments are uncorrelated with the error term (J = 3.119, p = 0.3736).



4         Heterogeneity in the Eﬀects of Television

Our results thus far focus on the eﬀect of preschool television exposure on the test scores of the

average student in our dataset. For many purposes, however, it will be important to know how the

eﬀects of television are distributed in the population, especially with respect to the socioeconomic

status of the student’s household. Theoretically, the direction of the relationship between parental

human capital and the eﬀect of television viewing on a child’s cognitive development is ambiguous.

On the one hand, it might be that richer or more educated parents are better able to select

educational programming for their children to watch, thus making the eﬀects of television more

positive in households with greater parental resources. On the other hand, if television’s eﬀects

come mostly through displacing other activities, a simple model of time allocation in the spirit of

Becker (1965) would predict that children with more educated parents will gain less from television

viewing, because for such children television is likely to displace human-capital-building activities.21

         In this section, we oﬀer evidence on the question of which children benefit the most (or are

harmed the least) from television exposure. On the whole, our findings support the hypothesis

that television is most beneficial in households with the least parental human capital. We find that

the positive eﬀects of television on test scores tend to be greatest for students whose parents do
    20
     As an additional robustness check, we follow Gentzkow (2006) and re-estimate our models using rural counties
only (results not shown). The point estimates from these models suggest similar conclusions to our estimates from
the full sample, but the sample is about one-third the size, so the standard errors are substantially larger.
  21
     The distinction between the direct eﬀect of television content on the viewer and the indirect eﬀect working
through displacement of other activities is discussed by Gaddy (1986) and Beentjes and Van der Voort (1988) among
others.



                                                       20
not have a high-school degree, and for students in households where English is not the primary

language. These findings seem most consistent with a model in which the eﬀect of television viewing

depends on the cognitive eﬀects of the other activities that it displaces. We also discuss evidence

supporting the rational-choice prediction that television viewing is greatest in households where its

eﬀects are most positive, which suggests that parental decisions about television viewing may vary

in response to diﬀerences in television’s eﬀect on test scores.

       Table 6 presents estimates of the eﬀect of television exposure for students whose mothers do

and do not have a high school education.22 In the first portion of the table, we repeat our basic

2SLS specification for these two subsamples. The estimated eﬀect of a year of television exposure

on the average test score is 0.04 for students whose mothers have less than a high-school education,

and 0.01 for students whose mothers have a high-school degree. These estimates are not suﬃciently

precise to allow us to distinguish these two coeﬃcients statistically, but the point estimates seem

most consistent with the presence of superior substitutes for television in households with highly

educated parents. The results for individual test scores nearly all support this hypothesis, and the

eﬀect of television on reading scores for students with non-high-school-educated mothers is positive

and statistically significant.

       One diﬃculty with interpreting these estimates is that, as figure 3 suggests, the diﬀusion of

television was somewhat faster among the high-school-educated. Because our measures of televi-

sion penetration are at the county level, they necessarily ignore within-county variation in the rate

of diﬀusion. To adjust our estimates for a possible bias, we compute average television penetration

from 1949-1955 for both high-school-educated and non-high-school-educated Gallup poll respon-

dents (Roper Center for Public Opinion Research, 1949-1955).23 Using these averages, we then

compute the ratio of each group’s penetration to overall television penetration during this period,

and scale each coeﬃcient accordingly. Since high-school-educated respondents to the Gallup poll

tended to be about 15 percent more likely to own televisions than the average respondent during
  22
     We obtain similar results using father’s education to split the sample rather than mother’s education.
  23
     Another way to avoid bias from diﬀerent penetration rates would be to ask whether television’s eﬀect diﬀers in
counties with either high or low average education levels. The fact that lower education counties might also have
less penetration is already corrected for in the estimates because our exposure measure is built from county-level
penetration data. We do not report these results here, but they show a similar pattern: in counties with lower-than-
median rates of high-school completion, we estimate larger positive television eﬀects on reading, verbal and general
knowledge scores than in counties with above-median education. The eﬀect on reading scores in low-education
counties is statistically significant at the 5 percent level.


                                                        21
this period, we divide the coeﬃcient (and standard error) on television exposure by 1.15 for students

whose mothers have high-school degrees. Similarly, since Gallup respondents who did not complete

high school were about 10 percent less likely to own a television than the average respondent, we

divide the figures for students whose mothers did not complete high school by .9. As the second

portion of the table shows, taking these adjustments into account makes little diﬀerence and leaves

our qualitative conclusions unchanged. We still find that students with less educated fathers tend

to benefit more from television exposure, and the coeﬃcients are quite similar to those in the first

portion of the table.

    The fact that students in diﬀerent households are likely to have watched diﬀerent amounts of

television as preschoolers could also lead to mechanical diﬀerences in the estimated treatment eﬀect

of television penetration. To correct for this, in the third portion of the table we further adjust

our estimates to allow for diﬀerences in viewing intensity by parental education. We estimate

preschool viewing hours for each respondent in the Coleman sample by scaling reported hours of

current (1965) daily viewership to reflect the diﬀerence in viewing intensity between preschoolers

and adolescents.24 We then rescale the coeﬃcients in table 6 for the high and low-education groups

by the ratio of the group’s average daily preschool viewing hours to the overall average. Again, this

adjustment does not make a substantial diﬀerence: the evidence still seems most consistent with

the view that television is more beneficial for students whose parents are less educated.

    The diﬀerences in viewing intensity between these two groups also suggest another important

pattern in the data: the groups that we estimate to benefit most from television are also those where

television watching is most intensive. Estimated average daily preschool viewing for children with

high-school educated mothers is 8 percent lower than for children with mothers who do not have

a high-school diploma. Although not conclusive, this pattern seems consistent with the rational-

choice hypothesis that parental choices respond to the incentives generated by cross-household

diﬀerences in the cognitive eﬀects of television.

    In table 7, we present several additional pieces of evidence on the heterogeneity in treatment

eﬀects across households. Because we find in table 6 that adjustments for diﬀerences in penetration
  24
     We scale each student’s reported hours of television viewing proportionally so that the average predicted preschool
viewing in each grade is equal to Schramm, Lyle, and Parker’s (1961) estimates of preschool viewing intensity in the
1950s.



                                                          22
and viewing intensity do not substantially alter our conclusions, we focus here on unadjusted

estimates. Given that our point estimates in section 3.5 suggest that the greatest gains from

television accrued in verbal, reading, and general knowledge scores, we turn first to the question

of whether these eﬀects are larger in households where English language exposure was low. The

results in the first two columns support this hypothesis. The estimated eﬀects of television on

verbal, reading, and general knowledge scores for students in non-English-speaking households are

positive and nontrivial in magnitude, and the eﬀect on reading scores is statistically significant

(p = 0.044). For the sample of students whose family members primarily speak English, the

point estimates are still positive, but are much smaller. The point estimates for math and spatial

reasoning also suggest more positive eﬀects for students in non-English-speaking households.

   In the second two columns, we present results for white and non-white students. We find that

non-white students benefit considerably more from television exposure than do white students.

The point estimate of the eﬀect on average test scores is more than 0.05 for non-white students, as

compared to less than 0.01 for white students. For non-white students, the eﬀect of television on

verbal scores is positive and statistically significant, and the eﬀects on reading and general knowl-

edge scores are positive and marginally statistically significant. By contrast, we find statistically

significant evidence that white students’ general knowledge test scores are decreased by television

exposure.

   To combine the information from these various subsample comparisons, we take advantage of

a question in the Coleman study that asks students how often they were read to at home prior to

starting school. If the eﬀects of television come mostly through displacement of other activities,

we would expect television viewing to be most harmful to students in households where preschool

reading by parents was common. To test this hypothesis, we interact our index of preschool reading

frequency with television penetration. Formally, let ri be an index of preschool reading, where a

value of 0 indicates that the student’s parents never read to her prior to school and a value of 1

indicates that the student was regularly read to at home. We will estimate a model of the form


                 yi = ψ 0 (yearsi ) + ψ 1 (yearsi × ri ) + Xi β + δ g + Wc γ g + μs + εi




                                                   23
As before, we will instrument for the expected number of years of preschool television ownership

yearsi with our measures of the timing of television introduction. Because the preschool reading

index ri may itself be endogenous to the introduction of television, and because it is likely to be

measured with error,25 we will instrument for this measure with our vector of demographics Xi .26

       Table 8 presents our estimates of this interaction model. The first column shows results for

average test scores. For students who were not read to as preschoolers, an additional year of televi-

sion is estimated to raise average test scores by about 0.09 standard deviations. This coeﬃcient is

marginally statistically significant (p = 0.058). Moving to the top of the preschool reading distri-

bution lowers this coeﬃcient by a statistically significant 0.11 standard deviations, implying that

students who were read to regularly would have experienced a small and statistically insignificant

decline in average test scores as a result of an additional year of television exposure.

       Looking across the columns of table 8, we see that similar patterns arise for the component test

scores. In all cases television is estimated to have a positive eﬀect on students whose parents did

not read to them, and in most cases this positive eﬀect is economically nontrivial and statistically

significant at the 10 percent level. Also, the interaction between childhood reading and television

exposure is consistently negative and nontrivial in size, and is often statistically significant, implying

in most cases that the eﬀect of television on students who were read to regularly is small and

negative.

       These findings provide further support for the hypothesis that children whose home environ-

ments were more conducive to learning were more negatively impacted by television.27 Moreover,

although we do not have suﬃcient data to reliably adjust these interactions for diﬀerences in
  25
     Response agreement between children and their parents on the question of preschool reading ranged from 60-80
percent, depending on the student’s grade (Coleman, 1966).
  26
     More precisely, we will instrument for the vector (yearsi , yearsi × ri ) with a vector of our television introduction
instruments Zgc and the full set of instruments interacted with the full set of demographic characteristics Xi .
  27
     To check the reasonableness of these estimates, we have estimated models that separate the eﬀects of television
at diﬀerent ages. In particular, we have constructed, using county penetration data, a measure of each student’s
expected number of years of television exposure during ages 0 through 3, and a separate measure for ages 4 through
6. Since the evidence we discuss in section 2 above indicates that the older group watched more television than the
younger group during the 1950s, we would expect the eﬀect of television ownership during ages 4 through 6 to be at
least as large as that for age 0 through 3. We find that this is indeed the case for the subsample with below-average
predicted preschool reading. For this group, for whom our estimates suggest mostly positive eﬀects of television on
test scores, we generally find stronger positive eﬀects for exposure at older ages (4 to 6) than for exposure at younger
ages (0 to 3). Among students with above-average predicted preschool reading, our overall estimates suggest small
negative or small positive eﬀects of television, with absolute values of the eﬀects generally larger for exposure at older
ages.




                                                            24
preschool viewing hours and television penetration, the results in table 6 suggest that accounting

for such diﬀerences would not meaningfully alter these conclusions.



5     Television and Non-cognitive Outcomes

Thus far we have argued that television has no discernible negative eﬀect on children’s cognitive

development, and even seems to have positive eﬀects for some groups. But it may be that many of

television’s most important eﬀects are on non-cognitive traits, such as interpersonal skills, which

may have an important impact on economic outcomes (see, e.g., Heckman and Rubinstein, 2001).

In this section, we first use the Coleman study data to estimate the eﬀect of television exposure

on several social and behavioral outcomes, and find little evidence of negative eﬀects. We then

use Census data to test for an eﬀect of television on labor market outcomes. Although tests with

Census data are less precise than those using Coleman study data, we again find no evidence of

an eﬀect of television on human capital. These findings suggest that our conclusions about the

cognitive eﬀects of television may generalize to non-cognitive eﬀects, including those relevant to

labor market performance.


5.1   Evidence from the Coleman Study

Table 9 reports 2SLS estimates of the eﬀect of television exposure on various attitudinal and

behavioral outcomes, using data from the Coleman study. These eﬀects are mostly small, negative,

and statistically insignificant. The main exception is a marginally statistically significant negative

eﬀect on the number of books a student reads during the summer. We also find a statistically

insignificant and small positive eﬀect on the number of hours the student spends on homework

each day.

    Notably, we find no evidence that preschool television exposure leads to less participation in

membership organizations, including sports teams and school clubs. This finding seems especially

interesting in light of Putnam’s (2000) hypothesis that television may have contributed to a decline

in “social capital” during the post-World War II period. Although our measure of club membership

is not available for 6th graders, our estimates nevertheless do not support Putnam’s hypothesis. Of

course, these estimates refer only to the long-term impact of preschool exposure on social partici-

                                                 25
pation, and therefore cannot speak directly to whether television had important contemporaneous

eﬀects on adult social capital.


5.2   Evidence from the U.S. Census

Our labor market data come from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (Ruggles et al, 2004).

We extracted information on schooling attainment for individuals ages 25 and up born in 1948,

1951, and 1954 from the 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 1% samples of the Census. We excluded

individuals still attending school or in group housing.

   Although the Census identifies sample individuals’ metropolitan area of residence, it does not

identify the metropolitan area in which an individual was born or raised. The Census does, however,

classify individuals by state of birth. Since we are interested in the eﬀects of childhood television

exposure, we will use state of birth to figure out the year of television introduction relevant to a

given sample individual. Although this measure is coarser than metropolitan area, the mobility of

the U.S. population means that an adult’s metropolitan area of residence is only a weak proxy for

her metropolitan area of birth.

   For each state, we compute the year in which the first county in the state received television.

Then we follow our procedures from the previous section and calculate for each individual the

expected number of years from ages 2-6 in which he or she lived in a state where television was

available. Although the coarseness of our geographic identifiers makes this a somewhat noisier

proxy than would be ideal, first stage models show a strong and statistically significant relationship

between the timing of the introduction of television and expected television exposure.

   Table 10 presents the results of two-stage least squares models of schooling completion and labor

market earnings as a function of expected years of television exposure. We treat years of television

exposure as endogenous, and use as instruments the interactions between our three categories of

television introduction years with dummies for birth cohort. In parallel with our study of test scores,

all specifications include fixed eﬀects for birth cohort, Census year, and state of birth, as well as

interactions between cohort dummies and log(state income) and log(state population). Standard

errors are adjusted for clustering on state of birth.

   Column (1) presents our estimates of the eﬀect of television exposure on the probability of


                                                  26
high school completion. We focus on the 1948, 1951, and 1954 birth cohorts, since this most

closely resembles the sample we studied in the previous section. We find a small and statistically

insignificant negative eﬀect: an additional year of television exposure causes a decrease of just

over one thousandth in the probability of completing high school. This suggests that our earlier

estimates are not likely to be subject to composition bias due to childhood television exposure

aﬀecting dropout rates.

    In column (2) we turn to eﬀects on labor market earnings. We again find a statistically in-

significant negative eﬀect, implying that an additional year of television exposure decreases annual

earnings by about 4 percent. The confidence interval allows us to reject negative eﬀects larger than

about 11 percent. Although this estimate is not very precise, there is nothing in these estimates to

suggest significant human capital eﬀects of childhood television exposure.

    One potential concern with this estimate is that television exposure may aﬀect the selection of

individuals into the labor market, which could introduce a bias in these estimates. In column (3)

we therefore restrict attention to prime-age white males, whose rates of labor market participation

are high enough to make severe composition bias unlikely. Our estimates in this case continue to

show no evidence of negative eﬀects of television.

    Finally, unlike in our analysis of the Coleman study, in our analysis of Census data we are not

restricted to using the 1948, 1951, and 1954 birth cohorts. In particular, with Census data we can

study the eﬀects of television exposure on cohorts born from 1930 to 1941, who began receiving

television primarily between the ages of 7 to 18. Estimating our model for this cohort therefore

allows us to take a first look at the question of whether the eﬀects of television diﬀer by age of

exposure. As column (4) shows, we continue to find no evidence of a negative eﬀect of television,

even for those who first began receiving broadcasts at ages 7 to 18.



6    Conclusions

In this paper we show that the introduction of television in the 1940s and 1950s had, if anything,

positive eﬀects on the achievement of students exposed to television as preschoolers. Our estimates

therefore cast significant doubt on the hypothesis that television was responsible for the post-



                                                27
World War II declines in cognitive skills (Winn, 2002; Glenn, 1994) that Bishop (1989) links to

the productivity growth slowdown of the 1980s. Our findings also suggest that much of the recent

correlational evidence attributing negative developmental eﬀects to childhood television viewing

may require reevaluation.

   Of course, it is possible that the type and variety of television content has changed over time in

such a way as to alter its eﬀects on cognitive development. We note, however, that congressional

hearings on violence in television began as early as 1952 (Hoerrner, 1999), and that the popular

children’s shows of 2003 do not seem obviously less cognitively demanding than those of 1953

(see appendix table 5). Finally, as a first step toward understanding the eﬀects of programming

variety on cognitive development, we have re-estimated our models using variation in the number

of television stations broadcasting as an independent variable, and find no evidence of negative

eﬀects of greater broadcast variety on cognitive development.




                                                28
References
 [1] Donna E. Alvermann, Lynn C. Smith, and John E. Readence. Prior knowledge activation
     and the comprehension of compatible and incompatible text. Reading Research Quarterly,
     20(4):420—436, Summer 1985.

 [2] Joshua D. Angrist. Treatment eﬀect heterogeneity in theory and practice. Economic Journal,
     114(494):83, 2004.

 [3] Erik Barnouw. Tube of Plenty: The Evolution of American Television. Oxford University
     Press, New York, 2nd rev. edition, 1990.

 [4] Christopher F. Baum, Mark E. Schaﬀer, and Steven Stillman. Instrumental variables and
     GMM: Estimation and testing. Boston College Economics Working Paper, 545, November
     2002.

 [5] Gary S. Becker. A theory of the allocation of time. Economic Journal, 75(299):493—517, 1965.

 [6] Johannes W. J. Beentjes and Tom H. A. Van der Voort. Television’s impact on children’s
     reading skills: A review of research. Reading Research Quarterly, 23(4):389—413, 1988.

 [7] Christopher Berry. School inflation. Education Next, pages 56—63, Fall 2004.

 [8] Marianne Bertrand, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. How much should we trust
     diﬀerences-in-diﬀerences estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1):249, 2004.

 [9] John H. Bishop. Is the test score decline responsible for the productivity growth decline?
     American Economic Review, 79(1):178—197, March 1989.

[10] Dina L. G. Borzekowski and Thomas N. Robinson. The remote, the mouse, and the no.
     2 pencil: The household media environment and academic achievement among third grade
     students. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med, 159(7):607—613, 2005.

[11] David Card and Alan B. Krueger. Does school quality matter? Returns to education and the
     characteristics of public schools in the united states. Journal of Political Economy, 100(1):1—40,
     February 1992.

[12] Elizabeth U. Cascio. Schooling attainment and the introduction of kindergartens into public
     schools. University of California, Davis mimeograph, April 2004.

[13] Dimitri A. Christakis, Frederick J. Zimmerman, David L. DiGiuseppe, and Carolyn A. Mc-
     Carty. Early television exposure and subsequent attentional problems in children. Pediatrics,
     113(4):708—713, 2004.

[14] James Samuel Coleman, United States Oﬃce of Education, and National Center for Educa-
     tional Statistics. Equality of educational opportunity. U.S. Dept. of Health Education and
     Welfare Oﬃce of Education, Washington, 1966.

[15] Stefano DellaVigna and Ethan Kaplan. The Fox News eﬀect: Media bias and voting. University
     of California, Berkeley Mimeograph, 2005.

[16] Simeon Djankov, Caralee McLiesh, Tatiana Nenova, and Andrei Shleifer. Who owns the media?
     Journal of Law and Economics, 46(2):341—81, 2003.


                                                  29
[17] Ronald G. Ehrenberg and Dominic J. Brewer. Did teachers’ verbal ability and race matter in
     the 1960s? Coleman revisited. Economics of Education Review, 14(1):1, 1995.

[18] Azriel Louis Eisenberg. Children and radio programs: a study of more than three thousand
     children in the New York metropolitan area. Columbia University Press, New York, 1936.

[19] Roper Center for Public Opinion Research.        Gallup Polls, volume USAIPO1949-
     0441,  USAIPO1950-0460,     USAIPO1951-0470,      USAIPO1953-0513,    USAIPO1953-
     0514, USAIPO1953-0522, USAIPO1954-0529, USAIPO1954-0537, USAIPO1955-0546,
     USAIPO1955-0549. Gallup Organization, 1949-1955.

[20] Fox Meadow School PTA. Radio for children—parents listen in. Child Study Magazine, XI(7),
     1933.

[21] Gary D. Gaddy. Television’s impact on high school achievement. Public Opinion Quarterly,
     50(3):340—359, 1986.

[22] D. A. Gentile, C. Oberg, N. E. Sherwood, M. Story, D. A. Walsh, and M. Hogan. Well-child
     visits in the video age: pediatricians and the American Academy of Pediatrics’ guidelines for
     children’s media use. Pediatrics, 114(5):1235—41, 2004.

[23] Matthew Gentzkow. Television and voter turnout. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(3),
     August 2006. Forthcoming.

[24] Matthew Gentzkow and Jesse M. Shapiro. Media bias and reputation. Journal of Political
     Economy, 114(2), April 2006. Forthcoming.

[25] Matthew A. Gentzkow and Jesse M. Shapiro. Media, education, and anti-Americanism in the
     Muslim world. Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer 2004.

[26] Norval D. Glenn. Television watching, newspaper reading, and cohort diﬀerences in verbal
     ability. Sociology of Education, 67(3):216—230, July 1994.

[27] Zvi Griliches. Hybrid corn: An exploration in the economics of technological change. Econo-
     metrica, Journal of the Econometric Society, 25(4):501—522, 1957.

[28] Zvi Griliches and William M. Mason. Education, income, and ability. Journal of Political
     Economy, 80(3):S74—S103, May-June 1972.

[29] Robert J. Hancox, Barry J. Milne, and Richie Poulton. Association of television viewing
     during childhood with poor educational achievement. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med, 159(7):614—
     618, 2005.

[30] Lars Peter Hansen. Large sample properties of generalized method of moments estimators.
     Econometrica, 50(4):1029—1054, July 1982.

[31] Eric A. Hanushek and John F. Kain. On the value of Equality of Educational Opportunity as
     a guide to public policy. In Frederick Mosteller and Daniel P. Moynihan, editors, On Equality
     of Educational Opportunity, pages 116—145. Random House, New York, 1972.

[32] James J. Heckman. Randomization as an instrumental variable. Review of Economics and
     Statistics, 78(2):336—341, May 1996.



                                               30
[33] James J. Heckman and Yona Rubinstein. The importance of noncognitive skills: Lessons from
     the GED testing program. American Economic Review, 91(2):145, 2001.

[34] James J. Heckman and Guilherme Sedlacek. Heterogeneity, aggregation, and market wage
     functions: An empirical model of self-selection into the labor market. Journal of Political
     Economy, 93(6):1077—1125, December 1985.

[35] Keisha L. Hoerrner. The forgotten battles: Congressional hearings on television violence in
     the 1950s. Manship School of Mass Communication Mimeograph, 1999.

[36] Caroline M. Hoxby and M. Daniele Paserman. Overidentification tests with grouped data.
     NBER Technical Working Paper, 223, February 1998.

[37] Judith A. Langer. Examining background knowledge and text comprehension. Reading Re-
     search Quarterly, 19(4):468—481, Summer 1984.

[38] Steven D. Levitt and Stephen J. Dubner. Freakonomics: a rogue economist explores the hidden
     side of everything. William Morrow, New York, 1st edition, 2005.

[39] Eleanor E. Maccoby. Television: Its impact on school children. Public Opinion Quarterly,
     15(3):421—444, 1951.

[40] Brent R. Moulton. An illustration of a pitfall in estimating the eﬀects of aggregate variables
     on micro unit. Review of Economics and Statistics, 72(2):334, 1990.

[41] American Academy of Pediatrics. American academy of pediatrics: Children, adolescents, and
     television. Pediatrics, 107(2):423—6, 2001.

[42] Robert D. Putnam. Bowling Alone. Simon and Schuster, New York, NY, 2000.

[43] Mabel L. Rice. The role of television in language acquisition. Developmental Review, 3:221—224,
     1983.

[44] Mabel L. Rice and Linda Woodsmall. Lessons from television: Children’s word learning when
     viewing. Child Development, 59(2):420—429, 1988.

[45] Sydney Roslow. Programming trends. Television, 9(4):22—23, 1952.

[46] A. D. Roy. Some thoughts on the distribution of earnings. Oxford Economic Papers, 3(2):135—
     146, June 1951.

[47] Steven Ruggles, Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken, Patri-
     cia Kelly Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series:
     Version 3.0. www.ipums.org, 2004.

[48] Wilbur Schramm, Jack Lyle, and Edwin B. Parker. Television in the lives of our children.
     Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA, June 1961.

[49] Hugh Richard Slotten. Radio and Television Regulation: Broadcast Technology in the United
     States, 1920-1960. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, 2000.

[50] Christopher H. Sterling. Electronic Media: A Guide to Trends in Broadcasting and Newer
     Technologies, 1920-1983. Praeger, New York, N.Y., 1984.


                                                31
[51] Christopher H. Sterling and John M. Kittross. Stay Tuned: A History of American Broadcast-
     ing. LEA’s communication series. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, N.J., 3rd edition,
     2001.

[52] James H. Stock and Motohiro Yogo. Testing for weak instruments in linear IV regression.
     NBER Technical Working Paper 284, 2002.

[53] V. C. Strasburger. Does television aﬀect learning and school performance?        Pediatrician,
     13(2-3):141—7, 1986.

[54] David Stromberg. Radio’s impact on public spending. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     119(1):189—221, 2004.

[55] Television Bureau of Advertising. TV basics 2003: A report on the growth and scope of
     television. http://www.tvb.org/rcentral/mediattrendstracks/tvbasics, October 19 2003.

[56] Television Digest. Television Factbook, volume 16. Television Factbook, inc., Washington DC,
     1953.

[57] Television Magazine. Programming. Television, 5(1):41—43, 1948.

[58] Television Magazine. Four hundred thousand dollars a week for the children’s market. Televi-
     sion, 8(8):21—22, 1951.

[59] Television Magazine. The child audience. Television, 12(4):83—84, 1955.

[60] Television Magazine. Market Book. Frederick Kugel Company, New York, various years.

[61] Judith Page Van Evra. Television and child development. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
     Mahwah, N.J., 1998.

[62] Elizabeth A. Vandewater, David S. Bickham, June H. Lee, Hope M. Cummings, Ellen A.
     Wartella, and Victoria J. Rideout. When the television is always on: Heavy television exposure
     and young children’s development. American Behavioral Scientist, 48(5):562—577, 2005.

[63] Marie Winn. The plug-in drug: Television, computers, and family life. Penguin, New York,
     March 2002.

[64] Willard Wirtz et al. On Further Examination: Report of the Advisory Panel on the Scholastic
     Aptitude Test Score Decline. College Entrance Examination Board, New York, 1977.

[65] Madeline Zavodny. Does watching television rot your mind? Evidence of the eﬀect on test
     scores. Economics of Education Review, 2006. Forthcoming.

[66] Frederick J. Zimmerman and Dimitri A. Christakis. Children’s television viewing and cognitive
     outcomes: A longitudinal analysis of national data. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med, 159(7):619—625,
     2005.




                                                32
Table 1 Variation in the timing of television introduction

Panel A: Before correcting for log(income) and log(population):

 First 10 DMAs to receive television     Last 10 DMAs to receive television
 Chicago (IL)                            North Platte (NE)
 Albany-Schenectady-Troy (NY)            Glendive (MT)
 Los Angeles (CA)                        Helena (MT)
 New York (NY)                           Presque Isle (ME)
 Philadelphia (PA)                       Casper-Riverton (WY)
 Washington (DC)                         Corpus Christi (TX)
 St. Louis (MO)                          Juneau (AK)
 Detroit (MI)                            Tallahassee-Thomasville (FL)
 Toledo (OH)                             Columbus-Tupelo-West Point (MS)
 Baltimore (MD)                          Laredo (TX)
 Hartford-New Haven (CT)                 Hattiesburg-Laurel (MS)


Panel B: After correcting for log(income) and log(population):

 First 10 DMAs to receive television     Last 10 DMAs to receive television
 Albany-Schenectady-Troy (NY)            Sacramento-Modesto (CA)
 Erie (PA)                               Portland (OR)
 Richmond-Petersburg (VA)                Corpus Christi (TX)
 Salt Lake City (UT)                     Burlington-Plattsburgh (VT/NY)
 Zanesville (OH)                         Orlando-Daytona Beach (FL)
 Toledo (OH)                             Tampa-St. Petersburg (FL)
 Memphis (TN)                            Casper-Riverton (WY)
 Binghamton (NY)                         Wichita (KS)
 Utica (NY)                              Wilkes-Barre (PA)
 Albuquerque-Santa Fe (NM)               Beaumont (TX)
 Omaha (NE)                              Denver (CO)

Notes: Panel B shows top and bottom 10 DMAs sorted by residuals from an OLS regression of year of first
television broadcast on log(DMA population) in 1960 and log(DMA income) in 1959.




                                                  33
Table 2 The correlates of television viewing intensity

                              Number of hours of      Standardized average
                               television viewing          test score
                                       (1)                     (2)
 Male                                0.0415                   -0.0524
                                    (0.0080)                 (0.0066)
 English not spoken                  0.0009                   -0.1798
 at home                            (0.0104)                 (0.0079)
 Father’s education                  -0.0509                  0.0544
 (index)                            (0.0034)                 (0.0016)
 Mother’s education                  -0.0306                  0.0481
 (index)                            (0.0043)                 (0.0015)
 White                               -0.1750                  0.3858
                                    (0.0242)                 (0.0294)
 Lives with                          -0.0537                  0.0757
 biological father                  (0.0071)                 (0.0057)
 Lives with                          0.1029                   0.1762
 biological mother                  (0.0107)                 (0.0059)
 Family has
      Telephone                      0.1199                   0.1069
                                    (0.0147)                 (0.0079)
      Record player                  0.1716                   0.0226
                                    (0.0083)                 (0.0044)
      Refrigerator                   0.3482                   0.4070
                                    (0.0321)                 (0.0143)
      Vacuum                         -0.0085                  0.0610
                                    (0.0115)                 (0.0092)
      Car                            0.0446                   0.0607
                                    (0.0137)                 (0.0093)
 F (12, 135)                         235.53                   708.12
 (p − value)                       (< 0.0001)               (< 0.0001)
 Number of observations              335981                   346562
 Number of schools                    800                      800
 Number of DMAs                       136                       136

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses are adjusted for clustering on DMA. Average test score is standardized
to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of unity within each grade. All regressions include fixed
eﬀects for school and grade and interactions between grade and log(DMA population) in 1960 and log(DMA
total income) in 1959. Dummies are included to indicate missing values for demographic controls.



                                                    34
Table 3 Correlational estimates of the eﬀect of television viewing on cognitive skills

                               Standardized                        Standardized component:
                                  average            Math       Spatial    Verbal Reading            General
                                 test score                    reasoning                            knowledge
 Controls for family background:

 Daily hours of television         0.0103           -0.0117      0.0357       0.0067      0.0089       -0.0099
 viewing (current)                (0.0010)         (0.0011)     (0.0011)     (0.0010)    (0.0010)     (0.0013)
 Number of observations           335981            335981       335981      335981      335981       219815
 Controls for family wealth:

 Daily hours of television         -0.0280          -0.0429      0.0051       -0.0326     -0.0252      -0.0501
 viewing (current)                (0.0011)         (0.0011)     (0.0011)     (0.0011)    (0.0011)     (0.0014)
 Number of observations           335981            335981       335981      335981      335981       219815

Notes: All regressions include fixed eﬀects for grade. All dependent measures are standardized to have a
mean of zero and a standard deviation of unity within each grade. Family background includes controls for
gender, English spoken at home, father’s education, mother’s education, race, lives with biological father,
and lives with biological mother. Family wealth includes separate dummies for whether student’s family has
a telephone, a record player, a refrigerator, a vacuum cleaner, or a car. Dummies are included to indicate
missing values for controls. General knowledge test scores are only available for students in grades 9 and 12.




                                                     35
Table 4 Reduced-form estimates of the eﬀect of television exposure on cognitive skills

                                       Number of years of          Standardized average
                                       television exposure              test score
                                                (1)               (2)       (3)       (4)
 TV introduced in 1949-1951
      × Grade 9                               -0.2624           -0.0229     -0.0002     -0.0076
                                             (0.0841)          (0.0440)    (0.0296)    (0.0291)
      × Grade 12                              -0.7137           -0.0480     -0.0312     -0.0347
                                             (0.1628)          (0.0477)    (0.0343)    (0.0319)
 TV introduced in 1952 or later
      × Grade 9                               -0.7641           -0.0066     0.0033      -0.0077
                                             (0.1070)          (0.0444)    (0.0333)    (0.0338)
      × Grade 12                              -1.0862           0.0017      0.0001      -0.0140
                                             (0.2834)          (0.0493)    (0.0393)    (0.0371)
 School and grade fixed eﬀects?                YES               YES         YES         YES
 DMA demographics × grade?                     YES               YES         YES         YES
 Student demographics?                          NO                NO         YES         YES
 Demographics × grade?                          NO                NO          NO         YES
 F (4, 135) statistic                          16.54              0.90        0.79        0.61
 (p-value)                                  (<0.0001)           0.4640      0.5345      0.6547
 Number of observations                       346562            346562      346562      346562
 Number of schools                             800               800         800         800
 Number of DMAs                                136               136          136        136

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses are adjusted for clustering on DMA. DMA demographics include
log(DMA population) in 1960 and log(DMA total income) in 1959. Student demographics includes controls
for gender, English spoken at home, father’s education, mother’s education, race, lives with biological father,
lives with biological mother, and separate dummies for whether student’s family has a telephone, a record
player, a refrigerator, a vacuum cleaner, or a car. Dummies are included to indicate missing values for
demographic controls.




                                                       36
Table 5 Structural (2SLS) estimates of the eﬀect of television exposure on cognitive skills

                              Standardized                       Standardized component:
                                 average           Math       Spatial    Verbal Reading            General
                                test score                   reasoning                            knowledge
 Eﬀect of number of years of preschool television exposure:


 Baseline                        0.0129            -0.0192     -0.0071      0.0268     0.0470       0.0494
                                (0.0385)          (0.0441)    (0.0482)     (0.0405)   (0.0348)     (0.0493)


 Baseline +                       0.0140           -0.0154     -0.0046      0.0254     0.0461       0.0696
 demographics                    (0.0309)         (0.0377)    (0.0459)     (0.0295)   (0.0296)     (0.0404)


 Baseline +                      0.0225            -0.0179     0.0028       0.0294     0.0557       0.0688
 demographics × grade           (0.0280)          (0.0380)    (0.0388)     (0.0290)   (0.0304)     (0.0409)


 Number of observations          346562           346562       346562      346562      346562       226487
 Number of schools                 800              800          800         800         800          705
 Number of DMAs                    136              136          136         136         136          134

Notes: Estimates are from two-stage least squares models with interactions between grade and category
of television introduction year used as instruments for years of television exposure. Standard errors in
parentheses are adjusted for clustering on DMA. All dependent measures are standardized to have a mean
of zero and a standard deviation of unity within each grade. Baseline includes fixed eﬀects for school and
grade and interactions between grade and log(DMA population) in 1960 and log(DMA total income) in 1959.
Demographics includes controls for gender, English spoken at home, father’s education, mother’s education,
race, lives with biological father, lives with biological mother, and separate dummies for whether student’s
family has a telephone, a record player, a refrigerator, a vacuum cleaner, or a car. Dummies are included
to indicate missing values for demographic controls. General knowledge test scores are only available for
students in grades 9 and 12.




                                                    37
Table 6 Mother’s education and the eﬀects of television exposure

                                 Standardized                        Standardized component:
                                    average            Math       Spatial    Verbal Reading            General
                                   test score                    reasoning                            knowledge
 Unadjusted estimates
 Does mother have high school degree?
   Yes                               0.0135           -0.0477      0.0125      0.0308      0.0450       0.0074
                                    (0.0298)         (0.0423)     (0.0396)    (0.0295)    (0.0317)     (0.0531)
   No                                0.0418           0.0289       -0.0342     0.0482      0.0942       0.0657
                                    (0.0335)         (0.0355)     (0.0448)    (0.0400)    (0.0455)     (0.0488)

 Adjusted for diﬀerences in average television penetration, 1949-1955
 Does mother have high school degree?
   Yes                           0.0117           -0.0414    0.0108   0.0267               0.0390       0.0064
   (Share with TV = 0.43)       (0.0259)         (0.0367) (0.0344) (0.0256)               (0.0275)     (0.0461)
   No                                0.0469           0.0324       -0.0383     0.0540      0.1056       0.0737
   (Share with TV = 0.34)           (0.0376)         (0.0398)     (0.0502)    (0.0449)    (0.0510)     (0.0547)

 Adjusted for diﬀerences in average daily preschool viewing hours and television penetration
 Does mother have high school degree?
   Yes                               0.0124           -0.0439      0.0115      0.0283      0.0414       0.0068
   (Average hours = 1.30)           (0.0274)         (0.0389)     (0.0364)    (0.0271)    (0.0292)     (0.0489)
   No                                0.0459           0.0318       -0.0376     0.0530      0.1035       0.0722
   (Average hours = 1.41)           (0.0368)         (0.0390)     (0.0492)    (0.0440)    (0.0500)     (0.0536)

Notes: Estimates are from two-stage least squares models with samples split by mother’s education. Standard
errors in parentheses are adjusted for clustering on DMA. All dependent measures are standardized to have a
mean of zero and a standard deviation of unity within each grade. All specifications include fixed eﬀects for
school and grade, interactions between grade and log(DMA population) in 1960 and log(DMA total income)
in 1959, controls for gender, English spoken at home, father’s education, race, lives with biological father,
lives with biological mother, and separate dummies for whether student’s family has a telephone, a record
player, a refrigerator, a vacuum cleaner, or a car, and demographic controls interacted with grade dummies.
Dummies are included to indicate missing values for demographic controls. General knowledge test scores
are only available for students in grades 9 and 12.




                                                     38
Table 7 Heterogeneity in the eﬀects of television exposure

                           English at home?              White?
                             Yes        No           Yes        No
                             (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)
 Eﬀect of number of years of preschool television exposure:
      Average                  0.0157      0.0766           0.0026     0.0526
                              (0.0278)    (0.0481)         (0.0263)   (0.0491)
      Math                     -0.0283     0.0352           -0.0293    -0.0055
                              (0.0391)    (0.0478)         (0.0407)   (0.0447)
      Spatial reasoning        -0.0050     0.0592           0.0225     -0.0345
                              (0.0363)    (0.0610)         (0.0279)   (0.0579)
      Verbal                   0.0252      0.0740           -0.0191    0.1167
                              (0.0286)    (0.0531)         (0.0189)   (0.0473)
      Reading                  0.0528      0.0927           0.0273     0.0922
                              (0.0333)    (0.0455)         (0.0388)   (0.0545)
      General knowledge        0.0260      0.2123           -0.0945    0.1401
                              (0.0379)    (0.1558)         (0.0425)   (0.0790)
 Number of observations:
      All grades               280455       57537          211613     126912
      Grades 9-12              186126       36235          142379      79746

Notes: Estimates are from two-stage least squares models with interactions between grade and category
of television introduction year used as instruments for years of television exposure. Standard errors in
parentheses are adjusted for clustering on DMA. All dependent measures are standardized to have a mean
of zero and a standard deviation of unity within each grade. All specifications include fixed eﬀects for school
and grade, interactions between grade and log(DMA population) in 1960 and log(DMA total income) in
1959, controls for gender, English spoken at home, father’s education, mother’s education, race, lives with
biological father, lives with biological mother, and separate dummies for whether student’s family has a
telephone, a record player, a refrigerator, a vacuum cleaner, or a car, and demographic controls interacted
with grade dummies. Controls for variable on which the sample is split are excluded. Dummies are included
to indicate missing values for demographic controls. General knowledge test scores are only available for
students in grades 9 and 12.




                                                      39
Table 8 Parental investments and the eﬀects of television exposure

                                  Standardized                         Standardized component:
                                     average            Math        Spatial    Verbal Reading             General
                                    test score                     reasoning                             knowledge
 Years of preschool                   0.0879            0.0474      0.0786       0.0791       0.0932       0.0907
 television exposure                 (0.0460)          (0.0471)    (0.0447)     (0.0529)     (0.0479)     (0.0598)
 Years of exposure                    -0.1126           -0.0952      -0.1110     -0.0943      -0.0912      -0.0824
 × Preschool reading index           (0.0483)          (0.0481)     (0.0353)    (0.0534)     (0.0461)     (0.0549)
 Number of observations               263854           263854       263854       263854      263854        175414


Notes: Estimates are from two-stage least squares models with interactions between grade and category of
television introduction year, and interactions between these variables and the full set of student demographics,
used as instruments for years of television exposure and years of television exposure interacted with preschool
reading frequency. Standard errors in parentheses are adjusted for clustering on DMA. All dependent
measures are standardized to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of unity within each grade. All
specifications include fixed eﬀects for school and grade, interactions between grade and log(DMA population)
in 1960 and log(DMA total income) in 1959, controls for gender, English spoken at home, father’s education,
mother’s education, race, lives with biological father, lives with biological mother, and separate dummies for
whether student’s family has a telephone, a record player, a refrigerator, a vacuum cleaner, or a car, and
demographic controls interacted with grade dummies. Dummies are included to indicate missing values for
demographic controls. General knowledge test scores are only available for students in grades 9 and 12.




                                                      40
Table 9 Eﬀect of television exposure on social and behavioral outcomes

 Dependent variable                                            Eﬀect of one year of         N
                                                               television exposure
 Number of hours spent on homework each day                            0.0148            334719
                                                                      (0.0424)
 Number of books read during summer                                    -0.0760           336129
 (standardized)                                                       (0.0423)
 Number of hours spent watching television each day                    -0.0211           335981
 (current)                                                            (0.0502)
 Student sometimes feels like (s)he “just can’t learn”                 -0.0040           327283
                                                                      (0.0208)
 Highest grade student wants to finish in school                       -0.0265           333572
 (standardized)                                                       (0.0222)
 Share of membership organizations                                     0.0170            217392
                                                                      (0.0400)

Notes: Estimates are from two-stage least squares models with interactions between grade and category
of television introduction year used as instruments for years of television exposure. Standard errors in
parentheses are adjusted for clustering on DMA. Standardized measures have a mean of zero and a standard
deviation of unity within each grade. Baseline includes fixed eﬀects for school and grade and interactions
between grade and log(DMA population) in 1960 and log(DMA total income) in 1959. All regressions include
controls for gender, English spoken at home, father’s education, mother’s education, race, lives with biological
father, lives with biological mother, and separate dummies for whether student’s family has a telephone, a
record player, a refrigerator, a vacuum cleaner, or a car, as well as for interactions between grade dummies
and these controls. Dummies are included to indicate missing values for demographic controls. Share of
membership organizations is number of the following organizations that the student belongs to, divided by
the total number of organizations for which the student provides a response: sports team, Student Council,
debate team, and hobby club. Participation in membership organizations is only available for students in
grades 9 and 12.




                                                      41
Table 10 Eﬀect of television exposure on labor market earnings and schooling attainment

                                  (1)                   (2)                    (3)                    (4)
 Dependent variable        Completed H.S.       log(wage income)       log(wage income)       log(wage income)
 Cohorts                  1948, 1951, 1954       1948, 1951, 1954      1948, 1951, 1954           1930-1941
 Sample                           All                   All                Prime-age              Prime-age
                                                                          white males            white males
 Years of television            -0.0020               -0.0371                -0.0118
 exposure, ages 2-6            (0.0135)              (0.0397)               (0.0396)
 Years of television                                                                                0.0102
 exposure, ages 7-18                                                                               (0.0167)
 Number of obs.                 285650                226649                 107965                 284551
 Number of states                 48                     48                     48                    48

Notes: Data from Ruggles et al (2004). Estimates are from two-stage least squares models with interactions
between birth year and category of television introduction year used as instruments for years of television
exposure. Standard errors in parentheses are adjusted for clustering on state of birth. All specifications
include fixed eﬀects for state of birth, year, and year of birth, as well as dummies for year of birth interacted
with log(state income) in 1959 and log(state population) in 1960.




                                                       42
Figure 1 The diﬀusion of television, 1945 to 1970




                            120




                            100
 Percent of US Households




                            80




                            60




                            40




                            20




                              0
                                  1945




                                         1950




                                                             1955




                                                                             1960




                                                                                       1965




                                                                                                         1970
                                                A Counties   B Counties   C Counties



Source: Sterling (1984).
Notes: “A Counties” are all counties in the 25 largest metropolitan areas. “B Counties” are all counties not
in A with populations of over 150,000 or in metropolitan areas over 150,000. “C Counties” are all others.




                                                                    43
Figure 2 The expansion of commercial television, 1940-1970




                      600




                      500




                      400
 Number of stations




                      300




                      200




                      100




                        0
                            1940




                                      1950




                                                             1960




                                                                    1970
Source: Television Factbooks, various years.




                                               44
Figure 3 The diﬀusion of television by education level



                                           0.9


                                           0.8
  Share with television set in household




                                           0.7


                                           0.6


                                           0.5
                                                                                                                HS degree
                                                                                                                No HS degree
                                           0.4


                                           0.3


                                           0.2


                                           0.1


                                            0
                                            1948   1949   1950   1951   1952        1953   1954   1955   1956
                                                                        Year


Notes: Data from nationally representative Gallup polls of American households (Roper Center for Public
Opinion Research, 1949-1955). Figure shows the share of respondents who report having a television in their
household by year, for respondents with and without a high-school degree.




                                                                               45
Figure 4 Television penetration in 1950 by year of TV introduction




                                  0.4




                                  0.3
 Fraction of households with TV




                                  0.2




                                  0.1




                                   0
                                        1940

                                               1941

                                                      1942

                                                             1945

                                                                    1947

                                                                           1948

                                                                                  1949

                                                                                         1950

                                                                                                1951

                                                                                                       1952

                                                                                                              1953

                                                                                                                     1954

                                                                                                                            1955

                                                                                                                                   1956

                                                                                                                                          1957

                                                                                                                                                 1958

                                                                                                                                                        1959

                                                                                                                                                               1960

                                                                                                                                                                      1961

                                                                                                                                                                             1962

                                                                                                                                                                                    1963

                                                                                                                                                                                           1964

                                                                                                                                                                                                  1970
                                                                                           Year of first TV station in DMA



Source: Television Factbooks, various years.; 1950 U.S. Census.
Notes: The height of each bar is the fraction of households with television sets as recorded in the 1950 or
1960 census, averaged over all DMAs that received television in the given year. Years in which no county
received their first station are omitted from the figure.




                                                                                                                      46
Appendix Table 1 Is predicted television exposure correlated with observables?

                              Predicted years of television    Standardized average
                                       exposure                     test score
                                          (1)                           (2)
 Male                                     -0.4730                       -0.0524
                                         (0.6152)                      (0.0066)
 English not spoken                       0.6050                        -0.1798
 at home                                 (0.6701)                      (0.0079)
 Father’s education                       -0.1875                       0.0544
 (index)                                 (0.1887)                      (0.0016)
 Mother’s education                       -0.0205                       0.0481
 (index)                                 (0.2259)                      (0.0015)
 White                                    0.2699                        0.3858
                                         (0.4412)                      (0.0294)
 Lives with                               -0.8221                       0.0757
 biological father                       (0.9202)                      (0.0057)
 Lives with                               -0.0244                       0.1762
 biological mother                       (1.2240)                      (0.0059)
 Family has
      Telephone                           0.9153                        0.1069
                                         (1.0186)                      (0.0079)
      Record player                       -0.4899                       0.0226
                                         (0.8809)                      (0.0044)
      Refrigerator                        0.0589                        0.4070
                                         (1.1307)                      (0.0143)
      Vacuum                              -0.1219                       0.0610
                                         (0.6499)                      (0.0092)
      Car                                 1.3549                        0.0607
                                         (0.7150)                      (0.0093)
 F (12, 135)                               1.09                        708.12
 (p − value)                             (0.3712)                    (< 0.0001)
 Number of observations                     404                        346562
 Number of schools                          –                           800
 Number of DMAs                             136                          136

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses are adjusted for clustering on DMA. Average test score is standardized
to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of unity within each grade. All regressions include fixed
eﬀects for grade and interactions between grade and log(DMA population) in 1960 and log(DMA total
income) in 1959. Regression (1) includes fixed eﬀects for DMA; regression (2) includes fixed eﬀects for
school. Dummies are included to indicate missing values for demographic controls.



                                                    47
Appendix Table 2 Is predicted television exposure correlated with teacher characteristics?

                              Predicted years of television
                                       exposure
 Male                                     -0.2581
                                         (0.4885)
 White                                    0.3625
                                         (0.3528)
 Age                                      0.0074
                                         (0.0212)
 Father’s education                       -0.0192
 (index)                                 (0.0924)
 Mother’s education                       -0.0434
 (index)                                 (0.1122)
 Has Master’s degree                      0.1907
                                         (0.4489)
 Years of classroom                       -0.0296
 experience                              (0.0267)
 Salary ($1000)                           0.1601
                                         (0.1313)
 Hours per day spent                      -0.1400
 in classroom                            (0.1566)
 Class size                               -0.0037
                                         (0.0178)
 Number of diﬀerent                       0.1293
 subjects taught                         (0.0621)
 Verbal test score                        -0.1845
 (standardized)                          (0.2022)
 F (12, 135)                               1.59
 (p − value)                             (0.1109)
 Number of observations                    252
 Number of schools                         –
 Number of DMAs                            85

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses are adjusted for clustering on DMA. Average test score is standardized
to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of unity within each grade. All regressions include fixed
eﬀects for grade and DMA and interactions between grade and log(DMA population) in 1960 and log(DMA
total income) in 1959. Dummies are included to indicate missing values for demographic controls.




                                                    48
Appendix Table 3 Is television introduction correlated with trends in school quality?

                                                                Year state first received television
 Change in log(average relative teacher salary):
 1920 cohort - 1930 cohort                                                     9.3809
                                                                              (4.1332)
 1930 cohort - 1940 cohort                                                     -0.0906
                                                                              (6.3179)
 Change in log(average number of school days per year):
 1920 cohort - 1930 cohort                                                     -18.2696
                                                                              (14.0157)
 1930 cohort - 1940 cohort                                                     40.8373
                                                                              (26.3258)
 Change in log(average teacher-student ratio):
 1920 cohort - 1930 cohort                                                     -1.6722
                                                                              (5.2949)
 1930 cohort - 1940 cohort                                                     8.9435
                                                                              (6.5421)
 N                                                                               48
 F (6, 39)                                                                      1.93
 p − value                                                                     0.1006

Notes: Unit of observation is the U.S. state (excluding Alaska and Hawaii). Dependent variable is the first
year in which any county in the state could receive a television broadcast. Independent variables are taken
from Card and Krueger (1992), as coded by Christopher Berry (2004).




                                                    49
Appendix Table 4 Sample splits by place of residence in childhood

                               Standardized                        Standardized component:
                                  average            Math       Spatial    Verbal Reading             General
                                 test score                    reasoning                             knowledge
 Students who report spending most of their lives in this town or elsewhere in state:

 Years of preschool               0.0227            -0.0239      0.0022       0.0347      0.0578       0.0497
 television exposure             (0.0278)          (0.0391)     (0.0402)     (0.0266)    (0.0294)     (0.0422)
 Number of observations           288828            288828       288828      288828      288828        199494
 Number of schools                  800               800         800          800         800           705
 Number of DMAs                     136               136         136          136         136           134


 Students who report spending most of their lives in another state or country:

 Years of preschool               -0.0124           -0.0461      -0.0222      -0.0062     0.0233       0.0618
 television exposure             (0.0524)          (0.0567)     (0.0464)     (0.0648)    (0.0508)     (0.1192)
 Number of observations            50807            50807        50807        50807       50807        22816
 Number of schools                  800               800         800          800         800           671
 Number of DMAs                     136               136         136          136         136           133

Notes: Estimates are from two-stage least squares models with interactions between grade and category
of television introduction year used as instruments for years of television exposure. Standard errors in
parentheses are adjusted for clustering on DMA. All dependent measures are standardized to have a mean
of zero and a standard deviation of unity within each grade. All specifications include fixed eﬀects for school
and grade, interactions between grade and log(DMA population) in 1960 and log(DMA total income) in
1959, controls for gender, English spoken at home, father’s education, mother’s education, race, lives with
biological father, lives with biological mother, and separate dummies for whether student’s family has a
telephone, a record player, a refrigerator, a vacuum cleaner, or a car, and demographic controls interacted
with grade dummies. Dummies are included to indicate missing values for demographic controls. General
knowledge test scores are only available for students in grades 9 and 12.




                                                      50
Appendix Table 5 The top five children’s television programs, 1953 and 2003

 Rank        Top Shows, 1953             Top Shows, 2003
 1              I Love Lucy                The Simpsons
                  (comedy)              (animated comedy)
 2               Superman                 American Idol
                  (action)                (game show)
 3       The Red Buttons Show         Malcolm in the Middle
           (comedy/variety)            (situation comedy)
 4               Dragnet                    Fear Factor
              (police drama)               (game show)
 5        The Roy Rogers Show           Survivor: Amazon
               (western)                  (reality show)

Notes: Data on 1953 viewing patterns are from a survey of elementary pupils’ “favorite” programs reported
in Television, April 1955, p. 84. Data on 2003 viewing patterns are from Nielsen audience data for children
ages 2-11.




                                                    51
