NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GEOGRAPHIC SPILLOVER OF UNIONISM
Thomas J. Holmes
Working Paper 12025
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12025
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2006

The research presented here was funded by NSF grant SES 0136842. I thank Junichi Suzuki for excellent
research assistance for this project. I thank Bruce Fallick and Henry Farber for sharing NLRB election data
with me. I have benefited from the comments of a number of seminar participants and from the comments
of Enrico Moretti and Morris Kleiner as discussants. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis or the Federal Reserve System. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
©2006 by Thomas J. Holmes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Geographic Spillover of Unionism
Thomas J. Holmes
NBER Working Paper No. 12025
February 2006
JEL No. J5, R0
ABSTRACT
Unionism in the United States is contagious; it spills out of coal mines and steel mills into other
establishments in the neighborhood, like hospitals and supermarkets. The geographic spillover of
unionism is documented here using a newly constructed establishment level data on unionism that
is rich in geographic detail. A strong connection is found between unionism of health care
establishments today and proximity to unionized coal mines and steel mills from the 1950s.
Thomas J. Holmes
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
1035 Heller Hall
271 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
holmes@econ.umn.edu

Unionization rates vary substantially across states in the United States. In South Carolina,
only 5 percent of workers are covered by union contracts while in West Virginia, 16 percent
are covered and in Pennsylvania, 18 percent. One factor underlying these diﬀerences is
industry composition. The heavily unionized mining and steel industries are nonexistent in
South Carolina but are major parts of the economies of West Virginia and Pennsylvania. But
diﬀerences in industry composition are not the whole story. Even within the same industries,
unionization rates are lower in South Carolina. In Pennsylvania and West Virginia it is easy
to find unionized supermarkets and hospitals as well as mines and steel mills. These are
virtually nonexistent in South Carolina.
The thesis of this study is that hospitals and supermarkets are unionized in Pennsylvania and West Virginia because unionism in coal mines and steel mills spilled over into other
establishments in the area. More generally, the thesis is that unionism is contagious at the
geographic level.
In recent years, there has been much discussion in the economics literature about social
interactions of all kinds, including peer group eﬀects in the classroom, knowledge spillovers
across firms, and network eﬀects in technology adoption.1 Geographic spillover of unionism
is a type of social interaction. In the prototypical model of this literature, a decision-making
agent is more likely to select a particular option if other agents also choose it because of
positive spillover benefits. The identification problem that pervades this literature is distinguishing the existence of spillovers from other explanations for parallel behavior. Individuals
who are near each other often share characteristics that lead them to make similar choices.
For example, if we see a neighborhood where every household owns a luxury automobile
like a Mercedes-Benz or Lexus, this is probably more an indication of the aﬄuence of the
neighborhood than a result of spillovers in car purchase decisions.
This same identification issue comes up when analyzing spillovers of unionism. Unionization rates tend to be low in the South. Historically, the South has had little employment
in union-prone industries like steel and automobiles. Hence, the absence of spillovers from
such industries may well be why hospitals and supermarkets are nonunion in the South. But
southern states share three other characteristics that also might matter. First, the South
has had a substantially diﬀerent racial history than the North. It is widely believed that
management in the South used race to break unions, playing poor whites oﬀ against blacks.
Diﬀerences in unionization rates between the North and the South today may reflect this
diﬀerent history of race relations.2 Second, early in the 20th century, the South was quite
poor compared to the North. To attract industry, the southern states pursued various anti1

See, for example, Manski (1993); Glaeser, Sacerdote, and Scheinkman (1996); Brock and Durlauf (2001);
and Gowrisankaran and Stavins (2004).
2
See Marshall (1967) for a history of unionism in the South and a discussion of the role of race.

union policies, such as right-to-work laws, that contributed to keeping unionization rates low
(Cobb 1993, Holmes 1998). Third, the South received fewer immigrants than the North. Such
immigrants, like those from Finland, often brought with them what were considered radical
ideas about socialism, and these ethnic diﬀerences in attitudes towards unions contributed
to diﬀerences in unionism between the North and the South.
In addition to dealing with these confounding factors, any analysis of how the location
of industries aﬀects unionism must confront the fact that eﬀects can go the other way. The
extent of unionism at a location may influence which industries locate there. Industries that
are prone to unions might avoid areas where unionism is strong. In the 1960s and 1970s, for
example, the domestic automakers General Motors and Ford pursued a southern strategy of
locating plants in the South with the specific intent of running nonunion operations. The
United Auto Workers fought back hard and eventually organized all the southern plants of
GM and Ford. Because of the selection of where such plants might locate, in the data we
might not see a positive connection between the location of such industries and the extent of
unionism in other industries, even if positive spillovers exist.
To address these issues, I undertake the following analysis. First, to circumvent endogeneity issues regarding the location of industry, I determine spillovers coming from coal
mines, metal mines, and steel mills in the 1950s. The primary determinant of the location of
mines is nature. Moreover, in the time period I consider, virtually all coal and metal mines
were unionized regardless of location, so union avoidance is likely not to have been a primary
location factor. Though less so than mines, the location of steel mills is heavily determined
by natural factors such as access to raw materials. And like mines, steel mills were unionized
virtually everywhere in the 1950s, including in the South.
Second, to control for the fact that the South is regarded as diﬀerent in many ways
from the North, I focus the analysis on the South in isolation. Thus my results are coming
from variation within the South, rather than a comparison of the North and South. The
question of the paper can then be posed as follows: Though there weren’t many such places,
selected areas of the South did have mining and metal. Is there evidence of union spillovers
in those places? While the main focus of the paper is the South, I obtain similar results for
other regions of the country.
Third, to control for confounding factors that might vary across states, even within
the South, my analysis compares locations within the same state. This fixed-eﬀects approach
holds constant state-level anti-union policies and any state-level diﬀerences in things like
race. Undertaking such an analysis requires data on unionism at a fine level of geographic
and industry detail. Since such data are not available from standard sources, a substantial
undertaking was required to collect the data.
Fourth, to make within industry, within state comparisons as clean as possible, I focus

2

on nontraded industries. This focus ensures that industries are diﬀuse enough throughout
each state to make comparisons possible (since every location has hospitals and grocery
stores). Also, the basic technology for nontraded goods like health care facilities and supermarkets tends to be similar across locations. For traded goods, technologies more likely
diﬀer, as locations specialize according to comparative advantage.
I find a significant connection between the probability that a nontraded good establishment is unionized today and proximity to mining and metal establishments from the
1950s. While overall in the South there was little of this activity, there were pockets in the
South with substantial amounts of such activity. In particular, Birmingham, Alabama, was
a major steel and coal center. And in Birmingham, one finds unionized nursing homes and
supermarkets, unlike most other places in the South where these are unheard of.

I. Background
This section provides some background information that is needed before getting started.
It begins by discussing unionism in U.S. coal mines and steel mills circa 1950. It then
discusses the possible channels through which this unionism might have spilled over into
other industries.
The strength of unions varies over time and across industries. The sources of variation
over time are many, but of particular importance are variations over time in the legal environment. It is widely recognized that the labor environment in the late 1930s was very positive
to unions and contributed to high unionization rates at mid-century. (See Freeman 1998.)
In contrast, the legal environment is regarded as less friendly to labor now, in addition to
other time trends working against labor (Neumann and Rissman 1984, Farber and Western
2000). The strength of unions varies across industries for various reasons, but certainly one
of them is diﬀerences in capital intensity and sunk costs. Mining and steel production are
capital-intensive industries with high sunk costs and are, hence, highly vulnerable to unionization. These industries also have other characteristics, e.g., working conditions, that make
them prone to unionization.
Given the favorable legal environment and favorable industry conditions, at midcentury virtually all of the coal mines and steel mills were unionized throughout the country.
In 1958, 95 percent of employment in the primary metals (two-digit SIC) industry in the
South was in establishments with a majority of workers under a union agreement (Douty
1960). Regarding mines, the labor economist H. G. Lewis (1963, p. 74) wrote, “In 1934 the
United Mine Workers, with the assistance of the National Industrial Recovery Act, succeeded
in organizing almost all of the bituminous coal mining industry, and from that time to the

3

present the extent of unionism in the industry has been close to 100 percent.”3 That was
written in 1963. Today, although unions continue to be strong in these industries, unions no
longer have them locked up. The 1980s saw entry of nonunion minimills in the steel industry.
Given the strength of unions in mines and mills in the earlier time period, I will focus on the
industries in that time period as a source of a spillover.
While there is little in the way of academic research that quantifies spillovers of unionism, parties involved in labor relations believe spillovers matter.4 Union oﬃcials believe that
if they successfully organize one plant in an area, it will be easier to organize a neighboring
plant. To take an example, the United Auto Workers has been trying very hard to organize
the Mercedes Plant in Vance, Alabama. According to industry observers, “Vance represents
what could be the first domino in a row of non-union transplant facilities for the UAW.
. . . If Vance is organized, Honda’s forthcoming plant in Alabama could be vulnerable.”5
This view is held by management as well. The Chamber of Commerce of Virginia (a state
where unionization is low) oﬀers seminars on “Protecting Our Positive Labor Climate” and
publishes annually the details of all the (relatively few) unionization attempts in the state.6
The Chamber’s approach of promoting vigilance and mapping union outbreaks is analogous
to the way the Centers for Disease Control might approach an infectious disease.
What is the transmission mechanism through which unionism in one establishment
spills over into another establishment? There are several possibilities.
Unionism can be transmitted from a coal mine to a grocery store when an individual
with experience working as a unionized coal miner either changes jobs and works in retail or
has children who work in retail. As discussed by Freeman and Medoﬀ (1984), union members
tend to have more positive views towards unions than nonmembers do. It is plausible that
workers retain these positive attitudes towards unions when they switch jobs. There is a
large literature in psychology and organizational behavior that emphasizes the importance
of workers’ prior attitudes in determining union organization success. These are formed in
a process of socialization and aﬀect the union commitment of a worker. (See, for example,
Fullagar et al. 1995 and Hester and Fuller, 2001.) There is evidence that positive attitudes
towards unions can be transmitted through the family. Deshpande and Fiorito (1989) report
that individuals who have family members in a union are more likely to have positive views
3

Additional evidence on industry shares is presented in Freeman and Medoﬀ (1979). Table 1 of that
study reports estimates of production worker covered by union contracts by industry. For anthracite and
bituminous coal mining, the percentages were 100 and 89 percent. For iron ores and copper ores, the
percentages were 100 percent. For blast furnace and basic steel products, the percentage was 98 percent.
4
There is some related academic research. Kremer and Olken (2001) present a model of evolutionary
competition of unions. Geographers are interested in the geography of unionism, e.g., Herod (1998), but
don’t frame the question the way I do here.
5
See “UAW Looks for Membership AdVANCEment,” Ward’s Auto World, July 1999.
6
See http://www.vachamber.com/pubs/labor_info.htm.

4

towards unions.
This discussion of attitudes can be given an economic interpretation. It is plausible
that workers who have never worked in a unionized facility and who don’t know many union
members are uncertain about the benefits of unions. Unions may be an experience good that
one can learn about either through direct contact or that of family and friends. With risk
aversion, following the logic of Erdem and Keane (1996), we can expect the market share of
a product–in this case, union representation–to be higher, the greater the experience with
the product.
The above discussion emphasizes the personal connection of a worker with unionism
though either his or her own experience or the experience of a family member. But even
if none of the workers in a particular establishment has a personal connection to unionism,
the workers will benefit more from a union if other people outside the establishment in the
surrounding area have such a connection. The ability to strike is a crucial component of union
success. For a strike to be successful, it is important that replacement workers and customers
not cross picket lines. These lines are less likely to be breached in an area where a large
fraction of population either works in coal mines or steel mills or has close family members
who do. For example, Marshall (1967, p. 177) discusses how a strike in 1937 to obtain a
union contract at a garment factory in Tennessee was successful because of the support of
the large number of members of the United Mine Workers in the area. Marshall also noted
that, “The workers in the garment plants were mostly women from the miners’ families.”
Another channel for spillovers besides attitudes has to do with union infrastructure and
staﬀ. Locations with many unionized mills and coal mines tend to be the homes of numerous
professional union staﬀ people with training in organizing and other specialized skills related
to unionism. In addition to tending to their responsibilities for existing unionized plants,
these staﬀ members are on the lookout for new opportunities, and these opportunities can
cross industry boundaries. As will be shown later, at locations where the steel industry is
concentrated, it is not uncommon for nursing homes and hospitals to be organized by the
United Steelworkers of America (USWA) union. Of course, this spillover of union organizing
staﬀ need not occur through the same union, since individuals with specialized skills can
switch aﬃliations. This is illustrated by the case of one Jon Hitchings from Pennsylvania.
According to his union, “He had formerly worked for the United Mine Workers working
underground for 22 years. He had been the President of the local mine committee and has a
good background for protecting workers’ rights.”7 This individual is now on the staﬀ of the
Services Workers union, representing social workers.
7

See the minutes from a meeting of Chapter 5 of Local 668 of the Service Employees International Union (SEIU) from October 10, 2002, posted at http://seiu668.localsonline.org/ourlocal/
chapter5minutes10102002.cfm.

5

II. The Data
The first part of this section uses the standard data source on unions to describe regional and
state-level diﬀerences in unionization rates. The standard source is not geographically precise
enough for my purposes, however. Therefore, the second part of the section describes the
two alternative data sets that I have constructed in order to provide the needed geographic
detail.
A. From the Standard Source: Regional and State Diﬀerences in Unionism
The standard source about unionization in the United States is the Current Population Survey
(CPS) pro‘duced jointly by the U.S. Bureaus of Labor Statistics and the Census. This is a
monthly survey of individuals that asks them whether or not they are union members or
covered by union contracts. The top section of Table 1 reports the percentage of workers who
have responded that they are covered by a union contract, by region, for selected industries
in a recent period. I take an average over three years of data, 1999 through 2001, rather than
use only one year, since otherwise the sample size is too low for some of the industry/location
cells in the table.
The main focus of this paper is the South, here defined as the 11 states that joined
the Confederacy.8 For the sake of making some initial comparisons, I also include two other
regions in Table 1. The North is the region of 21 states bounded on the west by the industrial states of Minnesota, Wisconsin, Illinois, and Missouri.9 This region is the traditional
industrial heartland of the United States and was once commonly called the “manufacturing
belt.” The Rest of U.S. is the remaining states, less Alaska and Hawaii (a total of 17).
The table also reports unionization rates for several selected states. North and South
Carolina from the South are selected because they are the least unionized states in the
country. As will be shown later, they also happen to have negligible mining and metal
sectors. Alabama, West Virginia, and Pennsylvania are selected because of their connections
to the coal mining and steel industries. These three states vary in their connection to the
south. Alabama is, of course, Deep South. Pennsylvania is unmistakably North. West
Virginia is classified as in the North because it wasn’t part of the Confederacy. But in other
respects it is like the South, and no one would confuse it with New York. West Virginia will
be left out of the baseline estimates for this paper which defines the South as just those states
in the Confederacy. But I emphasize that the case of West Virginia, with its relatively high
unionization rates in health care and groceries, provides strong prima facie evidence of my
8

The South is Arkansas, Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, and Virginia.
9
The North is Connecticut, Delaware, the District of Columbia, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Missouri,
Minnesota, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, West Virginia, Vermont, and Wisconsin.

6

thesis that unionism spills out of coal mines. And I get similar results if I were to include
West Virginia in the South.
Looking first at all industries combined (the first row), we see that the union coverage
rate in the South is 7.7 percent, and this is substantially less than the 19.5 and 15.3 percent
rates in the North and the rest of the United States. The rates in the Carolinas are only
about 5 percent. Even though Alabama is in the Deep South, it has a unionization rate of
11.3 percent. West Virginia’s rate is higher still. Alabama and West Virginia have more
mining and metal activity than the Carolinas, and this industry composition contributes to
their higher unionization rates. But even within the same industries, Alabama and West
Virginia tend to have higher unionization rates than North and South Carolina.
To make comparisons within the same industry, I focus attention on nontraded industries with significant unionization activity. By focusing on nontraded industries, I ensure
broad geographic coverage and, as discussed in the introduction, make it more likely that
the industries are similar across locations. To produce a list of industries, I took the 2000
CPS and selected industries in the construction, wholesale trade, retail trade, and service
sectors, because industries in these sectors are primarily not traded. I eliminated educational
services and government services in order to focus on the private sector. I selected only those
industries with a union coverage rate above 10 percent in 2000 and with at least 500,000
total employees in order to focus on industries with significant union activity. I eliminated
miscellaneous industries or “those not elsewhere classified.” This selection process resulted in
six industries: construction, wholesale groceries, retail groceries, hotels and motels, nursing
homes, and hospitals.10
As is clear in Table 1, unionization rates within these industries are substantially
higher in the North than in the South. Within the South, unionization rates in Alabama
are higher than in North or South Carolina in the same industry. West Virginia’s rates are
higher still. The thesis of this study is that the relatively high unionization rates in Alabama
and West Virginia in nontraded industries are in part a consequence of union spillovers from
the mining and metal sectors in these states.
B. From Alternative Sources: Richer Geographic Detail . . .
The empirical analysis of this project requires data on unionization at a fine level of geographic
detail. The CPS data are inadequate for this purpose. One problem is that the CPS is only
a tiny sample of the U.S. population, so sample sizes can be too small when we go to a high
level of geographic and industry detail. For example, in Table 1, I have observations on only
24 workers in the hotel industry in Alabama. Another problem is that for a large portion of
10

The CPS treats all of construction as one industry; unionization rates at a finer level of detail are not
available. Since unionization is heavy throughout all the industries in the construction sector, I take the
sector as a whole and treat it as an industry.

7

the CPS sample, geographic location within the state is not disclosed. Location in the large
metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) is disclosed, but location in the smallest MSAs and
rural counties is generally not disclosed. This is a particular problem for me because many
of the mining areas that I will be interested in are in rural counties.
My need for geographic data at a fine level of detail leads me to construct two alternative data sets that use administrative data from federal agencies. The first data set covers
nursing homes and hospitals. It is a very clean data set that has been put together in a
labor-intensive process. The second data set is cruder, but is broader in coverage, including
all six industries listed above. The results for hospitals and nursing homes are very similar
across the two data sets.
B.1. The FMCS/POS Data on Health Care Facilities
The starting point of the first data set is a directory of the universe of nursing homes and
hospitals in existence in the United States in 1996. This data set is the “Provider of Services”
file (POS) for 1996 released by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. There are
15,014 nursing homes and 6,906 hospitals.11 The POS data include address information and
facility characteristics, like organizational form (nonprofit, for profit, or government) and
number of beds.
In order to determine which of these facilities are unionized, I matched data on expiring
union contracts to establishments in the POS file. The Federal Mediation and Conciliation
Service (FMCS) is the source of the contract expiration data. The National Labor Relations
Act requires that notice of contract expiration be filed with this agency. This notice gives
the agency a heads up so that it can be ready if it has to mediate any strikes.
I matched 26,650 contracts in the FMCS data base from the period 1986—2003 to facilities in the POS file. My matching algorithm used the company name, address information,
and phone information found in both files. The process required an extensive amount of manual matches, and here Google proved invaluable. For example, by Googling a phone number
in the FMCS file, I could find additional information about the entity from the FMCS file
that would enable me to complete the match in the POS file. The overwhelming majority
of contracts in the health care industry cover a bargaining unit at a single establishment.
There do exist multi-unit contracts, particularly in the New York area, where industry consortia such as the League of Voluntary Hospitals negotiate industry-wide contracts covering
sometimes dozens of facilities. In such cases, I obtained additional information from the U.S.
Department of Labor, including the actual contracts themselves, to identify the establishments covered by the contracts. I also used Web sites of union locals to verify matches. See
11

I exclude Alaska and Hawaii here and throughout the rest of the study. The 15,014 figure includes only
nursing homes that are not part of hospitals.

8

the data appendix for details about the data and summary statistics. All of the data for this
paper are posted on the Web, and the appendix provides the web address.
DiNardo and Lee (2004) have also recently used the FMCS contract data to study a
diﬀerent question. They use the data in a wholesale fashion, using the data from all industries,
trying to match up all of the contracts. My approach is less ambitious than theirs in terms of
industry coverage. But by focusing on only one industry, I am able to do things in terms of
matching by hand and bringing in other sources of information which would not be feasible
if one were to look at all industries together.
I define a health care facility as unionized if there was at least one bargaining unit
under contract in the facility over the period of the contract data, 1986—2003. There are
3,555 unionized facilities in the POS file, according to this definition. The median unionized
facility has 6 expiring contracts. The maximum number of contracts for any one facility is
50, and this is for Washington Hospital in San Francisco. A contract with a given bargaining
unit will appear multiple times in the data set as it expires and is renewed on a two- or
three-year cycle. In addition, many facilities have multiple bargaining units with a contract
for the registered nurses, a contract for food service workers, etc. Washington Hospital even
has a contract for the radiologists.
Establishment unionization rates, weighted by beds, are reported in the middle section
of Table 1. The table shows that 20.2 percent of all nursing home beds are in unionized
establishments. This is about twice as large a portion as the 10.8 percent of workers in the
industry that are covered by unions from the CPS. A diﬀerence of this order of magnitude
is to be expected since in any given unionized establishment, a sizable fraction of workers
would not be covered by a union contract.12
The patterns with the FMCS/POS data are qualitatively very similar to the patterns
found with the CPS. Unionization rates in the South overall are much lower than in the North
and the rest of the country. The rates in North and South Carolina are particularly low.
B.2. The NLRB/CBP Data on Union Elections
To construct the FMCS/POS data, I made use of the publicly available data on the universe of health care establishments. For the other four industries I am looking at, such as
retail groceries and construction, there are no analogous public data on the universe of establishments. Even if such data were available, say, for grocery stores, additional complications
would make it diﬃcult to link them to the FMCS. Nursing home and hospital union contracts
12

For North Carolina, the establishment rate of 1.6 is actually smaller than the worker rate from the CPS
of 1.9. There are several potential explanations for this. First, the CPS estimate is based on a small sample,
so there can be sampling error. Second, the underlying population of establishments is somewhat broader
in the CPS sample than in the POS file that I use. See the data appendix for further discussion about the
set of establishments used in the POS file.

9

usually cover a single establishment, and the specific address and name of the establishment
are provided in the FMCS file. In contrast, contracts in the retail grocery industry usually
cover multiple grocery stores in an area, the location information in the FMCS file is often
vague, like “Chicago area,” and the number of establishments covered is often unspecified.
In order to have something to say about these other industries, I turn to data on
certification of representative (RC) elections supervised by the National Labor Relations
Board (NLRB). By law, these elections take place at the establishment level. I have data on
all elections over the period 1980—1999, and for each election, the three-digit SIC code of the
establishment is provided as well as the county where it is located.
The NLRB election data measure a flow while the FMCS contract data measure a
stock. If an industry were 100 percent union at a particular location and if there were no
entry and exit, then no elections would be observed there. The FMCS data on contracts
would pick up that this location is 100 percent union, but the NLRB data would find no
indication of unionism. While this limitation of the NLRB data should be kept in mind, I
think the NLRB data are a useful proxy of the extent of unionism in a particular industry
and location. Even heavily unionized areas are rarely 100 percent union, so there is room for
a union to expand. State overall unionization rates from the CPS are highly correlated with
NLRB election rates (ρ = 0.83).13
My goal here is to evaluate the rate at which NLRB elections in an industry and
location occur relative to the number of establishments in this industry and location. The
U.S. Census Bureau’s data series County Business Patterns (CBP) provides establishment
counts by industry, county, and employment size category. I linked the 1980—1999 NLRB
election data to the 1992 CBP data, using the industry, county, and size information. In the
first step of the matching process, I linked NLRB records of the same establishment, using
address and company name information. This is important since 37.5 percent of elections
are for establishments with multiple elections. I then matched the NLRB establishment-level
data to the CBP data, by three-digit SIC, county, and establishment size.14 One issue is that
there are establishments with elections before 1992 in the NLRB data that are shut down by
1992, so my process will match them to some other establishment that does exist in 1992.
This is not a serious problem because I am not actually using any information in the CBP
record that the NLRB record doesn’t already have. The purpose of the exercise is to create
a denominator for the probability of the event of an organizing election, to set up a pool of
potential election targets from which the given one was drawn. Since the CBP population
13

The correlation is between state total unionization rates from the CPS for 1990 (Hirsch and MacPherson
2003, 2005) and NLRB RC elections 1980—1999 per 1990 CPS state employment, weighted by employment.
14
The NLRB data set does not provide information about establishment size. But it does list the size of
the bargaining unit. I estimated establishment size in the NLRB data by setting it to twice bargaining unit
size.

10

moves slowly over time, the underlying pool for 1980 is roughly similar to the pool for 1992.
Table 4 below reports establishment counts by industry for establishments in the CBP in the
South group of states. Further details about the data are provided in the appendix.
An establishment in the NLRB/CPB data is defined as unionized if it has at least
one election over the period 1980—1999. Unionization rates, per 1,000 establishments, are
reported in the bottom section of Table 1. The nursing home and hospital industries have
relatively high rates overall, at 121 and 211 per 1,000 establishments. These rates are close in
magnitude to the rates in the FMCS/POS data (if we take into account that one is per 100,
the other per 1,000). The rates in the remaining four industries are relatively small. Unlike
the health care industry, most of the unionization of the grocery and construction industries
took place prior to 1980. Nonetheless, the qualitative patterns in the NLRB/CBP data set
are consistent with the patterns in the CPS data. For each industry, the unionization rates
in the South in the NLRB/CBP data are about half or smaller than the levels in the North,
just as occurs in the CPS. At the state data, compared with the Carolinas, unionization is
high in Alabama in nursing homes, groceries, and construction, in both the NLRB/CBP data
and the CPS data. The rates in West Virginia and Pennsylvania are higher still.
C. . . . And Other Variables
As explained in the introduction, I focus on the mining and primary metals sectors from
the mid-20th century, the heyday of unionism, as a source of contagion, or spillover. I
use data from the 1958 Census (U.S. Bureau of the Census 1961a, b) to determine the
distribution of employment by county. The data published by the Census include cell counts
of establishments by employment size classifications, e.g., an employment range of 250—499
employees. I use these establishment-level size ranges to estimate employment. For mining,
I include metal mining (SIC 1000), anthracite coal mining (SIC 1100), and bituminous coal
mining (SIC 1200). Metal manufacturing is defined here as primary metals manufacturing
(SIC 3300). See the data appendix for more details.
Table 2 reports employment shares in the mining and metal industries for 1958 (calculated as a percentage of 1960 total employment) for the nation as a whole and for selected
regions and states. Observe that in 1960, the employment share in these sectors was three
times higher in the North than in the South. These industries were essentially nonexistent
in North and South Carolina. Note, however, that the industries were well-represented in
Alabama, at nearly twice the national average. Pennsylvania was the leading steel-producing
state, and West Virginia was a leading coal-producing state.
As discussed above, immigrants may have brought positive attitudes towards unions
with them. This is potentially an interesting kind of spillover to look at, but not one that I will
focus on here. In my analysis, I will control for diﬀerences in immigration across locations.
For my immigration measure, I go all the way back to the 1910 Census. Immigration was
11

closed in the 1920s. In Table 2, the “foreign” statistic reported is the percentage of the white
population with at least one parent born outside of the United States. Note the dramatic
diﬀerence between the North and South in this measure: 49.1 percent of whites in the North
and only 8.1 percent of whites in the South.
The last row of the table highlights the well-known historical diﬀerences between the
North and South in matters of race. In 1910, 35 percent of the population in the South was
black compared to only 3 percent in the North.

III. The Statistical Model
Now I examine the cross-section relationship between an establishment’s unionization status
in the late 20th century and the degree to which it is located near where mining and metal
establishments existed in the 1950s.
A. Notation
In terms of notation, for an establishment e at location , let sm denote unionism spillover
from mining and metal industries at the establishment’s location. Let ue be an indicator
variable, so that ue = 1 if the establishment is unionized and ue = 0 if not. I examine the relationship between ue and sm , holding fixed various other characteristics of the establishment
and the location.
To define the spillover, let q m be the share of total employment that is in the unionized
mining and metal establishments in the 1950s at location . The spillover sm collected at
is a weighted average of the spillovers being emitted nearby. Let yk denote the distance in
miles between location k and location . Let N y = {k, yk ≤ y} be the neighboring locations
within y miles of . Define the spillover by
m

P

k∈N y

s (δ, y) = P

exp(−δyk )nk qkm

k∈N y

exp(−δyk )nk

.

(1)

This specification weights nearby spillovers being emitted both by population nk as well as
an exponential decay function that declines with distance. It is similar in spirit to a gravity
specification in trade models. The parameter δ governs how things decay with distance. The
parameter y governs how far one goes out to collect spillovers. In eﬀect, beyond the distance
y there is infinite decay of the spillover.
Let xe denote a vector of establishment characteristics, e.g., a measure of size or a form
of organization (like profit vs. nonprofit). Let z denote a vector of location characteristics.
This will include a vector of state fixed eﬀects, to capture diﬀerences across states in labor
market polices and race policies and mean diﬀerences across states in things like immigration.
12

The vector z also includes location characteristics that potentially vary within a state, like
demographic variables.
I model the decision to unionize in terms of a discrete choice framework. Suppose that
the value of unionization status to establishment e is
ve = x0e β + z 0 γ + αsm + e .

(2)

The establishment is unionized if ve ≥ 0 and is not if ve < 0. The key parameter here is α,
the coeﬃcient on the unionism spillover variable.
B. Variables
In the FMCS/POS data set, an establishment is unionized, ue = 1, if it has at least one union
contract over the period 1986—2003. In the NLRB/CBP data, an establishment is unionized
if it has at least one NLRB election over the period 1980—1999. I later consider alternative
definitions.
In the FMCS/POS data set, the establishment characteristics xe are size (number of
beds and number of beds squared), dummy variables for establishment organization form
(nonprofit, profit, or government), and a dummy variable for facility type (nursing home or
hospital). There are a few establishments with a missing value for organization form; these
get a separate dummy variable. In the NLRB/CBP data set, there are two characteristics:
employment size (with three size categories) and industry. Summary statistics are provided
in a table in the appendix.
Location is defined at the level of the county. The location characteristics z at the
county level are population density (population in the year 2000 divided by land area), share
of whites in 1910 with at least one foreign-born parent, and the black population share in
1910.
Recall that q m is defined to be the share of total employment in the 1950s in unionized
mining and metal establishments at location . As discussed earlier, at that time virtually
the entire mining and metal industries were unionized. So I assume here that they are both
all union, and I use the share of employment in 1958 in county to approximate q m .
I consider two alternative specifications for the spillover function (??). In the 30mile-spillover specification, I assume that the decay δ = 0 and the distance y = 30. The
assumption of δ = 0 makes things easy to estimate. In the continuous decay specification, I
free up δ and impose that y = 75.
C. Estimates
Table 3 reports the estimates of the statistical model with the FMCS/POS data on health
care facilities. The first three columns of figures are based on the data from the South, the
13

main focus of the paper. For comparison purposes, the last three columns report estimates
for the remaining contiguous United States. Table 6 below considers additional geographic
groupings.
Using the data from the South, the estimate of α in the 30-mile case is 13.5 and
the standard error is 2.5. To estimate standard errors, I cluster observations by county,
using the robust estimator of variance. (This makes a diﬀerence–without clustering, the
standard error is 2.0.) I discuss the magnitude of α further below. Here I just note that
if the probability of unionization is very small, as is the case here, then the probability is
m
approximately proportionate to eαs . So at α = 13.6, an increase from spillover sm = 0 to
sm = 0.1 is associated with a multiplicative increase in probability on the order of e1.36 = 3.9
times.
For the continuous decay specification and the South data, the estimate of α is 31.3
and spillovers decay at a rate of 1.5 percent per mile. It is not surprising that the spillover
coeﬃcient α is larger in the continuous decay specification. If there is decay, then treating
all spillovers within a 30-mile radius the same is a kind of measurement error.
The estimates for α using the data from the rest of the contiguous United States are
about half of what they are for the South. This finding is likely related to the fact that this
model is nonlinear and that unionization rates are much higher outside the South. So a given
proportionate increase outside the South is a much bigger increase in levels. To explore this
issue further, I report estimates of the linear probability model for both regions. With this
specification, the estimated coeﬃcient on sm is actually larger outside the South than in the
South. So a given change in sm outside the South is associated with a bigger change in level,
but a smaller change in percentage terms, outside the South as compared to the South.
The main conclusion to draw from Table 3 is that over several specifications and
two geographic populations of establishments, there is a strong positive correlation between
unionization of health care establishments and proximity to mining and metal industries in
the 1950s.
It is worth noting that the probability of unionization depends upon other variables as
well. The model is estimated with state-level fixed eﬀects (not reported) that are important
quantitatively. Examination of the coeﬃcients in Table 3 yields the following conclusions:
In the South, unionization is positively correlated with locations being historically black.
Outside the South, it is correlated with locations with large immigrant populations in the
early 20th century. In the South, hospitals are less likely to be unionized compared to nursing
homes. Outside the South, this is reversed.
Table 4 reports the estimates for the NLRB/CBP data in other industries in the South.
For the sake of comparison, I also include the 30-mile spillover estimates for the FMCS/POS
data. I report only the coeﬃcients on the spillover variables, but all of these estimates

14

include establishment characteristics and location characteristics in addition to state fixed
eﬀects. For nursing homes and hospitals, the 30-mile spillover coeﬃcient α estimate from the
NLRB/CBP data is 10.5, which is fairly close to the estimate of 13.5 from the FMCS/POS
data. When I group the remaining four industries in the NLRB/CBP data, the estimated
spillover coeﬃcient is 5.1. Examining each industry individually, I find that both retail
groceries and construction have coeﬃcients of 5.1, and both are statistically significant. For
wholesale groceries and hotels, there are relatively few observations, and the standard errors
are high.
Table 5 provides information about magnitudes. The first column of figures takes the
fitted probability of an establishment being unionized from the model with a 30-mile spillover.
For the FMCS/POS data (the first estimate in Table 4), I report the predicted probability by
state in the South. The second column of figures re-evaluates the fitted probabilities, setting
the spillover sm = 0.065, which is the average mining and metal share for all of Pennsylvania
in Table 2. The last column sets sm = 0.149, the average share in West Virginia. With the
Pennsylvania level of spillover, the fitted probabilities on average double, from 3.2 to 6.2,
and with the West Virginia level, they more than triple. In the estimates with the NLRB
data, for nursing homes and hospitals, the results are quantitatively the same, a doubling
with Pennsylvania’s level and a tripling with West Virginia’s. For the other industries in
the NLRB data, the relationship is more like a 50 percent increase with Pennsylvania and a
doubling with West Virginia.
Note that the exercise in Table 5 is intended merely to give a sense of the magnitude
of the empirical relationship. It is not an estimate of a treatment eﬀect, or prediction, of
what would have happened to say, South Carolina, if it had had the same geology and coal
fields as West Virginia. If this had been true, other things would have been diﬀerent that are
being held fixed in the model. For example, the exercise in Table 5 holds fixed the state-level
fixed eﬀect. If South Carolina had coal like West Virginia, it is likely it would have had
a base of powerful mine and steel worker unions that could have potentially blocked antiunion laws, such as the right-to-work laws that were passed in South Carolina. With such a
treatment, it might very well be that the resulting unionization rate in South Carolina would
be higher than the fitted value of 10.6 percent in Table 5. While the parameter estimates
are not structural, they do provide strong evidence that geographic spillover takes place. If
spillovers didn’t occur, I would expect no empirical connection between unionization rates
and proximity to mining and metal, given all of the controls that I have included.
Table 6 looks at the robustness of these results. The top row contains the 30-mile
spillover model’s estimates for the three data groups: nursing homes and hospitals in the
FMCS/POS and NLRB/CBP data and the other industries in the NLRB/CBP data (from
Table 4). The next row adds three location-level variables that have been suggested by sem-

15

inar participants: per capita income (2000 per capita income of the establishment’s county),
a political variable (the share voting Democratic in the 1988 presidential election), and demographic information more recent than 1910. (I use the black share for 2000, which in the
South is highly collinear with the 1910 black share.) Adding these variables makes virtually
no diﬀerence in the estimate of the spillover coeﬃcient. The second change is to eliminate
all right-side variables besides the spillover and the state fixed eﬀects, and the third is to
get rid of state fixed eﬀects as well. With these changes, the estimates decrease from the
original somewhat, but remain large. The fourth change keeps the right side the same as
the original but uses a stricter definition for classifying an establishment as unionized. For
the FMCS/POS data, I now require that an establishment have at least four contracts while
before I required only one. For the NLRB data, I now require an establishment to have
at least one election in which the union won while before I required only that it have an
election. These further restrictions reduce the number of establishments classified as union
on the order of one-half. But for the FMCS/POS data, there is virtually no change in the
spillover estimates. For the NLRB/CBP data, the coeﬃcient increases slightly.
The next set of robustness exercises maintains the baseline specification but changes
the geographic areas. Some scholars, such as Marshall (1967), use a broader definition of the
South that includes West Virginia, Kentucky, and Oklahoma. Adding these states lowers the
coeﬃcients, but the magnitude of the relationship remains large. The next geographic area
is the North, as defined earlier. The coeﬃcients are approximately half as they are for the
baseline estimates for the South. So in percent terms, the eﬀect is approximately one-half.
But the base probabilities in the North are on the order of twice as high, so the eﬀects in
the North are comparable in level terms with the South. The next region is the Mountain
and Plains States, the 14-state region between the Pacific States (California, Oregon, and
Washington) and the North and South. This region, including states like Montana, Colorado,
New Mexico, and Arizona, has significant mining activity in some places and so is a natural
area to focus on. For this region and for the FMCS/POS data, the estimate of α is 8.3 and
the standard error is 1.5, which are remarkably similar to the estimates for the other regions.
There is a diﬀerence with the estimates using the NLRB data as the coeﬃcients are close to
zero. This area is an anomaly in that elsewhere, for the health care sector, the coeﬃcient
obtained with the FMCS/POS contract data is similar to the coeﬃcient obtained with the
NLRB/CBP data. I don’t have an explanation for the diﬀerence. But I put more weight
on the FMCS/POS data, both because the data are cleaner and more reliable and because
conceptually I prefer a unionization measure in levels (i.e., existing contracts) rather than
in election rates. The final region considered is the Pacific States. There is little in the
way of mining or metal industries to speak of in this area and little variation in spillover
for identifying the relationship. (See summary statistics in Table A2.) Unsurprisingly, the

16

standard errors are quite high, in the range of 5 to 7, for this region. The exercise of
this paper is not interesting to consider for these states. The last row in Table 6 reports
the coeﬃcients when the data for all contiguous United States are pooled together. The
bottom line is that, particularly for the FMCS/POS contract data for health care facilities,
the relationship between unionization and spillover is strong throughout United States, not
just in the South.
The final data exercise broaches the issue of the channels through which spillovers take
place. As discussed earlier, one channel is union infrastructure and staﬀ. Unions employ staﬀ
people who are on the lookout for new organizing activities. Naturally, a union staﬀ person
will be mainly interested in expanding his or her own union. That is, a staﬀ person for the
USWA will be working to organize new USWA establishments. A staﬀ person for the United
Mine Workers (UMW) will be organizing for the UMW. To the extent that spillovers work
through an infrastructure channel, we should see as a necessary condition that health care
facilities and grocery stores near mining and metal establishments should be organized by
the UMW or the USWA. If we see health care facilities near coal mines represented by the
service workers union, the spillover can’t all be infrastructure.
To examine this issue, I use the information about union aﬃliation available in the
data. I consider what happens when I exclude representation by the USWA and the UMW.
Specifically, all establishments in the FMCS/POS data that have a labor contract with the
UMW or USWA or establishments in the NLRB/CBP data that have an election involving
one of those unions are classified as nonunion. So only those establishments unconnected
to the UMW or the USWA and having some other union aﬃliation are now classified as
union. In this case, as reported in Table 7, the spillover coeﬃcients for nursing homes and
hospitals fall by 30—45 percent, for the two data sets. The coeﬃcient falls for the other
industries as well, though by a much smaller amount. These declines are consistent with
union infrastructure being a factor. But the results also imply that union infrastructure is
not the whole story. More than half of the coeﬃcient remains when we reclassify the UMW
and USWA observations. This result is being driven by nursing homes and grocery stores
with aﬃliations like the Service Workers (SEIU) and Food and Commercial Workers (UFCW)
unions near mines and metal plants that are diﬀerent from the aﬃliations that have organized
the mines and factories.
The final row in Table 7 goes the other way and classifies as union only those establishments with a UMW or USWA contract. This increases all the coeﬃcients compared to
the original model estimates, especially so for the other industries in the NLRB/CBP, where
the coeﬃcient more than triples. It is clear that the USWA and UMW are getting out of
steel mills and coal mines into neighboring establishments.

17

IV. A Visual Presentation of the Data
The previous section uses statistics to summarize the data. This section provides a visual
presentation of the raw data. The results parallel the statistical findings.
The majority of mining and metal activity in 1958 was concentrated in the 15-state
region illustrated in Figure 1. The region accounted for 70 percent of all coal and metal
mining employment and 57 percent of primary metal manufacturing. And, again, virtually
all of these establishments were unionized. Figure 1(a) is a map of the location in 1958 of
establishments in these industries with 100 or more employees; each dot represents one plant.15
Consider the point labeled A in Pennsylvania in Figure 1(a). (State names are provided in the
bottom right map.) Just below point A is the area around Pittsburgh, which has the heaviest
concentration of the mining and metal industries. Next consider point B in Alabama. This
is the Birmingham area. This is also a major center of mining and metal manufacturing.
Looking between these two points, we see significant mining and metal activity, particularly
in West Virginia and eastern Kentucky. This area follows the Appalachian Mountains and is
rich in coal seams.
Figure 1(b) plots the locations of the health care facilities in the 1996 POS data that
I have classified as unionized based on the FMCS/POS data. The extent to which current
unionism in the health care sector follows the distribution of mining and metal activity from
the 1950s is remarkable. Note, in particular, the heavy concentration of unionized facilities
in West Virginia and eastern Kentucky and in Alabama around Birmingham, all areas where
mining and metal activities are concentrated.
The remaining two maps restrict attention to establishments aﬃliated with the USWA.
Figure 2(a) illustrates the location of health care facilities in the FMCS/POS data in the
region with at least one USWA contract. There are 54 such facilities in the region. The areas
where the USWA gets into health care facilities are all areas where there is a large base of
mines and steel mills. Figure 2(b) is based on information from the USWA Web site on the
location of grocery stores and beverage distributors that are represented by the USWA. (See
data appendix.) The same pattern holds here.

V. Concluding Remarks
This study shows that while unionism in health care facilities and grocery stores is weak in
the South overall, those facilities situated near coal mines and steel mills have unionization
rates closer to their counterparts in the North. How does unionism spill out of mines and
into grocery stores? This study suggests two answers. One is union infrastructure. This is
15

The location information in the map is accurate to the level of the county.

18

consistent with the fact that some of the health care facilities near mines and steel mills are
organized by the USWA. The second answer is that the workers themselves are bringing
in the seeds of unionism they have picked up from their own experience in mines or mills
or from the experiences of their families and friends. This is consistent with the fact that
most health care facilities near mines and mills are organized by unions unrelated to those
organizing mines and mills.
It is well-appreciated that the massive decline of heavy industry employment in the
United States has had a direct eﬀect in decimating the number of unionized workers in this
country. The results presented here suggest that there is a secondary eﬀect that goes beyond
those industries. The reduction in geographic spillovers from heavy industry can be expected
to also negatively impact unionism in other sectors, like health care and retail trade.
An example can make this more concrete. In 1958, Jeﬀerson County, Alabama, where
Birmingham is located, had 30,000 workers in steel mills and coal mines accounting for
14 percent of all employment. As of 2002, this number had fallen to only 9,000 workers,
accounting for just 2.5 percent of all employment. Spillovers have been vastly diluted. Lately,
several new auto plants have been built in the Birmingham area, and the United Auto Workers
has so far been unsuccessful in organizing them. If new auto plants in the Birmingham area
can resist unionization, there is little chance that the new nonunion entrants to the grocery
business in the area, like Wal-Mart, will ever be unionized.

19

Data Appendix
Here I describe in more detail the data I collected from various sources to get more geographical detail on unionism in the United States. Data and sample programs for the paper are
posted at www.econ.umn.edu/~holmes/data/geo_spill. Summary statistics are presented in
Tables A1 and A2.
A. FMCS/POS
I obtained the POS files from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). I selected all nursing homes and hospitals in the POS file from 1996. Nursing homes included
establishments in the following categories: skilled nursing facilities (SNF), nursing facilities
(NF), SNF/NF dually, and SNF/NF distinct. This resulted in 21,920 establishments, excluding any in Alaska and Hawaii.
I obtained the data on expired contracts from the Federal Mediation and Conciliation
Service (FMCS). I took the subset of FMCS contracts designated as from the “health care”
industry and matched them to the POS universe. For the purpose of matching, I included
the 1991 and 2001 POS files as well as the 1996 file. I used the address, phone numbers, and
company name information in the FMCS and POS file for matching. The computer did most
of the work here, but there was also an extensive amount of manual matching. As discussed
in the text, I made frequent use of Google to complete a match. In some cases, I would be
able to determine that the FMCS entity was actually a retirement home or a mental health
facility and therefore not part of my underlying universe. In other cases, I would be able to
obtain additional information about the facility that would enable me to complete the match
to the POS file. I was able to match 96.4 percent of the 27,629 health care facility contracts
in the FMCS data base.
In New York and Minnesota, there are industry-wide contracts that are negotiated by
a consortia of health care providers. In a majority of such cases, I was able to obtain the
actual contract from the U.S. Department of Labor and other sources in order to determine
the facilities covered from the contract language. There were several important multi-facility
contracts that could not be matched this way, particularly the complex set of contracts for
the Kaiser health system, a system of hospitals on the West Coast that is essentially all union.
For such cases, I went to the Web sites of the local unions negotiating the contracts, where
I usually found lists of the covered facilities. Of the 560 facilities listed on union Web sites
as represented, in 88 percent of the cases I already had one or more matching contracts for
the facility in the FMCS data base. I take this as evidence that the matched data are very
reliable.
In determining whether a facility was represented, I excluded in the FMCS data notices
of bargaining for first contracts. I used only expiration notices of contracts that have actually
20

been obtained.16
B. NLRB/CBP
I put together NLRB election data for 1980—1999, which I obtained from various sources:
Bruce Fallick (Fallick and Hassett 1999), Henry Farber (1984, 2001), the NLRB, and the
National Archives. I selected elections from the following six SIC industry codes: 15, contract
construction; 5140, wholesale groceries and related products; 5410, grocery stores; 7010,
hotels and motels; 8050, nursing and personal care facilities; and 8060, hospitals. Excluding
Alaska and Hawaii, this resulted in 13,859 elections.
I then matched elections by address and employer name and identified 11,098 unique
establishments. I then set establishment size equal to twice the eligible number of votes in
an election. Using the industry, county, and size information in the NLRB data, I matched
the 11,098 establishments to the CBP data. I aggregated size classes in the CBP data to
three employment size groups: 1—49, 50—249, and 250 and more. In a few cases, there was
not an establishment in a given size category in a given industry and county, and in such
cases, I assigned the NLRB establishment to a larger CBP establishment or, if none, to a
smaller CBP establishment. There were only 87 NLRB establishments for which I could not
find a corresponding establishment in the 1992 CBP in the same industry and county, and I
eliminated them.
C. Other Variables
As discussed in the text, data on mining and metal employment were obtained from the U.S.
Bureau of the Census (1961a, b). For the primary metal industries (SIC 33), the establishment
employment size data have seven categories: 1—19, 20—49, 50—99, 100—249, 250—499, 500—999,
and 1,000 and more. I set the employment of each establishment equal to the mean of its
size group. For the mining industries (SIC 10, 11, 12), the employment size groupings in
the tables are more aggregated: 0—19, 20—99, 100—249, and 250 and more. However, there is
additional information in the Census publication in the form of county maps of employment
that permitted me to break up the 250 and more category to 250—999 and 1,000 and above.
County demographic data from 1910 were obtained from a 1970s study of the InterUniversity Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR, 197?, 1988). Use of these
data required various cleanings. I went back to the original Census tabulations to fix some
mistakes and to fill in left out observations like those of the District of Columbia.
16

When workers vote for a union in an NLRB election, the firm is required to recognize the union and
bargain for a year. But in a large percentage of cases, the union never gets a first contract. (See Cooke
1985.) I exclude notices of first bargaining by eliminating records with blank values for contract expiration
and reopen dates. Beginning in 2003, the FMCS added an explicit categorical variable that distinguishes
notices of first bargaining. Using this new field, I have determined that my approach of identifying notices
of initial bargaining is very accurate.

21

Data on demographic information for 2000 and on per capita income were obtained
from the 2000 Census. Data for the 1988 presidential election were obtained from a 1988
ICPSR study. The figure reported is the Democratic share of the combined vote for the
Democratic and Republican candidates.
The data for Figure 2(b), the location of retail food and wholesale beverage distribution
establishments represented by the USWA, were obtained directly from the USWA Web site on
5/24/2001. This information is no longer posted there, so I have posted this noncopyrighted
information at my Web site, along with the rest of the data at my Web site.

22

References

Brock, William A., and Steven N. Durlauf, “Discrete Choice with Social Interactions,” Review
of Economic Studies, LXVIII (2001), 235—260.
Cobb, James C., The Selling of the South: The Southern Crusade for Industrial Development,
1936—1990, 2nd ed. (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1993).
Cooke, William N., Union Organizing and Public Policy: Failure to Secure First Contracts
(Kalamazoo, MI: W. E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 1985).
Deshpande, Satish P., and Jack Fiorito, “Specific and General Beliefs in Union Voting Models,” Academy of Management Journal, XXXII (1989), 883—897.
DiNardo, John, and David S. Lee, “Economic Impacts of New Unionization on Private Sector
Employers: 1984—2001,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXIX (2004), 1383—1441.
Douty, H. M., “Collective Bargaining Coverage in Factory Employment, 1958,” Monthly
Labor Review, LXXXIII (1960), 345—349.
Erdem, Tulin, and Michael P. Keane, “Decision-Making Under Uncertainty: Capturing Dynamic Brand Choice Processes in Turbulent Consumer Goods Markets,” Marketing
Science, XV (1996), 1—20.
Fallick, Bruce C., and Kevin A. Hassett, “Investment and Union Certification,” Journal of
Labor Economics, XVII (1999), 570—582.
Farber, Henry S., “The Extent of Unionization in the United States,” in Challenges and
Choices Facing American Labor, Thomas A. Kochan, ed. (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1984), pp. 15—43.
, “Union Success in Representation Elections: Why Does Unit Size Matter?”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, LIV (2001), 329—348.
Farber, Henry S., and Bruce Western, “Round Up the Usual Suspects: The Decline of Unions
in the Private Sector, 1973—1998,” Princeton University IRS Working Paper 437, 2000.
Freeman, Richard B., “Spurts in Union Growth: Defining Moments and Social Processes,”
in The Defining Moment: The Great Depression and the American Economy in the
Twentieth Century,” Michael D. Bordo, Claudia Goldin, and Eugene N. White, eds.
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998), pp. 265—295.
Freeman, Richard B., and James L. Medoﬀ, “New Estimates of Private Sector Unionism in
the United States,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, XXXII (1979), 143—174.
, What Do Unions Do? (New York: Basic Books, 1984).
Fullagar, Clive J. A., Daniel G. Gallagher, Michael E. Gordon, and Paul F. Clark, “Impact of
Early Socialization on Union Commitment and Participation: A Longitudinal Study,”
Journal of Applied Psychology, LXXX (1995), 147—157.
23

Glaeser, Edward L., Bruce Sacerdote, and Jose A. Scheinkman, “Crime and Social Interactions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXI (1996), 507—548.
Gowrisankaran, Gautam, and Joanna Stavins, “Network Externalities and Technology Adoption: Lessons from Electronic Payments,” Rand Journal of Economics, XXXV (2004),
250—276.
Herod, Andrew, ed., Organizing the Landscape: Geographical Perspectives on Labor Unionism (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1998).
Hester, Leslie Kim, and Jerry Bryan Fuller, “Building Union Commitment: The Impact of
Parental Attitudes and Participation,” Labor Studies Journal, XXVI (2001), 17—30.
Hirsch, Barry T., and David A. MacPherson, “Union Membership and Coverage Database
from the Current Population Survey: Note,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
LVI (2003), 349—354.
, Union Membership and Coverage Database from the CPS, www.Unionstats.com,
2005.
Holmes, Thomas J., “The Eﬀect of State Policies on the Location of Manufacturing: Evidence
from State Borders,” Journal of Political Economy, CVI (1998), 667—705.
Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research, “Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790—1970” [Computer file], ICPSR 3,
197?
, “General Election Data for the United States, 1970—1990,” DS14: National, 1988
[Computer file], ICPSR 13, 1988.
Kremer, Michael, and Benjamin A. Olken, “A Biological Model of Unions,” NBER Working
Paper 8257, 2001.
Lewis, H. Gregg, Unionism and Relative Wages in the United States: An Empirical Inquiry
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1963).
Manski, Charles F., “Identification of Endogenous Social Eﬀects: The Reflection Problem,”
Review of Economic Studies, LX (1993), 531—542.
Marshall, F. Ray, Labor in the South (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1967).
Neumann, George R., and Ellen R. Rissman, “Where Have All the Union Members Gone?”
Journal of Labor Economics, II (1984), 175—192.
U.S. Bureau of the Census, U.S. Census of Manufactures: 1958, Location of Manufacturing
Plants by Industry, County, and Employment Size: 1958, Part 7. Primary Metal
Industries; Fabricated Metal Products, Special Report MC58(S)-2.7 (Washington, DC:
U.S. Government Printing Oﬃce, 1961a).
, U.S. Census of Mineral Industries: 1958, Vol. II, Area Statistics (Washington,
DC: U.S. Government Printing Oﬃce, 1961b).

24

Table 1
Unionization Rates by Industry and Geographic Area

Regions
Data Set
CPS (1999–2001)
Rates per 100 workers
All Industries (including public sector)
Nontraded Industries with Significant
Unionization
Nursing and Personal Care Facilities
Hospitals
Wholesale Trade: Groceries
Retail Trade: Groceries
Hotels and Motels
Construction
FMCS/POS
Rates per 100 establishments
Nursing Homes
Hospitals
NLRB/CBP
Rates per 1,000 establishments
Nursing and Personal Care Facilities
Hospitals
Wholesale Trade: Groceries
Retail Trade: Groceries
Hotels and Motels
Construction

Least Unionized

Selected States
Highly Unionized

All

South

North

Rest of
U.S.

N.C.

S.C.

Ala.

W.Va.

Penn.

14.9

7.7

19.5

15.3

4.2

5.0

11.3

15.9

18.3

10.8
15.3
12.9
21.3
10.6
20.4

1.9
4.7
4.6
5.8
2.5
6.7

16.0
19.2
18.5
26.7
13.1
32.1

6.5
20.0
13.3
31.8
14.7
19.8

1.9
2.7
1.1
1.2
.0
2.5

.0
3.4
.0
.0
.0
4.3

3.4
5.0
11.7
9.1
.0
10.3

8.3
8.0
23.1
11.8
.0
23.9

17.7
15.2
23.6
17.3
6.9
28.9

20.2
26.0

4.8
3.4

31.8
38.5

10.9
30.4

1.6
4.6

1.9
2.4

10.5
1.9

35.6
12.2

32.3
41.2

120.8
210.6
27.8
7.2
18.9
7.0

54.5
27.5
16.7
2.3
6.7
4.3

180.4
324.7
32.1
7.3
28.2
8.1

68.5
230.2
30.8
14.8
19.3
7.9

20.5
17.6
18.0
.6
3.1
.7

50.5
37.0
10.7
1.2
3.4
.7

81.8
36.4
25.7
2.4
2.1
4.8

350.6
246.6
42.3
10.7
21.9
9.4

195.7
384.2
28.9
8.6
42.6
10.1

CPS = Results of Current Population Survey averaged over 1999–2001.
FMCS/POS = Combination of data on health care facilities from the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service and the “Provider of Services” file of the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services.
NLRB/CBP = Combination of data on establishments from the National Labor Relations Board (data on union representation elections) and the U.S. Census Bureau’s
data series “County Business Patterns” (number of establishments by industry, county, and employment size).

Table 2
Sources of Spillovers
Size and Location of Highly Unionized Industries
and Related Population Characteristics
in Selected Geographic Areas of the United States
in the 20th Century
Regions
Category
Industry Employment
Shares in 1958
Mining

All

South

North

Rest of
U.S.

Selected States
N.C.

S.C.

Ala.

W.Va.

Penn.

.5

.2

.6

.4

.0

.0

.9

11.1

1.5

Metal Manufacturing

1.7

.7

2.4

.8

.2

.1

4.0

3.8

5.0

Mining + Metal Manufacturing

2.2

1.0

3.0

1.2

.2

.1

4.9

14.9

6.5

Population Shares in 1910
White Population with ForeignBorn Parent

37.5

8.1

49.1

40.0

1.1

3.5

4.3

10.8

43.4

10.7

35.2

3.0

1.8

32.5

54.7

42.7

4.9

2.6

Black Population
Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census.

Tables 3–4
Estimating the Correlation Between
Unionization and Proximity to the
U.S. Mining and Metal Manufacturing Industries
in the 1950s
Table 3
In Health Care Facilities in Two Geographic Areas
Using the FMCS/POS Data and Three Model Specifications
(Numbers in parentheses are standard errors.)

Statistic
Spillover
Spillover Coefficient α
Decay Rate δ*100 (% per mile)
County Variables
Population Share in 1910
Black
White with Foreign-Born
Parent
Population Density (2000)
Establishment Characteristics
Log Beds
(Log Beds)2

30-Mile
Spillover

Government Dummy

31.3

.595

6.6

9.8

.837

(2.4)

(4.6)

(.215)

(1.0)

(2.0)

(.147)

—

1.4

—

4.5

—

3.4

(.7)

.4

(.9)

.1

(.1)

(.6)

.4

(.9)

.2

.084

1.1

−.0

−.0

(.1)

.2

1.5

1.8

(.022)

(1.7)

(1.6)

.005

2.8

2.7

(.017)

.001

(.004)

(1.1)

.2

(1.9)

(.1)

1.1

(.4)

.06

(.4)

.1

.062

(.122)

.389

(.064)

.009

(.03)

(.0)

−.028

1.7

1.7

.069

(.020)

(.5)

(.5)

(.035)

.005

−.1

−.1

(.002)

.006

(.0)

.1

(.0)

.1

(.003)

.001
(.004)

.018

(.2)

(.2)

(.004)

(.1)

(.1)

(.014)

−1.4

−1.4

−.010

−.2

−.2

−.031

−1.2

−1.2

−.013

−1.9

−1.9

−.210

−1.0

−1.1

−.022

6,194

6,194

(.3)

Number of Establishments

4.0

(1.2)

(.9)

Hospital Dummy

—

(.6)

(.5)

Type-Missing Dummy

Rest of Contiguous United States
Linear
30-Mile Contin
Spillover Decay Probability

13.6

(.1)

For-Profit Dummy

South
Contin
Linear
Decay Probability

(.5)
(.9)
(.3)

*All specifications include state-level fixed effects that aren’t reported.

(.007)
(.009)
(.009)

6,194

(.1)
(.2)

(.1)
(.2)

(.013)
(.020)

.6

.6

.089

(.1)

(.1)

(.011)

15,561

15,561

15,561

Table 4
In Other Industries in the South
Using the NLRB/CBP Data and Two Model Specifications
(Numbers in parentheses are standard errors.)

Data Set and Industry
FMCS/POS
Nursing Homes and Hospitals
NLRB/CBP
Nursing Homes and Hospitals
Other Nontraded Industries

Wholesale Trade: Groceries
Retail Trade: Groceries
Hotels and Motels
Construction
*

Value for Each
Specification and Statistic
30-Mile
Spillover
Continuous Decay
δ*100
α
α

Number of
Establishments
Unionized

13.6

31.3

1.4

6,194

199

10.5

20.9

2.1

7,557

357

5.1

11.1

(2.4)

(2.3)

(2.0)

1.0

(5.0)

5.1

(4.6)

(3.9)

(1.7)

1.1

228,026

1,048

6.9

—*

10,583

177

2.4

47,536

110

3.0

12,198

84

1.6

157,344

677

(7.0)

8.7

(8.8)

4.3

13.9

5.1

11.2

(1.7)

For this case, the estimate of δ was at the lower bound of zero.

(.8)

(3.3)

(2.7)

(4.4)

(.6)

(5.5)

(3.9)

(10.4)

(1.6)

(2.5)

Table 5
The Magnitude of the Fitted Empirical Relationship
Mean Fitted Probability of an Establishment Being Unionized
in Various Southern States and Industries,
at Alternative Spillover Levels, Using Estimates from 30-Mile Spillover Model

Geographic Area and Industry
By State
FMCS/POS Health Care Facilities
(per 100 establishments)
Alabama
Arkansas
Florida
Georgia
Louisiana
Mississippi
North Carolina
South Carolina
Tennessee
Texas
Virginia

Fitted Probability with Spillover of
West
Virginia
Actual
Pennsylvania

6.1
4.2
7.6
1.7
2.4
4.2
1.4
1.7
3.9
1.1
3.3

6.6
8.5
15.6
3.9
5.3
8.7
3.2
3.9
7.5
2.0
5.3

16.5
20.3
34.8
10.6
14.0
20.3
9.0
10.6
18.3
5.8
14.0

All of the South
FMCS/POS Health Care Facilities
(per 100 establishments)

3.2

6.2

15.1

NLRB/CBP Industries
(per 1,000 establishments)
Nursing Homes and Hospitals
Other Nontraded Industries
Wholesale Trade: Groceries
Retail Trade: Groceries
Hotels and Motels
Construction

47.2
4.6
16.7
2.3
6.9
4.3

79.0
6.0
17.6
3.0
8.8
5.7

159.6
9.1
19.1
4.6
12.3
8.5

Table 6
Robustness of the Model’s Spillover Coefficient Estimates
Model’s Estimates of Spillover Coefficients with Proposed Model Changes
and with Alternative Data Sets and Industries
(Numbers in parentheses are standard errors.)

Specification
Baseline 30-Mile Spillover Model
Model with Changes
Additional Location-Level Variables
Only State-Level Fixed Effects
No Controls

Value with
Specified Data Set and Industries
NLRB/CBP
FMCS/POS
Other
Nurs/Hosp
Nurs/Hosp
Industries
13.6
10.5
5.1
(2.4)

(2.3)

12.4

10.4

(2.7)

9.7

(2.1)

8.6

(2.2)

7.3

(2.0)

6.4

(2.0)

4.8

(2.0)

4.2

(1.5)

4.6

(2.9)

(2.5)

12.9

12.8

(2.4)

(1.6)

9.6
(1.4)

7.6
(1.2)

3.0
(1.0)

North

7.0
(1.2)

6.4
(1.1)

2.6
(.7)

Mountain and Plains States

8.3
(1.5)

1.2
(1.5)

1.0
(.9)

Pacific States (Calif., Ore., and Wash.)

−4.9
(6.9)

−14.5
(7.1)

−.7
(4.9)

All of Contiguous United States

7.5
(1.0)

5.5
(.9)

1.6
(.6)

Stricter Definition of Union Status
Alternative Geographic Areas
Expand South to include W. Va., Ky., and Okla.

(2.8)

(1.3)

7.0

Table 7
Examining a Potential Channel of Spillover:
Affiliation with Mining and Metal Manufacturing Unions
Model’s Estimates of Spillover Coefficients with the Classification of Establishments
as Unionized Linked to Their Affiliation with Either of Two Large Unions:
United Mine Workers or United Steelworkers of America
(Numbers in parentheses are standard errors.)

Specification
30-Mile Spillover Model
Model with Change in Definition of Union Status
Excludes UMW and USWA
Includes only UMW and USWA

Value with
Specified Data Set and Industries
NLRB/CBP
FMCS/POS
Other
Nurs/Hosp
Nurs/Hosp
Industries
13.6
10.5
5.1
(2.4)

9.2

(2.3)

6.0

(2.0)

4.3

(2.5)

(2.5)

(1.6)

15.4

11.7

15.6

(3.4)

(3.3)

(3.2)

Appendix Table A1
Detailed Summary Statistics for Establishments in South

Variable
Union

Value with Alternative Data Sets and Industries
NLRB/CBP
FMCS/POS
Other Nontraded
Health Care
Nursing Homes
Facilities
and Hospitals
Industries
Std.
Std.
Std.
Mean
Error
Mean
Error
Mean
Error
.03
.18
.05
.21
.005
.07

Establishment Size
Beds
Employment 1–49
50–249
250+

136.03
—
—
—

154.20

Establishment
Organization Form
Nonprofit
For-Profit
Government
Type Missing

.21
.64
.12
.04

.40
.48
.33
.19

Industry
Nursing Homes
Hospitals
Wholesale Trade: Groceries
Retail Trade: Groceries
Hotels and Motels
Construction

.64
.36
—
—
—
—

Population Share 1910
White Foreign
Black Share

.34
.51
.14

.47
.50
.35

.48
.48
—
—
—
—

.73
.27

.44
.44

.12
.30

.15
.19

.13
.31

Population Density (2000)

.55

.85

Neighboring Mining/Metal
Share

.01

.03

Number of Establishments

6,194

.948
.049
.004

.22
.22
.06

.05
.21
.06
.69

.21
.41
.23
.46

.15
.18

.13
.32

.15
.17

.66

.89

.72

.89

.01

.03

.01

.02

7,557

228,026

Appendix Table A2
Selected Summary Statistics by Region

Region and Variable
South
Union
Neig. Mine/Metal Share
Number of Establishments

Value with Alternative Data Sets and Industries
NLRB/CBP
FMCS/POS
Other Nontraded
Health Care
Nursing Homes
Facilities
and Hospitals
Industries
Std.
Std.
Std.
Mean
Error
Mean
Error
Mean
Error
.032
.009
6,194

.176
.027

.047
.212
.008
.026
7,557

.005
.008

North
Union
Neig. Mine/Metal Share
Number of Establishments

.261
.030
10,003

.439
.042

.212
.409
.030
.041
13,522

.010
.027

Mountain and Plains States
Union
Neig. Mine/Metal Share
Number of Establishments

.041
.012
3,231

.198
.042

.066
.249
.015
.042
3,603

.012
.021

Pacific States (Calif., Ore., Wash.)
Union
Neig. Mine/Metal Share
Number of Establishments

.263
.009
2,327

.449
.009

.162
.368
.009
.009
3,263

.010
.009

Contiguous United States
Union
Neig. Mine/Metal Share
Number of Establishments

.163
.019
21,755

.370
.037

.143
.350
.019
.037
27,946

.009
.018

228,026

362,470

89,067

123,729

803,292

.068
.024

.100
.037

.110
.052

.098
.009

.093
.034

Figures 1-2
A Visual Display of the Data:
Unionism Spills Over from Mining and Manufacturing
into Other Industries

Locations of Establishments in the 15 States with the Most Mining
and Manufacturing
(Each dot represents one establishment.)
Figure 1
Unionized Establishments
in the Region

Figure 2
Unionized Establishments
Represented by the USWA

1a. Mining and Metal Plants in 1958
With 100 or More Employees

2a. Health Care Facilities

A

# #### # ########
##
#########
#
# ## #####
#
# # # # # ##########
#
####
# # ### ############ ### ## # # # ##
# # ## # # # # ##################### # #### # # # #
##
#
#
#
# #
#
##
#
#
##
### ####
## ########
####
###### ########## ## # #
#
# #
##
#
#
#
#
#
#
#######
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
# ######
# ## ## # ## #
### #
#
## #
#
#
#
#
#
#
##### ###
#
#
#
#
#
#### # #### ##
#
#####
#
### ## #########
#####
#
#
#
# # ##### # #
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
######### #### ####
# ### #### #
#
#
#
# # ## #
# ## ##
## ######
# ######
### ##
# #
############
######### ##
## #
# ##
##
#
# #############
# ######################## # #
# #### ## ### ##
####
####
###
# ## #
## ### ## ### # ##### # # # # #####
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
## # ##
###
#####
####
# ###
##
#
##
# ## #
###
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
##
#
#
###
#
#### #
## ## #
#
#
#
#
#
##
# ##
#
#
# ## ##
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
####
#
# ### ## #
## ##
##
## #
##
# ###
#
####### ##
#
## ### ##
# ## # #
## ### ###
### #
#
####
##
####
####
#
#
#
#
#
##
#
#
#
# ##
#
##
######### ###
###
# # #### ##
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
# ########
##
#
#
# ######
## ######
##
###
######## #######
####### #
#
#### ##########
# ##
# #
## ## # ####
########## #
##
#
#
#
### ## ##
#
#
#
#
# ##
#
# # #### #
#
#
#
#
# ##
#
#
#
# ### #
#
## # #
#
#
#
#
# # # ######
#
#
#
#
################ ### #
# ######
### #
#
#
#
#

#

A

B

#
# # # #
# #
#
# ## ## #
#
#
#
# ##
##
# ## #### ##
# ## #
# ####
#

#

#

#
### ###

#

#
##

1b. Health Care Facilities
##

##
# # # #########
########
#
# ###########
########
######## #
# # # ## ##############
#
#############
## ########
#
#
#
#
# ## #
#
##

####

##

#
##
#
####

##
##

#

#

#

#

#
#

#
# #### #

##
# ##########
#
#
#

#
# #
# ####
###
# # #
######### ##### ## ##
## ##### # #
#
###
#### #
#
###
#
####
### # #
## ####
# ## #
# # # # ###### #
#
#########
#
#
#
#
#
## # ##
##
#### # ###
#### ## # ## # # ## # # #
#
##
# #### #
## ## #
### # # #
## # # ##
#
##
#
####
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
## ###
#### ##### ## ## # # ###
# # ## # #####
#
# #
# ## #############
### ###
# # #####
# # ## #
## # # # #
##
## #
#
#
#
#
#
########
# # ##
#
###
####
# ### # # ###########
# # ## # # ## # #
#### ## #
## ######
#
#
# # ####
# ## #
########
### # #
#
#
#
#
#
#
#####
#
##
#
#
##
###
#
##########
#
#
#
#
# ######
#
#
##
#
##
#####
##
# #### #
#
##
# ## ## ## ## #
#
### #
#
# ### # ##### ## # # # #
#
#
# ##
## ## ##
# ## ### #
#
#
#
#
# #
#
#
##
#
#
#
#
##
#
#

##

#
##

#

#
## #
#
# # #
## # #
#

##
#
#

#
#

2b. Grocery Stores and Beverage Distributors

#
#
#

#

#

#

#

#

Sources: FMCS/POS, USWA, Census 1958

ILLINOIS

INDIANA

# # #PENNSYLVANIA
### #
# ######### ##
# ##
###

OHIO

W. VIRGINIA

#

KENTUCKY

#
#
# # ##

TENNESSEE

MISSISSIPPI

N. CAROLINA
S. CAROLINA

####
ALABAMA

VIRGINIA

GEORGIA

DELAWARE
MARYLAND

