NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE TIME VARYING VOLATILITY OF
MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS
Alejandro Justiniano
Giorgio E. Primiceri
Working Paper 12022
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12022
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2006

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Alejandro Justiniano and Giorgio E. Primiceri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Time Varying Volatility of Macroeconomic Fluctuations
Alejandro Justiniano and Giorgio E. Primiceri
NBER Working Paper No. 12022
February 2006
JEL No. E30, C32
ABSTRACT
In this paper we investigate the sources of the important shifts in the volatility of U.S.
macroeconomic variables in the postwar period. To this end, we propose the estimation of DSGE
models allowing for time variation in the volatility of the structural innovations. We apply our
estimation strategy to a large-scale model of the business cycle and find that investment specific
technology shocks account for most of the sharp decline in volatility of the last two decades.
Alejandro Justiniano
Division of Monetary Affairs
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Washington, DC 20551
alejandro.justiniano@frb.gov
Giorgio E. Primiceri
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
g-primiceri@northwestern.edu

THE TIME VARYING VOLATILITY OF MACROECONOMIC
FLUCTUATIONS
ALEJANDRO JUSTINIANO AND GIORGIO E. PRIMICERI

Abstract. In this paper we investigate the sources of the important shifts in
the volatility of U.S. macroeconomic variables in the postwar period. To this
end, we propose the estimation of DSGE models allowing for time variation in
the volatility of the structural innovations. We apply our estimation strategy
to a large-scale model of the business cycle and …nd that investment speci…c
technology shocks account for most of the sharp decline in volatility of the last
two decades.

1. Introduction
It has been well documented that the volatility of output, in‡ation, interest
rates and many other macroeconomic variables of the U.S. economy has exhibited
a very high degree of time variation over the last …fty years (see, for instance,
Sims and Zha (2004) or Stock and Watson (2003a)). Perhaps, the most notorious
episode of substantial volatility shift in recent U.S. economic history is the “Great
Moderation,”1 which corresponds to the sharp decline in the standard deviation of
output as well as other macroeconomic and …nancial variables since the mid 1980s.
While signi…cant e¤orts have been devoted to determine the timing of the Great
Moderation (see, among others, Kim and Nelson (1999), McConnell and PerezQuiros (2000), Stock and Watson (2002), Chauvet and Potter (2001), Herrera and
Pesavento (2005)), there have been surprisingly few studies attempting to identify
the structural disturbances responsible for these volatility changes.
Date : First draft: July 2005. This version: January 2006.
We would like to thank Jinill Kim, Ernst Schaumburg, Jim Stock and seminar participants at the
Sveridge Riksbank, Northwestern University, Ohio State University and the 2005 International
Conference on Computing in Economics and Finance for comments. We are also grateful to
Riccardo Di Cecio for providing some of the investment de‡ators data. The views in this paper
are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as re‡ecting the views
of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or any other person associated with the
Federal Reserve System.
1
The name Great Moderation is due to Stock and Watson (2002), although the phenomenon
was …rst noted by Kim and Nelson (1999) and McConnell and Perez-Quiros (2000).
1

2

ALEJANDRO JUSTINIANO AND GIORGIO E. PRIM ICERI

In this paper we …ll this gap, by estimating a DSGE model in which the volatility
of the structural innovations is allowed to change over time. First, we describe an
algorithm that allows for simultaneous inference on both the model’s parameters
and the stochastic volatilities. Then, we apply our modeling and estimation strategy to a large-scale business cycle model of the U.S. economy, along the lines of
Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005) and Smets and Wouters (2003). The
model exhibits a number of real and nominal frictions, and various shocks with a
precise microeconomic interpretation. The novelty of our set-up is that all of these
shocks have variances that can ‡uctuate over time.
We believe that this is an interesting innovation because it enables us to identify
the sources of the changes in the volatility of the main macro variables during the
postwar period. Thereafter, we are able to shed light on the nature of the underlying
disturbances responsible for the Great Moderation and other shifts in the volatility
of the U.S. business cycle.
The main conclusions we reach in this study are as follows. First, the exogenous structural disturbances hitting the U.S. economy display substantial stochastic
volatility. Nonetheless, the degree of time variation in variances di¤ers considerably
across shocks, being more pronounced for technology disturbances and, particularly,
monetary policy shocks. Consequently, while stochastic volatility is present in all
of the model’s observed endogenous variables, di¤erent series exhibit contrasting
patterns of ‡uctuations in their variances.
Second, the decline in the volatility of output, investment, hours and consumption in the early 1980s is largely driven by investment speci…c technology shocks.
These shocks have an equivalent interpretation of disturbances to the inverse of the
price of investment in terms of consumption goods. We corroborate our …nding that
investment speci…c technology shocks have become less volatile by documenting a
decline in the standard deviation of the relative price of investment. Moreover,
motivated by Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2005), we suggest an interpretation of
these disturbances as proxying for investment …nancial frictions. In line with this
interpretation, we rely on evidence outside our DSGE model to show that …nancial
frictions did indeed decline at the beginning of the 1980s, particularly in mortgage
…nancing.

From the methodological standpoint, this paper is related to the statistics literature on stochastic volatility models (for an overview, see Kim, Shephard, and Chib

THE TIM E VARYING VOLATILITY OF M ACROECONOM IC FLUCTUATIONS

3

(1998)) and, more generally, on partial non-Gaussian state-space models (Shephard
(1994)). Drawing from this literature, we develop an e¢ cient algorithm, based on
Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods, for the numerical evaluation of the posterior of the parameters of interest. Methodologically, the paper
closest to ours is Laforte (2005), although in his analysis the time varying variances are modeled as Markov switching as opposed to the smoother processes in
the analysis here.
Regarding the application of these techniques, this paper is related to the large
literature using estimated micro-founded models to understand the main sources
of U.S. business cycle ‡uctuations (see, for instance, Rotemberg and Woodford
(1997), Ireland (2004), Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005), Smets and
Wouters (2003), Altig, Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Linde (2005)). However, as
mentioned, we depart from previous work in this area by allowing for time variation in the volatility of the structural disturbances. Our approach is also linked
to the fairly large literature dealing with the estimation of vector autoregressions
with heteroskedastic shocks (see, for example, Bernanke and Mihov (1998), Cogley
and Sargent (2003), Sims and Zha (2004), Primiceri (2005) or Canova, Gambetti,
and Pappa (2005)). In contrast to this strand of work, one advantage of our analysis is that a fully-‡edged model provides an easy interpretation for the structural
disturbances hitting the economy.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the class of models we
will deal with and outlines some methodological issues, with the details relegated
to an appendix. Section 3 and 4 illustrate our application to the model of the
U.S. business cycle and sketch the estimation technique. Section 5 and 6 discuss
the estimation results and address the causes of the Great Moderation. Section 7
concludes with some …nal remarks and priorities for future research.
2. Stochastic Volatility in DSGE Models
The general class of models we will work with is summarized by the following
system of equations:
(2.1)
where yt is a k

Et [f (yt+1 ; yt ; yt

1; t;

)] = 0,

1 vector of states and endogenous variables,

exogenous disturbances,

is a p

t

is an n

1 vector of

1 vector of structural parameters and Et denotes

the mathematical expectation operator, conditional on the information available at

4

ALEJANDRO JUSTINIANO AND GIORGIO E. PRIM ICERI

time t. For example, (2.1) can be thought as a collection of constraints and …rst
order conditions derived from a micro-founded model of consumers and/or …rms
behavior. The novelty here is that the standard deviation of the elements of

t

is

allowed to change over time. In particular, we make the assumption that
log

^t =

t

"t

t "t

N (0; In ),

where N indicates the normal distribution, In denotes an n
and

t

is a diagonal matrix with the n

1 vector

t

n identity matrix

of time varying standard

deviations on the main diagonal. Following the stochastic volatility literature (see,
for instance, Kim, Shephard, and Chib (1998)), we assume that each element of

t

evolves (independently) according to the following stochastic processes:
(2.2)

log

i;t
i;t

=

(1

i

) log

i

N (0; s2i )

Observe that modeling the logarithm of

+

i

log

i;t 1

+

i;t

i = 1; :::; n.
t,

as opposed to

t

itself, ensures that the

standard deviation of the shocks remains positive at every point in time.
Our objective is to characterize the posterior distribution of the model structural
T

parameters ( ) and the time varying volatility of the shocks (f t gt=1 ). Note that
the model described by (2.1) is in general nonlinear and its solution does not have
a closed-form expression. Therefore, an approximation of the solution is required.
Observe also that commonly used log-linearization methods would not serve our
purposes, as the time varying standard deviations would disappear under this approximation. Moreover, log-linear methods would be accurate in this set-up only if
the variability of the standard deviations were small. Higher order approximations
would instead preserve the interaction term

t "t .

However, the additional non-

linear terms generated in this case would considerably complicate the estimation.2
For these reasons, we develop what we call a partially nonlinear approximation of
the model, which combines the appeal for our purposes of both log-linearization
and higher order approximations. In particular, we approximate the solution of the
model by the partially nonlinear function
(2.3)

y^t = A^
yt

1

+ B^t = A^
yt

1

+B

t "t ,

2 There has been recent work estimating nonlinear DSGE models, as in Fernandez-Villaverde
and Rubio-Ramirez (2004) or An and Schorfheide (2005). However, these methods have been
applied only to small scale models.

THE TIM E VARYING VOLATILITY OF M ACROECONOM IC FLUCTUATIONS

5

where y^t denotes log deviations from the non-stochastic steady state of the variable
y. Appendix A proves that (2.3) represents a valid approximation of the model
solution.

3. The Model
We apply our method to a relatively large-scale model of the U.S. business cycle,
which has been shown to …t the data fairly well (Del Negro, Schorfheide, Smets,
and Wouters (2004)). The model is based on work by Christiano, Eichenbaum,
and Evans (2005) and Smets and Wouters (2003), to which the reader is referred
for additional details. Our brief illustration of the model follows closely Del Negro,
Schorfheide, Smets, and Wouters (2004).
3.1. Final goods producers. At every point in time t, perfectly competitive …rms
produce the …nal consumption good Yt , using the intermediate goods Yt (i), i 2 [0; 1]
and the production technology
Yt =

Z

1

1+

1

Yt (i) 1+

p;t

di

p;t

.

0

p;t

follows the exogenous stochastic process
log

p;t

= (1

where "p;t is i:i:d:N (0; 1) and

p ) log

p;t

p

+

p

log

p;t 1

+

p;t "p;t ,

evolves as in (2.2). Unless otherwise noticed,

this property of a time varying variance applies to all shocks in the model. Pro…t
maximization and zero pro…t condition for the …nal goods producers imply the
following relation between the price of the …nal good (Pt ) and the prices of the
intermediate goods (Pt (i), i 2 [0; 1])
Pt =

Z

1

Pt (i)

1
p;t

p;t

di

,

0

and the following demand function for the intermediate good i:
Yt (i) =

As a consequence,

p;t

Pt (i)
Pt

1+ p;t
p;t

Yt .

will also correspond to the price mark-up over marginal costs

for the …rms producing intermediate goods.

6

ALEJANDRO JUSTINIANO AND GIORGIO E. PRIM ICERI

3.2. Intermediate goods producers. A monopolistic …rm produces the intermediate good i using the following production function:
Yt (i) = max A1t

Kt (i) Lt (i)1

At F ; 0 ,

where, as usual, Kt (i) and Lt (i) denote respectively the capital and labor input
for the production of good i, F represents a …xed cost of production and At is an
exogenous stochastic process capturing the e¤ects of technology. In particular, we
model At as a unit root process, with a growth rate (zt

log

At
At 1 )

that follows

the exogenous process
zt = (1
As in Calvo (1983), a fraction

z)

+

p zt 1

+

z;t "z;t .

of …rms cannot re-optimize their prices and, as

p

we allow for indexation, set their prices following the rule
p

Pt (i) = Pt
where

is de…ned as

Pt
Pt 1

1

p

,

Subject to
the usual cost minimization condition, re-optimizing …rms choose their price (P~t (i))
t

and

1 (i) t 1

denotes the steady state value of

t.

by maximizing the present value of future pro…ts
Et

1
X

s s
t+s
p

s=0

where

t+s

nh
P~t (i)

p
s
1
j=0 t 1+j

i

p

Wt Lt (i) + Rtk Kt (i)

Yt+s (i)

o

,

is the marginal utility of consumption, Wt and Rtk denote respectively

the wage and the rental cost of capital.
3.3. Households. Firms are owned by a continuum of households, indexed by
j 2 [0; 1]. As in Erceg, Henderson, and Levin (2000), while each household is a monopolistic supplier of specialized labor (Lt (j)), a number of ‘employment agencies’
combines households’specialized labor into labor services available to the intermediate …rms
Lt =

Z

1+

1

1

Lt (j) 1+

w

w

dj

.

0

Pro…t maximization and a zero pro…t condition for the perfectly competitive employment agencies imply the following relation between the wage paid by the intermediate …rms and the wage received by the supplier of specialized labor Lt (j)
Wt =

Z

0

1

w

Wt (j)

1
w

dj

,

THE TIM E VARYING VOLATILITY OF M ACROECONOM IC FLUCTUATIONS

7

and the following labor demand function for labor type j:
1+ w
w

Wt (j)
Wt

Lt (j) =

Lt .

Each household maximizes the utility function3
Et

1
X

s

bt+s log (Ct+s (j)

hCt+s

1 (j))

't+s

s=0

Lt+s (j)1+
1+

,

where Ct (j) is consumption, h is the “degree” of internal habit formation, 't is a
preference shock that a¤ects the marginal disutility of labor and bt is a “discount
factor” shock a¤ecting both the marginal utility of consumption and the marginal
disutility of labor. These two shocks follow the stochastic processes
log bt

=

b

log 't

=

(1

log bt

1

+

b;t "b;t

' ) log '

+

'

log 't

1

+

';t "';t .

The household budget constraint is given by
Pt+s Ct+s (j) + Pt+s It+s (j) + Bt+s (j)

Rt+s

k
+Wt+s (j)Lt+s (j) + Rt+s
(j)ut+s (j)Kt+s

1 Bt+s 1 (j)
1 (j)

+ Qt+s

1 (j)

+

t+s

Pt+s a(ut+s (j))Kt+s

1 (j),

+

where It (j) is investment, Bt (j) denotes holding of government bonds, Rt is the
gross nominal interest rate, Qt (j) is the net cash ‡ow from participating in state
contingent securities,

t

is the per-capita pro…t that households get from owning

the …rms. Households own capital and choose the capital utilization rate which
transforms physical capital (Kt (j)) into e¤ective capital
Kt (j) = ut (j)Kt
which is rented to …rms at the rate Rtk (j).

1 (j),

The cost of capital utilization is

a(ut+s (j)) per unit of physical capital. Following Altig, Christiano, Eichenbaum,
and Linde (2005), we assume that ut = 1 and a(ut ) = 0 in steady state. In our
partially nonlinear approximation of the model solution, only the curvature of the
function a in steady state needs to be speci…ed,

a00 (1)
a0 (1) .

The usual physical

capital accumulation equation is described by
Kt (j) = (1
where

)Kt

1 (j)

+

t

1

S

It (j)
It 1 (j)

It (j),

denotes the depreciation rate and, as in Christiano, Eichenbaum, and

Evans (2005) and Altig, Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Linde (2005), the function
3 We assume a cashless limit economy as described in Woodford (2003).

8

ALEJANDRO JUSTINIANO AND GIORGIO E. PRIM ICERI

S captures the presence of adjustment costs in investment, with S 0 = 0 and S 00 >
0. Lucca (2005) shows that this formulation of the adjustment cost function is
equivalent (up to a …rst order approximation of the model) to a generalization of
a time to build assumption. As in Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell (1997) and
Fisher (2005),

t

is a random shock to the production technology of capital goods

and evolves following the exogenous process
log

=

t

log

+

t 1

;t " ;t .

Following Erceg, Henderson, and Levin (2000), in every period a fraction

w

of

households cannot re-optimize their wages and, therefore, set their wages following
the indexation rule
Wt (j) = Wt

zt
1 (j) ( t 1 e

1

1

)w( e )

w

.

The remaining fraction of re-optimizing households set their wages by maximizing
Et

1
X

s s
bt+s
w

't+s

s=0

Lt+s (j)1+
1+

,

subject to the labor demand function.
3.4. Monetary and Government Policies. Monetary policy sets short term
nominal interest rates following a Taylor type rule. In particular, the rule allows
for interest rate smoothing and interest rate responses to deviations of in‡ation
from the steady state and deviations of output from trend level:
"
#1 R
Rt 1 R
Yt =At Y
Rt
t
=
e R;t "R;t ,
R
R
Y =A
where R is the steady state for the gross nominal interest rate and "R;t is a monetary
policy shock. We also consider an alternative speci…cation of the policy rule, in
which the monetary authority responds to output growth.
Fiscal policy is assumed to be fully Ricardian and public spending is given by
Gt =

1
gt

1

Yt ,

where gt is an exogenous disturbance following the stochastic process
log gt = (1

g ) log g

+

g

log gt

1

+

g;t "g;t .

3.5. Market Clearing. The resource constraint is given by
Ct + It + Gt + a(ut )Kt

1

= Yt ,

THE TIM E VARYING VOLATILITY OF M ACROECONOM IC FLUCTUATIONS

9

3.6. Steady State and Model Solution. Since the technology process At is
assumed to have a unit root, consumption, investment, capital, real wages and
output evolve along a stochastic growth path. Once the model is rewritten in
terms of detrended variables, we can compute the non-stochastic steady state and
employ the partially nonlinear method illustrated in section 2 and appendix A, to
approximate the model around the steady state. This delivers a partial nonlinear
state space model of the kind described in Shephard (1994).
We conclude the discussion of the model by specifying the vector of observables,
completing the state space representation of our model:
(3.1)
where

[

log Yt ;

log Ct ;

log Xt denotes log Xt

log It ; log Lt ;

log Xt

log

Wt
;
Pt

t ; Rt ],

1.

4. Inference
4.1. The Data. We estimate the model using seven series of U.S. quarterly data,
as in Levin, Onatski, Williams, and Williams (2005) and Del Negro, Schorfheide,
Smets, and Wouters (2004). These series correspond to the vector of observable
variables of our model, reported in section 3.6. The sample for our dataset spans
from 1954QIII up to 2004QIV. All data are extracted from Haver Analytics database (series mnemonics in parenthesis). Following Del Negro, Schorfheide, Smets,
and Wouters (2004), we construct real GDP by diving the nominal series (GDP)
by population (LF and LH) and the GDP De‡ator (JGDP). Real series for consumption and investment are obtained in the same manner, although consumption
corresponds only to personal consumption expenditures of non-durables (CN) and
services (CS), while investment is the sum of personal consumption expenditures of
durables (CD) and gross private domestic investment (I). Real wages corresponds
to nominal compensation per hour in the non-farm business sector (LXNFC) divided by the GDP de‡ator. Our measure of labor is given by the log of hours of all
persons in the non-farm business sector (HNFBN) divided by population. In‡ation
is measured as the quarterly log di¤erence in the GDP de‡ator, while for nominal
interest rates we use the e¤ective Federal Funds rate. We do not demean or detrend
any series.
4.2. Bayesian Inference. Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods
are used to characterize the posterior distribution of the model’s structural paraT

meters ( ), the time varying volatility of the shocks (f t gt=1 ) and the coe¢ cients of

10

ALEJANDRO JUSTINIANO AND GIORGIO E. PRIM ICERI

the volatility processes (

;

; s2 ). Bayesian methods deal e¢ ciently with the high

dimension of the parameter space and the nonlinearities of the model, by splitting
the original estimation problem into smaller and simpler blocks. In particular, the
MCMC algorithm for this paper is carried out in three steps. First, a Metropolis
step is used to draw from the posterior of the structural coe¢ cients . Drawing
the sequence of time varying volatilities

T

(conditional on , ,

and s2 ) is in-

stead more involved and relies mostly on the method presented in Kim, Shephard,
and Chib (1998). It consists of transforming a nonlinear and non-Gaussian state
space form in a linear and approximately Gaussian one, which allows the use of
simulation smoothers such as Carter and Kohn (1994) or Durbin and Koopman
(2002). Simulating the conditional posterior of

;

; s2 is standard, since it is

the product of independent normal-inverse-Gamma distributions. The details are
left to appendix B.

4.3. Priors. As customary when taking DSGE models to the data, we …x a small
number of the model parameters to values that are very common in the existing
literature. In particular, we set the steady state share of capital income ( ) to
0:3, the quarterly depreciation rate of capital ( ) to 0:025 and the steady state
government spending to GDP ratio to 0:22, which corresponds to the average share
of government spending in total GDP (Gt =Yt ) in our sample. Moreover, in order
to reduce the number of free parameters, we set all the autoregressive coe¢ cients
of the log-volatilities,

’s, to 1, which re‡ects the assumption that the volatilities

follow geometric random walk processes.
The …rst three columns of table 1 report our priors for the remaining parameters
of the model. While most of these priors are relatively disperse and re‡ect previous
results in the literature, a few of them deserve some further discussion. For all
but one persistence parameters we use a Beta prior, with mean 0:5 and standard
deviation 0:15. The exception is the autoregressive coe¢ cient of the mark-up shock
due to a weak identi…cation problem between this parameter and the one capturing
the degree of price indexation. As a result, we imposed a tighter prior on

p

to

avoid convergence problems in our MCMC algorithm.
The priors for the variances of the shocks are Inverse-Gamma distributions with
mean and standard deviation equal to 0:15, with the exception of the investment
speci…c technology shock. In fact, as we will see in the next section, this shock
turned out to be (somewhat to our surprise) very important. To be conservative,

THE TIM E VARYING VOLATILITY OF M ACROECONOM IC FLUCTUATIONS

11

we decided to impose a prior favouring slightly less variation than other shocks.
Notice, however, that this prior enters only in the speci…cation of the model without
stochastic volatility that we estimate only for comparison.
The priors on the variance (s2 ) of the innovations to the log-volatility processes
deserve some comment as well, as these coe¢ cients are new in the DSGE literature. We chose an inverse-Gamma prior with mean equal to 0:012 for several
reasons. First, assuming that the log-volatilities behave as random walks, this parameterization implies an average variation of about 15 percent over our sample
of forty years. We regard this as a conservative estimate. Second, in the context
of time varying vector autoregressions, Primiceri (2005) has tested several prior
speci…cations and concluded that this value attains the highest marginal likelihood.
Nonetheless, we assessed the sensitivity of the estimates to alternative speci…cations
of the prior (especially for the variance of the innovation to the log-volatilities) and
found that these modi…cations had no important in‡uence on the results.
5. Estimation Results
5.1. Parameter estimates. The last three columns of table 1 summarize the posterior distribution of the model coe¢ cients, reporting posterior medians, standard
deviations and 5th and 95th percentiles computed with the draws. All coe¢ cients
estimates are fairly tight and seem for the most part in line with those reported in
Del Negro, Schorfheide, Smets, and Wouters (2004) and Levin, Onatski, Williams,
and Williams (2005).
One important exception is the wage stickiness parameter (

w ),

which is lower

than previous estimates reported in the literature dealing with inference in DSGE
models. In view of the welfare implications of wage rigidity (see, for instance,
Levin, Onatski, Williams, and Williams (2005)) these variations in estimates may
be important, although we do not explore these issues in the current paper. The
estimate of the Calvo stickiness parameters for prices ( p ) is approximately equal
to 32 , which is also a value slightly below those found in other papers.4 This number
seems still higher than estimates in micro studies (see, for instance, Bils and Klenow
(2004)), although the presence of indexation mechanisms (which assures that prices
are actually changed in every period) makes the results potentially consistent with
the micro evidence on the high frequency of price changes.
4 See Altig, Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Linde (2005) for an example of a model generating
an even lower estimate of the price stickiness parameter.

12

ALEJANDRO JUSTINIANO AND GIORGIO E. PRIM ICERI

For comparison, table 1 also reports posterior medians, standard deviations, 5th
and 95th percentiles of a model estimated with time invariant volatilities. Notice
that most of the coe¢ cient estimates are similar to the time varying model, although
there are some important exceptions. Most notably, two of the coe¢ cients related
to the labor market block of our framework change importantly when stochastic
volatility is allowed for. Speci…cally, the Calvo wage stickiness parameter (

w)

drops from 0:71 to 0:38 and the inverse Frisch elasticity of labor supply ( ) declines
as well from 3:8 to 2:5. The higher elasticity of labor supply and the more volatile
behavior of wages are compensated by a smoother pattern of the intra-temporal
preference shock ('t ), whose autocorrelation coe¢ cient is estimated much higher
in the stochastic volatility model. This suggests that not accounting for stochastic
volatility might introduce some identi…cation bias in the estimation.5
Finally, table 4 shows that the estimates of the …xed coe¢ cients are quite robust
to the alternative speci…cation of the monetary policy rule, in which the monetary
authority responds to output growth.
5.2. Volatility estimates. Figure 1 presents the plots of the time varying standard deviations for the seven shocks of our model. Notice that the degree of stochastic volatility varies substantially across disturbances. Three of the shocks seem to
have relatively constant standard deviations. This is the case for the price mark-up
shock (

p;t ),

and the two taste shocks (bt and 't ). The evidence is very di¤er-

ent for the volatility of the four remaining shocks, which exhibit a very important
amount of time variation. The exogenous disturbance showing the highest degree
P
, …gure 1a), for which
of time varying volatility is the monetary policy shock ("M
t

the di¤erence between the lowest and the highest levels of the standard deviation is
roughly 500 percent. Observe that the “Volcker episode”6 is perfectly captured in
our estimates, as well as the reduction in the volatility of monetary policy shocks
during the Greenspan period.
5 It is worth pointing out that the posterior distribution of the time invariant model is bimodal.
The values reported in table 1 are relative to the global maximum. However, there exists a local
maximum for which the level of the log-posterior is only slightly lower (just by one point) and
the values of the coe¢ cients are much closer to the estimates of the time varying model. Notice
also that the time varying model does not exhibit the problem of two modes, suggesting that
accounting for stochastic volatility might help to solve some of the identi…cation problems, which
are common in this class of models (Canova and Sala (2005)).
6 The “Volcker episode”refers to the high volatility of interest rates in the 1979-1983 period, due
to the monetary targeting regime initiated by chaiman Paul Volcker in response to the dramatic
rise in U.S. in‡ation in the 1970s.

THE TIM E VARYING VOLATILITY OF M ACROECONOM IC FLUCTUATIONS

13

Monetary policy shocks are not the only ones exhibiting a clean pattern of time
varying volatility. The standard deviation of technology shocks (zt , …gure 1b)
seems to decrease by almost 50 percent in the second part of the sample. This is
potentially consistent with the observed reduction in the volatility of GDP in the
last two decades, an issue addressed in more detail in the next section. A similar
pattern is observed for the volatility of the investment speci…c technology shock
( t , …gure 1d) and the government spending shock (gt , …gure 1c). Note, however,
that between these two shocks the fall in volatility at the beginning of the 1980s
seems more dramatic in the case of the investment speci…c technology shock.
One contribution of our analysis is the ability to quantify how the importance
of various shocks has changed over time in generating economic ‡uctuations. To
this end, we analyze the variance decomposition of each series, which will lead us to
address the causes of the Great Moderation in the next subsection. We perform the
variance decomposition exercise in the following way: for every draw of the parameters and the volatilities of the exogenous disturbances, we construct the implied
variances of the (endogenous) observable variables, using the state space representation of the model solution. Then, we re-compute the variances of the observable
variables, by sequentially setting to zero the volatility of all disturbances but one,
for all time periods. In this way we are able to investigate the contribution of each
shock to the variance of the observables. Notice that, since the variances are changing over time, our variance decomposition is a time varying “object” as well. Due
to space considerations, we do not present the graph of the variance decomposition
for all of the observables. Instead, we present a complete characterization of the
variance decomposition for GDP, while for the remaining series we only report the
time varying share of the variance explained by selected shocks.
Figure 2 presents the time varying shares of the variance of GDP growth due to
each exogenous disturbance. Consistent with Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell
(2000) and Fisher (2005), the most important shock in explaining the variability
of GDP growth seems to be the investment speci…c technology shock (…gure 2d).
Indeed, at least in the …rst part of the sample, this disturbance explains roughly
40 percent of the variance of GDP growth. Note, however, that the importance of
this shock declines over time.
On average, neutral technology and labor preference shocks each explain 20 percent of the variance of GDP. This share seems to remain relatively stable over
time for the neutral technology shock (…gure 2b), while it increases in the last two

14

ALEJANDRO JUSTINIANO AND GIORGIO E. PRIM ICERI

decades for the disturbances to labor preferences (…gure 2f). Other shocks are less
central for output. The limited importance of the monetary policy shock (…gure
2a) is striking and probably related to the observation that, in this class of models, ‡exible price output seems to track quite closely actual output (Walsh (2005)),
which represents a shortcoming of current sticky price models.
For the remaining series, …gure 3 plots the time varying variance shares explained
by selected shocks. A major portion of the variance of consumption is explained by
the inter-temporal shock to the discount factor (…gure 3a). Although not crucial
for output, monetary policy and mark-up shocks are each quite important for the
volatility of interest rates (…gure 3b) and in‡ation (…gure 3c). Moreover, as one
would expect, the investment speci…c technology shock and the labor preference
shock explain most of the variability of investment (…gure 3d) and hours (…gure 3e)
respectively, while the neutral technology shock accounts for about 40 percent of
the variance of real wages (…gure 3f).7
Figure 4 plots the model’s spectral variance decomposition for output, in deviations from the model’s common stochastic trend, driven by neutral technology.
We consider periodicities between 8 and 32 quarters. Figure 4 corroborates the
evidence on the importance of the investment speci…c technology shock, suggesting
that this disturbance is crucial in explaining output ‡uctuations at the business
cycle frequencies (…gure 4d). Note, however, that the labor disutility shock plays
also a very important role in this case (…gure 4f).
6. The Great Moderation
6.1. The Great Moderation and the role of investment speci…c technology
shocks. We now apply our methodology and our results to analyze in greater
detail the Great Moderation episode that we have alluded to earlier. In two very
in‡uential papers, Kim and Nelson (1999) and McConnell and Perez-Quiros (2000)
drew attention to the dramatic reduction in the volatility of U.S. GDP, which has
characterized the last two decades relative to the pre-1980s period.8 This change
seems to be more abrupt than gradual (Kim and Nelson (1999) and Stock and
Watson (2002)) and the break date is estimated to approximately correspond to
1984. In our sample, the standard deviation of GDP growth over the 1984-2004
period is almost one half of the standard deviation computed over the 1955-1983
7 The complete set of variance decomposition graphs is available upon request.
8 Stock and Watson (2003b) show a similar pattern for other G7 countries.

THE TIM E VARYING VOLATILITY OF M ACROECONOM IC FLUCTUATIONS

15

sample. As mentioned, the literature has labeled this phenomenon as the Great
Moderation.
A number of hypothesis have been put forward to account for this decline in
volatility and exhaustive reviews can be found in Blanchard and Simon (2001) and
Stock and Watson (2002, 2003a). Explanations of this phenomenon can be broadly
bunched as corresponding to simply good luck, technological progress (particularly
in managing inventories) or improvements in the conduct of monetary policy under
the Volcker and Greenspan chaimanships. However, several authors have found
evidence contrary to the technological progress and improved monetary policy hypotheses (see, for instance, Stock and Watson (2002), Maccini and Pagan (2003) or
Ahmed, Levin, and Wilson (2004)).
Therefore, the starting point of the analysis of the Great Moderation undertaken
in this paper is the very robust …nding of Stock and Watson (2002, 2003a), who
conclude that “this reduction in volatility is associated with an increase in the
precision of forecasts of output growth” (Stock and Watson (2002), p 42). Notice
that our framework is a natural candidate to understand the structural causes of
the reduction in forecast errors. In fact, given that our methodology allows for
time varying volatilities and is based on a fully-‡edged model, it provides an easy
interpretation for the structural disturbances hitting the economy.
Figure 5a plots the volatility of GDP growth implied by our model. There are
at least two things to notice. First, although the evolution of the standard deviation of GDP growth is very similar to the one obtained from univariate estimates,
we notice that the DSGE model somewhat overpredicts the level of the volatility.
This problem is common to the time invariant version of the model and is therefore indicative of di¢ culties in simultaneously matching the levels of persistence,
comovements and volatilities observed in the data, even with state of the art DSGE
models (Del Negro, Schorfheide, Smets, and Wouters (2004)). Second, nonetheless,
the model captures remarkably well the timing and the size of the Great Moderation, despite the abrupt nature of this fall in volatility. Observe that the volatility
of GDP growth starts declining around 1981, which is slightly earlier than some
estimates provided by the literature using models with discrete structural breaks.
This is due to the speci…cation of our time varying volatility model, which tends to
smooth out abrupt changes (see, for example, Boivin (2001)).
To assess the role played by each shock in accounting for the Great Moderation,
we rely on counterfactual simulations exercises. Our approach consists of using

16

ALEJANDRO JUSTINIANO AND GIORGIO E. PRIM ICERI

our model to simulate the volatility of GDP growth under alternative paths for
the volatility of each structural disturbance. This counterfactual simulations can
be interpreted as the hypothetical pattern of the volatility of GDP growth in the
period 1981-2004, had the standard deviation of that particular structural shock
only remained unchanged with respect to the 1980 level.9
Figure 6 presents the results of our counterfactual exercises. Our approach gives
a very strong conclusion about the causes of the Great Moderation. As evident
from …gure 6d, the main explanation for the Great Moderation seems to be the
sharp reduction in the volatility of investment speci…c technology shocks. That
is, had the volatility of investment speci…c technology shocks remained at its 1980
level, then the standard deviation of GDP growth would have been substantially
higher than the realized one in the 1981-2004 period.
Finally, it is worth noting that changes in the volatility of the monetary policy
shock have had a rather modest e¤ect on the decline in the variance of output
(…gure 6a). This is the case, despite the fact that the model reproduces quite well
the time varying pattern of the standard deviation of interest rates observed in the
data (…gure 5b).
6.2. The relative price of investment. In our model, investment speci…c technology shocks can be equivalently interpreted as disturbances to the inverse price
of e¢ cient units of investment in terms of consumption goods.10 Although this
variable is not used in our estimation, data on the price of investment relative to
consumption has been used by other authors to proxy for investment speci…c technology shocks (see, for instance, Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell (1997, 2000)
and Fisher (2005)).
In order to verify that the reduction in the volatility of investment speci…c technology shocks is not somewhat spurious and speci…c to our model, we rely on data
outside our DSGE model and analyze the volatility of this relative price. In particular, we construct the chain-weighted de‡ators for our components of consumption
(non-durables and services) and investment (durables and total private investment)
and estimate the standard deviation of its growth rate using a simple 10-year moving window. Figure 7 plots the estimate of the time varying standard deviation and
9 More precisely, we …x the volatility of each shock to the average of the time varying standard
deviation for all four quarters in 1980. A longer window does not a¤ect our results.
10 See Fisher (2005) for an explanation of this alternative interpretation.

THE TIM E VARYING VOLATILITY OF M ACROECONOM IC FLUCTUATIONS

17

makes clear that this volatility has sharply decreased in the second part of the postwar sample. Moreover, the timing of the decline corresponds remarkably well with
the timing of the Great Moderation. We regard the fact that our model provides a
very similar insight (without using any data on the relative price of investment) as
a remarkable result.
6.3. Interpretation. What are the main implications of our results? The answer
to this question depends on the interpretation of disturbances in DSGE models.
Most of the existing literature regards these shocks as genuinely exogenous shifts
in tastes, technology and policies. An alternative interpretation, however, is that
these disturbances can proxy for features of the economy that we wish to abstract
from when writing down our model (Hall (1997) and Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan
(2005)). In particular, Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2005) have recently argued
that disturbances similar to our investment speci…c technology shock might proxy
for investment …nancial frictions. This link becomes evident in models that take
into consideration agency costs for the …nancing of investment, such as Carlstrom
and Fuerst (1997).11 If we subscribe this view, a natural explanation of the Great
Moderation would be based on a reduction in …nancial frictions.
Interestingly, this purely “theoretical” hypothesis squares remarkably well with
the empirical and anecdotal evidence about the expanded access to credit and
borrowing for …rms and particularly households since the beginning of the 1980s.
The mortgage industry underwent substantial …nancial deregulation in this period,
following the passing of the Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary
Control Act (DIDMCA) in 1980 and the Garn-St Germain Act of 1982. An important component of this transformation was the demise of Regulation Q which had
established a ceiling for banks deposit rates, limiting de facto the amount of bank
lending in periods of rising interest rates. Overall, these new laws ignited other
developments (such as mortgage securitization) that fostered greater integration
between mortgage and capital markets and consequently led to greater availability
of mortgage credit at prevailing market interest rates (see, for instance, Hendershott (1990), Dynan, Elmendorf, and Sichel (2005) and Campbell and Hercowitz
(2004)).
Since our model is not rich enough to analyze this issue in greater detail, we
rely on alternative evidence to support our claim that a reduction in investment
11 See Faia and Monacelli (2004) for an analysis of alternative speci…cations of agancy costs
models and their implications for dynamics in New-Keynesian DSGE models.

18

ALEJANDRO JUSTINIANO AND GIORGIO E. PRIM ICERI

…nancial frictions–proxied by the decline in variability of our investment speci…c
technology shock–played a predominant role in the Great Moderation. This alternative evidence in support of our hypothesis is summarized in …gures 8 and 9.
Figure 8 plots the time varying standard deviations of consumption, investment
and several of their components, obtained using an AR(4) model with stochastic
volatility. Notice that the most drastic reduction in volatility has characterized the
time series of investment and particularly residential investment, whose standard
deviation has decreased by more than 70 percent. The volatilities of the other
components exhibit smoother evolutions with the exception, perhaps, of durable
consumption. This is consistent with the sizable reduction in the variability of
production in the automobile industry (as detailed in Ramey and Vine (2005)), as
it reasonable to expect that the automobile industry would also be quite sensitive
to deepening of credit markets (Campbell and Hercowitz (2004)).
Finally, observe that we present alternative series for real investment in equipment and software, depending on whether Gordon (1990)-Cummins and Violante
(2002) or NIPA de‡ators are used to construct these series. This is done in order to
asses the robustness of our results to additional quality adjustments in the NIPA de‡ator for equipment and software, as noted by Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell
(1997) and Fisher (2005) in their analysis of investment speci…c technology shocks.
As it is clear from …gures 8f and 8h, these data considerations are inconsequential
for our analysis of volatility.
Further compelling evidence on the role of …nancial frictions–particularly for
residential investment–in explaining the Great Moderation is presented in …gure 9
(…rst column) which plots the spreads between the 30-year …xed mortgage interest
rate and the AAA Moody bonds, 10-year and 30-year Treasury constant maturity
rates.12 The large and volatile spreads of the early 1980s correspond to the end of a
system dominated by heavily regulated thrift institutions, in which credit availability was subject to large swings due to ‡uctuations in deposits (Bradley, Gabriel,
and Wohar (1995)). The transition to smaller spreads is commonly associated with
the beginning of a more e¢ cient and integrated mortgage market (McCarty and
Peach (2002), Dynan, Elmendorf, and Sichel (2005) or Schnure (2005)).
With this observation in mind, next to each series, we also plot an estimate of the
time varying standard deviation for each spread, obtained using an AR(4) model
12 Our plots of the spreads start in 1978 because data about the 30-year Treasury constant
maturity rate are not available before that date.

THE TIM E VARYING VOLATILITY OF M ACROECONOM IC FLUCTUATIONS

19

with stochastic volatility. Three points deserve particular attention: …rst, all three
volatilities decline quite sharply at the beginning of the 1980s; second, the timing
of the decline coincides perfectly with the timing of the Great Moderation and,
particularly, of the important reduction in the volatility of residential investment
already documented (…gure 9d). Finally, the timing and the sharpness of the decline
in volatility of the mortgage over 30-year Treasury Bills spread (…gure 9f) suggests
that the turmoil in the mortgage market before the early 1980s was probably due
to other factors, beyond the chaos caused by the behavior of in‡ation and in‡ation
expectations during this period.
To summarize, the sharp decline in the volatility of investment speci…c technology
shocks, as well as the relative price of investment to consumption, matches very
well with the empirical evidence on the expanded access to credit and borrowing
for …rms and especially households since the beginning of the 1980s. Indeed, the
Great Moderation is most evident for residential investment, and the timing of this
reduction in volatility accords well with developments in the mortgage market that
are widely believed to have fostered a decline in …nancial frictions. We therefore
view the development of more elaborate DSGE models, relative to ours, that could
shed light on these issues as a worthy endeavor.

6.4. Robustness issues. In this subsection we perform robustness checks on our
important …nding that the Great Moderation appears to have been driven by the
decline in volatility of investment speci…c technology shocks.
Our focus is on two of the main explanations that have been provided for the
Great Moderation: changes in the conduct of monetary policy (Bernanke (2004))
and technological improvement in inventory management (McConnell and PerezQuiros (2000) and Kahn, McConnell, and Perez-Quiros (2002)). To deal with the
…rst issue, we perform a simple experiment which suggests that in the context
of this model, the lower variability of U.S. output is di¢ cult to explain when only
considering changes in the systematic part of monetary policy. Regarding inventory
management, our second exercise is to re-estimate our model using series that
abstract from the role of inventories in order to show that the Great Moderation is
still evident in this case, albeit in a somewhat less drastic manner. The results of
these two exercises (although they echo …ndings elsewhere using other methods and
models) cannot be taken as conclusive evidence against these two hypotheses, which
may have played some role in the Great Moderation. Nonetheless, they show that

20

ALEJANDRO JUSTINIANO AND GIORGIO E. PRIM ICERI

when these variants are considered, the decline in the variability of GDP growth is
once again largely attributed to a reduction in the volatility of investment speci…c
technology shocks.
6.4.1. Changes in monetary policy. Our strategy to address the importance of the
changes in the systematic part of monetary policy consists of estimating our model
(without stochastic volatility) on two separate subsamples, 1953-1979:II and 19832004:III. Notice that, following Hanson (2003), we exclude the 1979:III-1982:IV
period from the estimation since monetary policy during this period may not be
correctly characterized by a Taylor rule.13 Table 2 presents posterior modes and
standard deviations of the coe¢ cients estimated over these two periods. Observe
that there are some di¤erences in the coe¢ cient estimates across subsamples. Consistent with the evidence presented earlier, this is particularly the case for the
standard deviations of the shocks. In addition, table 3 highlights that the unconditional standard deviation of output growth in the second subsample relative to
the …rst is 0:52. In the context of our model this discrepancy can potentially be
explained by three di¤erent sets of parameters: the monetary policy coe¢ cients,
the remaining structural parameters and the standard deviations of the shocks.
With regard to the policy coe¢ cients, notice that, as expected, monetary policy
in the second subsample seems to have been more responsive to in‡ation (Clarida,
Gali, and Gertler (2000)). To assess the role of these change in the systematic part of
policy on the volatility of output, table 3 presents the relative standard deviation
of GDP growth when the coe¢ cients of the Taylor rule estimated in the second
subsample replace the corresponding coe¢ cients in the …rst subsample, leaving all
other coe¢ cients unchanged. In order to gauge the possible role of changes in
the remaining structural parameters, table 3 also presents the relative volatility
of GDP growth when a similar counterfactual exercise is performed by replacing
all coe¢ cients (other than the volatilities) from the second sub-sample. Table 3
makes clear that neither changes in the systematic part of monetary policy nor the
remaining structural coe¢ cients of the model seem to account for the decline in
the volatility of output. This result is in line with Sims and Zha (2004), Hanson
(2003), Leduc and Sill (2003), Primiceri (2005), Ahmed, Levin, and Wilson (2004).
13 To further check the robustness of this experiment, we have also estimated the model
from 1979:III to 2004:III allowing for stochastic volatility in order to capture the large degree of
variability of interest rates during this period. Our results are una¤ected by this modi…cation.

THE TIM E VARYING VOLATILITY OF M ACROECONOM IC FLUCTUATIONS

21

The split-sample estimates of table 2 are obtained using the priors reported in
table 1 for both subsamples. Notice that the prior for the coe¢ cient of the policy
response to in‡ation (

) is a normal distribution with mean equal to 1:7 and

standard deviation equal to 0:3. This prior speci…cation puts very low probability
on values of

smaller than one, which, according to Clarida, Gali, and Gertler

(2000), are plausible parameter values for the pre-1980 period. Interest in this
case arises from noting that, when

< 1, the model admits multiple (sunspot)

equilibria, which can generate arbitrarily high volatility in the macroeconomy. At
least in principle, this could potentially explain the larger volatility of GDP growth
in the pre-Volcker period.
To assess whether our results are driven by not allowing for indeterminacy, we reestimate the model in the pre-Volcker period using a di¤erent prior for the reaction
coe¢ cient to in‡ation. In particular, the new prior density for

has a larger

standard deviation (equal to 0:7) and, hence, puts considerably more weight on the
indeterminacy region. Interestingly, our new estimate of the reaction coe¢ cient
to in‡ation remains almost unchanged across priors (…rst two columns of table 4).
In particular, the 90 percent posterior interval is well above one and none of the
generated draws from the posterior falls close to the indeterminacy region.
We do not view the absence of indeterminacy in our estimates as surprising. In
fact, sunspot equilibria due to an accommodating central bank tend to generate a
positive comovement between in‡ation and real activity in sticky prices models, as
forcefully argued by Christiano and Gust (1999). This is clearly at odds with the
U.S. experience in the 1970s. As a result, we conclude that in our model, an explanation of the Great Moderation based on indeterminacy seems at odds with the
data, while we recognize that there are certainly other models in which an explanation along these lines could be more promising. Similarly, we acknowledge that
the role of real time data combined with mismeasurement of the variables entering
the Taylor rule may, in smaller models, provide a stronger case for monetary policy
as responsible, at least in part, for greater stability after 1984 (see Orphanides and
Williams (2005)). However, the validity of this explanation in the context of large
scale models like ours has not yet been addressed and remains a topic for future
research.

22

ALEJANDRO JUSTINIANO AND GIORGIO E. PRIM ICERI

6.4.2. Changes in inventory management. Regarding the role of inventories in explaining the Great Moderation, we proceed with the rather simple exercise of constructing series of investment and, therefore, output that abstract from inventories.
This approach corresponds with the measurement of investment series in some
business cycle quantitative studies (for example, Fisher (2005)). Furthermore the
rationale for subtracting inventories from output, as opposed to working with the
series for inventories themselves, arises from the ambiguity of whether inventories bu¤er or rather amplify economic ‡uctuations.14 That is, it remains unclear
whether an increase in the volatility of inventories would map into a rise or a decline
of the volatility of output. Our aim here is simply to check whether when removing
inventories the Great Moderation is still evident and, furthermore, whether our
conclusions regarding the importance of investment speci…c technology shocks in
accounting for this episode still hold.
Using this new series for investment and output15 we re-estimate the model with
stochastic volatility over the full sample. Figure 8 presents counterfactual exercises
constructed similarly to those reported in section 6.1, using the new coe¢ cient and
volatility estimates. In this case, the moderation in the variability of output growth
is still evident although the decline is somewhat more prolonged as opposed to
abrupt. Moreover, monetary policy shocks seem to be slightly more important than
in the baseline case. Notice, however, that the role of investment speci…c technology
shocks in accounting for the lower volatility of output growth remains for the most
part unaltered. This exercise suggests that, while inventories may be important for
understanding the sharp drop in the variability of output growth, it would seem
that additional explanations are needed to address the Great Moderation (see also
Stock and Watson (2002), Maccini and Pagan (2003), Herrera and Pesavento (2005)
or Ramey and Vine (2005) for similar conclusions). In this respect, and consistently
once again with our previous …ndings, our results point to the predominant role of
investment speci…c technology shocks in explaining the reduced volatility of the
U.S. economy after 1984.

14 Kahn and McConnell (2002), for instance, argue that while in theory inventories should
bu¤er production from ‡uctuations in sales, in practice the opposite occurs as inventories and
sales comove in the same direction.
15 We use nominal …xed investment and accordingly subtract inventories from nominal GDP.
Consistent with our previous data, per-capita series are obtained by dividing through with population and the GDP de‡ator.

THE TIM E VARYING VOLATILITY OF M ACROECONOM IC FLUCTUATIONS

23

7. Concluding Remarks
In this paper we have estimated a large scale DSGE model of the U.S. business
cycle allowing for the volatility of the structural innovations to change over time.
Our results indicate that the volatility of several shocks has changed dramatically
in the postwar period. However, the sharp reduction in the standard deviation of
GDP growth that has characterized the last twenty years can be explained mostly
due to the decline in the variability of a single disturbance: the investment speci…c
technology shock. This crucial disturbance has the equivalent interpretation of a
shock to the inverse price of e¢ cient units of investment in terms of consumption
goods and, indeed, we also document that this series has exhibited a substantial
moderation in its variability, in accordance with the predictions of our model.
Our results provide guidance for future research on the volatility of the U.S.
business cycle, suggesting that a fruitful avenue would be to model the variability
of disturbances a¤ecting the relative price of investment goods. In particular, it
would be useful to extend the DSGE model of this paper in order to provide a
more structural interpretation for the sharp reduction observed in the volatility of
these shocks. Although beyond the scope of this paper, we note that explanations
based on increased access to credit markets (Campbell and Hercowitz (2004)) and a
decline in investment …nancial frictions (like the ones modeled in Bernanke, Gertler,
and Gilchrist (1999) or Iacoviello (2005)) are potentially consistent with the decline
in the volatility of the relative price of investment.
We conclude by pointing out that the applicability of the modeling framework of
this paper goes well beyond the Great Moderation. Indeed, macro-…nance applications seem particularly suitable for this methodology. In fact, contrary to standard
models with homoskedastic innovations, DSGE models with stochastic volatility as
introduced in this paper generate time varying risk premia even with second order
approximations of the model solution. More generally, DSGE models with stochastic volatility are appropriate for analyzing the e¤ects of shocks to uncertainty and
risk, not only for asset prices, but also for the level of real activity.

Appendix A. Partially nonlinear approximation
This appendix proofs the validity of the partially nonlinear approximation of
the model solution. To simplify the notation, here we work with linearizations (as
opposed to log-linearizations). Consider the general class of models described by

24

ALEJANDRO JUSTINIANO AND GIORGIO E. PRIM ICERI

the following system of rational expectations equations:
(A.1)

Et [ (xt+1 ; xt ; "t ;

t )]

= 0,

"t
where each element of

t

N (0; I),

evolves as in (2.2). Relative to (2.1), (A.1) abstracts from

the presence of lagged values of x for simplicity. This is without loss of generality,
since the vector of state variables can always be extended to include lags. Let’s
de…ne
(A.2)

t

t

"t ,

with ‘ ’denoting the element-by-element product between two vectors. (A.2) can
be used to reparameterize (A.1) as follows:
(A.3)

Et [ (xt+1 ; xt ;

t;

t )]

= 0.

Assume that (A.3) admits a unique solution in the neighborhood of the nonstochastic steady state (described by

(x; x; 0; 0) = 0). This solution has the

form
(A.4)

xt = g ( t ;

t) .

To characterize the the …rst order approximation of (A.4), plug (A.4) into (A.3),
obtaining
Et

g

t+1 ;

; g ( t;

t+1

t) ; t;

and then take a …rst order Taylor expansion. Since

t

t

= 0,

and "t never enter (A.1) sep-

arately (but always as a product), the partial derivative of the function

(; ; ; )

with respect to its fourth argument is equal to zero, implying a …rst order approximation of the solution of the form
(A.5)

xt = g1

t

+ o(jj t ;

t jj)

where the matrix g1 , is a function of the partial derivatives of the function

( ; ; ; ).

Equation (A.5) makes evident that the …rst order approximation of the model
solution as a function of

t

does not include

t

explicitly.

Observe that the more conventional linear approximation of the model solution
derived directly from (A.1) would have the form
(A.6)

xt = g1

"t + o(jj"t ;

t jj).

THE TIM E VARYING VOLATILITY OF M ACROECONOM IC FLUCTUATIONS

Notice that the norms of both vectors, "t and

t,

25

are required to approach zero

for (A.6) to be an accurate approximation of the model solution. These conditions
are su¢ cient but not necessary for the accuracy of the approximation in (A.5),
therefore validating our partially nonlinear approximation.

Appendix B. The estimation algorithm
B.1. The Standard Case: Homoskedastic Disturbances. For the model without stochastic volatility, the estimation algorithm is simply a random walk Metropolis MCMC procedure, as suggested originally by Schorfheide (2000). To initialize
the chains we compute the posterior ordinate for 5; 000 draws from the priors, select the ten points attaining the highest posterior density and use a maximization
algorithm (Chris Sims’csminwel) to …nd the posterior mode. Having observed that
all chains lead to the same mode, the inverse Hessian at the peak is used as the variance of a proposal density for generating draws with the random walk metropolis.
We initialize multiple chains by scaling the inverse Hessian upwards and drawing
randomly from a normal centered at the mode. The variance-covariance matrix of
the proposal density is adjusted to attain an acceptance rate close to 0:25, as it
is usually suggested. Trace plots, kernel estimates as well as the variants of the
potential scale-reduction factors proposed by Brooks and Gelman (1998) are used
to gauge the convergence of the algorithm.

B.2. Stochastic Volatility. When the structural shocks exhibit stochastic volatility, this algorithm must be modi…ed to account for inference on the unobserved stochastic volatilities. A Metropolis within Gibbs MCMC algorithm allows us to iteratively draw from the posterior densities of the DSGE model’s parameters, stochastic
volatilities and associated innovation variances. As discussed below, generating a
draw for the stochastic volatilities entails using a normal mixture approximation
and sampling a set of latent indicators for the components of this mixture.
To illustrate the steps involved in sampling from the di¤erent blocks, let the
vector

collect all parameters of the DSGE model (other than the standard devi-

ations of the structural disturbances of the time invariant model) and notice that
the solution of the linearized DSGE model leads to a state-space representation of
the form

26

ALEJANDRO JUSTINIANO AND GIORGIO E. PRIM ICERI

(B.1)

xt

= Dyt

(B.2)

yt

= A( )yt

1

+ B( )

t

where xt and yt represent the observable variables and the endogenous / state
variables respectively. (B.2) is the same equation as in (2.3), but we have dropped
the “hats” to simplify the notation. As discussed in section A the novelty of our
framework is that the vector of structural innovations

t

(dimension n 1) is allowed

to have a time varying variance covariance matrix. Indexing each structural shock
by i, the stochastic volatilities for each shocks are modelled as
(B.3)
(B.4)

log

(B.5)

i;t

=

i;t

=

"i;t
i;t

i;t "i;t

(1

i

) log

i

+

i

log

i;t 1

+

i;t

N (0; 1)
N (0; s2i )

i = 1; :::; n.

Let the vector ht , with entry i given by hi;t = log

i;t ,

collect the log volatilities

for all shocks at time t and stack the whole sample of stochastic volatilities into
the matrix H T = [h1 ; h2 ; :::; ht ; :::; hT ]0 . Finally, we denote the sample of structural
shocks as

T

=[

0
1; 2 ; :::; t ; :::; T ] .

Suppose that the MCMC algorithm has completed iteration g (> 0); producing
samples

(g)

; H T;(g) and V (g) :of the parameters of interest (individual elements of

a vector are indexed by i while (g) indicates the current state of the chain). In
iteration g + 1, the following …ve steps are used to generate a set of new draws.
B.2.1. Step 1: Draw the structural shocks

T;(g+1)

. In order to generate a new sam-

ple of the stochastic volatilities we must …rst obtain a new draw of the structural
shocks. This can be done easily using the e¢ cient simulation smoother for disturbances developed by Durbin and Koopman (2002). The simulation smoother is
applied to the state space representation given by (B.1) and (B.2).
B.2.2. Step 3: Draw the stochastic volatilities H T;(g+1) . With a draw of

T

in hand the system of nonlinear measurement equations in (B.3) for each structural
shock, can be easily converted in a linear one, by squaring and taking logarithms
of every element. Due to the fact that the squared shocks

2
i;t

can be very small,

an o¤set constant is used to make the estimation procedure more robust. Dropping

THE TIM E VARYING VOLATILITY OF M ACROECONOM IC FLUCTUATIONS

27

the iteration indicators momentarily for ease of notation, this leads to the following
approximating state space form:

(B.6)

~i;t

=

(B.7)

hi;t

= hi;t

where ~i;t = log[(

2
i;t )

2hi;t + ei;t
1

+

i;t .

+ c]; c is the o¤set constant (set to 0:001); ei;t = log("2i;t ).

Observe that the e’s and the ’s are not correlated. The resulting system has a
linear, but non-Gaussian state space form, because the innovations in the measurement equations are distributed as a log

2

(1). In order to further transform

the system in a Gaussian one, a mixture of normals approximation of the log

2

distribution is used, as described in Kim, Shephard, and Chib (1998). Under the
assumption of orthogonality across the "’s (recall the variance covariance matrix of
the "’s is the identity matrix) this implies that the variance covariance matrix of
the v’s is also diagonal, allowing to use the same (independent) mixture of normals
approximation for any for each innovation:

f (ei;t ) =

K
X

k=1

qk fN (ei;t jsi;t = k),

i = 1; :::; n

where si;t is the indicator variable selecting which member of the mixture of nor-

mals has to be used at time t for the innovation i, qk = Pr(si;t = k) and fN ( )
denotes the pdf of a normal distribution. Kim, Shephard, and Chib (1998) select
a mixture of 7 normal densities (K = 7) with component probabilities qk , means
mk

1:2704, and variances rk2 , j = 1; :::; 7, chosen to match a number of moments

of the log

2

fqj ; mj ; rj2 g

below.16

(1) distribution. For completeness the constants are reported below

16 We abstract from the reweighting procedure used in Kim, Shephard, and Chib (1998) to
correct the minor approximation error.

28

ALEJANDRO JUSTINIANO AND GIORGIO E. PRIM ICERI

!

qj = Pr(! = j)

mj

rj2

1

0.00730

-10.12999

5.79596

2

0.10556

-3.97281

2.61369

3

0.00002

-8.56686

5.17950

4

0.04395

2.77786

0.16735

5

0.34001

0.61942

0.64009

6

0.24566

1.79518

0.34023

7

0.25750

-1.08819

1.26261

Source: Kim, Shephard and Chib (1998).
Conditional on S T;(g) , the system has an approximate linear and Gaussian
state space form. Therefore a new draw for the complete history of the volatility H T;(g+1) can be obtained recursively with the standard Gibbs sampling for state
space forms using, for instance, the forward-backward recursion of Carter and Kohn
(1994).
B.2.3. Step 3: Draw the indicators of the mixture approximation sT;(g+1) . A new
i;(g+1)

sample of the indicators, st

, for the mixture is obtained conditional on

T;(g+1)

and H T;(g+1) by independently sampling each from the discrete density de…ned by
(g+1)

Pr(si;t

(g+1)

= j j ~i;t

(g+1)

; hi;t

(g+1)

) _ qj fN (~i;t

(g+1)

j2hi;t

+mj 1:2704; rj2 ), j = 1; :::; 7

Consistent with notation above, collect the indicators for which component of the
mixture of the normal approximation to use for each structural shock and time
(g+1)

period into a stacked matrix sT;(g+1) = [s1

(g+1)

; s2

(g+1)

; :::; st

(g+1) 0

; :::; sT

]

B.2.4. Step 4: Draw the coe¢ cients of the stochastic volatility processes.
h
i
(g+1) (g+1) 2 (g+1)
Having generated a sample H T;(g+1) , the vector
; i ; si
, i =
i

1; :::; n, can be generated easily from the usual Normal inverse-Gamma distribution.
B.2.5. Step 5: Draw the DSGE parameters
gorithm, a new candidate parameter

(g+1)

. As in the time invariant al-

is drawn from a proposal density. However,

in this case, the computation of the likelihood used to construct the probability
of acceptance depends on H T;(g+1) . More formally the candidate draw is accepted
with probability
(

a = min 1;

L(Y T j ; H T;(g+1) ) ( )

L(Y T j

(g)

; H T;(g+1) ) (

(g)

)

)

,

THE TIM E VARYING VOLATILITY OF M ACROECONOM IC FLUCTUATIONS

29

where L( ) and ( ) denote the likelihood and the prior distribution respectively.
These …ve steps are repeated N times, across multiple chains. As in the case of
the time invariant model, we apply a battery of diagnostics to gauge the convergence
of the chains.

References
Ahmed, S., A. Levin, and B. A. Wilson (2004): “Recent U.S. Macroeconomic Stability: Good
Policies, Good Practicies, or Good Luck?,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(3),
824–832.
Altig, D., L. J. Christiano, M. Eichenbaum, and J. Linde (2005): “Firm-Speci…c Capital,
Nominal Rigidities and the Business Cycle,” NBER Working Paper No. 11034.
An, S., and F. Schorfheide (2005): “Bayesian Analysis of DSGE Models,” mimeo, University
of Pennsylvania.
Bernanke, B. (2004): “Great Moderation,” Speech, February 20, 2004.
Bernanke, B., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist (1999): “The Financial Accelerator in a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. B. Taylor, and
M. Woodford. North Holland, Amsterdam.
Bernanke, B. S., and I. Mihov (1998): “Measuring Monetary Policy,” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 113, 869–902.
Bils, M., and P. J. Klenow (2004): “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,”
Journal of Political Economy, 112(5), 947–985.
Blanchard, O. J., and J. Simon (2001): “The Long and Large Decline in U.S. Output Volatility,”
Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, 2001-1, 135–174.
Boivin, J. (2001): “The Fed’s Conduct of Monetary Policy: Has It Changed and Does It Matter?,”
mimeo, Columbia University.
Bradley, M. G., S. A. Gabriel, and M. E. Wohar (1995): “The Thrift Crisis, Mortgage-Credit
Intermediation, and Housing Activity,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 27(2), 476–97.
Brooks, S. P., and A. Gelman (1998): “General Methods for Monitoring Convergence of Iterative Simulations,” Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 7, 434–455.
Calvo, G. (1983): “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 12(3), 383–98.
Campbell, J., and Z. Hercowitz (2004): “The Role of Collateralized Household Debt in Macroeconomic Stabilization,” mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
Canova, F., L. Gambetti, and E. Pappa (2005): “The Structural Dynamics of US Output and
In‡ation: What Explains the Changes?,” mimeo, Bocconi University.
Canova, F., and L. Sala (2005): “Back to Square One: Identi…cation Issues in DSGE Models,”
mimeo, Bocconi University, Milan.
Carlstrom, C. T., and T. S. Fuerst (1997): “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations: A Computable General Equilibrium Analysis,” American Economic Review, 87(5),
893–910.

30

ALEJANDRO JUSTINIANO AND GIORGIO E. PRIM ICERI

Carter, C. K., and R. Kohn (1994): “On Gibbs Sampling for State Space Models,” Biometrika,
81(3), 541–553.
Chari, V., P. J. Kehoe, and E. R. McGrattan (2005): “Business Cycle Accounting,” Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Research Department Sta¤ Report 328.
Chauvet, M., and S. Potter (2001): “Recent Changes in the U.S. Business Cycle,” Manchester
School of Economics and Social Studies, 69(5), 481–508.
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005): “Nominal Rigidities and the
Dynamic E¤ect of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” The Journal of Political Economy, 113(1),
1–45.
Christiano, L. J., and C. Gust (1999): “The Great In‡ation of the 1970s,”mimeo, Northwestern
University.
Clarida, R., J. Gali, and M. Gertler (2000): “Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic
Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(1), 147–180.
Cogley, T., and T. J. Sargent (2003): “Drifts and Volatilities: Monetary Policies and Outcomes in the Post WWII U.S.,” mimeo, New York University.
Cummins, J. G., and G. L. Violante (2002): “Investment-Speci…c Technical Change in the US
(1947-2000): Measurement and Macroeconomic Consequences,” Review of Economic Dynamics,
5(2), 243–284.
Del Negro, M., F. Schorfheide, F. Smets, and R. Wouters (2004): “On the Fit and Forecasting Performance of New Keynesian Models,”Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Working Paper
No. 2004-37.
Durbin, J., and S. J. Koopman (2002): “A Simple and E¢ cient Simulation Smoother for State
Space Time Series Analysis,” Biometrika, 89(3), 603–616.
Dynan, K. E., D. W. Elmendorf, and D. E. Sichel (2005): “Can Finacial Innovation Explain
the Reduced Volatility of Economic Activity?,” in Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy, ed. by B. McCallum, and C. I. Plosser.
Erceg, C. J., D. W. Henderson, and A. T. Levin (2000): “Optimal Monetary Policy with
Staggered Wage and Price Contracts,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 46(2), 281–313.
Faia, E., and T. Monacelli (2004): “Optimal Interest Rate Rules Rules,Asset Prices and Credit
Frictions,” mimeo, Universitat Pompeu Fabra.
Fernandez-Villaverde, J., and J. Rubio-Ramirez (2004): “Estimating Nonlinear Dynamic
Equilibrium Economies: A Likelihood Approach,” mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.
Fisher, J. D. M. (2005): “The Dynamic E¤ect of Neutral and Investment-Speci…c Technology
Shocks,” mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
Gordon, R. J. (1990): The Measurement of Durable Goods Prices. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, IL.
Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and P. Krusell (1997): “Long Run Implications of InvestmentSpeci…c Technological Change,” American Economic Review, 87(3), 342–362.
Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and P. Krusell (2000): “The role of investment-speci…c technological change in the business cycle,” European Economic Review, 44(1), 91–115.
Hall, R. E. (1997): “Macroeconomic Fluctuations and the Allocation of Time,” Journal of Labor
Economics, 15(2), 223–250.

THE TIM E VARYING VOLATILITY OF M ACROECONOM IC FLUCTUATIONS

31

Hanson, M. (2003): “Varying Monetary Policy Regimes: A Vector Autoregressive Investigation,”
mimeo, Wesleyan University.
Hendershott, P. H. (1990): “The Market for Home Mortgage Credit: Recent Changes and
Future Prospects,” NBER Working Paper no. 3548.
Herrera, A. M., and E. Pesavento (2005): “The Decline in U.S. Output Volatility: Structural
Changes and Inventory Investment,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, forthcoming.
Iacoviello, M. (2005): “House Prices, Borrowing Constraints and Monetary Policy in the Business Cycle,” American Economic Review, 95(3), 739–764.
Ireland, P. N. (2004): “Technology Shocks in the New Keynesian Model,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(4), 923–936.
Kahn, J. A., and M. M. McConnell (2002): “Has Inventory Volatility Returned? A Look
at the Current Cycle,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Current Issues in Economics and
Finance, 8(5), 1–6.
Kahn, J. A., M. M. McConnell, and G. Perez-Quiros (2002): “On the Causes of the Increased
Stability of the U.S. Economy,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review,
8(1), 183–202.
Kim, C.-J., and C. R. Nelson (1999): “Has the U.S. Economy Become More Stable? A Bayesian
Approach Based on a Markov-Switching Model of the Business Cycle,”The Review of Economics
and Statistics, 81, 608–616.
Kim, S., N. Shephard, and S. Chib (1998): “Stochastic Volatility: Likelihood Inference and
Comparison with ARCH Models,” The Review of Economic Studies, 65(3), 361–393.
Laforte, J.-P. (2005): “DSGE Models and Heteroskedasticity: A Markov-Switching Approach,”
mimeo, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Leduc, S., and K. Sill (2003): “Monetary Policy, Oil Shocks, and TFP: Accounting for the
Decline in U.S. Volatility,” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Research Working Paper no.
03-22.
Levin, A. T., A. Onatski, J. C. Williams, and N. Williams (2005): “Monetary Policy Under
Uncertainty in Micro-Founded Macroeconometric Models,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual.
Lucca, D. O. (2005): “Resuscitating Time to Build,” mimeo, Northwestern University.
Maccini, L. J., and A. Pagan (2003): “Explaining the Role of Inventories in the Business Cycle,”
mimeo, Johns Hopkins University.
McCarty, J., and R. W. Peach (2002): “Monetary Policy Transmission to Residential Investment,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, 8(1), 139–158.
McConnell, M. M., and G. Perez-Quiros (2000): “Output Fluctuations in the United States:
What Has Changed Since the Early 1980’s,” American Economic Review, 90(5), 1464–1476.
Orphanides, A., and J. C. Williams (2005): “The Decline of Activist Stabilization Policy:
Natural Rate Misperceptions, Learning, and Expectations,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and
Control, 29, 1927–1950.
Primiceri, G. E. (2005): “Time Varying Structural Vector Autoregressions and Monetary Policy,”
The Review of Economic Studies, 72, 821–852.
Ramey, V. A., and D. J. Vine (2005): “Declining Volatility in the U.S. Automobile Industry,”
mimeo, University of California, San Diego.

32

ALEJANDRO JUSTINIANO AND GIORGIO E. PRIM ICERI

Rotemberg, J. J., and M. Woodford (1997): “An Optimization-Based Econometric Model for
the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 12, 297–346.
Schnure, C. (2005): “Boom and Bust Cycles in Housing: The Changing Role of Financial Structure,” IMF Working Paper no. 200.
Schorfheide, F. (2000): “Loss-Function Based Evaluation of DSGE Models,” Journal of Applied
Econometrics, 15, 645–670.
Shephard, N. (1994): “Partial Non-Gaussian State Space,” Biometrika, 81, 115–131.
Sims, C. A., and T. Zha (2004): “Were There Regime Switches in US Monetary Policy?,”mimeo,
Princeton University.
Smets, F., and R. Wouters (2003): “An Estimated Stochastic Dynamic General Equilibrium
Model of the Euro Area,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 1(5), 1123–1175.
Stock, J. H., and M. W. Watson (2002): “Has the Business Cycle Changed and Why?,” NBER
working paper no. 9127.
(2003a): “Has the Business Cycle Changed? Evidence and Explanations,”mimeo, Princeton University.
(2003b): “Understanding Changes in International Business Cycle Dynamics,” mimeo,
Princeton University.
Walsh, C. E. (2005): “Comments on “Monetary Policy Under Uncertainty in Micro-Founded
Macroeconometric Models,” by A. Levin, A. Onatski, J. Williams and N. Williams,” in NBER
Macroeconomics Annual.
Woodford, M. (2003): Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Federal Reserve Board
Northwestern University and NBER

Table 1: Prior densities and posterior estimates with and without stochastic volatility
Posterior

Prior
Coefficient

Description

Posterior with Stochastic Volatility 3/

2/

Prior
Density 1/

Mean

Std

Median

Std

[5,95] Prob

Median

Std

[5,95] Prob

ιp

Price indexation

B

0.5

0.15

0.149

0.059

[ 0.072 , 0.263 ]

0.288

0.091

[ 0.158 , 0.4529 ]

ιw

Wage indexation

B

0.5

0.15

0.11

0.031

[ 0.064 , 0.164 ]

0.134

0.035

[ 0.081 , 0.197 ]

γ

SS technology growth rate

N

0.5

0.025

0.425

0.024

[ 0.39 , 0.46 ]

0.4344

0.023

[ 0.4 , 0.47 ]

h

Consumption habit

B

0.5

0.1

0.809

0.03

[ 0.759 , 0.864 ]

0.748

0.027

[ 0.705 , 0.793 ]

λp

SS mark-up goods prices

N

0.15

0.05

0.243

0.038

[ 0.18 , 0.304 ]

0.218

0.034

[ 0.161 , 0.275 ]

λw

SS mark-up wages

N

0.15

0.05

0.127

0.046

[ 0.054 , 0.207 ]

0.171

0.038

[ 0.114 , 0.241 ]

L ss (log)

SS leisure

N

396.83

0.5

397.218

0.451

[ 396.507 , 397.986 ]

396.799

0.479

[ 396.045 , 397.624 ]

π

SS quarterly inflation

N

0.5

0.1

0.578

0.098

[ 0.415 , 0.735 ]

0.712

0.056

[ 0.625 , 0.81 ]

r

SS real interest rate

N

0.5

0.1

0.997

0.073

[ 0.876 , 1.117 ]

0.996

0.067

[ 0.89 , 1.114 ]

ν

Inverse Frisch labor

G

2

0.75

3.856

0.914

[ 2.598 , 5.618 ]

2.423

0.759

[ 1.57 , 4.036 ]

ξp

Calvo prices

B

0.75

0.1

0.784

0.023

[ 0.745 , 0.821 ]

0.681

0.027

[ 0.637 , 0.725 ]

ξw

Calvo wages

B

0.75

0.1

0.718

0.051

[ 0.619 , 0.784 ]

0.379

0.051

[ 0.302 , 0.472 ]

χ

Elasticity capital utilization costs

G

5

1

7.136

1.104

[ 5.552 , 9.133 ]

7.328

1.050

[ 5.773 , 9.222 ]

S''

Investment adjustment costs

N

4

1.5

2.051

0.586

[ 1.331 , 3.244 ]

2.447

0.490

[ 1.702 , 3.338 ]

Φp

Taylor rule inflation

N

1.7

0.3

2.014

0.144

[ 1.804 , 2.275 ]

2.503

0.184

[ 2.225 , 2.832 ]

Φy

Taylor rule output

G

0.125

0.1

0.072

0.014

[ 0.05 , 0.097 ]

0.024

0.011

[ 0.008 , 0.045 ]

Notes:
Calibrated coefficients: labor share (α) at 0.3, depreciation rate (δ) is 0.025, g at 1/0.77 which implies a SS government share of 0.22
Relative to the text, γ is expressed in percentage points, while π and r are expressed as net rates, in percentage points. Finally, the standard deviations of the innovations are also scaled by 100 for the
estimation. All these changes are reflected in the specification of the priors.
1/ N stands for Normal, B Beta, G Gamma and I Inverted-Gamma1 distribution
2/ Median, standard deviations and posterior percentiles of 110,000 draws from the Random Walk metropolis algorithm for the model without stochastic volatility. We discard the initial 50,000 draws.
3/ Median, standard deviations and posterior percentiles of 120,000 draws from the Random Walk metropolis within Gibbs algorithm for the model with stochastic volatility. We discard the initial 50,000

Table 1 (continued): Prior densities and posterior estimates with and without stochastic volatility

Prior
Coefficient

Description

Posterior

Posterior with Stochastic Volatility 3/

2/

Prior
Density 1/

Mean

Std

Median

Std

[5,95] Prob

Median

Std

[5,95] Prob

ρμ

Investment specific technology

B

0.5

0.15

0.909

0.028

[ 0.859 , 0.949 ]

0.831

0.036

[ 0.772 , 0.888 ]

ρλ

Mark-up

B

0.8

0.1

0.876

0.036

[ 0.81 , 0.925 ]

0.908

0.029

[ 0.854 , 0.95 ]

ρφ

Labor disutility

B

0.5

0.15

0.489

0.07

[ 0.379 , 0.609 ]

0.924

0.033

[ 0.857 , 0.964 ]

ρb

Intertemporal preference

B

0.5

0.15

0.822

0.051

[ 0.716 , 0.884 ]

0.822

0.042

[ 0.745 , 0.883 ]

σr

Monetary policy

I

0.15

0.15

0.254

0.014

[0.232 , 0.28 ]

σz

Technology growth

I

0.15

0.15

1.097

0.057

[1.006 , 1.192 ]

σg

Government spending

I

0.15

0.15

0.553

0.035

[0.501 , 0.615 ]

σμ

Investment specific technology

I

0.1

0.1

0.136

0.021

[0.108 , 0.178 ]

σλ

Mark-up

I

0.15

0.15

0.096

0.011

[0.08 , 0.115 ]

σφ

Labor disutility

I

0.15

0.15

0.988

0.283

[0.587 , 1.52 ]

σb

Intertemporal preference

I

0.15

0.15

0.55

0.202

[0.387 , 1.083 ]

Notes:
Calibrated coefficients: labor share (α) at 0.3, depreciation rate (δ) is 0.025, g at 1/0.77 which implies a SS government share of 0.22
Relative to the text, γ is expressed in percentage points, while π and r are expressed as net rates, in percentage points. Finally, the standard deviations of the innovations are also scaled by 100 for the
estimation. All these changes are reflected in the specification of the priors.
1/ N stands for Normal, B Beta, G Gamma and I Inverted-Gamma1 distribution
2/ Median, standard deviations and posterior percentiles of 110,000 draws from the Random Walk metropolis algorithm for the model without stochastic volatility. We discard the initial 50,000 draws.
3/ Median, standard deviations and posterior percentiles of 120,000 draws from the Random Walk metropolis within Gibbs algorithm for the model with stochastic volatility. We discard the initial 50,000

Table 2: Posterior estimates on Split Sample (without stochastic volatility)

Description

Coefficient

Posterior
Sample I: 1954q3 - 1979q3

Posterior
Sample II: 1984q1 - 2004q4

Mode

Std

Mode

Std

ιp

Price indexation

0.218

0.088

0.178

0.073

ιw

Wage indexation

0.094

0.031

0.410

0.075

γ

SS technology growth rate

0.461

0.025

0.476

0.024

h

Consumption habit

0.817

0.032

0.688

0.041

λp

SS mark-up goods prices

0.180

0.004

0.122

0.039

λw

SS mark-up wages

0.150

0.002

0.178

0.009

L ss (log)

SS leisure

397.072

0.454

396.941

0.486

π

SS quarterly inflation

0.576

0.115

0.646

0.059

r

SS real interest rate

0.734

0.089

0.731

0.066

ν

Inverse Frisch labor

2.270

0.738

1.723

0.566

ξp

Calvo prices

0.708

0.046

0.721

0.034

ξw

Calvo wages

0.626

0.084

0.350

0.073

χ

Elasticity capital utilization costs

6.014

1.814

6.180

1.016

S''

Investment adjustment costs

0.814

0.227

1.875

0.544

Φp

Taylor rule inflation

1.644

0.099

2.386

0.170

Φy

Taylor rule output

0.057

0.015

0.031

0.016

ρr

Taylor rule smoothing

0.787

0.038

0.815

0.023

ρz

Technology growth

0.306

0.081

0.321

0.071

ρg

Government spending

0.922

0.022

0.965

0.011

ρμ

Investment specific technology

0.911

0.041

0.847

0.041

ρλ

Mark-up

0.893

0.035

0.902

0.040

ρφ

Labor disutility

0.515

0.145

0.919

0.041

ρb

Intertemporal preference

0.508

0.143

0.833

0.050

σr

Monetary policy

0.234

0.027

0.153

0.013

σz

Technology growth

1.198

0.143

0.727

0.061

σg

Government spending

0.700

0.060

0.438

0.035

σμ

Investment specific technology

0.085

0.013

0.061

0.011

σλ

Mark-up

0.142

0.035

0.102

0.017

σφ

Labor disutility

0.693

0.188

0.246

0.037

σb

Intertemporal preference

0.881

0.249

0.202

0.039

Calibrated coefficients: labor share (α) at 0.3, depreciation rate (δ) is 0.025, g at 1/0.77 which implies a SS government share of 0.22
Relative to the text, γ is expressed in percentage points, while π and r are expressed as net rates, in percentage points. Finally, the standard deviations of the
innovations are also scaled by 100 for the estimation. All these changes are reflected in the specification of the priors.
Prior distributions are identical to those reported in Table 1.

Table 3: Model implied relative standard deviations for output
Split sample estimates and counterfactuals
A

B

C

D

Sample I : 1954q31979q3

Sample II : 1984q1 2004q4

Sample I: monetary
policy coefficients
Sample II 1/

Std only Sample I; all
other coefficients Sample
II 2/

1

0.526

1.026

1.114

Std of output
(relative to std
sample I)

1/ All coefficients and standard deviations at median estimates for sample I, but replace coefficients of the Taylor rule and the mean of
inflation with median estimates for sample II.

2/ Standard deviations at median estimates for sample I, while all other coefficients are at their median estimates for sample II.

Table 4: Posterior estimates (without stochastic volatility) based on
alternative prior and output growth specification for the Taylor Rule

Coefficient

Description

Sample I: 1954q3 - 1979q3
Looser prior on Φp, Taylor
Rule Inflation 1/

Full Sample
Output growth in Taylor
Rule /2

Full Sample
Output growth in Taylor
Rule /2

Posterior

Posterior

Posterior with Stochastic
Volatility

Median

Std

Median

Std

Median

Std

ιp

Price indexation

0.218

0.086

0.141

0.053

0.221

0.071

ιw

Wage indexation

0.094

0.032

0.096

0.032

0.084

0.024

γ

SS technology growth rate

0.460

0.025

0.448

0.024

0.436

0.022

h

Consumption habit

0.817

0.011

0.780

0.028

0.740

0.031

λp

SS mark-up goods prices

0.170

0.005

0.295

0.006

0.235

0.035

λw

SS mark-up wages

0.141

0.002

0.113

0.002

0.120

0.039

L ss (log)

SS leisure

397.080

0.447

396.780

0.482

396.288

0.419

π

SS quarterly inflation

0.576

0.095

0.838

0.059

0.755

0.050

r

SS real interest rate

0.730

0.079

0.939

0.068

0.950

0.056

ν

Inverse Frisch labor

2.253

0.558

2.838

0.887

2.582

0.705

ξp

Calvo prices

0.706

0.019

0.783

0.023

0.746

0.028

ξw

Calvo wages

0.622

0.026

0.769

0.039

0.483

0.046

χ

Elasticity capital utilization

6.022

1.019

7.029

2.187

7.696

0.981

S''

Investment adjustment cost

0.796

0.166

1.212

0.349

3.091

0.752

Φp

Taylor rule inflation

1.625

0.121

2.224

0.133

2.735

0.163

Φy

Taylor rule output

0.057

0.001

0.802

0.131

0.615

0.095

Notes:
Calibrated coefficients: labor share (α) at 0.3, depreciation rate (δ) is 0.025, g at 1/0.77 which implies a SS government share of 0.22
Relative to the text, γ is expressed in percentage points, while π and r are expressed as net rates, in percentage points. Finally, the standard deviations of the innovations are also scaled by
100 for the estimation. All these changes are reflected in the specification of the priors.
Except for the coefficients of the Taylor rule, all other priors are identical to those in Table 1/
1/ Prior for Φp is Normal(1.7,0.7) to provide greater prior mass to the region of indeterminacy. Prior for Φy is N(0.125,0.1) as in Table 1.
2/ Prior for Φp is Normal(1.7,0.3) as in Table 1. Prior for Φy is N(0.5,0.3) and in terms of output growth.

Table 4 (continued): Posterior estimates (without stochastic volatility) based on
alternative prior and output growth specification for the Taylor Rule

Coefficient

Description

Sample I: 1954q3 - 1979q3
Looser prior on Φp, Taylor
Rule Inflation 1/

Full Sample
Output growth in Taylor
Rule /2

Posterior

Posterior

Full Sample
Output growth in Taylor
Rule /2
Posterior with Stochastic
Volatility

Median

Std

Median

Std

Median

Std

ρr

Taylor rule smoothing

0.784

0.030

0.833

0.017

0.861

0.014

ρz

Technology growth

0.308

0.059

0.232

0.054

0.294

0.051

ρg

Government spending

0.922

0.024

0.984

0.001

0.982

0.006

ρμ

Investment specific techno

0.912

0.027

0.888

0.022

0.803

0.034

ρλ

Mark-up

0.891

0.035

0.886

0.036

0.858

0.041

ρφ

Labor disutility

0.509

0.048

0.579

0.063

0.851

0.063

ρb

Intertemporal preference

0.504

0.059

0.703

0.064

0.786

0.053

σr

Monetary policy

0.234

0.019

0.251

0.015

σz

Technology growth

1.193

0.082

1.113

0.056

σg

Government spending

0.701

0.058

0.570

0.035

σμ

Investment specific techno

0.084

0.006

0.115

0.016

σλ

Mark-up

0.143

0.006

0.104

0.011

σφ

Labor disutility

0.683

0.042

1.129

0.301

σb

Intertemporal preference

0.880

0.050

0.468

0.120

Notes:
Calibrated coefficients: labor share (α) at 0.3, depreciation rate (δ) is 0.025, g at 1/0.77 which implies a SS government share of 0.22
Relative to the text, γ is expressed in percentage points, while π and r are expressed as net rates, in percentage points. Finally, the standard deviations of the innovations are also scaled by
100 for the estimation. All these changes are reflected in the specification of the priors.
Except for the coefficients of the Taylor rule, all other priors are identical to those in Table 1/
1/ Prior for Φp is Normal(1.7,0.7) to provide greater prior mass to the region of indeterminacy. Prior for Φy is N(0.125,0.1) as in Table 1.
2/ Prior for Φp is Normal(1.7,0.3) as in Table 1. Prior for Φy is N(0.5,0.3) and in terms of output growth.

Figure 1: Stochastic Volatility of the DSGE Model Shocks
A. Monetary Policy Shock

B. Technology Shock

Median, 5th and 95th percentiles

Median, 5th and 95th percentiles

1

1

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

3

3

2.5

2.5

2

2

1.5

1.5

1

0.5

0.5

D.

2004

2000

1996

1992

1988

1984

1980

1976

1972

1968

1956

C. Government Spending Shock

1964

0

1960

0

2004

2000

1996

1992

1988

1984

1980

1976

1972

1968

1964

1960

0

1956

0

1

Investment Specific Technology Shock

Median, 5th and 95th percentiles

Median, 5th and 95th percentiles

1.5

1.5

1

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

1

0.5

F.

Mark-up Shock

0.05

Intertemporal Preference Shock
Median, 5th and 95th percentiles

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

2004

2000

1996

1992

1988

1984

1980

1976

1972

1968

1964

0

1960

0

2004

2000

1996

1992

1988

1984

1980

0.2

0.1

0.1

1956

2004

2000

1996

1992

1988

1984

1980

1976

1972

1968

1964

1960

0

1956

0

0.2

2004

0.05

2000

0.1

0.3

1996

0.1

0.3

1992

0.15

0.4

1988

0.15

0.4

1984

0.2

1980

0.2

1976

0.25

0.5

1968

0.25

0.5

1964

0.3

1960

0.3

1956

Labor Disutility Shock

Median, 5th and 95th percentiles

Median, 5th and 95th percentiles

G.

1976

1972

1968

1964

0

1956

2004

2000

1996

1992

1988

1984

0

1972

E.

1980

1976

1972

1968

1964

1960

0

1956

0

1960

0.5

Figure 2: Variance Decomposition for Output Growth 1/
A. Monetary Policy Shock

B. Technology Shock

Median, 5th and 95th percentiles

Median, 5th and 95th percentiles
0.5

0.2

0.1

0.1

Median, 5th and 95th percentiles

Median, 5th and 95th percentiles

0.2

1956

2004

F. Labor Disutility Shock
Median, 5th and 95th percentiles
1

0.5

0.2

0.1

0.1

G. Intertemporal Preference Shock
Median, 5th and 95th percentiles
0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

2004

2000

1996

1992

1988

1984

1980

1976

1972

1968

0

1964

0

0

1/ For variance decompositions, medians need not add up to exactly one, but means do

1992

0

1956

2004

2000

1996

1992

1988

1984

1980

1976

1972

1968

1964

0

1960

0

0.3

0.2

1988

0.1

0.4

0.3

1984

0.1

0.5

0.4

1980

0.2

0.6

0.5

1976

0.2

0.7

0.6

1972

0.3

0.8

0.7

1968

0.3

0.9

0.8

1964

0.4

1960

0.4

1

0.9

2004

2000

1996

1992

1988

1984

1980

1976

1972

1964

1960

1968

E. Mark-up Shock
Median, 5th and 95th percentiles
0.5

1960

0

2004

0

0

1956

0

0.2

2000

0.1

0.4

2000

0.1

0.4

1996

0.2

1996

0.3

0.2

0.6

1992

0.3

0.6

1988

0.4

0.8

1984

0.4

0.8

1980

0.5

1976

0.5

1

1972

0.6

1968

0.6

1

1964

0.7

1960

0.7

1956

2004

D. Investment Specific Shock

C. Government Spending Shock

1956

2000

1956

0

1996

0

2004

2000

1996

1992

1988

1984

1980

1976

1972

1968

1964

1960

0

1956

0

0.3

0.2

1992

0.1

0.4

0.3

1988

0.1

0.5

0.4

1984

0.2

0.6

0.5

1980

0.2

0.7

0.6

1976

0.3

0.8

0.7

1972

0.3

0.9

0.8

1968

0.4

1

1964

0.4

1
0.9

1960

0.5

Figure 3: Selected Variance Decomposition for Other Series
( Series , Shock )
A. Consumption, Intertertemporal Preference Shock

B. FFR, Monetary Policy Shock

Median, 5th and 95th percentiles

Median, 5th and 95th percentiles

1

1

1

1

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

2004

2000

1996

1992

1988

1984

1980

1976

1972

1968

1964

1956

0

1960

0

2004

2000

1996

1992

1988

1984

1980

1976

1972

1968

1964

1960

0

1956

0

D. Investment, Investment Specific Technology Shock

C. Inflation, Mark-up Shock

Median, 5th and 95th percentiles

Median, 5th and 95th percentiles
0.6

0.6

0.4

1

1

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.4

0.2

2004

2000

1996

1992

1988

1984

1980

1976

1972

1968

1964

0

1956

0

2004

2000

1996

1992

1988

1984

1980

1976

1972

1968

1964

1960

0

1956

0

1960

0.2

F. Real Wages, Technology Shock

E. Labor, Labor Disutility Shock

Median, 5th and 95th percentiles

Median, 5th and 95th percentiles
1

1

1

1

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

2004

2000

1996

1992

1988

1984

1980

1976

1972

1968

1964

0

1960

0

1956

2004

2000

1996

1992

1988

1984

1980

1976

1972

1968

1964

1960

0

1956

0

Figure 4: DSGE Spectral Variance Decomposition for Output

1/

Spectrum decomposition for (log) output, in deviations from the model's common stochastic trend, for periodicities between
8 and 32 quarters
A. Monetary Policy Shock

B. Technology Shock

Median, 5th and 95th percentiles

Median, 5th and 95th percentiles

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

2004

2000

1996

1992

1988

1984

1980

1976

1972

1968

1964

1956

0

1960

0

2004

2000

1996

1992

1988

1984

1980

1976

1972

1968

1964

1960

0

1956

0

D. Investment Specific Shock

C. Government Spending Shock

Median, 5th and 95th percentiles

Median, 5th and 95th percentiles
0.5

0.5

1

0.4

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.3

0.3

0.6

0.6

0.2

0.2

0.4

0.4

0.1

0.1

0.2

0.2

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

2004

2000

1996

1992

1988

1984

1980

1976

1972

0

1968

0

1/ For variance decompositions, medians need not add up to exactly one, but means do

2004
2004

2000

1996

0

1992

0

1956

2004

2000

1996

1992

1988

1984

1980

1976

1972

1968

0.4

2000

0.1

Median, 5th and 95th percentiles
0.4

1996

1992

1988

1984

1980

0.2

0.1

G. Intertemporal Preference Shock

1964

1976

0.3

0.2

0

1964

0

0.4

0.3

1988

0.1

0.5

0.4

1984

0.1

0.6

0.5

1980

0.2

0.7

0.6

1976

0.2

0.8

0.7

1972

0.3

0.9

0.8

1968

0.3

1

1964

0.4

1960

1972

1
0.9

1960

0.4

1960

1968

F. Labor Disutility Shock
Median, 5th and 95th percentiles
0.5

1956

1964

1956

2004

2000

1996

1992

1988

1984

1980

1976

1972

1964

1960

1968

E. Mark-up Shock
Median, 5th and 95th percentiles
0.5

1956

0

1960

0

0

1956

0

1

Figure 5: DSGE Time Varying Standard Deviation of
Output Growth and Federal Funds Rate
Median, 5th and 95th percentiles

Output Growth
2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

55

60

65

70

75

80

85

90

95

00

05

00

05

Federal Funds Rate
( Level annualized , multiplied by 4 )
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
55

60

65

70

75

80

85

90

95

Figure 6: Actual and counterfactual standard deviation (std) for output growth
Counterfactual std obtained by fixing for the remainder of the sample the std of each shock, one at a time, to the average
level of the time variying standard deviations in 1980

A. Monetary Policy Shock

B. Technology Shock

Counterfactual Median, 5th and 95th percentiles

Counterfactual Median, 5th and 95th percentiles

2.4

2.4

2

2

2.4

2.4

2

2

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

2001

0.8

1997

0.8

1993

0.8

1989

0.8

1985

1.2

1981

1.2

2001

1.2

1997

1.2

1993

1.6

1989

1.6

1985

1.6

1981

1.6

D. Investment Specific Technology Shock

C. Government Spending Shock

Counterfactual Median, 5th and 95th percentiles

Counterfactual Median, 5th and 95th percentiles
2.4

2.4

2

2

2.4

2.4

2

2

0.8

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

2001

E. Mark-up Shock

F. Labor Disutility Shock

Counterfactual Median, 5th and 95th percentiles

Counterfactual Median, 5th and 95th percentiles

2.4

2.4

2

2

2001

0.8

1997

0.8

1993

0.8

1989

1.2

1985

1.2

1981

1.2

1997

1.2

1993

1.6

1989

1.6

1985

1.6

1981

1.6

2.4

2.4

2

2

0.8

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

1981

2001

0.8

1997

0.8

1993

0.8

1989

1.2

1985

1.2

2001

1.2

1997

1.2

1993

1.6

1989

1.6

1985

1.6

1981

1.6

G. Intertemporal Preference Shock
Counterfactual Median, 5th and 95th percentiles
2.4

2.4

2

2

0.4

0.4

2001

0.8

1997

0.8

1993

1.2

1989

1.2

1985

1.6

1981

1.6

Counterfactual standard deviation
Actual standard deviation
5th and 95th percentiles

Figure 7: Time-Varying Standard Deviation
Relative Price of Investment to Consumption
Obtained Using a 10 Year Window
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
64

68

72

76

80

84

88

92

96

00

04

Figure 8: Time Varying Standard Deviations
Median Standard Deviations from an AR(4) with stochastic volatility

A. Consumption

B. Investment
6

.7
5
.6
4
.5
3
.4
2
.3
1
60

65

70

75

80

85

90

95

00

05

60

65

70

C. Non-Durables

75

80

85

90

95

00

05

90

95

00

05

00

05

00

05

D. Residential

1.0

10
9

0.9
8
0.8

7
6

0.7
5
0.6

4
3

0.5
2
0.4

1
60

65

70

75

80

85

90

95

00

05

60

65

70

75

80

85

F. Equipment and Software
NIPA Deflator

E. Services
.9

4.5

.8
4.0

.7
.6

3.5

.5
3.0

.4
.3

2.5

.2
2.0

.1
60

65

70

75

80

85

90

95

00

05

60

65

70

75

80

85

90

95

H. Equipment and Software
GCV Deflator

G. Durables
4.5

4.5

4.0

4.0

3.5

3.5

3.0

3.0

2.5

2.5

2.0

2.0
60

65

70

75

80

85

90

95

00

05

60

65

70

75

80

85

Note: Consistent with the data used to estimate the DSGE model,
Consumption corresponds to Non-Durables and Services, while
Investment is the sum of Private Investment and Durables

90

95

Figure 9: Mortgage Spreads
Levels and Time Varying Standard Deviations
Median standard deviation from an AR(4) with stochastic volatility

Standard Deviation
Spread 30Y Mortgage Rate and Moody's AAA

Spread 30Y Mortgage Rate and Moody's AAA
3.5

1.6

3.0

1.4

2.5

1.2

2.0
1.0
1.5
0.8
1.0
0.6

0.5

0.4

0.0
-0.5

0.2
78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04

78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04

Standard Deviation
Spread 30Y Mortgage Rate and T-Bill 10Y

Spread 30Y Mortgage Rate and T-Bill 10Y
4.0

1.6

3.5

1.4
1.2

3.0

1.0
2.5
0.8
2.0
0.6
1.5

0.4

1.0

0.2

0.5

0.0
78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04

78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04

Spread 30Y Mortgage Rate and T-Bill 30Y

Standard Deviation
Spread 30Y Mortgage Rate and T-Bill 30Y

4.0

1.8

3.5

1.6
1.4

3.0

1.2
2.5
1.0
2.0
0.8
1.5

0.6

1.0

0.4

0.5

0.2
78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04

78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04

Figure 10: Actual and counterfactual standard deviation (std) for output growth exlcuding stocks
Counterfactual std obtained by fixing for the remainder of the sample the std of each shock, one at a time, to the average level of the time variying
standard deviations in 1980
B. Technology Shock

A. Monetary Policy Shock

Counterfactual Median, 5th and 95th percentiles

Counterfactual Median, 5th and 95th percentiles
2.4

2.4

2

2

2.4

2.4

2

2

0.8

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

1981

2001

0.8

1997

0.8

1993

0.8

1989

1.2

1985

1.2

2001

1.2

1997

1.2

1993

1.6

1989

1.6

1985

1.6

1981

1.6

D. Investment Specific Technology Shock

C. Government Spending Shock

Counterfactual Median, 5th and 95th percentiles

Counterfactual Median, 5th and 95th percentiles
2.4

2.4

2

2

2.4

2.4

2

2

0.8

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

2001

2001

0.8

1997

0.8

1993

0.8

1989

1.2

1985

1.2

1981

1.2

1997

1.2

1993

1.6

1989

1.6

1985

1.6

1981

1.6

F. Labor Disutility Shock

E. Mark-up Shock

Counterfactual Median, 5th and 95th percentiles

Counterfactual Median 5th and 95th percentiles
2.4

2.4

2

2

2.4

2.4

2

2

0.8

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

1981

2001

0.8

1997

0.8

1993

0.8

1989

1.2

1985

1.2

2001

1.2

1997

1.2

1993

1.6

1989

1.6

1985

1.6

1981

1.6

G. Intertemporal Preference Shock
Counterfactual Median, 5th and 95th percentiles
2.4

2.4

2

2

0.4

0.4

2001

0.8

1997

0.8

1993

1.2

1989

1.2

1985

1.6

1981

1.6

Counterfactual standard deviation
Actual standard deviation

5th and 95th percentiles

