NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INDIA’S PATTERN OF DEVELOPMENT:
WHAT HAPPENED, WHAT FOLLOWS
Kalpana Kochhar
Utsav Kumar
Raghuram Rajan
Arvind Subramanian
Ioannis Tokatlidis
Working Paper 12023
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12023
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2006

This paper was presented at the Carnegie-Rochester Conference held on November 18 and 19, 2005. This
paper reflects the authors’ views and not necessarily those of the International Monetary Fund, its
management, or its Board. We are grateful to our discussant, Abhijit Banerjee, for helpful comments, and
to Josh Felman, Enric Fernandez, Poonam Gupta, Devesh Kapur, Aaditya Mattoo, Brian Pinto, Ramana
Ramaswamy, V.S. Krishnan, Shang- Jin Wei, John Williamson, and participants at the Carnegie-Rochester
Conference for useful feedback. We thank the following for providing data for this study: Abhijit Banerjee
and Lakshmi Iyer, Tim Besley, Poonam Gupta, Jean Imbs and Romain Wacziarg, Andrei Levchenko and
Romain Ranciere, and Catriona Purfield. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Kalpana Kochhar, Utsav Kumar, Raghuram Rajan, Arvind Subramanian, and Ioannis Tokatlidis.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

India’s Patterns of Development: What Happened, What Follows
Kalpana Kochhar, Utsav Kumar, Raghuram Rajan, Arvind Subramanian, and Ioannis Tokatlidis
NBER Working Paper No. 12023
February 2006
JEL No. O14, O53
ABSTRACT
India seems to have followed an idiosyncratic pattern of development, certainly compared to other
fast-growing Asian economies. While the emphasis on services rather than manufacturing has been
widely noted, within manufacturing India has emphasized skill-intensive rather than labor-intensive
manufacturing, and industries with typically higher average scale. We show that some of these
distinctive patterns existed even prior to the beginning of economic reforms in the 1980s, and argue
they stem from the idiosyncratic policies adopted soon after India's independence. We then look to
the future, using the growth of fast-moving Indian states as a guide. Despite recent reforms that have
removed some of the policy impediments that might have sent India down its distinctive path, it
appears unlikely that India will revert to the pattern followed by other countries.
Kalpana Kochhar
International Monetary Fund
kkalpana@imf.org
Utsav Kumar
International Monetary Fund
ukumar@imf.org
Raghuram Rajan
International Monetary Fund
Research Department, Rm 10-700
700 19th Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20431
and NBER
rrajan@imf.org
Arvind Subramanian
International Monetary Fund
asubramanian@imf.org

Ioannis Tokatlidis
International Monetary Fund
itokatlidis@imf.org

-2-

I. INTRODUCTION
With an average of 13 million people expected to enter India’s labor force each year for the
next four decades, many have expressed concerns about the relatively jobless growth of the
last fifteen years (see, for example, Mehta, 2005). While China, the world’s manufacturing
powerhouse, appears to be absorbing surplus labor from agriculture into manufacturing, there
is growing concern that India has failed to match its neighbor in this process. To many,
India’s emergence as a world-class services hub offers scant comfort because of the
relatively limited prospects of such skill-based development for employment growth. In
addition, worries are mounting about the uneven distribution of opportunities across states
(the fast –growing peninsula versus the slow-moving hinterland), sectors (services versus
manufacturing or agriculture), and skill and education levels (call-centers versus cow-herds).
In particular, can India foster growth in labor-intensive manufacturing? If yes, how? If not,
how can jobs be provided for India’s vast, growing, pool of low-skilled labor? These are
some of the questions addressed in this paper.
To preview the answers, we argue that the nature of the policies India followed after
independence in 1947 created unique specializations prior to the economic reforms that
started in the 1980s. Relative to other comparable poor countries, India’s emphasis on
tertiary education, combined with a variety of policy distortions, may have channeled the
manufacturing sector into more skill-intensive industries. Furthermore, the government’s
desire to create capital goods production capability, especially through public-sector
involvement, implied that India had a greater presence in industries that required scale (and
capital) than other developing countries. Regulatory penalties and constraints on large private
enterprise implied, however, that within most industries, the average scale of enterprise was
relatively small. Finally, rigid labor laws as well as constraints on the scale of private
enterprises may well have limited India’s presence in labor intensive manufacture, the usual
specialization in a populous developing country. Given these idiosyncratic policies, India had
a far more diversified presence across manufacturing industries than the typical developing
country. Interestingly, it had a lower-than-normal presence in services in the early 1980s,
where the skill intensive segments such as telecommunications were still dominated by the
slow-moving public sector.
Recent trends reflect a continuation of some of the patterns that existed prior to the beginning
of economic reforms in the 1980s, especially in the continuing movement away from labor
intensive industries and towards skill intensive industries. The big change has been in
services, which have grown substantially, especially in skill intensive segments like
telecommunications (as the private sector has been allowed in) and other business services
(activities such as software and business process outsourcing that have benefited from the
opening of the economy), but also in finance-intensive segments like construction.
We then look ahead, using the growth of fast-moving Indian states as a crystal ball. Despite
economic reforms that have removed some of the policy impediments that sent India down
its idiosyncratic path, it appears unlikely that India will revert to the pattern followed by

-3-

other countries. There have been changes, no doubt in patterns of activity. But states are not
increasing their presence in labor intensive industries, as one might expect if there were a
reversion to the presumed typical pattern of growth for a poor country.
Instead, economic reforms combined with growing decentralization of policy-making appear
to have allowed states to use the capabilities built up over the period of heavy policy
intervention—in other words, freed them to grow at a pace consistent with their built-up skill
base and institutional, as well as infrastructural, capability. On the one hand, this freedom has
increased India’s overall growth rate. On the other, it has led to a considerable divergence
between states in growth and incomes and in the pattern of specialization. The fast-growing
peninsular states are starting to resembling industrial countries in their specialization, moving
towards skill-intensive services and manufacturing. But the areas where India has built
capabilities serve least well the populous, institution- and infrastructure-poor states of the
hinterland. Whether these states can develop appropriate growth strategies, and whether these
strategies will be impeded or helped by the growth of the more advanced states is a central
question for India’s economic future. We offer some conjectures, and discuss policy
implications.
The structure of the paper is as follows. We first examine India’s pattern of development
circa 1980 on the grounds that a snap shot at this point reflects the legacy of India’s unique
and much-commented upon development strategy: a curious combination of simultaneously
favoring and disfavoring domestic entrepreneurship with a rich overlay of arcane rules and
procedures. We then examine what happened between 1980 and 2001 to see how the shift in
policies from dirigisme to greater reliance on the market affected the pattern of development,
especially for fast-moving states. We then use this post-1980s experience as a basis to
speculate about the future.
II. INDIA CIRCA 1980
How should India’s development strategy since Independence in 1947 and until the early
1980s be characterized? Many excellent books and papers have been written about this, and
we refer the reader to them for details.1 A (perhaps overly) simplified view of the main
aspects, however, would include:
(i) A focus on self sufficiency to avoid dependence on imports, and hence excessive external
influence on domestic affairs. This view was understandable in a country emerging from
colonialism, and which saw itself as an exemplar for other developing countries. It translated
into an emphasis on rapid industrialization, especially the creation of domestic heavy

1

The canonical references are Bhagwati and Desai (1970), Bhagwati and Srinivasan (1993),
Joshi and Little (1994), and Krueger (1975).

-4-

industries—that is industries producing capital goods 2 In addition, the pattern of
industrialization focused on reducing dependence on foreign exchange through import
substitution. Trade restrictions were the inevitable side effect of these policies.
(ii) To ensure that investible resources were channeled to the “right” industries, and given
that India was capital-poor, Indian planners devised a combination of heavy public sector
involvement (with some industries—the “commanding heights”—being reserved only for the
public sector) and controlled private sector involvement.
(iii) Unlike many developing countries, independent India always allowed private sector
activity. But to be consistent with the planning strategy, there had to be ways to control the
private sector and this was done through investment licensing, import licensing, controls on
the use of foreign exchange, controls on credit allocation, and controls on prices. Also, the
threat always remained that the government would enter even those industries which were
not explicitly reserved for the public sector (the threat was realized in 1969 when Indira
Gandhi nationalized a number of private banks). In addition to maintaining coherence with
the planning framework, a separate reason to control the private sector was to avoid undue
concentration of economic power.
Additional mechanisms to enforce this objective included the Monopoly and Restrictive
Trade Practices act (MRTP)—which imposed severe constraints on expansion by large firms
and groups, and the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act (FERA).
(iv) In order to encourage labor intensive manufacture in the private sector, significant
benefits were given to small scale firms (these included tax concessions and holidays,
preferential access to credit, subsidized interest rates, and preferential treatment in
procurement by the government). In addition, some goods were exclusively reserved for
production by the small scale sector.3
(v) At the same time, however, significant protections for labor, especially in large firms,
were enacted. For example, an amendment to the Industrial Disputes Act (1947) in 1976
made it compulsory for firms with 300 or more workers to seek the permission of the
relevant government to dismiss workers. In 1982, the ceiling for seeking permission to
dismiss workers was lowered to 100 workers.

2

Recall that the most successful example of development around the time of India’s
independence was Soviet Russia, and many of independent India’s early leaders, including
Jawaharlal Nehru, were greatly influenced by it. P.C. Mahalanobis, the father of Indian
planning viewed the capacity to “make machines that make machines” as crucial to the
economy’s long-term rate of growth.
3

See Mohan (2002) for more details.

-5-

(vi) Also, for a variety of reasons (see Wiener (1990) for one view), for a poor country India
spent, and still spends, relatively far more resources on higher education than on primary
education. For example, India spent 86 percent of per capita GDP on each student in tertiary
education in 2000 while it spent 14 percent of per capita GDP per student in primary
education. By contrast, China spent 10.7 percent and 12.1 percent, respectively of per capita
GDP per student in tertiary and primary education. Put another way, India spent substantially
more in PPP adjusted dollars per student in tertiary education than China, and even Korea or
Indonesia in 2000.
So what was the legacy of this complex web of policies in terms of the pattern of
development? We turn to this in the next section and examine various aspects of this
pattern—sectoral shares of output and employment; factor-use; size; and diversification.
But before we do that, a caveat. Historically, India has been gifted with many clever theorists
and statisticians. Unfortunately, the quality of Indian data has not matched the quality of its
users (see, for example, Srinivasan (2003)). As a result, much extant work focuses on
deploring the quality of Indian data, and attempting to correct problems through careful
econometrics. Unfortunately again, this focus has also dampened the quantum of empirical
work, especially policy relevant empirical work. While acknowledging problems with the
data, we will not dwell on their inadequacies. Instead, we will attempt to tease out broad
patterns, and in a variety of ways, both of which might make the work less susceptible to
concerns about the data. That said, all findings are subject to the caveat that the data are what
they are.
A. Value Added Shares in 19814
Did 30 years of dirigisme post-independence distort manufacturing? This is the first question
we address. In Table 1, we present the share of output in the different sectors in India in 1981
and compare it with that in a number of developing and developed countries. At a little over
16 percent of GDP, India’s share in manufacturing seems low, especially when compared
with a number of East Asian countries and China. But from the work of Kuznets and
Chenery, we know that the manufacturing share varies with the level of development, rising
and then falling off once a country approaches a high level of income. So one way to check
whether India’s share of manufacturing is too low is to see if it is “too low” correcting for its
level of income, the square of the level of income (to correct for non-linearities), and also
size.5
4

That the data are what they are does not mean we ignore problems. For example, there are
aberrations in the Indian data for 1980 that do not appear in subsequent years. This is why we
use data from 1981.
5

Of course, other factors could also affect sectoral shares (see, for example, Chenery and
Taylor (1968)), but our intent here is primarily to see whether India is an outlier after
correcting for obvious factors, rather than to do an exhaustive study of the sectoral
(continued)

-6-

In Table 2, we report the results of cross-section regressions of a country’s sectoral share in
total output on these variables and an indicator for India. First, correcting only for the income
terms, India is a positive outlier among countries in its share of value added in manufacturing
in 1981 with its share significantly exceeding the norm by 4.6 percentage points (see Table 2,
column 1). However, after correcting for country size (proxied for by land area), the
coefficient on the India indicator declines to 2.3 percentage points in 1981 which is not
statistically significant (column 2).6 In what follows, when we refer to a coefficient without
qualification, it is to the estimate in the specification including country size.
If anything it is in services that India is an outlier in 1981 (columns 3 and 4), and a negative
one at that. India’s share of services in value added is significantly below that for other
countries in 1981 (about 3.6 percentage points lower after correcting for income and size,
column 4). Again, this seems surprising from today’s vantage point.
The robust take-away here is that India was not an outlier on manufacturing in 1981, given
its per capita GDP and size. The conventional wisdom that India under-performs in
manufacturing could either be because it underperformed over the next 20 years, or because
it is compared with China, which is a significant positive outlier in 1981 (the coefficient for
the China indicator is highly significant, with the coefficient suggesting that even after
controlling for income and size China’s manufacturing is an astonishing 29 percentage points
of GDP greater than that for the average country).7
B. Employment Shares in 1981 and Productivity8
When India’s share of industrial sector employment in total employment is compared with
other countries, India again does not seem to be an outlier (Table 2, columns 5 and 6). In the
composition of growth. We will report results for the largest sample of countries, though the
results are qualitatively similar unless specifically noted for a cross-section restricted to nonOECD countries.
6

The picture is slightly different when one looks at the share of value added in the industrial
sector—which includes manufacturing, mining, construction and core infrastructure
industries like electricity, water, and gas. We find that the coefficient on the India indicator is
negative 3 percentage points, although it is not statistically significant.
7

By contrast, China was a large negative outlier in services in 1981, with a share in GDP
about 15 percentage points less than for the typical country, controlling for income and size.

8

Comparable cross-country data on employment shares are not available separately for the
manufacturing sector, only for industry (manufacturing, mining, and core infrastructure
sectors), and services. Thus the analysis of employment shares is conducted for industry and
services.

-7-

case of services (columns 7 and 8), however, India seems to have a significant 7.5 percentage
point lower employment share than other countries, after controlling for income and size.
In estimates that are not reported, we find that India was a significant positive outlier with
respect to relative productivity in industry and services in the cross-section in 1981,
suggesting productivity in agriculture was low.
C. Use of factors: Labor intensity, skill intensity
What did the policies do in terms of industry specialization? The analysis below is limited to
the manufacturing sector where we have comparable cross country data from the UNIDO.
The first industry characteristic we examine is labor intensity, where the proxy for labor
intensity is the share of wages in value added for the industry in a country averaged across a
broad group of developing countries—examples of industries that score highest on labor
intensity are clothing, printing and publishing, and non-electrical machinery while those that
score lowest are beverages, tobacco, and petroleum refineries (Table 3).
We examine the pattern of output within manufacturing to see whether India had a bias in
1981 in favor of labor-intensive activities. We first divide industries into those that are above
the median and those below the median in terms of labor-intensity. Then, for each country,
we calculate the ratio of the total value added by above-median-labor-intensity industries to
the total value added by below-median-labor-intensity industries. If Indian manufacturing
generates relatively more value added in labor intensive industries, then in a cross-country
regression of this ratio against log per capita GDP, its square, and an indicator for India, the
India indicator should be positive and significant (see Table 4, Panel A, column 1).9
However, the coefficient is negative and insignificant. The coefficient on the India indicator
is moderately negative again when the dependent variable is the ratio of employment shares
(see Table 4, Panel B, column 1). When we regress the ratio of productivity in above median
labor intensive industries to below median industries in 1981 against income and size, we
find that the India indicator is positive and significant (Table 4, Panel C, column 1).10
Let us now turn to skill intensity.11 To characterize the skill-intensity of a sector, we use data
from the input-output matrix for South Africa, which contains data on 45 sectors and 5
primary factors of production—capital plus four categories of labor: highly skilled, skilled,
unskilled, and informal sector (see Alleyne and Subramanian, 2001). As a proxy for the skill
9

Including country size in the regression does not change the results.

10

In a number of places in this paper, we use the median to divide industries. As a robustness
check, we also grouped them into the top and bottom third, excluding the middle third to
avoid possible misclassification of industries. Our results remained qualitatively unchanged
using this alternative classification.
11

We are grateful to Aaditya Mattoo for suggesting the idea of exploring skill intensity.

-8-

intensity of an industry we use the share of remuneration of the highly skilled and skilled
categories of workers in total value added.12 The categorization of industries according to
skill is in Table 3. The most skill intensive industries are printing, other chemicals, and
professional and scientific equipment. The least skill intensive include textiles, leather,
footwear, and wood products. The correlation between an industry’s labor intensity and its
skill intensity is positive but small and not statistically significant, suggesting they capture
different things.
For each country, we calculate the ratio of the total value added by above-median-skillintensity manufacturing industries to the total value added by below-median-skill-intensity
industries, and regress that against income, its square, and size. It is striking that even by
1981, India was specializing in skill-intensive industries: in Table 4, column 2 in Panels A
and B, the India indicator both in terms of output and employment shares is positive and
highly significant. India was thus more specialized in skill-intensive products than other
countries with similar levels of income and size. Also, relative labor productivity in skilled
industries is higher in India (Panel C, column 2).
D. Industry scale
We now establish two facts about the “scale” of Indian enterprise. First, manufacturing was
unusually concentrated in industries that typically require large scale. Second, however,
within industries, the array of policies that targeted size appear to have had their intended
effect, with Indian firms unusually small relative to firms in the same industry in other
countries.
We measure size in two different ways—as value added per establishment and as
employment per establishment. It is plausible that the optimal scale of establishments could
vary across industries – for example, an integrated steel plant is much larger than a tannery.
The average size of establishments in an industry, averaged across countries, could be a
proxy for optimal scale. However, at least two factors may affect this. First, to the extent that
the size of the domestic market matters, a larger country would be associated with larger
establishments (see the evidence in Kumar, Rajan, and Zingales (2000), for example).
Second, the coverage of manufacturing data can vary across countries, with the smallest
firms being covered in some countries and not in others.

12

The choice of South Africa was dictated primarily by data availability, although we have
checked the robustness of our results to alternative definitions of skill intensity, including
restricting the definition to the highly skilled category and defining skill intensity in terms of
share of remuneration in output rather than value added. We also checked the correlation of
our measures of skill intensity with that compiled for the U.S. by Rajan and Wulf (2004). It
is 0.66, for the highly skilled category, and 0.5 when skill intensity includes highly skilled
and skilled workers.

-9-

For these reasons, we cannot simply take the average of the value added per establishment
(or employees per establishment) in an industry across countries to get a measure of scale for
the industry.13 Instead, we focus on relative size, that is, we find the relative size of
establishments in an industry in a country by dividing the value added (or employment ) per
establishment in the industry by the value added (or employment) per establishment in the
country. It is this relative size that we average across countries for each industry to find a
measure of the scale of establishments in that industry.
The industries with the largest scale across countries are petroleum refineries, tobacco, and
iron and steel, while that with the smallest scale is furniture (Table 3). The ranking of
industries differs only marginally across our two measures of establishment size, so we will
use the measure based on value added per establishment. The results do not differ
qualitatively if we use the other measure.
We find that the ratio of value added in above-median scale industries to that below is
significantly higher in India (Table 4, Panel A, column 3). Interestingly, relative employment
shares in above-median scale industries is also significantly higher in India relative to other
countries (see Panel B, column 3). As a result relative productivity is somewhat lower for
above-median-scale industries in India, but not significantly so (Panel C, column 3).
The correlation between scale and labor intensity is strongly negative and significant (-0.59)
while the correlation between scale and skill intensity is small (-0.01) and insignificant (see
Table 3). This suggests that our measure of scale proxies for capital intensity, which in turn
offers an explanation for why production is concentrated in the large-scale sectors in India;
Indian planners laid emphasis on building capital intensive, large scale, heavy industries
because of their belief that “machines that made machines” would boost savings and hence
long-run growth. They also commandeered these sectors for the public sector, and many of
the impediments to scale that were faced by the private sector simply did not apply to the
public sector. Moreover, employment was an implicit objective in the public sector. As a
result, a capital scarce country was overrepresented, both in terms of value added and
employment, in the capital intensive/large scale segments of industry.
The real impact of the discriminatory policy regime against private sector scale (industrial
licensing, reservation and other incentives for small scale sectors, and the MRTP Act) may
then have been felt within industry rather than between industries. With the caveats about
cross-country comparisons of establishment size noted above, and some attempt at correcting
for them, we find that the average size of firms in India is substantially below that in other
countries—this is true in the aggregate and in almost every industry. In Chart 1, we contrast
the average firm size in India with the average firm size in 10 emerging market countries for
13

We would be mixing industries represented in large countries or countries with extensive
coverage with industries represented in small countries or countries with little coverage,
reducing comparability.

- 10 -

manufacturing as a whole and for the nine largest industries in India.14 The contrast is
striking: for example, the average firm size in manufacturing in India is about US$300,000
per firm whereas it is about US$4 million in the comparator countries—a multiple exceeding
10. Parenthetically, note that in the chart, the pattern of size across industries in India
matches the pattern in comparator countries (with, for example, Iron and Steel or Industrial
Chemicals being large and Food Products small), albeit at a much lower level, verifying that
relative size is a distinctive characteristic of an industry that holds across countries.
Some of the regulations, especially those pertaining to labor, applied only to registered firms
that exceeded a certain size. So the effects of the regulatory regime should be seen on another
margin – we should see relatively more activity in labor intensive industries done by
unregistered firms. Using data from unregistered manufacturing, we find the ratio of value
added in above-median labor intensive industries to that in below median labor intensive
industries in unregistered manufacturing (obtained from the Central Statistical Organization)
is significantly higher (by about 2 times in 1980) than in registered manufacturing.15 By
contrast, labor laws were less applicable to non-unionized, highly skilled workers—for
example, to professionals. So we should find the ratio of value added in above-median skill
intensive industries to that in below median skill intensive industries in unregistered
manufacturing is not significantly higher than in registered manufacturing. It is not—quite
the opposite, the ratio of above-to below-median skill intensive industries in the unregistered
sector is about ¼ of that in the registered sector.16
E. Diversification
Before we discuss these findings, let us add one more fact, which follows from the facts on
labor-intensity, skill and size. Imbs and Wacziarg (2003) show that in the course of
development, countries first diversify within manufacturing, producing many things, and
14

In presenting this stylized fact, we attempt to avoid possible biases. We first compared
manufacturing output from UNIDO and the World Bank’s World Development Indicators.
The UNIDO database only covers the registered manufacturing sector in India, defined as
firms not using power and employing 20 or more people, or firms using power and
employing 10 or more people. Hence the UNIDO data are biased toward larger firms in
India. The UNIDO data covers about 60 percent of the data reported in the WDI. For the
purposes of comparison with other countries, we eliminated countries where the UNIDO data
had a lower share of total value added in manufacturing than in India. This would bias our
test towards finding that India had relatively larger firms.
15

Recall that what we have reported thus far are figures from registered manufacturing using
UNIDO data.
16

The fact that the ratio is so much lower in the unregistered sector suggests that skillintensive sectors might require a larger scale of operation for technological reasons.

- 11 -

then after a certain level of income, start specializing, producing fewer things. Technically,
the relationship between the concentration of value added across industries (the Gini
coefficient or the Herfindahl index), and income is U-shaped, with the turning point
occurring at about US$10,000 per capita.
Given that India has a more skill-based and scale-based (typically more capital-intensive)
pattern of production, the presumption would be that it has specialized in more areas than the
typical developing country, and hence it should exhibit a more diverse pattern of production.
When we examine the concentration of Indian industry compared to the average country
pattern, we find that India is significantly less concentrated (or more diversified), not just in
terms of the distribution of value-added across industries, but also when concentration is
measured in terms of employment (Panels A and B, column 4 in table 4). The coefficient on
the India indicator when the dependent variable is the concentration of value-added is -0.07,
and it is -0.06 when the dependent variable is the concentration of employment. In other
words, India has an output and employment profile across industries that is approximately
one standard deviation less concentrated than that for the average country, suggesting a
broader array of skills/capabilities in the labor force.
The contrast with China is interesting. At first blush, China’s index which is close to that for
India would suggest that China too is an outlier in terms of diversification. It turns out,
however, that after controlling for size, China is not unusually diversified in the cross-section
whereas India is.
F. The effects of pre-1980s policies: Summary and Discussion
To summarize, compared with countries at a similar level of development and size, in 1981
India had approximately the normal share of output and employment in manufacturing.
Output in services was below the norm, as was employment in services. Manufacturing
output and employment appeared to be above the norm in industries that typically are skill
intensive or have larger establishments. Average establishment size was substantially smaller
than in comparable countries. And finally, Indian manufacturing was significantly more
diversified both in terms of output and employment than countries of comparable income and
size.
One seemingly anomalous finding captures the strange pattern of India’s development. This
relates to the high relative labor productivity observed in the labor-intensive sectors in India,
which raises the question of why this did not, for example, translate into exports of laborintensive goods. We offer three possible explanations. First, the high relative labor
productivity could simply be the converse of the low labor productivity in the large-scale
capital-intensive industries, the latter itself a result of the fact that these were dominated by
state owned firms where over-staffing was a common phenomenon and even an objective.
Second, the stringent labor laws that make it hard to lay off labor and the consequent
hesitancy to hire (and to drive down marginal labor productivity to the value maximizing
level) could also explain why productivity is moderately higher in labor intensive industries.
Third, the discrimination against size that we have noted above may well have limited the

- 12 -

labor-intensive sector’s incentive and ability to exploit economies of scale and generate large
volumes of exports.
The paradox of Indian manufacturing in the early 1980s is thus that of a labor-rich, capitalpoor economy using too little of the former, and using the latter very inefficiently.17 The
reason, simply put, was perverse policy. Unlike the East Asian economies, which drew
employment from agriculture into manufacturing at a rapid pace, India did not.
The one area where Indian manufacturing appears to have thrived is in the industries using
highly skilled labor. The far greater investment in tertiary education for a country of its percapita income—of which the Indian Institutes of Technology and the Indian Institutes of
Management are just the best-known examples—resulted in the plentiful availability of
highly skilled, cheap, labor. This then enabled India to generate relatively greater value
added and employment in skill-intensive industries as compared to the typical poor country.
As far as services were concerned, India was a significant negative outlier in 1981. In part,
this may have been because the slow-moving public sector again dominated areas like
telecommunications and business services where India’s advantage in skills (as evidenced by
the pattern of specialization in manufacturing) might have been used. By contrast, sectors
like retail and construction were left to the private sector, where the limited access to finance
(both for the service provider and the customer) kept businesses small and growth limited.
Finally, the greater diversification of Indian manufacturing could be explained as a
consequence of all the policy distortions. The import substitution strategy, the skewed pattern
of education, as well as the encouragement given to the public sector to invest in areas that
are typically not a poor country’s comparative advantage, may well have driven India into
industries that other countries at comparable income levels shy away from.
In this cloud of distortion may well have resided a silver lining—in creating capabilities that
did not exist in the typical poor country, India may have created potential sources of growth
that would allow it to follow a different growth path from other countries as policy
distortions were removed. Put another way, unique distortions may well have created unique
sources of comparative advantage that allowed India to follow a different path. It is that path
that we now explore.
17

It may well be, of course, that India’s labor intensive production was concentrated in the
unregistered sector, for which we do not have comparable data from other countries. To the
extent that firms in the unregistered sector have inefficiently small scale, total production
would still be smaller and less competitive than it could be without the spectrum of
regulations. Also, unregistered labor intensive production has been falling considerably over
time, suggesting that this explanation for India’s lack of concentration in labor intensive
manufacturing is less applicable today.

- 13 -

III. HOW HAS INDIA CHANGED SINCE THE

EARLY 1980S?

A. Policy Changes Since the 1980s
A number of observers (see, for example, Kohli (2005), Rodrik and Subramanian (2005),
Virmani (2005)) have noted the pro-business tilt of the Indian economy beginning in the
early 1980s, away from controls and repression of the domestic private sector. The pace of
reforms accelerated in the early 1990s, in the wake of the external crisis.
The reforms have been attributed to various causes ranging from a realization that the
panoply of controls were self-defeating, to a realization by the Congress Party that given the
growing challenges to its power, it had to woo business (see Kohli (2005)).
The key features of reforms in the 1980s were (i) import liberalization—especially of capital
goods and intermediate inputs—primarily through the expansion of the range and number of
goods on the open general licensing list and through a reduction in canalization; (ii) the
extension of export incentives through the tax system, and more liberal access to credit and
foreign exchange; (iii) the significant relaxation of industrial licensing requirements through
direct “delicensing” of some industries and through “broad banding” which permitted firms
in some industries to switch production between similar product lines; (iv) decontrol of
administered prices of key intermediate inputs. Kohli (2005) and Rodrik and Subramanian
(2005) characterize the reforms of the 1980s as having been “pro-business” in orientation.
The reforms of the 1990s—which some have distinguished from the reforms of the 1980s as
having been “pro-market” in orientation—included (i) the abolition of industrial licensing
and the narrowing of the scope of public sector monopolies to a much smaller number of
industries; (ii) the liberalization of inward foreign direct and portfolio investment; (iii)
sweeping trade liberalization including the elimination of import licensing and the
progressive reduction of nontariff barriers; (iv) major financial sector liberalization,
including the removal of controls on capital issues, freer entry for domestic, and foreign,
private banks and the opening up of the insurance sector; (v) and liberalization of investment
and trade in important services, such as telecommunications. Areas that remained largely
untouched by reforms in the 1990s were the labor market; small scale reservations (where
there has been some movement only in the last 4-5 years); privatization both of nonfinancial
enterprises and of banks; and further agricultural sector reforms.
The reforms are reflected in the sharp acceleration in all underlying measures of growth: for
example, the annual average rate of growth of GDP per worker increased from 0.7 percent in
the 1970s to 3.9 and 3.3 percent, respectively in the 1980s and 1990s, while TFP growth
increased from -0.5 percent to 2.5 and 1.6 percent over the same time. (Ahluwalia, 1991 and
1995, Unel, 2003). That there was a decisive break in India’s growth pattern is documented
in De Long (2003), Rodrik and Subramanian (2005), and Williamson and Zagha (2002).
How have these twenty years of reform, slow and sluggish yet consistent, affected the pattern
of development, if at all? We first look at the evolution in the variables discussed above—

- 14 -

sectoral shares, factor intensities, size and diversification, between the early 1980s and early
2000s. Our prior was that given the distinct turn towards business and markets and away
from controls, any anomalies in the pattern of development or in their underlying trend
should have been corrected or at least arrested. The data, as we will see, did not support this
prior.
B. Manufacturing versus services in the cross-section
The traditional view proposed by Kuznets and Chenery would suggest a rapid increase in the
share of manufacturing with a decline in agriculture and an uncertain or modest effect on
services. However, between 1980 and 2002, India’s share of services in value added went up
from 37 percent to 49 percent, while its share of manufacturing in value added remained
broadly unchanged at 16 percent, with the decline in agriculture mirroring the performance of
services.18 The corresponding numbers for employment were 19 percent to 22 percent and 14
percent to 18 percent.
Is this evolution in sectoral shares unusual when compared with other countries? We can
check this in a number of ways. We can re-do the analysis that we did for 1980 for the latest
period, 2002 (i.e. running cross-country level regressions). We can also see if the change in
share of a country’s activity in manufacturing or services is unusual after controlling for per
capita income and the overall growth rate. We report the results of these exercises in Table 5.
We find manufacturing over this time period tended to perform less well than in other
countries after controlling for the other variables but not significantly so.19 In the regressions
using the change in the share of manufacturing value-added to overall growth (column 1,
Panel B), the India indicator is negative. Similarly, in the level regressions for 2000 (column
1, panel A), the coefficient of the India indicator is smaller than in the corresponding
specification for 1981. Thus, a pattern of a relative slowing in manufacturing growth is
suggested by the data, ironically when reforms were removing the shackles on
manufacturing.
Of course, what is indisputable is the performance of services over this period. India has been
unusual in this regard. For example, in the 2000 level regressions, the India indicator is
positive and significant (Table 5, panel A, column 4): the coefficient suggests that India’s
share is significantly higher (3.8 percentage points) than in other countries. This is broadly
18

This development appears to contradict the Kuznets-Chenery hypothesis. Kongsamut,
Rebelo, and Xie (2001), however, argue based on an analysis of 123 countries over the
period 1970-89 that the share of services rises more with development than anticipated in the
Kuznets-Chenery view.
19
However, we find that industry (that is, manufacturing, mining and core infrastructure
industries) was a significant negative outlier in 2000, possibly related to the much worse than
average performance of India’s infrastructure sector.

- 15 -

confirmed in the change regressions, with the India indicator significant and the coefficient
suggesting that India posted an increase in the size of the services sector that was 10
percentage points of GDP greater than for the average country, after controlling for the level
of income and growth. .
Finally, India is again a negative outlier in terms of the employment share in services, falling
below other countries by a huge 17 percentage points in 2000. Gordon and Gupta (2004) note
that unlike other countries, India’s labor’s share in services employment has been flat rather
than growing with income. To generate the huge increase in value added in services without
a commensurate increase in employment, labor productivity must have gone up tremendously
in services.20 We will shortly explore why.
In sum then, Indian manufacturing showed signs over the post-1980s period of not keeping
up with the average performance in other, similar, countries. The services sector has indeed
boomed, but the share of employment in services is significantly below that of countries with
similar size and similar per capita income. Let us now delve deeper into the details of India’s
growth to understand what might explain these trends.
C. Labor and skill intensity in the cross-section
Recall that around 1980 India specialized in skill- intensive industries and in industries where
establishments were relatively large in scale. India did not produce an unusually high share
of labor-intensive products. What happened to this pattern after the 1980s?
In Chart 2, we plot the evolution in the share of output generated in labor-intensive relative to
non labor-intensive products for India and a selected group of comparator countries. India’s
share is declining, whereas that of many of the others is either increasing, or decreasing but at
much higher levels of income. Note that China’s share is also declining but from much
higher initial levels. Chart 3 supports this view as it shows that the relative share of output
generated in large scale (typically, capital-intensive) industries has been rising sharply in
India.
In Chart 4, we plot the evolution in the relative share of output generated in skill-intensive
industries for India and a selected group of comparator countries. Again, it is striking that
India’s share in skill intensive manufacturing, which was already high in 1980 despite its
lower level of per capita income, has been increasing and is at levels reached by Malaysia or
Korea at much higher levels of per-capita income. There is also a striking contrast with
China. China’s share of output in skill intensive industries is lower than India’s and has been
20

Gordon and Gupta (2004) argue that the increase in labor productivity in India is not
because of an increase in capital intensity. Instead, they argue it is because there has been
greater emphasis in India on skill intensive services.

- 16 -

virtually flat whereas India’s level has been higher and rising. The move toward skillintensive goods is also reflected in India’s exports: the share of exports in skill-intensive
goods has risen sharply from about 25 percent in 1970 to about 65 percent in 2004. It is
worth noting that these developments are not affected by the fact that our data so far have
been limited to the registered manufacturing sector in India. Indeed, when we trace the
evolution of labor- and skill-intensive products in the informal sector, we see the same
pattern (Chart 5).
These developments are more formally captured in the regressions reported in Table 6 for
2000. They show that India is not an outlier in terms of the share of manufacturing output or
employment generated in labor intensive industries, but continues to be strongly so for the
share of value added and employment in skill-intensive industries and large scale industries:
the coefficient on the India indicator remains broadly unchanged between 1981 and 2000.
In terms of productivity too, skill-intensive industries stand out while the relative
productivity of large scale industries has declined further. Relative labor productivity in labor
intensive industries has remained approximately similar to 1981 (Tables 4 and 6, Panel C).
In other words, the evidence suggests that many of the unique features of India’s
development that were apparent in 1981 have not changed, despite reforms. The evolution in
diversification since the unleashing of liberalization in 1980 also supports this interpretation.
In the cross-section we find that India continues to be an outlier in 2000 on both measures of
diversification: indeed, when we compare the change in diversification between 1980 and
2000, we find that India is again an outlier, suggesting that the pace of diversification in India
after 1980 has been greater than that for the average country (see Charts 6 and 7).
Part of the explanation for this continuity of trends may be that the reforms have not been
completed—for example, labor markets remain untouched and education expenditure is still
skewed. But part of the explanation may be that there is hysteresis in growth paths, perhaps
as a result of the acquisition of organizational capabilities and specific human capital. So the
specializations induced by distortions may indeed be accentuated as reforms progress, rather
than reversed. Some evidence of this possibility comes from examining the growth of the
Indian states.
IV. THE STATES’ STORY
A. Manufacturing versus services at the level of the states
The aggregate developments (i.e. for India in the cross-section) are mirrored at the
development of the states. In Chart 8, we plot the change in share of manufacturing between
1980 and 2000 at the level of the Indian states against their aggregate growth. Interestingly,
the relationship is flat. Looking at the fast growing states, we see that a number of them—
Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Delhi, Maharashtra, and Karnataka—have seen no change or a
negative change in the share of manufacturing despite rapid growth rates.

- 17 -

The performance of the labor-intensive industries in the cross-section is again reflected at the
level of the states. Chart 9 suggests there is no relationship between states’ growth and the
change in the relative share of labor-intensive industries.21 A number of fast-growing
states—Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat and Maharashtra—witnessed a decline in the share of laborintensive industries, but so did a number of slow moving states like Madhya Pradesh and
Uttar Pradesh.
In sum, either the fast growing states have seen constancy or decline in their share of
manufacturing, or where they has been an increase—Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, and
Haryana—it has occurred in capital and skill-intensive industries (in the case of Gujarat,
there has been a huge decline in the textiles industry with a corresponding increase in the
petrochemical industry; similarly, Andhra Pradesh saw a decline in the share of food.
beverages, tobacco, textiles, and paper related industries and a large increase in the basic
metals and alloys industries).
Similarly, the reason that India is such a positive outlier in the cross-section in terms of the
share of services is that nearly all states in India—regardless of their growth performance—
have seen a uniform shift toward services (see Chart 10 where the increase in share of all
states in services is uniformly high, with the fastest growing states having the highest
increase in share).
While services in the aggregate have grown in all states, there seems to have been a
noteworthy difference between services that are predominantly in the public sector and those
that are in the private sector. In Chart 11, we plot the change in share of services that are
predominantly performed by the public sector (such as electricity, public administration,
railways, and other community services) against average annual state growth, and find a
negative correlation. By contrast, Chart 12 suggests that the increase in the share of services
that are predominantly in the private sector (such as business services (including software),
real estate, and retail trade) is strongly positively correlated with state growth.22 In short, the
share of public sector services including administration is growing in the laggard states,
while the share of private sector services is growing in the fast-moving states.
The important conclusion that emerges therefore from analyzing the performance of the
Indian states is that since 1980, despite the liberalization policies, India is actually veering
further away from labor intensive industries. Furthermore, there is no clear pattern of
21

For the analysis at the level of the states, we use the inverse of labor productivity (at the
All-India level) to rank industries by labor-intensity.
22

Acharya (2002) has argued that services sector growth is artificially inflated by the large
wage increase awarded to public sector employees in 1998 by the Fifth Pay Commission.
Our findings suggest service growth in the fast moving states has been outside the public
sector.

- 18 -

movement amongst fast growing states towards these industries—instead, they seem to be
moving into skill intensive services.
B. Diversification
Let us now turn to diversification. Chart 13 suggests that there is little relationship between a
state’s growth in the period 1980-2000 and the increase in its concentration, though if
anything, it is mildly positive. The majority of states, however, continue to become more
diversified (that is, the change in their Herfindahl index is negative).
Recall that Imbs and Wacziarg (2003) find that the relationship between diversification and
income turns negative beyond a threshold level of income. This may well be what has been
happening in India – while states in general continue to become more diversified, a number
of fast-growing states—Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, West Bengal, Delhi and Maharashtra—saw
stagnation or declines in their share of manufacturing and a sharp rise in the share of
services. These states have also been those that have seen no significant increase in
diversification (Chart 13). In other words, some of the richer states have started to behave
like rich countries in starting to specialize in manufacturing even as, or because, they are
doing less manufacturing and more services. But these states are becoming less diversified
not because they are reverting to the pattern followed by less developed, labor-abundant
countries (hence moving left and up the quadratic relationship documented by Imbs and
Wacziarg (2003)) but more likely because they are behaving more like advanced skill
intensive countries (hence moving right and up the quadratic relationship).
V. UNDERSTANDING POST-1980 PERFORMANCE
We have argued that some of the degree to which India was diversified in the past was a
result of past policies. One might expect that as controls came off, some of this
diversification would be reversed. Yet instead of reverting to labor intensive manufacturing
growth—the specialization undertaken by many Asian countries at India’s stage of
development—India and its fast growing states appear to be skipping a stage – specializing in
skill intensive and large scale industries, and services. We will show that the performance of
the fastest moving states seems to be driven both by the capabilities they possessed at the
dawn of liberalization and the business environment they created. What is indisputable is
liberalization allowed states to stretch to achieve their potential, instead of being held down
by a centralized “convoy” system that forced each state to move at a common but mediocre
growth rate.
A. Pre-existing capabilities
Economic development results from the interaction of growth opportunities with the right
fundamentals (the pre-existing capabilities) that allow these opportunities to be exploited. In
the conventional view of the Indian development process, there was a long and dark period—
the period of controls and import substitution—followed by a burst of sunlight and reforms
since 1991. The boom in the IT-industry first awakened observers to the fact that the dark

- 19 -

age was not all dark, that important cumulative capabilities were being built that yielded
rewards with a lag, and that these capabilities were as important as the (largely external)
opportunities that sparked the IT boom. In the case of India, one key capability was
institutions: democracy, rule of law, free press, universities, and technocratic bureaucracy
that recent research shows are crucial to economic development. Another key capability that
has been extensively remarked upon in the context of the IT boom is the pool of skilled
human capital, built through the technology, management, and research institutes, as well as
through the public sector, a kind of import substitution effort in skilled human capital
development, which was integral to the Nehruvian vision.
One proxy for this latter capability could be the extent to which states were diversified across
manufacturing. There are two arguments why the extent of diversification may capture state
level capabilities. One simply is that those states that had a vibrant and entrepreneurial
private sector should have diversified the most in response to the pre-1980 distortions (for
example, into areas that were not dominated by the public sector). Thus the extent of
diversification in the early 1980s captures the vibrancy of entrepreneurship in the state.
Another is to see the diversification as driven by a broader set of forces than only the private
sector, and including the public sector. In this view, India’s pre-1980s development strategy,
which led to unusually (compared with other countries) large diversification also created
within India a pattern of capability in the different states that played a key role in economic
performance when the constraints placed on the states were lifted in the post-1980s period.23
For instance, engineers who originally were employed by the state-owned Computer
Maintenance Corporation or Electronic Corporation of India Ltd (ECIL) provided the
backbone for many of the computer firms that started up in Bangalore. Similarly, many of the
key players in the explosive growth of the financial sector in Mumbai were alumni of the
State Bank of India; Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL) was a substantial supplier of
managerial talent for many private sector firms; even the much-derided Indian Airlines plied
the private sector with highly qualified pilots.
Both arguments suggest that the degree of diversification in the early 1980s proxies for some
capability that led to the stronger growth of diversified states, they differ only insofar as
whether the capability was latent (that is, diversification simply proxies for the state’s private
sector entrepreneurial zeal), or created through diversification itself.
Whatever the source of this capability, did it matter for growth? Chart 14 sheds light on this
question. In the chart, we plot the Herfindahl coefficient of concentration within
23

This is consistent with the findings in Aghion et. al. (2005) who show that states that were
closest to the technological frontier were the ones that benefited most from the reforms of the
early 1990s. It is also consistent with Rodrik and Subramanian (2005) who show that states
with the greatest manufacturing capability pre-1980s were the ones that benefited most post1980s.

- 20 -

manufacturing in the different states in the early 1980s against the subsequent overall growth
rates. The chart shows a very strong correlation between the initial level of diversification of
manufacturing in a state and the state’s subsequent economic performance.
Using state-level data for the period 1960-2000 compiled and recently released by the
Economic and Political Weekly Research Foundation, we put the correlation observed in
Chart 14 on firmer ground. We create a panel dataset with variables defined for four
decades—1960s, 1970s, 1980s and 1990s. We run standard growth regressions with a
measure of each state’s economic performance in each decade as the left hand side variable.
The inclusion of state fixed effects makes the specification very general. Since we are
interested in the differential effect of manufacturing concentration across decades, we
interact the explanatory variables with the appropriate decadal dummies. In the first five
columns of Table 7, the left hand side variable is measured over decades, while in the last
five it is an average over 20 years. In all cases, we find that the initial level of concentration
in manufacturing is strongly negatively correlated with subsequent economic performance
especially in 1990 but not in 1980 or the decades prior to the onset of reforms. This suggests
the capability proxied for by diversification came into its own when the shackles on state
growth were removed, but did not matter before.
In columns 5-6 and 11-12 of Table 7, the coefficient on diversification interacted with the
1990s dummy is significant even after controlling for the quality of the institutions in the
states (columns 5 and 11) and for literacy levels (columns 6 and 12). Thus, the diversification
measure is picking up something beyond these attributes of states.
Of course, an immediate question is whether fast-growing states simply continued doing
what they were doing, only with more resources – in other words, were the capabilities
specific to the industries that existed in the state? We determine the correlations, state by
state, of the value added in each industry in 1980 with the value added in 1997. If fast
moving states were simply doing what they did before, the correlation should be strongest for
those states. In fact, as Chart 15 suggests, the faster-growing states show lower correlation, or
greater churning, across time. This is one piece of evidence that the capabilities that
diversification proxies for were general.
A second piece of evidence is in Chart 16, which shows that initial diversification in
manufacturing is also strongly correlated with subsequent growth in services, suggesting that
the capabilities had broader uses and were not just confined to manufacturing.
In sum, regardless of how the capabilities came about, they helped foster state growth,
especially when the economy started liberalizing.
B. Decentralization
While the formal reforms at the center received tremendous publicity, perhaps less noticed
was the growing decentralization of policy. The Congress party had held power without a
break at the center since independence, but the aura of invincibility surrounding it started

- 21 -

waning soon after Indira Gandhi lost the post-Emergency election in 1977. Also, even though
the Congress party was returned to power at the center through much of the 1980s, a number
of states were captured by the opposition, often regional or even single-state parties.
No longer could a regional leader be confident that the center—where the party in power
might be different from that running the state—would dole out its bounty fairly across states,
and over time. Also, the parties in power could change, so that implicit agreements reached
by prior governments might not be honored by subsequent governments. Simply put, the
centrifugal forces created by the dispersion of political power in India did not sit well with
the enormous centralization of economic power, and the inter-state cross-subsidies the center
effected through its investment strategy. Something had to give, and it was the latter. This
trend is summarized by Echeverri-Gent (2001) as follows: “The rise of single-state parties
has contributed to important changes in national politics. It is an important factor in the
declining salience of national issues and the growing importance of state-level issues in
coalitional strategies.”
But this change was about more than the identity and ideology of political actors: it was
fundamentally about greater devolution in political and economic power toward the states.
Greater political decentralization meant greater decision-making at the level of the states,
including on economic issues, not least the ability to attract private sector investment. This
was, of course, facilitated by the gradual dismantling of the industrial licensing system that
used regional equity as one of the primary criterion guiding industrial investments.
The rising trend in private investment, as well as the falling trend in public investment, over
this period (Chart 17) would have contributed to differentiating outcomes between states,
with private investment more sensitive to differences in policies across states.
We now turn to show that decentralization was a key dynamic that affected post-1980s
growth performance. Of course, a simple clue to evaluating whether the decentralization
dynamic at work is to look at comparative growth performance across states. In Table 8,
column 1, we regress state growth against beginning-of-period per capita GDP interacted
with decadal dummies. Since there are no other covariates, this specification addresses the
question of unconditional convergence. In columns 2-4, we add time and state fixed effects to
answer the question of whether there is conditional convergence. In column 2, the ordinary
least squares estimator is used, while the estimation in columns 3 and 4 are based on the
system GMM procedure.24 For our purposes, the important point is not whether there is
convergence or divergence on average (which seems to depend on the procedure used) but
that regardless of estimation procedure, divergences accelerated in the 1990s remains
unchanged (see also Aiyar, 2001). The coefficients on the income term interacted with an
indicator for the 1990s is positive and significant. And the coefficient on the 1990s term is
always greater than that for the previous periods.
24

The ordinary least squares estimation is inconsistent in the presence of a lagged dependent
variable and fixed effects, and the GMM procedures do not suffer from this shortcoming.

- 22 -

We can test the decentralization dynamic in yet another way: if decentralization was indeed
important, then states’ economic performance should be more closely tied to state-level
policies and institutions in the post-1980s period than before. After all, if the pre-1980s era
was about the center deciding where industrial investments should be located, for example,
where and how much electricity capacity to install, there is little that the states could have
done to affect economic performance within their borders.
In terms of analysis, this suggests that running state level growth regressions with state level
variables on the right hand side variables should be more meaningful for the post-1980s
period than before. We focus on state-level infrastructure and institutions and their impact on
state-level performance. If the state-level business environment were indeed an important
determinant, we could hope to pick up its effects in two kinds of regressions. In the first, we
use the Rajan-Zingales (1998) methodology to ascertain the impact of infrastructure: in
particular, if infrastructure were important, it should be the case that in states that have better
infrastructure, industries that are more infrastructure-intensive should grow faster. Moreover,
to the extent that differences became more pronounced in the 1990s when state policies
started mattering as a result of growing decentralization, we should see the effects most
pronounced in the 1990s.
To estimate these regressions, we need industry growth by states. For the 1980s and 1990s,
we have 2-digit industry level manufacturing data from the EPW Foundation.
Next, we need a measure of state-level infrastructure development and policy. Such measures
of infrastructure development could include electricity generation capacity per capita or the
extent of road and rail networks. There are three problems with these measures. First, they
were largely central government determined, often a legacy of the pre-reform era. Second,
capacity creation could have been related to prospects of growth. Third, infrastructure
capacity could be quite different from infrastructure quality.
Instead, as a joint measure of infrastructure capability as well as state policies affecting the
quality of infrastructure and the business environment, we use the transmission and
distribution losses (T&D losses) of state level electricity boards (as a fraction of generating
capacity). Transmission and distribution losses refer to power that is generated but not paid
for—in part because some of it is lost along power lines naturally in the process of
transmission and distribution, but in greater part because it is stolen. In areas where T&D
losses are high, the quality of power, as reflected in the voltage as well as reliability, is low.
Thus T&D losses are not directly related to capacity, but are determined by state level
political decisions. They reflect the quality of both infrastructure and institutions (politicians
turning a blind eye to power theft by their constituencies, or politicians unwillingness to
enforce laws, as well as viability and level of corruption in state electricity boards).
We construct infrastructure intensity measures for particular industries from the India inputoutput tables. Specifically, we construct a measure of the amount of electricity used per unit
of value added of each industry.

- 23 -

In Panel A of Table 9, we report regressions in which the growth rate of industry i in state s
is regressed on industry and state fixed effects and interactions between our infrastructure
development and infrastructure intensity measures. In column 1 we present the results for the
1980s and in column 2 for 1990s;25 We find that the coefficient on the interaction is negative
and significant for the 1990s but not for the 1980s. That is, for the 1990s, we find that in
states that have more T&D losses (worse infrastructure and institutions), industries that are
intensive in the use of electricity grow slower. These results suggest that decentralization is
affecting the growth dynamic because a state level policy variable has started influencing a
state-level outcome.
More generally, state level institutions do appear to have had a greater impact on state
growth, not just on infrastructure intensive industries. As Chart 18 shows, there is a negative
correlation between the average T&D losses in 1980-2000 in a state and its growth during
that period.
In order to explore this further, we turn to whether state-level institutions have an effect on
state-level growth, and whether that effect is more pronounced recently (see Table 9, Panel
B).
We then run regressions where the left hand side variable is some measure of decadal state
level performance (as in Table 7), and on the right hand side we include state fixed effects,
time/decadal) effects, initial income interacted with the time effects, and the measure of
state-level institutions interacted with time effects. A test of the decentralization hypothesis is
that the institutions measure should not yield significant coefficients for the pre-1980s period
but should do so, especially for the 1990s (we should not expect very strong results for the
1980s given the time it takes for political structures to get embedded and for agents to
internalize the change).26
In columns 1-3 we report the coefficient estimates for different combinations of the controls
when the measure of institutions is T&D losses. In columns 4-8, we vary the measure of
state-level institutions (including, successively, measures of investment climate,
25

We cannot run these regressions for the 1970s because we do not have state and sector
level manufacturing data.
26

In these regressions, the measure of institutions is time-invariant, measured either as the
average for the 1980-2000 period or for 2000. This raises concerns about endogeneity. Our
assumption, however, is that institutional quality is fairly persistent which is consistent with
the high correlation between the historically determined Banerjee and Iyer (2005) measure of
the non-landlord holdings in colonial India, which could be interpreted as a measure of the
historical determinants of current institutions, and contemporary institutions. For example,
the correlation between the Banerjee-Iyer measure and the measure of current investment
climate is 0.77.

- 24 -

infrastructure penetration, financial sector, mass media, and primary school education). In all
cases, we find that the interaction coefficient for the 1970s and (in seven out of eight cases
for the) 1980s are insignificant while the coefficient for the 1990s is significant and has the
expected sign. This suggests a tighter relationship between state level institutions and state
level performance in the 1990s.27
In sum, both state level capabilities and state level policies and institutions seemed to start
mattering in the 1990s. With the center no longer enforcing inter-state equity, divergences in
growth rates between states increased. These divergences raise a number of questions that we
now turn to.
VI. LOOKING AHEAD
Where is India headed? We have argued that India’s pattern of diversification and growth
over the last two decades might reflect the consequences of the peculiar specializations
created by the pre-1980 policies. Instead of India’s fast growing states reverting to a more
traditional pattern of specialization in labor intensive industries, commensurate with India’s
income levels, they appear to have skipped directly to specialization in skill intensive
industries (within manufacturing) or to services where they appear to have a comparative
advantage (at least vis a vis other poor countries).28
In Table 10, we illustrate how unusual the behavior of some of the fast-growing states is. In
column 1, we compute the level of income at which the average country in the cross-section
exhibits a declining share of manufacturing and increasing diversification. In column 2, we
compute the comparable level of income at which the fast-growing states exhibit the same
characteristic or “pathology.” The table shows that the Indian states have started behaving
like industrial countries at nearly a quarter or one-fifth of their income levels. For example,
manufacturing should normally start declining at about US$14,700 per capita: yet, Karnataka
and Maharashtra have seen a decline in the share of manufacturing at an income per capita of
about US$2700 and US$3400, respectively. A similar pattern is evident with respect to
diversification.
The impact of the pre-1980s policies combined with decentralization has meant that Indian
states are more responsible for their economic fortunes, which in turn has led to sharp
27

These results on the impact of institutions (in Table 9) broadly hold even after controlling
for the initial level of capability, for which we use the initial value of the Herfindahl index as
a proxy.

28

For example, with substantial trained personnel in drugs and pharmaceuticals, as well as a
large, poor, population in need of treatment, the cost of drug trials in India is low, in contrast
to most other countries where one or the other ingredient is missing.

- 25 -

divergences in their growth rates. With the caveat that Indian states are enormously large
entities and are internally very diverse, it would appear that the fast growing peninsular states
are starting to resemble more developed countries in their specialization, while the slow
growing hinterland states, with still rapidly growing, less well-educated, populations (Table
11) may not have the capability to emulate them. It may well be that these hinterland states
(as well as backward areas in the fast-growing states) will have to follow a more traditional
path of growth, focusing on labor intensive manufacture. But they have not thus far.29 That
they have not may be because further reform is needed—in particular, more flexible labor
laws and an improvement of infrastructure, especially vis a vis the states in the hinterland so
that these industries can be internationally cost-competitive—to revitalize labor intensive
manufacturing.
Here again the weight of history may be telling. The archaic labor laws have strong
organized constituencies, in particular, labor unions tied to political parties, backing them.
Given the way Indian industry has specialized, the costs of these laws are not experienced by
incumbents, and the political leadership, or will, to amend them has not emerged.30
Furthermore, given that poor governance, which tends to be persistent, in part, explains the
slow growth of the hinterland states (see chart 18), the needed improvement in governance,
business climate as well as physical infrastructure will be more difficult in the laggard states.
In this regard, the high correlation between the historically determined Banerjee and Iyer
measure (see footnote 26) and current institutions is telling evidence of the yoke of history
and the difficulty of change.
Even if serious reforms were undertaken in the laggard states, competition from the more
advanced states will not make it easy for them to grow. First, consider the output side. The
laggard states are typically distant from ports and airports. Transportation costs will come
down as infrastructure is built out, but it is unclear whether the improvements will help them
out-compete the fast-growing peninsular states where many of the initial large-scale
infrastructure projects are being undertaken, and where ancillary infrastructure exists. Even if
India moves to using its unskilled labor, one might expect the effects to first be seen in the
fast-growing states (which have their own share of surplus labor in agriculture) before
trickling down to the laggard states.

29

For example, Chart 9 illustrates that, between 1980 and 2000, the share of labor-intensive
industries in total value added declined in Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh, and remained
unchanged in Orissa and Bihar.
30

In other words, most commentators look to existing firms to see if labor laws are a
problem. But existing firms have adapted to these laws, as suggested both by their pattern of
specialization and their scale. The more pertinent question is whether new firms are kept
from entering because of the laws. The pattern of specialization in India suggest they are.

- 26 -

On the input side, even labor intensive unskilled manufacturing requires a skilled supervisory
and managerial force. Despite the large numbers of graduates emerging from universities in
India, the number of graduates with the skills to work in industry or the service sector is
relatively limited. With the immense demand for skilled workers in the export oriented
services industry, wages of skilled workers have been going up very fast.31 Given the
extremely competitive situation in (typically tradable) labor intensive industries, highly paid
supervisory skilled workers are affordable only if they are used very economically relative to
the use of unskilled labor – if, for example, firms have scale.32 Here again, the fast moving
states where the business and political climate is more conducive to scale have an advantage.
That the advanced skill-intensive part of the Indian economy may be bidding up scarce skills
in such a way as to slow the growth of labor intensive manufacture, and the exit of surplus
labor from agriculture, need not imply that the economy is using resources inefficiently (at
least in a static sense). The immediate adverse consequences of this peculiarly Indian
externality are, however, more likely to be political.
For if this process continues, the fast-growing states will not only suck the more mobile
skilled labor from the slow moving states leading to a further hollowing out of prospects, but
also the divergence in growth rates will increase further. Indeed, there are additional reasons
for concern. Visaria and Visaria (2003) suggest that based on current fertility rates in
different states, of the expected 620 million addition to the Indian population between now
and 2051, 60 percent will be in Bihar, MP, Rajasthan and UP, and only 22 percent will be in
the fast growing states of Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, and Maharashtra.
With populous laggard states like Uttar Pradesh and Bihar having substantial political power
because of their numbers, the demands for redistribution will increase, as will migration.
These will create immense political strains between Indian states and the potential for serious
differences.
Put another way, the convergence phenomenon that typically takes place across countries
may be impeded in the India of the future by one big difference—the common and mobile
pool of skilled labor. The very fact of skill-based development in the fast growing states may
impede labor-intensive development because of the rise in the price of skilled labor. This
31

A recent issue of Business Week notes that: “As India's domestic economy expands, the
shortfalls are spreading beyond tech. Wages for semi-skilled workers in the textile factories
of Coimbatore, for example, are up 10% this year, while supervisors' salaries have risen by
20%. Pay in the banking industry is up 25% in the past year and has more than doubled in hot
areas such as private equity. Airline pilots have seen wages rise 25%. Overall, Indian salaries
will rise by 12.8%, compared with inflation of 5.5%, according to human resources
consultancy Mercer, which warns that continued increases could hurt India's economic
revival.”
32

An alternative possibility is that the wages on unskilled labor fall, but wages in agriculture
may place a floor here.

- 27 -

could induce an Indian variant of Dutch disease (Bangalore Bug so to speak) that would
reduce the profitability of labor-intensive and tradable manufacturing. In an era of global
supply chains with wafer-thin profit margins, this might be a substantial impediment to the
growth of labor-intensive manufacturing in the lagging states.
The obvious solution is not to impede the growth of the fast-movers but to enhance the
availability of the resource in scarce supply. While the earlier emphasis on funding tertiary
education at the expense of primary education may well have been an aberration, India may
now have too little tertiary education of the right kind at this juncture. India does produce an
immense number of degree holders, but there are serious doubts about the quality of
education many receive. The number of high quality institutions is still very small, witness
the extraordinary competition to get into them. In the same way as industry was delicensed,
India needs to “delicense” higher education, remove the barriers to starting new institutions,
as well as encourage foreign direct investment here. In short, from a policy perspective, the
irony is that in order to promote unskilled labor-intensive activities in the future, a great deal
of attention may need to be paid to fostering the supply of skilled labor. 33
It may well be that new institutions of higher education are easier to start in the fast-growing
states. If so, limits on access to out-of-state students (or a refusal to recognize results from
other state examinations) need to be reduced, and educational standards harmonized across
states, so that a truly all-India market for higher education can be created. This will then
create a pool of skilled workers who will be essential to enhance the growth of the nowlaggard states.
In summary, then, changes since the early 1980s—the move toward pro-business and promarket economic policies and economic and political decentralization have unleashed
tremendous economic opportunities, but also—thanks to pre-existing patterns of
specialization in favor of skilled-based production—have unleashed the gale winds of
divergence, big time.34 A unitary India, centralized politically and uniformly mediocre in
economic performance has given way to multiple Indias with performance more related to
the capabilities of individual states and the opportunities they create. The fast-growing states
have fallen into patterns of production that are more similar to the industrial countries than to
the fast growing East Asian economies.
33

To some extent, there has been an encouraging endogenous response in terms of the
increased demand for education throughout India triggered by the prospect of better income
opportunities (see Rodrik and Subramanian, 2004). In fact, using Mincerian wage
regressions, Desai et. al. (2005) show that the returns to education have increased
substantially for the two highest levels of educational attainmnent between 1994 and 1999.
34

It is one of the abiding ironies that the pre-1980s policies, championed on grounds of
equity and socialism, might be the cause of the divergences in incomes and other disparities
in more recent years.

- 28 -

Ideally, of course, the laggard states would reform on their own—push for scrapping archaic
labor laws (few realize how pernicious these are because their effects, in terms of the laborintensive firms that are unborn, cannot easily be seen), improve infrastructure and the
business climate —and utilize their vast pools of underemployed low-cost labor to attract
investment in labor-intensive manufacturing and agri-business. They would thereby catch up
with the leading states in India.
There is a precedent—Europe had similar disparities but through various initiatives,
prosperous Western Europe offered incentives for laggard European countries to reform. The
external pull set reforms into motion, so much so that some of the former laggards like
Ireland and Spain are now Europe’s locomotives. If a loosely knit community of nations
could do it, why can’t a united nation of states? A reformist center—and India cannot afford
to not have one—could play the role of the European Commission (expanding what the
center is already doing on the fiscal side) and offer laggard states more incentives to reform.
In this scenario, the pattern of convergence that we saw in the post-war period between
industrial countries and the East Asian economies would play itself out within India in the
future. The recent revival of manufacturing growth (we do not have complete data on the
most recent years, hence this revival is not captured by our study), albeit seemingly heavily
concentrated in skill intensive and capital intensive industries, offers some hope for this
scenario.
However, even if the needed reforms were to occur, there is a possibility that powerful forces
emanating from the common market for resources could slow convergence. If they were to
do so, India will have to brace itself for a lot of social churning as people move not just in
search of jobs but also in search of acquiring the human capital to become employable. How
India reacts to, and shapes, these forces may well be the biggest economic question India
faces over the next few decades.

- 29 -

References
Acharya, Shankar, 2002, “Macroeconomic Management in the 1990s,” Economic and
Political Weekly, No. 37 (16), April 20, pp. 1515-38
Acharya, Shankar, 2003, “Can India Grow Without Bharat?”
www.rediff.com/money/2003/nov/25guest.html.
Aghion, Philippe, Robin Burgess, Stephen Redding, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, 2005, “Entry
Liberalization and Inequality in Industrial Performance,” Journal of the European
Economic Association, Vol. 3, No. 2-3, pp. 291-302(12), April-May.
Ahluwalia, Isher J., 1991, Productivity and Growth in Indian Manufacturing (New Delhi:
Oxford University Press).
Ahluwalia, Montek, 2000, “Economic Performance of States in the Post Reforms Period,
Economic and Political Weekly, May 6, pp.1637-48
Aiyar, Shekhar, 2001, “Growth Theory and Convergence Across Indian States: A Panel
Study,” in India at the Crossroads, edited by Tim Callen, Patricia Reynolds, and
Christopher Towe (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
Alleyne, Trevor, and Arvind Subramanian, 2001, “What Does South Africa’s Pattern of
Trade Say About Its Labor Markets?” IMF Working Paper 01/148 (Washington:
International Monetary Fund).
Arellano, Manuel, and Stephen Bond (1991) “Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data:
Monte Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations,” Review of
Economic Studies 58(2): 277-97.
Besley, Tim, and Robin Burgess, 2004, “Can Labor Regulation Hinder Economic
Performance? Evidence from India?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
Vol. 119, No. 1, pp. 91-134.
Bhagwati, Jagdish and Padma Desai, 1970, Planning for Industrialization (London: Oxford
University Press).
Bhagwati, Jagdish, and T.N. Srinivasan, 1993, “India’s Economic Reforms,” paper prepared
for the Ministry of Finance, Government of India.
Banerjee, Abhijit, and Lakshmi Iyer, 2005, "History, Institutions and Economic Performance:
The Legacy of Colonial Land Tenure Systems in India,” American Economic Review,
Vol. 95, No. 4.

- 30 -

Blundell, Richard and Stephen Bond (1998) “Initial Conditions and Moment Restrictions in
Dynamic Panel Data Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 87: 115-143.
Chenery, H.B. 1960, “Patterns of Industrial Growth,” American Economic Review
Vol. 57, pp. 415-26.
Chenery. H.B. and L.J. Taylor, 1968, “Development Patterns: Among Countries and Over
Time,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 50, pp. 391-416.
DeLong, Bradford, 2003, “India Since Independence: An Analytic Growth Narrative," in
Dani Rodrik, (ed.) “In Search of Prosperity: Analytical narratives on Economic
Growth,” Princeton University Press.
Desai, M. D. Kapur, and J. Mchale, 2005, “The Fiscal Impact of High-Skilled Emigration:
Flows of Indians to the U.S,” mimeo, Harvard University.
Echeverri-Gent, John, 2001, Political Economy of India’s Fiscal and Financial Reforms,
CREDPR Working Paper No. 105 (Stanford University: Center for Research on
Economic Development and Policy Reform).
Gordon, James and Poonam Gupta, 2004, “Understanding India’s Services Revolution,” IMF
Working Paper No. 171 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
Imbs, Jean, and Romain Wacziarg, 2003, “Stages of Development,” The American Economic
Review, March, Vol. 93, No. 1.
Joshi, Vijay, and I.M.D. Little, 1994, India: Macroeconomics and Political Economy 19641991 (Washington: The World Bank).
Joshi Vijay, and I.M.D. Little, 1996, India’s Economic Reforms, 1991-2001 (Oxford:
Clarendon Press).
Kelkar, Vijay, 2004, India: On the Growth Turnpike, K.R. Narayanan Memorial lecture,
Australian National University,
http://ecocomm.anu.edu.au/nieb/KRNarayananOration2004.htm
Krueger, A.O., 1975, The Benefits and Costs of Import Substitution in India: A
Microeconomic Study (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press).
Kohli, Atul, 2005, Politics of Economic Growth in India, 1980-2005, unpublished
manuscript, Princeton University.
Kongsamut, Piyabha, Sergio Rebelo, and Dantang Xie, 2001, “Beyond Balanced Growth,”
IMF Working Paper 01/85 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

- 31 -

Kumar, Krishna, Raghuram Rajan, and Luigi Zingales, 1999, “What Determines Firm Size?”
NBER Working Paper 7208.
Mehta, Bhanu Pratap, 2005, “How India Lost the Will to Reform,” Financial Times,
November 1.
Mohan, Rakesh, 2002, Small Scale Industry Policy in India: A Critical Evaluation, in
Economic Policy Reforms and the Indian Economy, edited by Anne O. Krueger,
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Rajan, Raghuram, and Arvind Subramanian, 2005, “ What Undermines Aid’s Impact on
Growth,” IMF Working Paper 05/126 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
Rajan, Raghuram and Julie Wulf, 2004, “Are Perks Purely Managerial Excess?,” NBER
Working Paper No. 10494 (Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research).
Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales, 1998, ‘Financial Dependence and Growth,” American
Economic Review, Vol. 88, No. 3.
Rodrik, Dani, and Arvind Subramanian, 2004, “Why India Can Growth at Seven Percent a
Year or More? Projections and Reflections” Economic and Political Weekly.
Rodrik, Dani, and Arvind Subramanian, 2005, “From Hindu Growth to Productivity Surge:
The Mystery of the Indian Growth Transition,” IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 52, No. 2.
Srinivasan, T.N, 2003, India’s Statistical System: Critiquing the Report of the National
Statistical Commission, Economic and Political Weekly, January 25.
Topalova, Petia, 2004, “Factor Immobility and Regional Impacts of Trade Liberalization:
Evidence on Poverty and Inequality from India, Unpublished manuscript, Department
of Economics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Unel, Bulent, 2003, “Productivity Trends in India’s Manufacturing Sectors in the Last Two
Decades,” IMF Working Paper 03/22 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
Virmani, Arvind, 2005, “Policy Regimes, Growth and Poverty in India: Lessons of
Government Failure and Entrepreneurial Success,” ICRIER Working Paper No. 170,
Indian Council for Research on International Economic Relations, New Delhi.
Visaria, Leela and Pravin Visaria, 2003, “Long Term Population Projections for Major
States, 1991-2101,” Economic and Political Weekly, November.
Wiener, Myron, 1991, The Child and the State in India (Princeton: Princeton University
Press).

- 32 -

Williamson, John and R. Zagha, 2002, “From the Hindu Rate of Growth to the Hindu Rate of
Reform,” Working Paper No. 144, Stanford Center for International Development.

- 33 -

Chart 1. Average Firm Size in India and Comparator Countries in 1990
10.00

Value added (in US$ millions) per establishment in 1990

9.00
8.00
7.00
6.00
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
Textiles

Iron and steel

Transport
equipment

Food products

Machinery
Machinery,
except electric
electric

Industrial
chemicals

Other
chemicals

Other nonmetallic
mineral
products

All industries

Top nine ISIC 3 digit industries by value added for India in 1990
India

Comparator countries

Sources: Based on authors’ calculations. Data used is from UNIDO 3-digit industrial statistics database (2003).
Notes: The nine industries shown here account for 76% of value added in manufacturing sector in 1990 for India.
Comparator countries comprise: Brazil, Chile, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Singapore and Turkey.
For these set of comparator countries ratio of total value added in manufacturing from UNIDO to total value added in
manufacturing from WDI is greater than in India in 1990.

- 34 -

Chart 2. Value-Added Share by Labor Intensity

.4

Ratio of value added
.6
.8

1

Ratio of value added in above median labor intensive sectors to below median sectors

7

7.5
CHN

8
8.5
Log GDP per capita
IND

IDN

9
KOR

9.5
MYS

Sources: Based on authors’ calculations. Data used is from UNIDO 3-digit industrial statistics database (2003).
Notes: Starting point for all countries is 1981 and the last period is 1996. For classification of above and below
median labor intensive sectors refer to table 3.
CHN stands for China, IND for India, IDN for Indonesia, KOR for Korea, MYS for Malaysia.

- 35 -

Chart 3. Value-Added Share by Relative Size

.6

.8

Ratio of value added
1
1.2
1.4

1.6

Ratio of value added in above median sectors by relative size to below median sectors

7

7.5
CHN

8
8.5
Log GDP per capita
IND

IDN

9
KOR

9.5
MYS

Sources: Based on authors’ calculations. Data used is from UNIDO 3-digit industrial statistics database (2003).
Notes: Starting point for all countries is 1981 and the last period is 1996. Relative size is as defined in the text.
For classification of above and below median sectors by relative size refer to table 3.
CHN stands for China, IND for India, IDN for Indonesia, KOR for Korea, MYS for Malaysia.

- 36 -

Chart 4. Value added Share by Skill Intensity

.5

1

Ratio of value added
1.5
2

2.5

Ratio of value added in above median skill intensive sectors to below median sectors

7

7.5
CHN

8
8.5
Log GDP per capita
IND

IDN

9
KOR

9.5
MYS

Sources: Based on authors’ calculations. Data used is from UNIDO 3-digit industrial statistics database (2003).
Notes: Starting point for all countries is 1981 and the last period is 1996. For classification of above and below
median skill intensive sectors refer to table 3.
CHN stands for China, IND for India, IDN for Indonesia, KOR for Korea, MYS for Malaysia

- 37 -

Chart 5. Ratio of Value Added in Sector Above to Sectors Below Median Labor Intensity
and Skill Intensity in Unregistered Manufacturing
3.00

2.50

Above to Below Median in Labor Intensity
2.00

1.50

1.00

Above to Below Median in Skill Intensity
0.50

0.00
1970

1972

1974

1976

1978

1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

Source: Based on authors’ calculations. Data on unregistered manufacturing are from the Central Statistical
Organization, Government of India.

- 38 -

Chart 6. Diversification in Indian Manufacturing

.06

Herfindahl Index
.08
.1

.12

Herfindahl Index based on value added

7

7.5
CHN

8
8.5
Log GDP per capita
IND

IDN

9
KOR

9.5
MYS

Sources: Based on authors’ calculations. Data used is from UNIDO 3-digit industrial statistics database (2003).
Notes: Starting point for all countries is 1981 and the last period is 1996.
CHN stands for China, IND for India, IDN for Indonesia, KOR for Korea, MYS for Malaysia.
Herfindahl Index is a measure of concentration. The lower the index the lower is concentration and the higher is
diversification.

- 39 -

Chart 7. Diversification in Indian Manufacturing

.06

.08

Herfindahl Index
.1
.12

.14

Herfindahl Index based on employment

7

7.5
CHN

8
8.5
Log GDP per capita
IND

IDN

9
KOR

9.5
MYS

Sources: Based on authors’ calculations. Data used is from UNIDO 3-digit industrial statistics database (2003).
Notes: Starting point for all countries is 1981 and the last period is 1996.
CHN stands for China, IND for India, IDN for Indonesia, KOR for Korea, MYS for Malaysia.
Herfindahl Index is a measure of concentration. The lower the index the lower is concentration and the higher is
diversification.

- 40 -

Chart 8. Manufacturing and States’ NSDP growth
Change in share of Manufacturing in NSDP 1980-2000
HP
MP
PJ HY

AP

UP

BH

AS

KL
RJ

NG

JK

MH

MN

KK

TP
DL

-5

0

5

Change in share of manufacturing in NSDP 1980-2000 (%)

10

GJ

WB

-10

OR

TN

1

2

3

4

Average Annual Growth of NSDP per capita 1980-200 (%)

Sources: Based on authors’ calculations. Data used is
Product of States of India: 1960-61 to 2000-01.
Notes: NSDP is the net state domestic product.
Code State
Code State
AP Andhra Pradesh
JK Jammu & Kashmir
AS Assam
KK Karnataka
BH Bihar
KL Kerala
DL Delhi
MH Maharashtra
GJ Gujarat
MN Manipur
HP Himachal Pradesh MP Madhya Pradesh
HY Haryana
NG Nagaland

5

from EPW Research Foundation CD-ROM, Domestic
Code
OR
PJ
RJ
TN
TP
UP
WB

State
Orissa
Punjab
Rajasthan
Tamil Nadu
Tripura
Uttar Pradesh
West Bengal

- 41 -

Chart 9. Share in Labor Intensive Industries and States’ NSDP growth

.4

Change in ratio of above median to below median labor intensive industries

PJ

JK
OR

0

Change in ratio of value added

.2

DL

TN
KK

KL WB

BH

HY
RJ

MP

-.2

MH
AP

-.4

UP

GJ

1

2

3

4

Average annual growth rate of NSDP per capita (%) 1980-2000

5

Sources: Based on authors’ calculations. Data is used from EPW Research Foundation CD-ROMs, Domestic
Product of States of India: 1960-61 to 2000-01 and Annual Survey of Industries.
Notes: NSDP is the net state domestic product. On vertical axis is the change in ratio of valued added in above
median labor intensive sectors to value added in below median sectors.

- 42 -

Chart 10. Services and States’ NSDP growth

OR

20

Change in share of services in NSDP 1980-2000 (%)

40

Change in share of Services in NSDP 1980-2000

TP

BH
MNRJ
JK

MP

HP
HY

UP

AS

GJ
WB

MH
DL AP

TN
KK

-20

0

PJ

-40

NG

1

2

3

4

Average Annual Growth of NSDP per capita 1980-200 (%)

5

Sources: Based on authors’ calculations. Data used is from EPW Research Foundation CD-ROM, Domestic
Product of States of India: 1960-61 to 2000-01.
Notes: NSDP is the net state domestic product.

- 43 -

Chart 11. Public Services and States’ NSDP growth
Change in share of Public Services in NSDP 1980-2000

JK
HP
BH
OR

10

15

Change in share of public services in NSDP 1980-2000 (%)

20

TP

MN

MP

5

RJ

AS

GJ

UP

KL

AP
MH

KK
TN

-5

0

PJ HY WB

DL

1

2

3

4

Average Annual Growth of NSDP per capita 1980-2000 (%)

5

Sources: Based on authors’ calculations from EPW Research Foundation CD-ROM, Domestic Product of
States of India: 1960-61 to 2000-01.
Notes: NSDP is the net state domestic product. Selected public sector services include electricity, public
administration, railways and other public sector services.

- 44 -

Chart 12. Private Sector Services and States’ NSDP growth

HY
OR
KK
TN

BH

WB

AP

RJ

0

Change in share of private services in NSDP 1980-2000 (%)

10

Change in share of Private Services in NSDP 1980-2000

MP

UP

HP

AS

GJ

MH

MN
PJ

TP
DL

-10

JK

-20

NG

1

2

3

4

Average Annual Growth of NSDP per capita 1980-2000 (%)

5

Sources: Based on authors’ calculations from EPW Research Foundation CD-ROM, Domestic Product of
States of India: 1960-61 to 2000-01.
Notes: NSDP is the net state domestic product. Selected private sector services include business services,
real estate and retail trade.

- 45 -

Chart 13. Change in Diversification and States’ NSDP growth

Change in Diversification
.1

BH

DL

HY

OR

UP

JK

RJ
PJ KL WB

AP
MH

TN
KK

MP

-.1

Change in HI
0

GJ

-.2

AS

1
2
3
4
Average annual growth rate of NSDP per capita 1980 - 2000 ( % )

5

Sources: Based on authors’ calculations. Data used is from EPW Research Foundation CD-ROM, Domestic
Product of States of India: 1960-61 to 2000-01 and 3-digit industry level data at the state level is from Circon
India Data Center.
Notes: NSDP is the net state domestic product. HI is the Herfindahl Index based on value added. Herfindahl
Index is the measure of diversification used. Change in Herfindahl Index is calculated as the difference between
Herfindahl Index averaged for 1982, 1984, 1985 and Herfindahl Index averaged for 1995-1997.

- 46 -

Chart 14. Initial Diversification and States’ NSDP Growth

.4

Diversification Index

Herfindahl Index in 1982
.1
.2
.3

AS

BH

MP

OR

JK

GJ
PJRJ
KL WB
DLMHAP
HY

TN
KK

0

UP

1

2
3
4
Average annual growth rate of NSDP per capita 1980-2000(%)

5

Sources: Based on authors’ calculations. Data used is from EPW Research Foundation CD-ROMs, Domestic
Product of States of India: 1960-61 to 2000-01 and 3-digit industry level data at the state level is from Circon
India Data Center.
Notes: NSDP is the net state domestic product. HI is the Herfindahl Index based on value added. Herfindahl
Index is the measure of diversification used. Herfindahl Index is a measure of concentration. The lower the
index the lower is concentration and the higher is diversification.

- 47 -

Chart 15. Diversification and States’ NSDP growth

1

Correlation between share of value added in 1982 and 1997
BH

AS
MP
TN

.8

WB

Correlation

RJ

MH
KK

GJ

.6

KL

DL

HY
PJ
UP

.4

OR

.2

AP

1

2

3

4

Average Annual Growth of NSDP per capita 1980-2000 (%)

5

Sources: Based on authors’ calculations. Data used is from EPW Research Foundation CD-ROM, Domestic
Product of States of India: 1960-61 to 2000-01 and 3-digit industry level data (NIC-1987) at the state level is
from Circon India Data Center.
Notes: NSDP is the net state domestic product. On the vertical axis is the correlation between the share of value
added in 1982 and 1997 at the 3-digit industry level data (NIC-1987).

- 48 -

Chart 16. Initial Diversification Index and Services

.4

Initial Diversification Index and Services

Herfindahl Index in 1982
.1
.2
.3

AS

BH

MP

OR

JK

GJ
UP

RJ

PJ

WB
APMH

TN
KK

0

DLHY

2
3
4
5
Average annual growth rate of services per capita 1980-2000(%)

6

Sources: Based on authors’ calculations. Data used is from EPW Research Foundation CD-ROMs, Domestic
Product of States of India: 1960-61 to 2000-01 and 3-digit industry level data at the state level is from Circon
India Data Center.
Notes: HI is the Herfindahl Index based on value added. Herfindahl Index is the measure of diversification
used. Herfindahl Index is a measure of concentration. The lower the index the lower is concentration and the
higher is diversification.

- 49 -

Chart 17. Public and Private Investment
Public, Private, and Private Corporate Investment in India
(in percent of GDP)
18
16

Public

Private

Private Corporate

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

1971-1980

1981-1990

1991-1995

Source: Author’s calculations based on national accounts data from CSO.

1996-2001

- 50 -

Chart 18. T&D Losses and States’ Growth

25

T & D losses and Growth
RJ

Average T & D losses 1980 - 2000
20

OR

AS

HY

DL
WB

UP

AP

BH
KK
KL

GJ

MP
PJ
TN

15

MH

1

2
3
4
Average annual growth rate of NSDP per capita 1980 - 2000(%)

5

Sources: Based on authors’ calculations. Data used is from EPW Research Foundation CD-ROM, Domestic
Product of States of India: 1960-61 to 2000-01.
Notes: NSDP is the net state domestic product. Transmission and distribution losses (T&D) is the fraction of
electrical power generated but not paid for, measured as a percent of availability.

-51Table 1. Sectoral Shares in Value-Added and Employment
Employment in Sector as Percent
of Total Employment

Value Added as Percent of GDP

(1)

1980
(3)

(2)

(6)

(7)

Agriculture

Industry

Services

36.6

68.1

13.9

18.6

43.8
48.5
41.7
40.5
41.0
33.6
28.7
22.2

45.2
21.4
34.3
44.4
36.3
57.4
48.1
51.4

29.3
68.7
55.9
34.0
37.2
23.5
70.8
43.0

24.7
18.2
13.2
29.0
24.1
26.5
10.3
34.9

46.1
11.7
30.2
37.0
38.7
49.0
18.9
22.1

24.4
41.7

39.2
36.8

74.6
64.0

8.7
18.5

16.5
16.4

26.6

48.8

59.3

18.2

22.4

17.1
34.7
24.9
26.1
32.6
20.3
33.6
15.7

28.0
50.2
46.1
36.2
50.7
28.0
42.0
25.3

64.7
33.4
36.7
59.5
40.5
67.8
49.0
59.4

24.2
46.9
45.3
10.9
18.4
17.5
48.8
34.5

19.3
23.0
17.3
28.0
32.2
26.9
19.0
24.5

56.5
29.9
37.3
61.0
49.5
55.2
32.2
40.9

14.1
24.2

26.6
38.3

46.1
49.1

64.5
43.2

12.3
18.5

23.2
38.3

Agriculture

Manufacturing

India

38.9

16.3

24.5

Brazil
China
Indonesia
Korea
Malaysia
Mexico
Thailand
Turkey

11.0
30.1
24.0
15.1
22.6
9.0
23.2
26.4

33.5
40.5
13.0
28.6
21.6
22.3
21.5
14.3

Low Income
Lower Middle Income

36.4
21.5

14.8
29.1

India

24.6

15.9

Brazil
China
Indonesia
Korea
Malaysia
Mexico
Thailand
Turkey

7.3
16.4
17.2
4.3
8.8
4.2
9.0
15.4

Low Income
Lower Middle Income

27.3
12.5

(4)

Industry Services

(5)

2000

Sources: World Bank, World Development Indicators 2005, except Korea, OECD-Stractural Analysis Database,
and India, National Accounts Statistics, Indiastat.com
Notes: For the Low Income, and Lower Middle Income groups as classified by the World Bank, we report the respective averages.
Employment shares are reported for the years indicated, except India(1983), Brazil (1981 and 1999) and Turkey (1982).
Employment shares for the low income group for 2000 are estimates.

-52Table 2: India in the cross section: Share of manufacturing and services, early 1980s
Share of output (1981)
Manufacturing
Services
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
15.37
21.58
36.27**
27.81
(14.58)
(13.75)
(17.01)
(17.79)

Share of employment (1983)
Industry
Services
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
26.76
22.09
66.5**
67.20**
(20.8)
(20.8)
(29.07)
(30.07)

-0.73
(0.88)

-1.09
(0.83)

-1.95*
(1.03)

-1.46
(1.08)

-1.17
(1.2)

-0.92
(1.2)

-3.15*
(1.71)

-3.19*
(1.76)

4.58***
(1.25)

2.33
(1.76)

-6.50***
(1.3)

-3.55**
(1.61)

-0.260
(2.52)

0.560
(2.82)

-7.41**
(3.27)

-7.53**
(3.63)

Control for country size

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Observations

101

101

122

122

44

44

43

43

Log GDP per capita

Log GDP per capita 2

India indicator

Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses
***represents significance at 1%, **represents significance at 5%, *represents significance at 10%
Country size is measured by area in square killometers.

Labor Intensity
0.01
(0.97)
26
-0.74***
(0.00)
28

355
324
356
311
321
369
382
342
323
322
381
390
331
332

BY RELATIVE SIZE

0.13
(0.53)
26

Skill Intensity

Rank Correlation

Rubber products
Footwwear, except rubber or plastic
Plastic products
Food products
Textiles
Other non-mettalic mineral pdts
Machinery except electric
Printing & Publishing
Leather products
Wearing apparel
Fabricated Metal products
Other manufacturing products
Wood products, except furniture
Furniture, except metal

INDUSTRY DESCRIPTION
Petroleum Refineries
Tobacco
Iron & steel
Industrial chemicals
Beverages
Non-ferrous metals
Other chemicals
Misc Petroleum and coal pdts
Paper and products
Machinery, electric
Transport Equipment
Glass and producdts
Pottery, China, earthenware
Professional and scientific equipment
314
354
313
311
369
322
372
321
341
324
362
323
331
361

ISIC Code
353
342
352
385
383
384
382
351
332
381
371
390
356
355

Notes: In each subgroup, the industries are ranked by descending order of the corresponding measure of intensity or size.
Labor intensity is measured by the share of wages in value added for the industry in a country, averaged across a broad group
of developing countries, as in Rajan and Subramanian (2005).
Relative size is the ratio of value added per establishment within the industry over the value added per establishment within
the country, averaged across countries for each industry.
Skill is measured by the ratio of the remuneration of highly skilled and skilled labor over the total value added of the industry.

Sources: Labor intensity, Rajan and Subramanian, (2005), Relative Size (as defined in text), UNIDO, 2003, Skill intensity, South Africa's National Accounts.

-0.01
(0.94)
26

Skill Intensity

Correlation

Rubber products
Paper and products
Iron & steel
Machinery, electric
Other non-metallic mineral products
Food products
Other chemicals
Plastic products
Industrial chemicals
Non-ferrous metals
Misc. Petroleum and coal products
Beverages
Tobacco
Petroleum Refineries

355
341
371
383
369
311
352
356
351
372
354
313
314
353

Labor Intensity
Skill Intensity
0.10
p-value
(0.63)
observations
26
Relative size
-0.59***
p-value
(0.00)
observations
28

M
E
D
I
A
N

B
E
L
O
W

M
E
D
I
A
N

A
B
O
V
E

INDUSTRY DESCRIPTION
Wearing apparel
Printing & Publishing
Machinery except electric
Furniture, except metal
Footwear, except rubber or plastic
Textiles
Wood products, except furniture
Transport Equipment
Pottery, China, earthenware
Leather products
Fabricated Metal products
Glass and products
Professional and scientific equipment
Other manufacturing products

ISIC Code
322
342
382
332
324
321
331
384
361
323
381
362
385
390

ISIC Code
353
314
371
351
313
372
352
354
341
383
384
362
361
385

Table 3: Classification of Industries by Labor Intensity, Size and Skill Intensity

BY LABOR INTENSITY

BY SKILL INTENSITY

Tobacco
Misc. Petroleum and coal products
Beverages
Food products
Other non-metallic mineral products
Wearing apparel
Non-ferrous metals
Textiles
Paper and products
Footwear, except rubber or plastic
Glass and products
Leather products
Wood products, except furniture
Pottery, China, earthenware

INDUSTRY DESCRIPTION
Petroleum Refineries
Printing & Publishing
Other chemicals
Professional and scientific equipment
Machinery, electric
Transport Equipment
Machinery except electric
Industrial chemicals
Furniture, except metal
Fabricated Metal products
Iron & steel
Other manufacturing products
Plastic products
Rubber products

-53-

0.0002
(0.10)
-0.11
(0.3)
80

PANEL B

0.27***
(0.07)
1.29***
(0.07)
80

-0.004
(0.07)
0.52***
(0.09)
80

0.04
(0.06)
-0.18
(0.13)
81

PANEL C

0.29***
(0.08)
0.26***
(0.09)
81

0.1*
(0.05)
0.30***
(0.03)
81

0.09***
(0.03)
0.16*
(0.1)
74

-0.03
(0.05)
1.11***
(0.12)
74

-0.25***
(0.09)
-0.18
(0.23)
74

0.001***
(0.0003)
-0.06***
(0.02)
81

Concentration Index
Based on employment
(4)
-0.02***
(0.006)

0.001**
(0.0004)
-0.07***
(0.02)
80

Concentration Index
Based on valued added
(4)
-0.02***
(0.01)

Notes: Column 4 also controls for country size. In column 4, GDP variables and area are not in log terms (consistent with Imbs and Wacziarg (2003))
The Herfindahl index is the measure of concentration.
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses
***represents significance at 1%, **represents significance at 5%, *represents significance at 10%

Observations

India indicator

Log GDP per capita

2

Ratio of value added per worker in above median sectors to below median sectors
Labor Intensity
Skill Intensity
Size
(1)
(2)
(3)
Log GDP per capita
-1.51***
0.41
3.84***
(0.53)
(0.875)
(1.5)

Observations

India indicator

Log GDP per capita2

Ratio of employment in above median sectors to below median sectors
Labor Intensity
Skill Intensity
Size
(1)
(2)
(3)
Log GDP per capita
-0.6
-4.28***
-1.42*
(1.00)
(1.21)
(0.85)

Observations

India indicator

Log GDP per capita

2

Ratio of value added in above median sectors to below median sectors
Labor Intensity
Skill Intensity
Size
(1)
(2)
(3)
Log GDP per capita
-0.02
-3.90***
0.19
(1.61)
(1.19)
(1.16)

Table 4: India in the cross section: Labor Intensity, Skill Intensity, Size, and Diversification, 1981
PANEL A

-54-

149
Panel B

156

No

(4)
8.01

156

Yes

(1.46)

3.77**

(0.6)

-0.040

(10.3)

Country size is measured by area in square killometers.

***represents significance at 1%, **represents significance at 5%, *represents significance at 10%

116

(1.63)

(1.37)
93

9.87***

-2.57*

0.41
(0.53)

0.7**
(0.33)

(0.77)

(0.66)

(2)
3.96***

(1)

-1.91***

Services

Manufacturing

Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses

Observations

India indicator

Average annual growth rate

Log initial GDP per capita

149

Observations

Yes

(1.17)

-0.05

(0.6)

-0.19

(10.34)

10.88

(3)

Services

Change in share of output (1981-2000)

No

0.26
(1.11)

(0.73)

(0.38)

(0.12)

2.4***

-0.72*

-0.610

(6.38)

(6.41)

(2)
15.41**

(1)

13.18**

Control for size

India indicator

Log GDP per capita2

Log GDP per capita

Manufacturing

Share of output

Panel A

(6)

76

Yes

(1.36)

1.13

(0.63)

-2.71***

(11.23)

52.4***

(7)

74

No

(3.03)

-17.22***

(1.31)

-1.49

(23.91)

38.99

(8)

74

Yes

(3.78)

-16.57***

(1.3)

-1.54

(23.83)

39.69*

Services

39

(2.05)

1.70

(0.6)

0.47

(0.92)

-3.37***

(3)

Industry

38

(3.59)

0.94

(0.64)

-0.18

(1.39)

2.91**

(4)

Services

Change in share of employment (1983-2000)

76

No

(1.17)

0.56

(0.62)

-2.67***

(11.28)

51.79***

(5)

Industry

Share of employment

Table 5: India in the cross section: shares of manufacturing and services, 2000

-55-

0.13
(0.09)
0.11
(0.11)
47

PANEL B

0.11
(0.11)
1.09***
(0.15)
47

-0.04
(0.05)
0.43***
(0.1)
47

-0.15
(0.3)
-0.79
(0.79)
61

PANEL C

0.11*
(0.06)
0.26***
(0.1)
60

0.02
(0.03)
0.27***
(0.04)
60

0.07*
(0.03)
0.19***
(0.06)
47

-0.06
(0.04)
0.88***
(0.12)
47

-0.17**
(0.08)
-0.65***
(0.19)
47

0.0003***
(0.0001)
-0.08***
(0.02)
61

Concentration Index
Based on employment
(4)
-0.01***
(0.004)

0.0001
(0.0001)
-0.05***
(0.01)
47

Concentration Index
Based on valued added
(4)
-0.003
(0.003)

Notes: Column 4 also controls for size. In column 4, GDP variables and area are not in log terms (consistent with Imbs and Wacziarg (2003))
The Herfindahl index is the measure of concentration.
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses
***represents significance at 1%, **represents significance at 5%, *represents significance at 10%

Observations

India indicator

Log GDP per capita

2

Ratio of value added per worker in above median sectors to below median sectors
Labor Intensity
Skill Intensity
Size
(1)
(2)
(3)
Log GDP per capita
-1.05*
1.11
2.70*
(0.58)
(0.74)
(1.37)

Observations

India indicator

Log GDP per capita2

Ratio of employment in above median sectors to below median sectors
Labor Intensity
Skill Intensity
Size
(1)
(2)
(3)
Log GDP per capita
2.72
-1.29
-0.19
(4.84)
(1.02)
(0.43)

Observations

India indicator

Log GDP per capita

2

Ratio of value added in above median sectors to below median sectors
Labor Intensity
Skill Intensity
Size
(1)
(2)
(3)
Log GDP per capita
-1.92
-1.13
0.79
(1.4)
(1.84)
(0.83)

Table 6: India in the cross section: Labor Intensity, Skill Intensity, Size, and Diversification, 2000
PANEL A

-56-

67

63

63

63

63

-3.28
(2.68)

59

-2.49
(2.27)

33

31

31

31

31

29

-5.77**
(2.38)

20 year state growth rates (1960-2000)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)

-7.81*** -7.97** -5.47* -8.72** -6.75***
(2.41) (2.65) (2.57) (3.48)
(2.55)

(7)

Notes: In columns (1) to (5), the dependent variable is average per capita state growth calculated over the four ten-year periods, 1960-1970, 1970-1980,
1980-1990, 1990-2000. In columns (6) to (10), the average per capita state growth is calculated over the two twenty-year periods, 1960-1980, and 1980-2000.
All regressions include state and period effects.
The Herfindahl index (HI) of value added is the measure of concentration.
Columns (2) and (8) include the Besley Burgess Index (2004)
Columns (3) and (9) include the Besley Burgess Index (2004), and its interaction with the decadal dummies and twenty year period dummies respectively.
Columns (4) and (10) include the Besley Burgess Index (2004),its interaction with the decadal dummies and twenty year period dummies respectively, and the log of initial per capita income.
Columns (5) and (11) include the Besley Burgess Index (2004),its interaction with the decadal dummies and twenty year period dummies respectively, log of initial per capita income
and a measure of institutions (transmission and distribution losses) interacted with decadal dummies and twenty year period dummies respectively
Columns (6) and (12) include the Besley Burgess Index (2004), log of initial per capita income, and their interaction with the decadal dummies and twenty year period dummies respectively,
and initial literacy (in 1980) interacted with decadal dummies and twenty year period dummies respectively
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses
***represents significance at 1%, **represents significance at 5%, *represents significance at 10%

Observations

HI* Dummy for 1980-2000

-4.59
(3.09)

-8.73** -8.26** -7.3* -16.29*** -14.65*** -11.29**
(3.44) (3.69) (4.10) (5.63)
(5.04)
(4.76)

-0.42
(3.07)

HI* Dummy for 1990s

-2.17
(3.10)

-2.14
(2.96)

(6)
0.79
(2.20)

HI* Dummy for 1980s

HI* Dummy for 1970s

(1)
4.77*
(2.57)

Table 7: Indian States: Diversification and Growth
10 year state growth rates (1960-2000)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
5.31* 4.01
0.83
0.80
(2.77) (2.56) (2.98)
(2.39)

-57-

-58Table 8. Indian States: Convergence and Divergence, 1960-2000
Unconditional

Conditional

1960-2000

1960-2000

1960-2000

1960-2000

(1)

(2)

OLS

OLS

(3)
System
GMM

(4)
Difference
GMM

0.94**
(0.37)

-6.99***
(2.22)

0.51
(0.76)

-8.37
(6.42)

Log Initial NSDP per capita*1970s dummy

-0.03
(0.04)

-0.16
(0.71)

-0.03
(0.04)

0.11
(0.09)

Log Initial NSDP per capita*1980s dummy

0.16***
(0.04)

0.43
(0.78)

0.17***
(0.04)

0.4**
(0.17)

Log Initial NSDP per capita*1990s dummy

0.17***
(0.06)

2.3**
(1.05)

0.19***
(0.07)

0.69**
(0.34)

79

79

79

58

Estimation procedure
Log Initial NSDP per capita

Observations

Notes: The dependent variable in all regressions is the annual average decadal rate of growth in per capita state domestic product.
The regressions for conditional convergence in columns 2-4 include state and time fixed effects. The system GMM estimator
is based on Blundell and Bond (1998) and the difference estimator is based on Arellano and Bond (1991).
The Hansen test of overidentification and the test of no second order autocorrelation are satisfied for the system and difference GMM estimations.
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses
***represents significance at 1%, **represents significance at 5%, *represents significance at 10%

-0.08***
(0.02)

I* Dummy for 1990s

63

-0.08**
(0.03)

-0.07
(0.04)

-0.01
(0.03)

63

-0.08**
(0.04)

-0.08**
(0.03)

-0.002
(0.02)

59

1.18**
(0.54)

-0.47
(0.37)

-0.49
(0.41)

Investment
climate

63

1.24***
(0.44)

-0.07
(0.38)

-0.2
(0.33)

Infrastructure
penetration

63

1.19**
(0.51)

0.01
(0.42)

63

1.39***
(0.43)

-0.09
(0.39)

-0.35
(0.33)

Mass media
penetration

Financial
sector
strength

-0.11
(0.27)

(7)

(6)

266
(8)

Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses
***represents significance at 1%, **represents significance at 5%, *represents significance at 10%

Panel B: The dependent variable is the decadal average of annual state growth rates. All regressions include state and period fixed effects,
initital income interacted with time effects (not reported), and a measure of state-level institution (I) interacted with time effects as follows:
(I) as defined at the top of each column, is transmission and distribution losses in columns (1) to (3); investment climate, reflecting the overall investment attractiveness
of the state, in column (4); a measure of the spread of infrastructure throughout the state in column (5); a measure of the strength of the financial sector
in column (6); a measure of the outreach of mass media within each state in column (7); and the enrollment in classes instructed in English as a percent of total
enrollment at the primary and upper primary level in column (8).
Column (2) includes the Besley Burgess Index (2004). Columns(3) to (8) include the Besley Burgess Index (2004), and its interaction with the decadal dummies.

55

0.26***
(0.06)

0.08
(0.05)

0.11**
(0.04)

Primary
schooling in
English

Notes:
Panel A: The dependent variable is the annual average rate of growth of industry (i) in state (s). All regressions include state and industry effects.
Transmission and distribution losses (TD) is the fraction of electrical power generated but not paid for, measured as a percent of availability in 1980.
Electricity intensity is the share of electricity input in the value added of the sector. Overall infrastructure intensity is the share of the sum of electricity,
transportations and communications inputs in the value added of the sector. Both these indices are measured in percent.

67

-0.05
(0.04)

I* Dummy for 1980s

Observations

-0.02
(0.03)

I* Dummy for 1970s

Transmission and distribution losses

(1)

269
Panel B: 10 year state growth rates (1960-2000)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

-1.23
(0.84)

-0.9
(0.59)

Initial share of sector
i in state s

Observations

-0.19**
(0.09)

0.06
(0.13)

1990-1997

(2)

TD*Intensity

Electricity Intensity

Panel A: Sectoral growth rates

1982-1990

(1)

Table 9: Decentralization: State Characteristics and Growth

-59-

(1)
14728

18216

Criterion

Manufacturing to GDP

Diversification

State income level (in US$ PPP per capita) at
turning point 2/
(2)
Delhi
5438
Karnataka
2649
Maharashtra
3375
West Bengal
2175
Tamil Nadu
2842
Andhra Pradesh
2220
Delhi
5438
Gujarat
2886
Haryana
3187
Karnataka
2649
Maharashtra
3375
Tamil Nadu
2842

Source: Authors' calculations
1/ The turning point represents the income level at which the ratio of manufacturing to GDP (or the index of diversification) starts declining
for the average country in the cross-section and is computed from a regression of the relevant variable on income, income square, and size
2/ The states included are those for which the ratio of manufacturing to GDP (or the diversification) has started to decline or remained roughly constant
over the period 1980-2000. Income level is for the year 2000

Income level (in US$ PPP per capita)
at turning point in the cross-section 1/

Table 10: How Unique are the Fast-Growing States?

-60-

1.8
1.5
1.9
1.4
1.7
1
0.4
1.4

Lagging States /1
Madhya Pradesh
Assam
Chhattisgarh
Uttar Pradesh
Orissa
Jharkhand
Bihar

Group Average

0.8

1.2
1.1
1.1
1
0.8
0.6
0

2.1
1.6
2
2
2
1.5
1.3
1.8

3.7
2.6
2.5
2.8
2.3
2.5
2.4
2.7

Infrastructure
Penetration 3/
(2)

0.9

1.1
1.1
0.6
0.9
1
1
0.3

1.6
1.8
1.7
1.4
2
1.8
1.2
1.6

3.9
2.4
2.1
3.5
2.2
2.2
2
2.6

Financial
Sector
Strength 4/
(3)

0.9

1.1
0.8
1
1.2
0.8
1
0.1

2.1
2.4
1.4
1.9
1.5
1.4
1.5
1.7

3.5
2.6
2.5
2.5
2.5
2.1
2.3
2.6

Mass Media
Penetration 5/
(4)
Index Rating

1.5

1.4
1.7
1.2
0.9
2.7
1.4
1.1

0.5
6.6

12.5
4.6
1.2
0.9
19.9

6.6
5.7

12.9
6.0
2.5
0.2

Primary
Schooling
in English /6
(5)

Sources: "How are the States Doing? 2002" Indicus Analytics for the Confederation of Indian Industr
Primary schooling in English is from "Elementary Education in India: Analytical Report 2003"; Banerjee and Iyer (2005) for land tenure da
Notes:
1/ Leading, Middle or Lagging states were grouped depending on whether they are at the top, middle or bottom third respective
of the sum of the relative ranking on investment climate, infrastructure penetration, financial sector strength and mass media penetratio
2/ Reflects the climate of the State in terms of its overall investment attractivenes
3/ Measures the spread of infrastructure within a state
4/ Measures the strength of the financial sector of the state
5/ Measures the outreach of media to the masses within each state
6/ Enrolment in classes instructed in English as a percent of total enrollment at the primary and upper primary level, 2001-200
7/ Combined male and female adult literacy rate.
8/ State average is weighted over district level data, using district area as percent of state area as a weight.
The index is 0 if the colonial land tenure system is entirely landlord based and 1 if it is entirely individual based. See Banerjee and Iyer (2005)
The value for Delhi is borrowed from Besley and Burgess (2004), who use an aggregation at the state level similar to ours.

1.6
2.0

2.3
2.3
2.5
2
1.2

3.1
3.1
2.8
2.3
2.4
2.9
2.7
2.8

Middle States /1
Andhra Pradesh
Himachal Pradesh
Haryana
Uttaranchal
West Bengal
Jammu & Kashmir
Rajasthan
Group Average

Leading States /1
Delhi
Tamil Nadu
Kerala
Maharashtra
Gujarat
Punjab
Karnataka
Group Average

Investment
Climate 2/
(1)

Table 11: The State of India's States

59.5

64.1
64.3
65.2
57.4
63.6
54.1
47.5

61.1
77.1
68.6
72.3
69.2
54.5
61.0
66.3

81.8
73.7
90.9
77.3
70.0
70.0
67.0
75.8

Adult
Literacy
Rate /7
(6)

0.34

0.00

0.45
0.35

0.02
0.89

0.00
0.37

0.00

0.81

0.67

0.88
0.71
1.00
0.72
1.00
0.85
1.00
0.88

Colonial
Land Tenure
Index /8
(7)

-61-

Natural log of GDP per capita, which is measured in constant 2000 international $ for tables
2 and 5.
Natural log of GDP per capita, which is measured in constant 1996 international $ for tables
4 and 6.
Country area in square kilometers
Ratio of wages to value added in that sector; for each sector and decade, it is the average across
years and countries.
Ratio of value added to number of workers at the 2-digit National Industrial Classification, 1987
(NIC 1987)
Ratio of remuneration of highly skilled and skilled labor in sector j to the value added of that
sector
The ratio of the value added (or employment) per establishment in an industry over the value
added (or employment) per establishment in that country.
Change between 1981 and 2000 in the value added share of manufacturing or services as a
percent of GDP.
Change between 1981 and 2000 in the employment share of manufacturing or services as a
percent of total employment.
Ratio of the sum of value added in all sectors above median to the sum of value added of all
sectors below median, where the median is that of labor intensity, or skill intensity or relative
firm size. Complete classification of industries along each of these dimensions is provided in

Log GDP per Capita

Change in Share of
Output
Change in Share of
Employment
Ratio of Value Added

Country Size
Labor Intensity
in sector i
Labor Intensity
in sector i, state s
Skill Intensity
in sector i
Relative Firm Size

Employment Share

Value added in Agriculture, Manufacturing, Industry and
Services in percent of GDP, in 1981 and 2000.
Employment in Agriculture, Industry and Services in percent
of total employment, in 1983 and 2000.

Appendix Table 1. List of Variables and Data Sources

Value Added Share

5. OECD, Structural Analysis Database (SAD)

World Bank, 2005, WDI
Indiastat.com for India
UNIDO, 2003

World Bank, 2005, WDI

South Africa, National Accounts
Statistics 1989
UNIDO, 2003

EPWRF, ASI

Penn World Tables version 6.1
October, 2002
World Bank, 2005, WDI
UNIDO, 2003

World Bank, 2005, WDI
OECD, SAD
World Bank, 2005, WDI
OECD, SAD
Indiastat.com for India
World Bank, 2005, WDI

1. Industrial Statistics Database (2003) of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO).
Data are at 3-digit level of the International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities (ISIC, Revision 2).
2. World Development Indicators (WDI, World Bank)
3. Domestic Product of States of India: 1960-61 to 2000-01, CD-ROM of Economic and Political Weekly Research Foundation (EPWRF).
4. Annual Survey of Industries (ASI), 1973-74 to 1997-98, CD-ROM of Economic and Political Weekly Research Foundation.
Data are at 2-digit level of the National Industrial Classification (1987) for India.
Data at 3-digit level of the National Industrial Classification (1987) for India are from Circon India Data Center

Appendix: Data Sources and Description

-62-

The share of the sum of electricity, transportation and communications inputs in the value
added of sector i, in percent.

The fraction of electrical power generated but not paid for, measured as a percent of availability

Transmission and

Table 3.
Ratio of the sum of value added in all unregistered manufacturing sectors above median, to the
sum of value added in all unregistered manufacturing sectors below median, where the median
is that of labor intensity or skill intensity.
Ratio of the sum of employment in all sectors above median to the sum of employment in all
sectors below median, where the median is that of labor intensity or skill intensity or relative
firm size. Complete classification of industries along each of these dimensions is in Table 3.
Ratio of the value added per worker in all sectors above median to the value added per
worker in all sectors below median, where the median is that of labor intensity or skill
intensity or relative firm size. Complete classification of these industries along each of
these three dimensions is orovided in table 3.
Average annual growth rate of net state domestic product (NSDP) per capita for the periods
1960-1970, 1970-1980, 1980-1990, and 1990-2000
Average annual growth rate of net state domestic product (NSDP) per capita for the periods
1960-1980 and 1980-2000
Change in the ratio of value added is the difference in the ratio of value added in above median
labor intensive sectors to below median sectors between 1980 and 1997. Classification of
sectors is available from authors
Index comes from state-specific amendments to the Industrial Disputes Act of 1947. Besley
and Burgess code changes in the following way: 1 for a change that is pro-worker, 0 for a
change that is judged not to affect the bargaining power of either workers or employers, and -1
for a change which is regarded as pro-employer. Using these changes a cumulative index is
constructed to map the entire history of the state.
Concentration across 3-digit ISIC( Rev. 2) sectors, measured by the Herfindahl index of value
added.
For Indian states, this is the concentration across 3-digit (NIC-1987) sectors
measured by the Herfindahl Index of value added
Concentration across 3-digit ISIC (Rev. 2) sectors, measured by the Herfindahl index of
employment.
Growth rate of real gross value added of sector i ( 2-digit National Industrial
Classification (NIC-1987)) in state s .
The share of electricity input in the value added of sector i, in percent.

Overall Infrastructure
Intensity of sector i

Electricity Intensity
of sector i

Herfindahl Index of
Employment
Sectoral Growth Rate

Herfindahl Index of
Value Added

Besley- Burgess Index

Decadal Average
Growth Rate of state s
20-year Average
Growth Rate of state s
Change in ratio of
value added sector i state s

Ratio of Value Added
Per Worker

Ratio of Value Added
in Unregistered
Manufacturing in India
Ratio of Employment

EPWRF, Annual Survey of
Industries.
CSO, GOI
Input-Output Transactions Table
1989 and 1999.
CSO, GOI
Input-Output Transactions Table
1989 and 1999.
Planning Commission

UNIDO, 2003

Circon India Data Center

UNIDO, 2003

Besley and Burgess (20004)

EPWRF, Domestic Product of
States of India: 1960-61 to 2000-01
EPWRF, Domestic Product of
States of India: 1960-61 to 2000-01
EPWRF, ASI

UNIDO, 2003

UNIDO, 2003

Central Statistical Organization (CSO),
Government of India (GOI)

-63-

Adult Literacy Rate
Colonial Land Tenure
System at state s

Primary Schooling
in English at state s

Mass Media Penetration
at state s

Financial Sector Strength
at state s

Infrastructure Penetration
at state s

Distribution Losses (TD)
at state s
Investment Climate
at state s

Combined male and female adult literacy rate.
Average per state, over district level data, weighted using district area as percent of state area as
a weight. The measure varies between 0, for entirely landlord based colonial land tenure system,
and 1, for entirely individual based tenure system.

Indicus Analytics,
How are the States Doing, 2002

Overall investment attractiveness of the state, that takes into account the ratio of actual inflow
of private and government investment to GSDP, the ratio of FDI approved to NSDP, the ratio
of total industrial workers to the number of employees in firms registered at BIFR, the ratio of
small scale industries to sick small scale industries, the ratio of proposed investment to NSDP, the ratio
ratio of commercial bank credit to GSDP, the percent of working age population and per capita GSDP.
Spread of infrastructure within a state, that accounts for the inverse of estimated villages not
connected with pucca roads, the fraction of villages with electricity, the fraction of habitats with
drinking water, the ratio of the length of roads to the geographical area of that state, the ratio of the
length of railways to the geographical area of the state, the fraction of the population that subscribes
to the internet and the per capita GSDP.
The strength of the financial sector of the state, accounting for small savings per capita, the ratio of
of gross state domestic product from finance to small savings, the number of bank branches per
capita, the ratio of commercial bank credit to GSDP from manufacturing and per capita GSDP
from finance.
Media outreach within each state that accounts for the ratio of daily newspapers sold to
population, the number of cable TV connections per thousand households, the number of TV sets
owned per thousand households, the number of radios owned per thousand households, and the
literacy rate of all persons.
Enrollment in classes instructed in English, as a percent of total enrollment at the primary and
upper primary level in 2001-2002.
Elementary Education in India:
Analytical Report 2003,
Department of Education, GOI)
Census of India, 2001
Banerjee and Iyer (2005)

Indicus Analytics,
How are the States Doing, 2002

Indicus Analytics,
How are the States Doing, 2002

Indicus Analytics,
How are the States Doing, 2002

Government of India

in 1980.

-64-

