                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             SPECIAL INTEREST GROUPS AND THE
                               ALLOCATION OF PUBLIC FUNDS

                                             Monica Singhal

                                         Working Paper 12037
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12037


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2006




I am grateful to Alberto Alesina, Nava Ashraf, Keith Chen, Raj Chetty, David Cutler, Martin Feldstein, Amy
Finkelstein, Ed Glaeser, Jens Hilscher, Caroline Hoxby, Larry Katz, Ben Olken, Ricardo Reis, Jonah
Rockoff, Jesse Shapiro, Bryce Ward and seminar participants at Harvard University for numerous helpful
conversations and comments. I thank the National Science Foundation and the National Institute on Aging
for their financial support. Heather Langdon, Neil Mehta and Katherine Stanchik provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Monica Singhal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Special Interest Groups and the Allocation of Public Funds
Monica Singhal
NBER Working Paper No. 12037
February 2006
JEL No. H7, D7, H1

                                           ABSTRACT

A long-standing puzzle in the fiscal federalism literature is the empirical non-equivalence in
government spending from grants and other income. I propose a fully rational model in which
violations of fungibility arise from dynamic interactions between politicians and interest groups with
the ability to raise funds for local government. The predictions of the model are tested by exploiting
unique features of windfalls received by states under a settlement with the tobacco industry.
Although windfalls are unrestricted, the median state increased spending on tobacco control
programs from zero to $2.30 per capita upon receipt of funds. The marginal propensity to spend on
such programs is 0.20 from settlement revenue and zero from overall income. States which were not
involved in the settlement lawsuits spend less. The findings are consistent with the predictions of
the model when political partisanship is introduced: Republican governors spend less and factors
which should lead to political convergence increase spending for Republicans and decrease spending
for Democrats. These results cannot be explained by existing models in the literature.

Monica Singhal
Harvard University
JFK School of Government
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
monica_singhal@harvard.edu
1    Introduction

Standard models of …scal federalism predict that grants received by local governments should be

considered equivalent to increases in the income of the local constituency.                  Perhaps the most

commonly studied violation of this fungibility principle is the ‡ypaper anomaly: the empirical ob-

servation that money "sticks where it hits." Local governments spend more from intergovernmental

grants than from equivalent increases in constituent income, and grants for particular programs

tend to increase spending on those programs far more than standard theory suggests. Numerous

studies have documented the existence of ‡ypaper e¤ects, with estimates of the increase in local

spending arising from a dollar grant ranging from 25 cents to one dollar (Hines and Thaler 1995).1

    I propose a new, rational model of government spending decisions that focuses on the potential

role of special interest groups in in‡uencing the allocation of public funds. In this model, special

interest groups have the ability to raise funds for local governments by undertaking costly e¤ort.

In a dynamic setting, it is optimal for rational politicians to take the preferences of these interest

groups into account when making spending decisions to ensure that groups have incentives to

undertake the e¤ort costs of raising funds in the future.            I test the predictions of the model by

examining the response of state spending on tobacco prevention and control programs to receipt of

windfalls arising from state lawsuits against the tobacco industry.

    There are few theories in the existing literature that can explain observed violations of fungibil-

ity. Filimon, Romer and Rosenthal (1982) propose a model in which agenda-setting bureaucrats

are able to hide grants from voters.         While this model predicts that money received by govern-

ments will remain at the government level, it does little to explain why categorical grants should

systematically increase expenditure in particular spending categories.                Models focusing on rent

   1
     Models illustrating the standard revenue equivalence proposition include Bradford and Oates (1971a, 1971b).
See Gramlich (1977), Inman (1979) Fisher (1982) and Hamilton (1983) for a review of the earlier ‡ypaper literature.
More recent work includes Baicker (2001), Gordon (2004), Lutz (2004), and Evans and Owens (2005).


                                                        1
seeking by public o¢ cials (Inman 1979), …scal illusion (Oates 1979), voter uncertainty (Turnbull

1992), possible di¤erences in the tax burden of the average versus median voter (Fisher 1982) or the

deadweight costs associated with raising tax revenue (Hamilton 1986) similarly predict that grants

should produce a greater increase in government spending than equal increases in constituent in-

come but make no predictions about the allocation of spending across categories. Hines and Thaler

(1995) argue that these e¤ects can be explained by voter mental accounting; however, I present

evidence that is di¢ cult to reconcile with a simple mental accounting story.

       Two studies explicitly consider the processes by which grants received by local governments are

determined and the potential role of such processes in generating violations of fungibility across

spending categories.       Chernick (1979) argues that granting agencies allocate project grants to

communities willing to commit more local funds to the project, creating implicit matching require-

ments even for lump sum grants. Knight (2002) proposes a legislative bargaining model in which

a bargaining process at the federal level leads to endogenous grants that re‡ect local spending

preferences. Applying this model to federal highway grants, he …nds that instrumenting for grants

with measures of political bargaining power eliminates apparent ‡ypaper e¤ects.

       I focus instead on the interaction between special interest groups and government. A substan-

tial literature exists addressing the role of special interest groups in in‡uencing political decision-

making.       However, to the best of my knowledge, existing work has not considered the potential

in‡uence of special interest groups on local spending in the …scal federalism context.2

       I exploit unusual features of windfalls that states received as a result of a 1998 settlement with

the tobacco industry to test the special interest group model against alternative hypotheses. The

tobacco settlement agreement resolved multiple lawsuits …led by states against the tobacco industry

   2
    Dougan and Kenyon (1988) examine a potential role for pressure groups in generating ‡ypaper e¤ects. In their
model, however, interest groups are not responsible for procuring grants and they assume limited crowd-out by local
governments.




                                                        2
during the 1990s.       Under the terms of the settlement, tobacco companies must pay states large

annual sums (on the order of $7 billion per year) in perpetuity. I examine the response of state

spending on tobacco prevention and control programs to receipt of settlement funds.

       Two key features of the settlement windfalls are advantageous for testing violations of fungibility

in the allocation of funds. First, settlement money is unrestricted and use of funds is left entirely to

the discretion of states. Settlement windfalls should therefore, in theory, be considered equivalent

to increases in state income. Second, I demonstrate that the timing and magnitude of windfalls

are plausibly exogenous to desired spending on tobacco control programs. Grants do not re‡ect

underlying spending preferences and are truly lump-sum, without explicit or implicit matching

provisions.      The models proposed by Chernick and Knight are therefore not applicable in this

case.3

       I …nd clear evidence of violations of fungibility in government spending decisions. Average per

capita spending on tobacco control programs increased more than six-fold from the …scal year before

settlement revenues were received to the …scal year after receipt. The marginal propensity to spend

on such programs is 0.20 from settlement revenues and zero from other income. I …nd that states

that did not …le lawsuits prior to the settlement, where anti-tobacco interest groups presumably

exerted less e¤ort, spend signi…cantly less on tobacco control programs after the settlement. Finally,

I show that spending patterns conform closely to the predictions of the model in a world with

political partisanship. Republican governors spend less than Democrats, and factors which should

lead to political convergence, namely eligibility for re-election and facing an opposition controlled

senate, result in increased spending by Republicans and decreased spending by Democrats.

       This empirical setting di¤ers in at least two important ways from traditional empirical ‡ypaper

   3
    Concerns that apparent violations of fungibility may be driven by econometric misspeci…cations, such as incorrect
treatment of price e¤ects arising from matching grants (Mo¢ tt 1984) or omitted variable bias (Hamilton 1983) are
also unlikely to be problematic.




                                                         3
studies.   First, as mentioned, settlement revenues are unrestricted.             Examining the response of

spending on tobacco prevention and control programs to settlement windfalls therefore provides a

test of fungibility but di¤ers from classic ‡ypaper since revenues were not speci…cally labeled for

such programs. Second, transfers in this case are from private industry to local government, rather

than intergovernmental transfers. While these features have advantages in distinguishing among

alternative models, they also raise potential caveats in generalizing the …ndings to other settings.

I consider these issues in the concluding section of the paper.

    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows.             Section 2 presents the model.          Section 3

provides background on the settlement agreement and payments. Section 4 describes the empirical

methodology and data used, and Section 5 presents the results. Section 6 concludes.



2     Interest Groups and the Allocation of Funds

      "It’s moral treason to me. We got all this money, then legislatures and governors
      who were not even in this …ght act like the money fell out of heaven and spend it on
      the political whim of the day." –Mississippi Attorney General Michael Moore on state
      decisions to spend settlement funds on non-tobacco related programs (New York Times,
      2001)




2.1    Motivation

Grants-in-aid from the federal government to states are of two main types: mandatory "entitle-

ment" grants, for which spending is determined by existing law, and discretionary grants, for which

funding is allocated on an annual basis. In …scal year 2003, almost 60% of federal dollars given in

grants-in-aid to states, excluding Medicaid, were discretionary.4             In this system, interest groups

have the ability to in‡uence grants-in-aid through contributions and lobbying e¤orts.                    Interest

  4
    Source: Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. The primary mandatory grants-in-aid from the federal govern-
ment to states are through Medicaid, food stamp, and welfare programs. Most other grants-in-aid are discretionary.



                                                        4
groups are large contributors to federal legislators: during the 1997-1998 election cycle, over 4,500

Political Action Committees spent almost $500 million dollars and a variety of other organizations

spent $1.5 billion on lobbying Washington.5 A substantial literature (Becker 1983, Grossman 1994,

Grossman and Helpman 2001) has shown that these groups do have the power to in‡uence policy

and the distribution of grants.

       In this paper, I develop a model of how interest groups procuring funds at the federal level can

in‡uence the allocation of public funds at the local level.              I de…ne an interest group broadly as

any agent who has the ability to in‡uence grants to local governments and has speci…c spending

preferences that may di¤er substantially from the local median voter.6                     Why should local gov-

ernments not treat these grants as fungible once they are received?                   I argue that this occurs as

the result of a dynamic interaction between interest groups and local government. If an interest

group raises funds for its preferred good and the local government does not increase spending on

that good, interest groups have no incentive to undertake the costs of procuring grants.                        Local

governments must trade o¤ the social welfare bene…t of treating funds as fungible against the cost

of losing future grants.

       My empirical analysis focuses on a particular case: the tobacco settlement. Similar interac-

tions between interest groups and government, however, are common in a wide variety of settings.

Discretionary grants-in-aid to states include allocations for local health programs, environmental

projects, schools, law enforcement and workforce programs, and are lobbied for by interest groups

ranging from medical associations to labor unions. The model is therefore applicable to violations

of fungibility in a number of contexts.7

   5
     Source: The Center for Responsive Politics. www.opensecrets.org.
   6
     An "interest group" could also be a group within the government, as long as these two conditions are met.
   7
     For example, the types of interactions I describe provide one possible explanation for the ‡ypaper e¤ects observed
by Evans and Owens (2005) in the COPS program.




                                                          5
2.2      Model

I begin with a simple stylized reputation model in which a long-run government player interacts

with a number of short-run interest group players.8

       An interest group derives utility from spending on a particular good that it cares about: the

"lobby good," z. It cannot produce z directly but can raise amount L for the local government by

exerting e¤ort. The government chooses spending on a variety of goods, including z, conditional on

funds received from the interest group and other income Y . I do not assume political agency by the

government in order to demonstrate that violations of fungibility are possible even in a framework

equivalent to one in which decisions are made by a median voter. I consider the implications of

the model in a world with political agency and partisanship in Section 5.5.4. I make the strong

assumption that lobby groups are homogeneous and that all lobby goods enter the government

utility function in the same way.9 For simplicity, I also restrict the interest group e¤ort choice to

be binary.

       The government makes its decision simultaneously with its interest group opponent in each

period. In the case in which the government receives no funds from the interest group, it solves

the following problem:

                                 max UG (z; x) subject to pz z + px x       Y;                              (1)
                                  z;x



where z represents the lobby good (also a "good" in the government utility function) and x repre-

sents other government and private voter goods. Prices in this case represent the cost of production

of the various goods. Solving this problem gives the optimal choice of goods, which I denote as:

(z 0 ; x0 ).   When an interest group chooses to raise funds for the government, it does so with an

   8
     This model adapts standard models of reputation with a single long-run player; see Kreps and Wilson (1982),
Milgrom and Roberts (1982), Fudenberg and Tirole (1998).
   9
     Allowing heterogeneity in lobby goods does not alter the basic intuition of the model.




                                                       6
implicit understanding that the government will provide "payback" by spending the funds on the

good the interest group cares about, z. Whether payback occurs depends on two factors: the type

of the government and the action chosen by the government.

       This model assumes two types of governments: Committed and Strategic.                                   The Committed

government always chooses Reciprocate. The Strategic government can choose one of two strategies:

Reciprocate or Renege. I de…ne these in the following way. Under Renege, the government breaks

the implicit contract and treats the interest group funds as it would other income, maximizing

UG (z; x) subject to the constraint pz z + px x                  Y + L. Solving this problem leads to a choice of

goods along the government’s income expansion path: (z 0 ; x0 ). Under Reciprocate, the government

spends all the interest group funds on the lobby good, leading to the consumption choices (b  b).
                                                                                           z; x

The government would prefer to allocate L across all goods and would therefore be better o¤ by

reneging.

                                                                          z ;e¤ ort) > UL (z 0 ;no e¤ ort)
       I assume that interest groups have utility functions such that UL (b

and UL (z 0 ;e¤ ort) < UL (z 0 ;no e¤ ort); that is, interest groups prefer to undertake e¤ort and provide

L if and only if the government pays them back.

       The above equations imply the following payo¤ matrix:10

                                                                GOVERNMENT
                                                               Reciprocate Renege

                 INTEREST GROUP                   E¤ ort             (a; c)       ( b; d)

                                               No E¤ ort             (0; 0)        (0; 0)

       The Nash equilibrium of the stage game is then (No E¤ ort, Renege) yielding payo¤s of (0; 0)

even though (E¤ ort, Reciprocate) results in higher payo¤s (a; c) for both players.

       I now consider the implications of this model in a dynamic setting in which the government

  10
   The zero payo¤s in the second row arise from normalizing UG (z 0 ; x0 ) and UL (z 0 ;no e¤ ort ) to zero for simplicity.
                                                        z ;e¤ ort ), b = jUL (z 0 ; e¤ ort )j, c = UG (b
The payo¤s in the …rst row are then as follows: a = UL (b                                                 b), and d = UG (z 0 ; x0 ).
                                                                                                       z; x



                                                                 7
interacts with an interest group in each period.             An interest group observes the past actions of

the government with previous interest groups but not its type. In this setting, an interest group

will put forth e¤ort if it has a su¢ ciently high belief that the government is Committed, and a

Strategic government has incentives to build a reputation for being Committed by paying back

interest groups.11 The goal of the government is to maximize its discounted sum of payo¤s with a

discount factor . I assume no borrowing or savings; the government must balance the budget in

each period.

       Intuitively, Strategic governments face the following fundamental trade-o¤: spending more on

the lobby good creates a social welfare loss relative to reneging and allocating interest group funds

across all goods; however, it generates a gain in the form of additional income from interest groups

in the future if the government is perceived to be Committed as a result.12

       The model predicts violations of fungibility even in cases in which the government may be

unlikely to interact with a particular interest group repeatedly. By reneging on any interest group,

the government signals its type to all interest groups.


2.3      Solution and Comparative Statics

Suppose that the interest group’s prior probability that the government is Committed is p0 . In the

one period case, the Strategic government always reneges, and the interest group provides e¤ort if

p0 a     (1   p0 )b > 0. This occurs when the prior probability that the government is Committed

  11
     This setup corresponds to the standard reputation e¤ects framework. Without multiple types, there is no
uncertainty for the interest group. As Fudenberg and Tirole (1998) point out, an alternative approach is to model
reputations in a repeated game of complete information with trigger strategies. For example, the interest group
could provide funds as long as the government has not reneged on a previous interest group and refuse to provide
funds as soon as the government reneges. This approach does not change the set of equilibria and does not capture
the idea that reputation corresponds to something the opponents have learned (Fudenberg and Tirole 1998).
  12
     While altering the de…nition of the Committed type changes some of the speci…c empirical predictions of the
model, the basic intuition and result remain the same. The key condition is that the Committed type spends more
on the lobby good than the Strategic government would choose to spend in a static setting. As long as interest group
e¤ort is conditional on a su¢ ciently high belief that the government is Committed, there exists scope for reputation
e¤ects.



                                                         8
                                   b
exceeds a threshold value: p0 >   a+b   p.

   In the two period case, the Strategic government can Renege in period 1, revealing its type.

The total payo¤ to the government is then d + 0. The government can also Reciprocate in period

1 to build a reputation for commitment.       If doing so causes the interest group to provide e¤ort

in period 2, the government gets a total payo¤ of c + d. Solving yields the following necessary

condition for the Strategic government to Reciprocate:


                                              c
                                                > (1            )                                                (2)
                                              d


The Strategic government is willing to Reciprocate in period 1 if doing so induces interest groups

to provide funds in period 2. If the condition in equation (2) holds, the equilibrium depends on

p0 , the prior probability of a Committed government. If p0 > p, the government Reciprocates in

period 1 and interest groups provide e¤ort in both periods. If p0 < p, the Strategic government

                                               p0 a
Reciprocates in period 1 with probability    (1 p0 )b
                                                      .    Interest groups are indi¤erent about providing
                                                                          2
                                                                     b
e¤ort in period 2 and provide e¤ort in period 1 if p0 >             a+b        = p2 : Solving by induction to the N

period case, the prior probability of a Committed government (p0 ) required for the interest group

                                                                          b
to provide funds decreases in N geometrically at the rate                a+b    . For details of the solution, please

see Appendix A.1.

   The standard revenue equivalence proposition states that government expenditure from grants

                                                    @z          @z
and from other income should be the same:           @L     =    @Y   .     Much of the empirical literature on

                                                  @z       @z
categorical ‡ypaper e¤ects …nds instead that      @L   >   @Y   . This model implies a positive probability

of the government reciprocating, thereby spending more on z when it receives a grant than if it

followed the income expansion path, as long as the necessary condition given in equation (2) holds.

The model thus predicts systematic violations of fungibility across spending categories consistent



                                                       9
with ‡ypaper e¤ects.

   Violations of fungibility are more likely when      is high (more weight is given to future periods),

holding the other parameters …xed.      Equation (2) also shows that for a given , the probability

that the government Reciprocates is increasing in dc , the ratio of social welfare when the government

Reciprocates to social welfare when the government Reneges. This implies:


                                   @z   @z              c
                            prob      >         =f        ; where f > 0                             (3)
                                   @L   @Y              d


We should be more likely to observe violations of fungibility when there are low costs of misallocating

toward the lobby good relative to pursuing the socially optimal spending path.


2.4   Alternative Models

One alternative theory is that governments spend lobby money on the lobby good because they

fear voter punishment if they behave otherwise.         Such a model, however, would require either

behavioral preferences on the part of voters or a framework in which spending money on the lobby

good provides a costly signal of some other characteristic voters care about. Another alternative

is a bargaining model between interest groups and politicians. This type of model would need to

explain why interest groups are more willing or able to punish the local government when the funds

are for "their" good.

   I now test some of the predictions of the special interest group model by examining state

responses to funds received under a settlement agreement with the tobacco industry.




                                                  10
3     Background on the Tobacco Master Settlement Agreement

3.1    History

The Master Settlement Agreement represents the culmination of lawsuits …led by states against

the tobacco industry in the mid-1990s.             More than 40 states brought suit against tobacco com-

panies, alleging that these companies violated consumer protection and antitrust laws, concealed

information about their products, manipulated nicotine levels in cigarettes in order to increase

their addictiveness, and conspired to keep less addictive products o¤ the market. States sought

reimbursement from the tobacco industry for expenditures on tobacco-related illness.

    A settlement proposal was negotiated by state attorneys general and the tobacco industry in

1997. The settlement was then proposed as Congressional legislation that would have been binding

for all states.    However, the bill was voted down in June of 1998.                  During this period, Florida,

Minnesota, Mississippi and Texas negotiated independent settlement agreements with the tobacco

industry. After the failure of the bill, several states began negotiations with tobacco companies

to reach a joint settlement agreement that would not require Congressional approval.                             These

e¤orts were successful, and in November of 1998, the remaining 46 states settled jointly under the

Multistate Master Settlement Agreement. The primary condition of the settlement agreement is

the requirement that the tobacco industry transfer large amounts of money to the states annually

in perpetuity.13

    To be eligible to receive funds, each state was required to obtain approval of the settlement

from its state court, a process known as achieving state-speci…c …nality. The …rst payments to the

states were disbursed when 80% of the states whose shares equaled 80% of total payments reached

state-speci…c …nality. This occurred in November 1999, and the …rst payments were released the

  13
     The settlement also placed strong restrictions on tobacco advertising practices. For the full text of the settlement
agreement see: http://naag.org/upload/1032468605_cigmsa.pdf.



                                                           11
following month. Settlement revenue is unrestricted and the allocation mechanism and use of funds

are left entirely to the discretion of the states.


3.2   Payments

States receive three types of payments under the settlement: (1) initial payments, paid in …ve install-

ments from 1999 to 2003; (2) annual payments, paid in perpetuity; and (3) Strategic Contribution

Fund payments meant to compensate states for the costs incurred in state lawsuits, paid from

2008 to 2017. The two major adjustments made to annual settlement payments are an in‡ation

adjustment and a volume adjustment.         Annual payments increase by the CPI or 3%, whichever

is higher. The volume adjustment is based on increases or decreases in the number of cigarettes

shipped nationally relative to a base volume. The volume adjustment is not state-speci…c. Initial

payments are subject to the volume adjustment but not the in‡ation adjustment.            At the time

of the settlement, total unadjusted payments made to settling states under the agreement through

2025 were projected to be almost $206 billion (Table 1 ), or $120 billion in present value terms using

a discount rate of 4%.

   Table 2 provides a summary of settlement disbursements to states in …scal year 2002.           The

average amount of revenue a state receives is $100 million annually, which corresponds to $22 per

capita and $100 per smoker.

   Initial and annual payments are distributed among the states according to …xed state allocation

percentages. Base allocation percentages are calculated using a formula that equally weights two

factors: the state’s share of total direct medical costs related to smoking and the state’s share of

smoking-attributable Medicaid expenditures (Modisett 1997).

   Total direct medical costs related to smoking represents smoking-related health costs incurred

by all payment sources in a state in 1990. Smoking-attributable Medicaid expenditures represents



                                                     12
the amount of a state’s Medicaid expenditures directly attributable to smoking and to illnesses

associated with smokeless tobacco use for individuals over 18 in 1993.14                   Two adjustments were

made to direct medical costs: …gures were multiplied by 1.28 to re‡ect in‡ation in medical costs

between 1990 and 1993 and Medicaid costs were then subtracted to prevent double counting of

these expenditures. The percent of the total settlement amount allocated to state i is then given

by the following formula:

                                       0                1               0                   1
                                      SM CDi A                              AdjDM Ci A
                    percenti = 0:5 @ P                             + 0:5 @ P                                       (4)
                                       SM CDi                                AdjDM Ci
                                           i                1993            i                   1993

where SMCD i and AdjDMC i are the smoking-related Medicaid costs and the adjusted direct med-

ical costs for state i.

    Negotiations among states at the time of the settlement resulted in some small adjustments

to these base percentages.          Table 3 illustrates the allocation percentages as they would have

been had the above formula been followed as well as the actual percentages under the settlement.

Di¤erences between the simulated and actual allocation percentages may not be completely random

(it is unlikely to be a coincidence that California and New York receive exactly the same shares) but

are generally very small. The coe¢ cient of correlation between the two is 0.99, and proxying for

actual settlement revenues using the simulated allocation percentages does not a¤ect the results.

    The size of a state’s windfall in a given year is then the aggregate annual payment, determined

under the terms of the settlement, multiplied by its allocation percentage. Allocation percentages

were …xed at the time of the settlement agreement, so states’spending decisions do not a¤ect future

  14
     The population of each state was categorized into non-smokers, current smokers, former smokers with less than
15 years exposure and former smokers with greater than 15 years exposure. The e¤ect of type of exposure on each
smoking-related medical condition and then the level of expenditure was estimated as a function of smoking, medical
conditions and health status. The costs do not re‡ect lifetime medical care costs but rather medical care costs
paid for by all sources per year. Models controlled for age, race/ethnicity, poverty status, marital status, education,
medical insurance, region, seat-belt use and obesity. See Modisett (1997) for further details on calculations.




                                                          13
revenues.15     Counties in New York and California receive a share of state settlement payments

directly since counties in these states bear a share of Medicaid costs.              New York and California

state governments therefore receive 51% and 50% of their total state allocations, respectively.16

    Smoking-attributable Medicaid and other health care costs in 1993 are the only systematic

determining factors of state settlement revenue receipt.               These two factors alone account for

over 99% of the variation in settlement revenues if New York and California state revenues are

not adjusted for direct payments to counties and over 90% if revenues are adjusted (Table 4 ).17

Running the regression in per capita terms gives an R2 of 72% when New York and California

revenues are not adjusted and 53% when revenues are adjusted. Per capita settlement revenues

are orthogonal to a variety of other potentially relevant state characteristics (column 6). Controls

for state income per capita, an indicator for whether the state had a large pre-existing tobacco

control program, the share of the state population under 18 and the conservativeness of the state

as measured by Republican vote share in the 2000 presidential election are all insigni…cant.



4     Empirical Methodology and Data

4.1    Testing the Main Prediction of the Interest Group Model

The interest group model predicts that when interest groups are instrumental in procuring funds,

governments will spend these funds disproportionately on the interest group’s preferred goods. In

the case of the tobacco settlement, lawsuits were orchestrated largely by state attorneys general

with substantial involvement by anti-tobacco and health organizations. A large body of anecdo-

  15
     State spending on tobacco control programs could a¤ect future revenues in an extremely indirect way through
the national volume adjustment. However, this e¤ect would bias against spending on such programs.
  16
     The direct payment of a share of settlement revenues to counties in these states raises an interesting set of
questions about the response of state governments to increased county revenues. I do not address these issues here.
  17
     Coe¢ cients di¤er from 0.5 because the regressions are run on the levels of smoking-related health costs rather
than the shares.




                                                        14
tal evidence indicates that these groups felt that settlement dollars should be spent on tobacco

prevention and control programs. The following quote is typical:


        "A compassionate but naïve person would expect the states to use their $246 billion [sic]
        windfall to try to prevent more people from su¤ ering and dying from cancer, emphysema
        or other smoking related illnesses. If this is blood money, why not try to stop the
        bleeding? Ah, but the greedy deal makers in our state capitals have other plans for
        the money ... I’m talking about construction projects. Paying bills, new non-medical
        programs ... Most of this spending would be …ne if it came out of state tax revenue, but
        ... this money should not be poured into general funds. It should be used to help prevent
        and cure disease." –Judy Jarvis, radio host and lung cancer victim (New York Times,
        1999)



      I therefore focus my analysis on state spending on tobacco prevention and control programs.

Figure 1 illustrates the number of states allocating substantial funds toward such programs over

time. Although the settlement agreement was reached in 1998, states …rst received funds in the

middle of the 2000 …scal year. The number of states spending at least $0.50 per capita on tobacco

control programs increased almost six-fold from six states in …scal year 1999 to thirty-four states in

…scal year 2001. The …ve states with substantial programs prior to the settlement18 funded their

programs primarily through increases in excise taxes on cigarettes. The remaining states allocated

virtually no state funds toward such programs prior to the settlement (Figure 2 ). Among these

(non-prespending) states, mean per capita spending increased from only $0.04 in 1999 to $2.78

in the year after settlement funds were received.               Despite displaying virtually no preference for

spending on tobacco control programs through the mid-to-late 1990s (a period of substantial budget

surpluses for most states), all but one of the non-prespending states had instituted such a program

by …scal year 2002.19         States with pre-existing programs also responded to settlement revenues,

increasing spending from an average of $4.15 per capita in …scal year 1999 to $7.67 in …scal year

2001.
 18
      Arizona, California, Maine, Massachusetts and Oregon.
 19
      The only state not allocating state funds toward tobacco prevention and control by …scal year 2002 was Tennessee.


                                                           15
   In the next sections, I test the predictions of the interest group model more formally.


4.2      Econometric Speci…cation

The empirical strategy I employ to test for violations of fungibility is a variation on a traditional

…xed e¤ects speci…cation.               By exploiting both the time series and cross-sectional variation in

settlement revenue receipt, I test for violations of fungibility in two ways. Consider the following

regression framework:



  T obacco Controlit =          0   +   1 (Settlement revenue)it     +   2 (Income)it   +       t   +     i   + Xit + "it    (5)



where     t   is a set of year dummies,       i is   a set of state dummies and Xit is a set of time-varying state

controls. In a standard …xed e¤ects setting, the key parameter of interest is                             1,   which would be

interpreted as measuring the e¤ect of settlement revenue receipt on tobacco control spending.                                  t


would be included primarily as a control to pick up underlying trends in spending over time.

   The tobacco control experiment is unusual in that the pre-trend in tobacco control spending

is essentially ‡at and close to zero.                A large, discontinuous increase in spending occurs when

settlement revenues are received (Figure 1 ).                 Thus, both    1   and the     t ’s        have causal meaning

and can be used to test for violations of fungibility.                Coe¢ cients on the time dummies pick up

changes in tobacco control spending within a state over time; the …rst test is whether there exists

a discontinuity in spending at the time of settlement revenue receipt. The second test is whether

the marginal propensity to spend on tobacco control from settlement revenues is higher than the

marginal propensity to spend from state income. The relevant test is                    1   >       2   (rather than    1   > 0)

to distinguish the income e¤ect component of settlement revenue receipt from a true fungibility

e¤ect.    The      t   coe¢ cients indicate whether states spent on the lobby good when they received

lobby funds and          1   indicates whether states that received more lobby money spent more on the

                                                              16
lobby good.

       There are two primary identi…cation assumptions. The identifying assumption for                     t   is that

spending on tobacco control programs would not have changed from the …scal year before funds

were received to the …scal year after in the absence of receipt of settlement funds. The identifying

assumption for       1   is that the size of a state’s settlement windfall is orthogonal to other state

characteristics that might in‡uence spending on tobacco control programs. The allocation formula

does re‡ect the historical costs of smoking in each state, raising the potential concern that settlement

revenue is proxying for the need or desirability of spending money on such programs. I test both

identifying assumptions in Section 5.2.


4.3      Data

The last comprehensive surveys of state tobacco control spending prior to the settlement were

conducted by the Association for State and Territorial Health O¢ cials (ASTHO) in 1994. Data

on state spending for …scal years 1996–2000 were collected by the author from individual states.

As illustrated in Figure 1 and Figure 2, only …ve states had substantial tobacco control programs

prior to the receipt of settlement funds; the remaining states spent virtually nothing.20 I exclude

…scal year 2000 data from my analysis since states …rst received funds in the middle of this …scal

year.

       Data on state tobacco control funding after settlement funds were received comes from two

sources. The primary data source is a series of State Highlights Reports published by the Centers

for Disease Control (CDC). Reported state allocations include funding speci…cally appropriated to

any governmental agency, foundation, trust fund, board or university for tobacco control programs.

  20
     Data for Alaska, Louisiana and Maryland were not obtainable for the 1996-2000 …scal years. These states spent
nothing in the 1990, 1992 and 1994 ASTHO surveys. I therefore assign them zero spending for 1996-1999. My
…nding that almost all states spent virtually nothing on tobacco prevention and control programs prior to the receipt
of settlement funds is con…rmed by numerous sources including CDC (1999) and Farrelly, et al. (2001).



                                                         17
They do not include funds directed toward tobacco research, health services, tobacco farmers or

tobacco dependent communities (CDC 2001). In a few cases, appropriations were made for mul-

tiple …scal years at once or revenues were set aside in trust funds.            The CDC includes the full

appropriation amount in the year in which it was allocated.

       A secondary data source is information on allocation of tobacco settlement revenue compiled by

the National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL). Reported state allocations include funds for

community and school-based tobacco-use prevention programs, media campaigns, tobacco control

measures and tobacco cessation treatment (NCSL 2002). The major advantage of the NCSL data

is that they contain allocations for …scal years 2003 and 2004, whereas CDC data are currently

limited to …scal years 2001 and 2002. The main drawback is that NCSL data include only tobacco

control spending from settlement revenues. Data from the two sources are close in most cases, but

NCSL data underreport spending in states where settlement revenues were not the only funding

source for tobacco control programs.         In addition, NCSL data do not include money set aside

in endowment funds.        Both data sources re‡ect appropriations for spending related to tobacco

control at the beginning of the …scal year and may di¤er from actual expenditures.                I use CDC

data whenever possible and supplement the analysis with NCSL data as a speci…cation check and

also in cases in which adding additional years of data is especially useful. The two data sources

produce almost identical results.

       Settlement revenues received by states were tabulated by the National Association of Attorneys

General (NAAG) and re‡ect the amount disbursed to each state in a given …scal year.21 Sources

on the remaining variables are given in Appendix A.2.

  21
    Arkansas and Missouri did not immediately achieve state-speci…c …nality. Their settlement disbursements for
…scal 2001 therefore re‡ect both …scal 2000 and 2001 payments. I exclude 2001 data for these two states in all
analyses.




                                                      18
5         Results

5.1         Main Findings

Table 5 provides summary statistics on per capita tobacco control program allocations for …scal

years 1998, 1999, 2001 and 2002.22                   The mean amount allocated toward tobacco control after

receipt of settlement funds is a little more than $3.00 per capita. There is substantial variation in

allocation amounts across states.

         I test for violations of fungibility by estimating the following equation:



               T obacco Controlit =       0   +   1 (Srevit   Srevt ) +   2 (Incit       Inct ) + (Af ter) +   i    (6)



         Srevit and Incit are per capita settlement revenue and income for state i in year t, Af ter is an

indicator which is equal to 1 for …scal years 2001 and 2002 and                      i   is a state …xed e¤ect. The two

tests are:        1   >   2   and    > 0. Settlement revenue and income are measured in deviations from

the year mean so that               can be interpreted as the change in spending at the average levels of these

variables. Per capita settlement revenue and income are measured in real 2002 dollars.

         I …nd strong evidence that states violate fungibility in spending decisions as predicted by the

interest group model (Table 6 ). Column 1 gives the results when state …xed e¤ects are not included.

 1,      the propensity to spend from settlement revenue, is 0.18 and signi…cant at the 1% level;                    2,


the propensity to spend out of income, is essentially zero and insigni…cant. The average increase

in spending upon receipt of settlement funds, ; is 2.93 and also signi…cant at the 1% level. This

represents an almost six-fold increase in spending. Adding state …xed e¤ects does not a¤ect the

coe¢ cient estimates, as shown in Column 2.                    1   increases to 0.21 and        to 3.07.   In columns 3

and 4, I replace the indicator for Af ter with a full set of time dummies. It is clear that the e¤ect

    22
         Data are not available for Arizona and Massachusetts for …scal year 2002.


                                                              19
is being driven by a discontinuity at the time of settlement fund receipt; there is almost no change

in spending from …scal year 1998 to 1999 or from …scal year 2001 to 2002. Including earlier years

or using earlier years as the base years does not change the results.

    Both e¤ects are large in magnitude.          The increase in spending from …scal year 1999 to 2001

at the mean income and mean per capita settlement revenue level (approximately $24) is $3.00.

Taking a propensity to spend of 20 cents per dollar of settlement revenue, this implies that per

capita spending at the minimum level of settlement revenue receipt ($11) would be $0.40 and

spending at the maximum level of receipt ($40) would be over $6.00.

    While a marginal e¤ect of 20 cents on the dollar may …rst appear small relative to existing

‡ypaper estimates, it is quite large given the context of this particular experiment.                 Settlement

revenues received by states are generally much larger than the amount that could be feasibly spent

on tobacco prevention and control programs. Dollar-for-dollar spending might not be reasonable

in this case.

    In addition, the marginal propensity to spend on tobacco control programs from state income

or state government revenue prior to the settlement was essentially zero.                The existing ‡ypaper

e¤ect literature tends to report the propensity to spend out of grants for programs such as health

or education without considering the magnitude of the e¤ect relative to the marginal propensity

to spend on those goods from income or state revenue. This raises di¢ culties when attempting to

compare the magnitude of ‡ypaper across di¤erent spending categories.

    Another possible theory relevant in this particular context is that voters may have learned about

the costliness of smoking during the course of the lawsuits.23              However, states did not increase

spending on tobacco control programs during the lawsuits or even after the settlement agreement

was reached; spending increased only after the receipt of settlement funds. This discontinuity is

  23
     This theory could generalize to other contexts if voters believe the timing or magnitude of categorical grants
carry real information about the desirability of spending in that category.


                                                        20
di¢ cult to reconcile with a learning story.         In addition, I show in the next section that factors

which we might expect to in‡uence spending if states truly learned about the costliness of smoking,

such as smoking prevalence or youth smoking rates, have no e¤ect on spending decisions.


5.2      Testing the Identifying Assumptions

The identi…cation assumption for the Af ter coe¢ cient is a constant underlying time trend. Figure

3 illustrates a plot of the time coe¢ cients obtained from regressing per capita tobacco control

spending on year dummies with state …xed e¤ects for years 1992-2002.                    It seems clear that the

time trend prior to the settlement was ‡at and that receipt of settlement funds is the key driving

factor behind the increase in spending from …scal year 1999 to …scal year 2001.

       The identi…cation assumption for the settlement revenue coe¢ cient is that settlement revenues

are not proxying for other state characteristics that might in‡uence tobacco control spending. Such

factors cannot explain the discontinuity in spending over time, but must be addressed when using

cross-sectional variation in settlement payments across states, particularly since the settlement

revenue formula is a function of smoking-related factors.

       I test this identi…cation assumption by adding controls for measures of the need for tobacco

control programs using data from the post-settlement period with an indicator for whether the

state had a large pre-existing program (Table 7 ). I control for the percent of the state population

that smoked in 1998, state-speci…c minimum spending guidelines recommended by the Centers for

Disease Control (for more details see Appendix A.2 ), and the state youth smoking rate in 1997.

These measures have no signi…cant direct e¤ects, no e¤ect on the settlement revenue coe¢ cient,

and no additional explanatory power.24            The results are virtually unchanged when controls for

  24
    The statistical signi…cance of the settlement revenue coe¢ cient drops to the 10% level when the youth smoking
rate is added as a control as a result of reductions in sample size; comparable state-level data on youth smoking is
only available for half of the settlement states.




                                                        21
region, youth share and conservativeness of the state are added (column 4).

   The possibility remains that states do care about these factors, but in some nonlinear function

that is captured by the settlement revenue variable.     I therefore examine the direct e¤ect of

a variety of indicators of the costliness of smoking without including settlement revenue in the

regression (Appendix Table 1 ). Smoking prevalence, state-speci…c minimum spending guidelines

recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and youth smoking rates have no signi…cant e¤ects

on tobacco control spending.


5.3   Robustness Checks

I perform two additional robustness checks: I substitute actual settlement revenues with simulated

…gures re‡ecting the recommended allocation formula and I use NCSL data on tobacco control

spending rather than CDC data.     The results are given in Table 8.   Both checks result in only

slight reductions in the marginal propensity to spend from settlement revenue: the coe¢ cient on

per capita settlement revenue is 0.18 when simulated settlement …gures are used and 0.19 when

NCSL data are used. Estimates are signi…cant at the 1% level in both cases. The Af ter coe¢ cient

drops to 2.05 when the NCSL data are used since these data underestimate spending in the post-

settlement period, particularly for states with pre-existing programs in which substantial funding

comes from non-settlement revenues. However, despite the downward bias, the coe¢ cient is still

large in magnitude and signi…cant at the 1% level.


5.4   Persistence Over Time

I next test whether the e¤ects are persistent or diminish over time by including NCSL data on

…scal year 2003 and 2004 allocations. Again, NCSL data tabulates payments on tobacco control

programs only from settlement revenues and is therefore a biased measure of spending.         The



                                               22
advantage is the availability of additional years of data, necessary for analyzing the dynamics of

the e¤ect.

    Table 9 presents regression results and Figure 4 and Figure 5 plot the time dummies and

settlement revenue coe¢ cients with 95% con…dence intervals.                Spending at the average levels of

per capita settlement revenue and income in …scal years 2001-2003 is almost identical. Spending

falls somewhat in …scal 2004, but the di¤erence is not statistically signi…cant. The propensity to

spend from settlement revenues is higher in …scal year 2002 relative to the other …scal years, but

there is no systematic decrease in spending propensity over time. In …scal 2004, spending at the

average levels of settlement revenue and income is $1.37 higher than in …scal 1999 in real terms,

and the propensity to spend is 0.16.          Both e¤ects are signi…cant at the 1% level.            Overall, the

e¤ects appear to be strongly persistent, at least into the …fth year of fund receipt.


5.5     Further Predictions of the Interest Group Model

5.5.1    Interest Group E¤ort


The model I have proposed argues that governments will spend on the lobby good in order to pay

back interest groups that exerted e¤ort to procure funds. In the case of the tobacco settlement,

interest groups in some states were involved in lawsuits leading up to the settlement. Other states

simply signed on to the …nal settlement, receiving windfalls without e¤ort by interest groups.25

Since these governments do not have interest groups to pay back, we should expect them to treat

settlement funds as they would other state income.

    I test this prediction empirically by constructing an indicator equal to one if the state did not

…le a lawsuit prior to the settlement. Interacting this indicator with settlement revenue and the

  25
     Anti-tobacco and public health groups and activists provided expert testimony, produced "anti-smoking" reports,
supported the development of lawsuit strategies, and engaged in grassroots campaigns against the tobacco industry.
In the absence of direct measures of interest group e¤ort, I use lawsuit …ling as a proxy. The following states did
not …le lawsuits: Alabama, Delaware, Kentucky, North Carolina, Tennessee, Virginia and Wyoming.


                                                        23
Af ter indicator, I …nd that states that did not …le lawsuits spent less than states that …led (Table

10 ).     States that …led lawsuits increased average spending by $3.45 after receipt of settlement

funds compared with $1.41 for states that did not …le lawsuits, and the di¤erence is statistically

signi…cant at the 5% level. States that did not …le lawsuits also have a propensity to spend of 14

cents on the dollar compared to 23 cents for …ling states, although this di¤erence is not statistically

signi…cant.26

       We might expect states that …led lawsuits to have di¤erent underlying preferences for such

spending. However, we should then see di¤erences in spending between lawsuit and non-lawsuit

states prior to the settlement as well as di¤erences in the propensity to spend out of overall income.

I do not observe any such di¤erences (unreported). In addition, any …xed di¤erence across states

will be picked up by the state …xed e¤ect. Interacting lawsuit …ling with settlement revenue and

the Af ter indicator when state …xed e¤ects are included captures whether or not these states react

di¤erently than other states to the receipt of settlement funds relative to other income.

       Similar patterns are observed in Lutz’s (2004) study of a New Hampshire court-mandated

school …nance reform.        Although he …nds little evidence of ‡ypaper e¤ects overall, he does …nd

that "plainti¤ towns" that …led the suits leading to the court mandate spend signi…cantly more

than other municipalities on education upon receipt of the resulting state grants.27


5.5.2      Discount Factor


The model predicts that governments that weigh future periods more should spend more on tobacco

prevention and control programs.           I do not …nd interaction e¤ects of years to the next election

or governor’s eligibility for re-election on spending (unreported). It is likely that these measures

  26
      No-lawsuit states still spend $2.45 less on average when major tobacco producing states (Georgia, Kentucky,
North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee and Virginia) are excluded, although this result is no longer statistically
signi…cant (column 2).
   27
      I thank Byron Lutz for helpful discussion on this point.



                                                         24
are imperfect proxies for the true discount factor. I argue in the next section that eligibility for

re-election, in particular, appears to be picking up political constraints on government rather than

the government discount factor.


5.5.3   Political Factors


The model in Section 2 does not consider political agency on the part of the government and

is equivalent to a model in which decisions are made by a median voter.          I now consider the

implications of the model in a world with political partisanship. In particular, I relate the interest

group model to models of the political process in which politicians have preferred policies and cannot

credibly commit to enact more moderate policies if elected (Alesina 1988, Alesina and Rosenthal

1995). In these models, policy convergence is achieved through repeated elections (politicians are

punished if they break their promises once in o¢ ce) or through compromises between the executive

and legislature if the government is divided.

   We can think of politicians in this world making their decisions based on a utility function

that is some weighted average of the utility function of the politician and the utility function

of the median voter.    We might imagine that di¤erent politicians have di¤erent utility costs of

misallocating toward tobacco control programs, particularly from a corner solution in which no

funds were being spent.     The necessary condition for Reciprocating is then more likely to be

satis…ed when the costs of misallocation are low. If politicians from one political party face lower

costs of misallocating on such programs than the median voter and politicians from the other party

face higher costs, we should observe the party with low costs spending more.        Suppose for now

that Democrats face lower costs of misallocating toward tobacco control than the median voter and

that Republicans face higher costs. The model then predicts that we should observe Democrats

spending more from settlement funds than Republicans. It further generates the strong prediction



                                                 25
that factors that lead to greater political convergence, such as eligibility for re-election and facing

an opposition controlled legislature, should then decrease spending for Democrats and increase

spending for Republicans. (The pattern would be reversed if in fact Republicans are the low cost

party.)

       I test these predictions by analyzing the e¤ects of political factors on spending in the post-

settlement period.28        I …nd strong evidence in support of the model (Table 11 ).                     Having a

Republican governor at the time the budget for the …scal year is passed decreases average spending

by $1.90 from a base of $4.74 (signi…cant at 10%). Having a Republican governor also decreases

the propensity to spend to 5 cents on the dollar from a base of 37 cents on the dollar, and this

di¤erence is signi…cant at the 1% level. Note that we do not see di¤ering propensities to spend

out of other income, indicating that these results are not being driven solely by di¤erences in the

propensity to spend on tobacco control.

       I …nd that eligibility for re-election (which should move parties closer to the median voter)

reduces both average spending and the propensity to spend for Democrats and increases both for

Republicans (column 2). Similarly, facing an opposition controlled state senate decreases spending

for Democrats and increases spending for Republicans, both on average and at the margin (column

3).

       These results should be taken with some caution given the relatively small sample size. Nev-

ertheless, the patterns are quite striking and consistent, lending support to the interest group

model.

  28
    I focus on the post-settlement period because the vast majority of states were not spending anything on such
programs prior to the settlement. The direct e¤ect of political factors in the pre-settlement period cannot be credibly
estimated.




                                                          26
6    Conclusion

I …nd clear evidence that states systematically violate fungibility in spending decisions in response to

windfalls received under the tobacco settlement. The observed spending patterns are not consistent

with existing models of the political process. The interaction e¤ects of lawsuit participation and

political factors are also di¢ cult to reconcile with a mental accounting story. I …nd support for my

proposed model, which predicts violations of fungibility as a result of dynamic interactions between

interest groups and local government. Spending patterns also conform to the speci…c predictions

of the model when we allow political partisanship and policy divergence.

    As noted in the introduction, there are at least two main caveats to generalizing these results.

First, settlement revenues were not speci…cally labeled for tobacco prevention and control programs,

whereas most grants-in-aid are labeled for particular projects. In this model, the relevant factor is

not the label of the grant but rather the preference of the interest group that procured the grant.

In practice, these are likely to be the same for most grants-in-aid. The model can thus provide

an explanation for cases of classic ‡ypaper e¤ects.      Second, the transfers in the settlement are

from industry to local government. The same model, however, applies to grants from federal to

local governments; if anything, we might expect the links between interest groups and grants to be

stronger in the case of intergovernmental grants.

    The interest group model would not be as applicable to situations in which there is truly no

discretionary component to grants-in-aid.     This is rarely the case.   As mentioned, a substantial

share of intergovernmental grants are allocated on a discretionary basis. In addition, ‡ypaper e¤ects

in entitlement programs are generally identi…ed from program expansions. These expansions may

be the result of interest group involvement, in which case the incentives outlined in the model

would apply. Observed ‡ypaper e¤ects in other contexts, such as in spending by local governments

in response to grants from international aid agencies and non-governmental organizations, could


                                                  27
also be explained by a similar type of dynamic interaction between local governments and granting

agencies.




                                               28
References
 [1] Alesina, Alberto. "Credibility and Policy Convergence in a Two Party System with Rational
     Voters." American Economic Review, 78: 796-806, 1988.

 [2] Alesina, Alberto and Howard Rosenthal. Partisan Politics, Divided Government, and the
     Economy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995.

 [3] Baicker, Katherine. "Government Decision-Making and the Incidence of Mandates." Journal
     of Public Economics. 82(2): 147-194, 2001.

 [4] Becker, Gary S. "A Theory of Competition Among Pressure Groups for Political In‡uence."
     Quarterly Jounal of Economics. 98(3): 371-400, 1983.

 [5] Bradford, David and Wallace Oates. "The Analysis of Revenue Sharing in a New Approach
     to Collective Fiscal Decisions." Quarterly Journal of Economics. 85(3): 416-439, 1971a.

 [6] Bradford, David and Wallace Oates. "Toward a Predictive Theory of Intergovernmental
     Grants." American Economic Review. 61(2): 440-448, 1971b.

 [7] Centers for Disease Control. "Investment in Tobacco Control: State Highlights 2001." U.S.
     Department of Health and Human Services, 2001.

 [8] Centers for Disease Control. "Investment in Tobacco Control: State Highlights 2002." U.S.
     Department of Health and Human Services, 2002.

 [9] Centers for Disease Control. "Tobacco Control Activities in the United States: 1994-1999."
     U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1999.

[10] Chernick, Howard A. "An Economic Model of the Distribution of Project Grants" in Fiscal
     Federalism and Grants-in-Aid, Peter Mieszkowski and William H. Oakland, eds. Washington
     D.C.: Urban Institute, 1979.

[11] Dougan, William R. and Daphne A. Kenyon. "Pressure Groups and Public Expenditures:
     The Flypaper E¤ect Reconsidered." Economic Inquiry. 26(1): 159-170, 1988.

[12] Evans, Bill and Emily Owens. "Flypaper COPS." Mimeo, University of Maryland, 2005.

[13] Farrelly, Matthew C., Terry F. Pechacek and Frank J. Chaloupka. "The Impact of Tobacco
     Control Program Expenditures on Aggregate Cigarette Sales: 1981-1998." NBER Working
     Paper 8691, December 2001.

[14] Fisher, Ronald C. "Income and Grant E¤ects on Local Expenditure: The Flypaper E¤ect and
     Other Di¢ culties." Journal of Urban Economics, 12: 324-345, 1982.

[15] Filimon, Radu, Thomas Romer and Howard Rosenthal. "Asymmetric Information and Agenda
     Control." Journal of Public Economics, 17: 51-70, 1982.

[16] Fudenberg, Drew and Jean Tirole. Game Theory. Cambrige: The MIT Press, 1991.

[17] Gordon, Nora. "Do Federal Grants Boost School Spending? Evidence from Title I." Journal
     of Public Economics. 88(9-10): 1771-92, 2004.



                                              29
[18] Gramlich, Edward M. "Intergovernmental Grants: A Review of the Empirical Literature" in
     The Political Economy of Fiscal Federalism, Wallace E. Oates, ed. Lexington, Mass.: D.C.
     Heath, 1977.

[19] Grossman, P.J. "A Political Theory of Intergovernmental Grants." Public Choice. 78: 295-303,
     1994.

[20] Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman. Special Interest Politics. Cambridge: The MIT Press,
     2001.

[21] Hamilton, Bruce W. "The Flypaper E¤ect and Other Anomalies." Journal of Public Eco-
     nomics, 22: 347-362, 1983.

[22] Hamilton, Jonathan. "The Flypaper E¤ect and the Deadweight Loss from Taxation." Journal
     of Urban Economics, 19: 148-155, 1986.

[23] Hines, James R. and Richard H. Thaler. "Anomalies: The Flypaper E¤ect." Journal of
     Economic Perspectives, 9(4): 217-226, 1995.

[24] Inman, Robert P. "The Fiscal Performance of Local Governments: An Interpretive Review"
     in Current Issues in Urban Economics, Peter Mieszkowski and Mahon Straszheim, eds. Bal-
     timore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1979.

[25] Knight, Brian. "Endogenous Federal Grants and Crowd-out of State Government Spending:
     Theory and Evidence from the Federal Highway Aid Program." American Economic Review,
     92(1): 71-92, 2002.

[26] Kreps, D. and R. Wilson. "Reputation and Imperfect Information." Journal of Economic
     Theory, 27: 253-279, 1982.

[27] Lutz, Byron. "Taxation with Representation: The Incidence of Intergovernmental Grants in
     a Plebiscite Democracy." Mimeo, MIT, 2004.

[28] Milgrom, P. and J. Roberts. "Predation, Reputation and Entry Deterrence." Journal of
     Economic Theory, 27: 280-312, 1982.

[29] Modisett, Je¤rey A. "An Analysis of Various Methods of Allocating Tobacco-Settlement Pro-
     ceeds Among the States (Allocation Subcommittee Draft Version)." unpublished manuscript,
     August 8, 1997.

[30] Mo¢ tt, Robert. "The E¤ects of Grants-in-Aid on State and Local Expenditures: The Case
     of AFDC." Journal of Public Economics, 23: 279-305, 1984.

[31] National Conference of State Legislatures. "State Management and Allocation of Tobacco
     Settlement Revenue 1999-2001." August 2001.

[32] National Conference of State Legislatures. "State Management and Allocation of Tobacco
     Settlement Revenue 2002." August 2002.

[33] National Conference of State Legislatures. "State Management and Allocation of Tobacco
     Settlement Revenue 2003." September 2003.




                                               30
[34] Oates, Wallace E. "Lump-sum Intergovernmental Grants Have Price E¤ects" in Fiscal Feder-
     alism and Grants-in-Aid, Peter Mieszkowski and William H. Oakland, eds. Washington D.C.:
     Urban Institute, 1979.

[35] Turnbull, Geo¤rey K. "Fiscal Illusion, Uncertainty and the Flypaper E¤ect." Journal of
     Public Economics, 48: 207-223, 1992.

[36] Williams, Evans and Emily Owens. "Flypaper COPS." mimeo, University of Maryland,
     September 2004.




                                             31
   Appendix
   A.1 Solution to Interest Group Model
    Since the Committed government always pays back, the probability of being Committed condi-
tional on Reciprocate must be at least p0 . If p0 > p, interest groups always provide e¤ort in period
1 and e¤ort in period 2 if the government Reciprocates in period 1. If p0 < p, the equilibrium
condition requires that the interest group in period 2 will randomize so that the government is
indi¤erent in period 1; in other words, so that the the posterior probability of Committed condi-
tional on Reciprocate is exactly the threshold value p. If is the probability of Reciprocate by
a Strategic government, Bayes’ rule implies that the probability of being Committed conditional
                         0                                                          0
on Reciprocate is p0 + p(1 p0 ) . Setting this equal to p and solving gives = (1 p pa0 )b . The total
                                                                                p0 a            a+b
probability of Reciprocate in period 1 is therefore p0 + (1            p0 )   (1 p0 )b
                                                                                         = p0    b    . The interest
                                               a+b                     a+b
group will provide e¤ort in period 1 if   p0    b    a        1   p0    b     b > 0. This condition holds when
             2
        b
p0 >   a+b       . We can now solve by induction to the N period case. For example, when N = 3 we
can see that if p0 > p2 , the government will Reciprocate and the interest group will provide funds.
If p0 is between p2 and p3 , the government will randomize and the interest group will provide funds
in period 1. If p0 < p3 , the government will randomize and the interest group will not provide
funds in period 1. The prior probability of a Committed government (p0 ) required for the interest
                                                                     b
group to provide funds decreases in N geometrically at the rate a+b     .

   A.2 Data Sources
    Centers for Disease Control Minimum Spending Guidelines: The Centers for Disease Con-
trol put forth a 1999 report with "best practices" state-speci…c spending guidelines. The re-
port included the CDC’s estimate of the minimum spending required for each state to imple-
ment comprehensive and e¤ective tobacco control programs. The full report is available at:
http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/bestprac.htm.
    Lawsuit Participation: This variable indicates whether a state …led a lawsuit prior to the
settlement. The indicator is taken from a summary of litigation documents available at the
following website: http://www.library.ucsf.edu/tobacco/litigation/summary.html
    Political Variables: Data on political parties come from various issues of The Book of the States,
published by the Council of State Governments. Gubernatorial and state senate control re‡ect
the party in power at the time budget allocations are made for the …scal year. The independent
governor of Maine was classi…ed as a Democrat. Eligibility for re-election was computed taking
into account state-speci…c term limit laws.
    State Population and Income: Bureau of Economic Analysis. The calendar year population
and income are counted for the next …scal year (ex: 1990 population counted for the 1991 …scal
year).
    Youth Share: 2000 census. The youth share is the percentage of the state population under
18.
    Smoking Variables: Percent of population that smokes from Centers for Disease Control; youth
smoking rate from the Youth Tobacco Surveys (YTS).




                                                         32
                                                          FIGURE 1
                                   Settlement States Allocating Funds for Tobacco Control

                       40

                       35

                       30
    Number of States




                       25

                       20

                       15

                       10

                       5

                       0
                            1990   1992    1994    1996    1997    1998     1999    2000      2001      2002
                                                               Year

                                                       funding > $0.50 per cap

Notes: This figure illustrates spending for the 46 states that were involved in the settlement. Data for 1990, 1992
and 1994 come from surveys conducted by the American State and Territorial Health Officials (ASTHO). Data for
1996-2000 were collected by author. Data for 2001-2002 come from the CDC.




                                                            33
                                                  FIGURE 2
                           Mean Per Capita Spending on Tobacco Control Programs
                             (excluding states with large pre-existing programs)

              3.5

               3

              2.5
    Dollars




               2

              1.5

               1

              0.5

               0
                    1990     1992   1994    1996     1997     1998      1999     2000     2001      2002
                                                           Year

Notes: All figures given in 2002 dollars. Excludes Arizona, California, Maine, Massachusetts and Oregon. Data
for 1990, 1992 and 1994 come from surveys conducted by the American State and Territorial Health Officials
(ASTHO). Data for 1996-2000 were collected by author. Data for 2001-2002 come from the CDC.




                                                      34
                                           FIGURE 3
                      Test of After Coefficient Identification Assumption
  Regression of Per Cap Tobacco Control Spending on Year Dummies with State Fixed Effects

                             4

                            3.5

                             3
      Coefficient on Year




                            2.5

                             2

                            1.5

                             1

                            0.5

                             0
                                  1990   1992   1994   1996   1997    1998   1999   2000   2001    2002
                                                                   Year

Notes: All figures given in 2002 dollars. Data for 1990, 1992 and 1994 come from surveys conducted by the
American State and Territorial Health Officials (ASTHO). Data for 1996-2000 were collected by author. Data for
2001-2002 come from the CDC.




                                                              35
                                                           FIGURE 4
                                              Persistence of Spending Over Time
                                     Graph of Time Dummies with 95% Confidence Interval

       Dollars per Capita   4
                            3
                            2
                            1
                            0
                            -1
                                      1998        1999    2001      2002       2003       2004
                                                            Fiscal Year




                                         FIGURE 5
                              Propensity to Spend Over Time
           Graph of Settlement Revenue Coefficient with 95% Confidence Interval

                            0.35
     Spending Propensity




                             0.3
                            0.25
                             0.2
                            0.15
                             0.1
                            0.05
                                 0
                                           2001          2002           2003          2004
                                                             Fiscal Year


Notes: All figures given in 2002 dollars. Data for 1998-1999 were collected by author. Data for 2001-
2004 come from the NCSL.




                                                            36
                                                 TABLE 1
                                    Settlement Payments Through 2025

Type of Payment                                     Amount                                   Total


1998                                            $2,400,000,000                          $2,400,000,000

2000                                                                                    $6,411,750,000

   Initial                                      $2,472,000,000

   Annual                                       $3,939,750,000

2001                                                                                    $6,923,660,000

   Initial                                      $2,546,160,000

   Annual                                       $4,377,500,000

2002                                                                                    $8,313,294,800

   Initial                                      $2,622,544,800

   Annual                                       $5,690,750,000

2003                                                                                    $8,391,971,144

   Initial                                      $2,701,221,144

   Annual                                       $5,690,750,000

2004-2007                                                                              $28,016,000,000

   Annual                                       $7,004,000,000

2008-2017                                                                              $80,040,000,000

   Annual                                       $7,143,000,000

   SCF                                           $861,000,000

2018-2025                                                                              $64,031,999,976

   Annual                                       $8,003,999,997

TOTAL                                                                                  $204,528,675,920

Notes: Figures reported are without any adjustments other than the Previously Settled States reduction. Source:
National Governors’ Association. www.nga.org/cda/files/TOBDETAIL.pdf.




                                                        37
                                              TABLE 2
                         Summary Statistics: Settlement Revenues (FY 2002)
                                         Dollars (000s)          Dollars Per     Dollars Per
                                                                     Capita    1998 Smoker

Min                                               13,800              10.25           56.74
Median                                            68,300              21.55           89.90
Mean                                            101,000               21.97           98.26
Max                                             361,000               37.20          172.13
N                                                     46                 46              46
Notes: These figures include both annual and initial payments.




                                                        38
TABLE 3: State Allocation Percentages
State                                  Actual            Simulated
Alabama                                1.62%                1.59%
Alaska                                 0.34%                0.25%
Arizona                                1.47%                1.02%
Arkansas                               0.83%                0.94%
California                            12.76%               11.25%
Colorado                               1.37%                1.39%
Connecticut                            1.86%                2.03%
Delaware                               0.40%                0.31%
Georgia                                2.45%                2.62%
Hawaii                                 0.60%                0.45%
Idaho                                  0.36%                0.28%
Illinois                               4.65%                5.23%
Indiana                                2.04%                2.40%
Iowa                                   0.87%                0.95%
Kansas                                 0.83%                0.89%
Kentucky                               1.76%                2.02%
Louisiana                              2.26%                2.35%
Maine                                  0.77%                0.84%
Maryland                               2.26%                2.37%
Massachusetts                          4.04%                4.13%
Michigan                               4.35%                4.43%
Missouri                               2.27%                2.22%
Montana                                0.42%                0.34%
Nebraska                               0.59%                0.53%
Nevada                                 0.61%                0.51%
New Hampshire                          0.67%                0.59%
New Jersey                             3.87%                3.97%
New Mexico                             0.60%                0.50%
New York                              12.76%               13.91%
North Carolina                         2.33%                2.50%
North Dakota                           0.37%                0.30%
Ohio                                   5.04%                5.48%
Oklahoma                               1.04%                1.15%
Oregon                                 1.15%                1.08%
Pennsylvania                           5.75%                5.58%
Rhode Island                           0.72%                0.66%
South Carolina                         1.18%                1.18%
South Dakota                           0.35%                0.27%
Tennessee                              2.44%                2.50%
Utah                                   0.44%                0.37%
Vermont                                0.41%                0.31%
Virginia                               2.04%                2.25%
Washington                             2.05%                2.10%
West Virginia                          0.89%                1.01%
Wisconsin                              2.07%                2.16%
Wyoming                                0.25%                0.14%
Notes: Simulated figures calculated from formula after removing shares of non-settlement states. Correlation: 0.99.

                                                        39
                                                TABLE 4
                          Determinants of State Settlement Revenue (FY 2002)

                                     Settlement Revenue                Settlement Revenue per Capita

                                       (1)        (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)

Smoking attributable Medicaid        0.534**     0.154
                                     (0.036)    (0.079)
Smoking attributable other health    0.103**    0.081**
                                     (0.005)    (0.010)
Smoking attr. Medicaid per cap                               0.625**       0.404**       0.387**      0.391**
                                                             (0.105)       (0.133)       (0.133)      (0.142)
Smoking attr. other health per cap                           0.067**       0.085**       0.103**      0.119**
                                                             (0.022)       (0.027)       (0.033)      (0.040)
State income per cap                                                                    -2.01e-04    -1.38e-04
                                                                                       (1.92e-04)   (2.26e-04)
Pre-settlement program                                                                                 -1.437
                                                                                                      (2.411)
Youth share (2000)                                                                                     -0.016
                                                                                                      (0.572)
Repub vote share (2000)                                                                                0.094
                                                                                                      (0.120)

Observations                           46             46            46          46          46            46
R-squared                            0.992          0.901         0.716        0.530       0.542         0.557
Notes: Smoking attributable Medicaid and smoking attributable other health correspond to SMCDi and AdjDMCi in
the allocation formula. Columns 1 and 3 do not adjust New York and California state settlement revenues for
payments made directly to counties. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                        40
                                           TABLE 5
              Summary Statistics: Tobacco Prevention and Control Program Spending
                                    FY 1998                  FY 1999               FY 2001                 FY 2002

Min                                         0                       0                      0                       0
Median                                      0                       0                   2.30                    2.78
Mean                                     0.52                    0.49                   3.34                    3.21
Max                                      6.88                    6.51                 21.26                    18.10
N                                          46                      46                     44                      44
Notes: All figures in 2002 dollars. Data for fiscal years 1998 and 1999 compiled by author. Data for fiscal years
2001 and 2002 come from CDC.




                                                        41
                                                TABLE 6
                                 Per Capita Spending on Tobacco Control
                                          (1)                  (2)                  (3)                  (4)

Settlement rev per capita              0.184**               0.210**             0.187**               0.214**
                                        (0.042)              (0.045)              (0.043)              (0.046)
State income per capita                2.87e-05             -4.80e-04            2.73e-05             -4.93e-04
                                      (5.02e-05)           (3.42e-04)           (5.05e-04)           (3.45e-04)
After                                  2.927**               3.071**
                                        (0.409)              (0.318)
FY=1999                                                                           -0.031               -0.031
                                                                                 (0.572)              (0.442)
FY=2001                                                                          3.107**              3.174**
                                                                                 (0.583)              (0.456)
FY=2002                                                                          2.720**              2.943**
                                                                                 (0.579)              (0.449)
Constant                                0.507                                     0.523
                                       (0.285)                                   (0.405)

State Fixed Effects                      No                   Yes                   No                  Yes

Observations                             180                 180                 180                    180
R-squared                               0.274               0.447               0.276                  0.448
Notes: Settlement revenue per capita and income per capita are de-meaned. Years: 1998, 1999, 2001 and 2002.
Fiscal year 2000 excluded because settlement revenues were received in the middle of this fiscal year. * significant
at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                         42
                                               TABLE 7
                         Test of Settlement Revenue Identification Assumption
                                            (1)                 (2)                 (3)                  (4)

Settlement rev per cap                    0.199**              0.199*               0.255+             0.206**
                                          (0.070)              (0.090)             (0.148)             (0.071)
State inc per cap                        -5.30e-06            3.56e-07            -1.37e-04           -1.12e-04
                                        (9.48e-05)           (1.04e-04)          (1.55e-04)          (1.31e-04)
Pre-settlement program                    4.069**             4.184**              6.072**               3.067
                                          (1.411)              (1.402)             (2.083)             (1.966)
FY = 2002                                  -0.218               -0.222              -0.605              -0.269
                                          (0.467)              (0.522)             (0.871)             (0.490)
% pop smokes (1998)                        -0.053                                                       -0.090
                                          (0.176)                                                      (0.172)
CDC recommended min per cap                                    -0.013
                                                              (0.257)
Youth smoking rate (1997)                                                          -0.160
                                                                                  (0.170)
Region = South                                                                                           0.831
                                                                                                       (1.510)
Region = Midwest                                                                                         2.931
                                                                                                       (2.146)
Region = West                                                                                            2.510
                                                                                                       (2.063)
Youth share (2000)                                                                                      -0.133
                                                                                                       (0.293)
Repub vote share (2000 pres)                                                                           -0.142+
                                                                                                       (0.077)
Constant                                   4.417               3.278               9.234               14.388
                                          (4.138)             (2.548)             (6.620)             (10.622)

Observations                                88                    88                   43                   88
R-squared                                 0.221                 0.219                0.270                0.321
Notes: Settlement revenue per capita and income per capita are de-meaned. Years: 2001, 2002. All columns are
pooled OLS with state-clustered standard errors. + significant at 10%, * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                        43
                                                  TABLE 8
                                              Robustness Checks
                                                  (1)                        (2)                      (3)
                                               Base Case                 Simulated               NCSL tobacco
                                                                       Settlement Rev             control data

Settlement rev per capita                        0.210**                   0.177**                   0.185**
                                                 (0.045)                   (0.041)                   (0.039)
State income per capita                         -4.80e-04                 -1.65e-04                 -2.24e-04
                                               (3.42e-04)                (4.78e-04)                (2.89e-04)
After                                            3.071**                   2.911**                   2.051**
                                                 (0.318)                   (0.321)                   (0.273)

State Fixed Effects                                Yes                      Yes                       Yes

Observations                                      180                      180                        182
R-squared                                        0.447                    0.663                      0.351
Notes: Settlement revenue per capita and income per capita are de-meaned. Years: 1998, 1999, 2001 and 2002.
Fiscal year 2000 excluded because settlement revenues were received in the middle of this fiscal year. * significant
at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                         44
                                                  TABLE 9
                                    Persistence of the Effects over Time
                                                              (1)                                (2)
                                                   FY 1998, 1999, 2001-2004           FY 1998, 1999, 2001-2004

Settlement rev per cap                                        0.159**                          0.184**
                                                              (0.034)                           (0.042)
Settlement rev per cap*(FY>2002)                                                                 -0.039
                                                                                                (0.039)
FY = 1999                                                       0.056                             0.056
                                                               (0.402)                          (0.402)
FY = 2001                                                     2.085**                          2.123**
                                                               (0.411)                          (0.413)
FY = 2002                                                     2.127**                          2.127**
                                                               (0.402)                          (0.402)
FY = 2003                                                     2.142**                          2.142**
                                                               (0.402)                          (0.402)
FY = 2004                                                     1.368**                          1.368**
                                                               (0.402)                          (0.402)
State inc per cap                                             7.64e-06                         6.78e-05
                                                             (3.38e-04)                       (3.43e-04)

State Fixed Effects                                             Yes                              Yes

Observations                                                  274                                274
R-squared                                                    0.585                              0.587
Notes: Settlement revenue per capita and income per capita are de-meaned. Years: 1998, 1999, 2001-2004. Fiscal
year 2000 excluded because settlement revenues were received in the middle of this fiscal year. * significant at 5%;
** significant at 1%. Tobacco control spending data from 2001-2004 from the NCSL.




                                                        45
                                                     TABLE 10
                                        Tests of the Interest Group Model
                                                        (1)                                  (2)
Settlement revenue per capita                        0.227**                              0.227**
                                                     (0.048)                              (0.052)
(No lawsuit)*(Settlement rev per cap)                 -0.083                                0.083
                                                     (0.135)                              (0.273)
After                                                3.449**                              3.478**
                                                     (0.347)                              (0.378)
(No Lawsuit)*After                                   -2.032*                               -2.450
                                                     (0.965)                              (1.753)
State income per capita                             -4.83e-04                            -6.23e-04
                                                   (3.38e-04)                           (3.71e-04)

State fixed effects                                   Yes                                  Yes

Observations                                            180                                   156
R-squared                                              0.473                                 0.482
Notes: No lawsuit states are Alabama, Delaware, Kentucky, North Carolina, Tennessee, Virginia and Wyoming.
Settlement revenue per capita and income per capita are de-meaned. Years: 1998, 1999, 2001 and 2002. Fiscal year
2000 excluded because settlement revenues were received in the middle of this fiscal year. Column 1 includes all
states. Column 2 excludes big tobacco producing states: Georgia, Kentucky, North Carolina, South Carolina,
Tennessee and Virginia. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                       46
                                                 TABLE 11
                     Testing the Predictions of the Model with Political Partisanship
                                                             (1)                 (2)                  (3)

Settlement revenue per capita                            0.369**               0.595**              0.469**
                                                         (0.091)               (0.168)              (0.098)
(Repub governor)*(Settle rev per cap)                   -0.318**              -0.579**              -0.375*
                                                         (0.103)               (0.178)              (0.181)
(Elig for re-election)*(Settle rev pc)                                         -0.332+
                                                                               (0.198)
(Repub gov)*(Elig)*(Settle rev pc)                                              0.438+
                                                                               (0.232)
(Opposition senate)*(Settle rev pc)                                                                -0.443**
                                                                                                    (0.116)
(Repub gov)*(Opp senate)*(Settle rev pc)                                                            0.378*
                                                                                                    (0.181)
Constant (measures avg spending for Democrats)           4.742**              4.581**               5.463**
                                                         (0.781)              (1.125)               (0.864)
Repub governor                                           -1.900+              -2.594*                -2.223
                                                         (0.957)              (1.228)               (1.406)
Eligible for re-election                                                       -0.178
                                                                              (1.386)
(Repub governor)*(Elig)                                                        1.905
                                                                              (1.884)
Opposition senate                                                                                   -2.612**
                                                                                                     (0.905)
(Repub governor)*(Opposition senate)                                                                  1.634
                                                                                                     (1.623)
State income per capia                                   -2.01e-05            5.81e-06              6.88e-05
                                                        (2.32e-04)           (9.78e-04)            (8.00e-05)
(Repub governor)*(State income per capita)                8.29e-05
                                                        (2.46e-04)

Observations                                                 88                   88                    88
R-squared                                                  0.157                 0.303                0.334
Notes: Years: 2001, 2002. Controls for an indicator for fiscal year 2002. Settlement revenue per capita, income per
capita are de-meaned. All columns are pooled OLS with state-clustered standard errors. + significant at 10%; *
significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                        47
                                        APPENDIX TABLE 1
            Effect of Smoking Related Variables on Per Capita Tobacco Control Spending
                                                      (1)                   (2)                   (3)

% pop smokes (1998)                                  0.016
                                                    (0.185)
CDC recommended min per cap                                                0.311
                                                                          (0.216)
Youth smoking rate (1997)                                                                         -0.037
                                                                                                 (0.163)
State inc per cap                                   6.64e-05              9.77e-05              -9.56e-06
                                                   (8.31e-05)            (8.14e-05)            (1.42e-04)
Pre-settlement program                                3.971                4.248*                8.113**
                                                     (2.136)               (1.950)               (1.335)
FY = 2002                                             0.114                 0.130                 -0.299
                                                     (0.442)               (0.442)               (0.852)
Constant                                              2.452                 0.419                  4.913
                                                     (4.323)               (1.875)               (6.297)

Observations                                                88              88                     43
R-squared                                                 0.097            0.139                 0.175
Notes: Years: 2001, 2002. Income per capita is de-meaned. All columns are pooled OLS with state-clustered
standard errors. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                      48
