NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION, POPULATION GROWTH AND THE LONG-RUN
WORLD INCOME DISTRIBUTION
Marcos Chamon
Michael Kremer
Working Paper 12038
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12038

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2006

The views expressed in this paper are our own and do not necessarily reflect the views or policies
of the International Monetary Fund. We are grateful to David Weil, Lant Pritchett, to participants at
the IFPRI/Cornell conference on threshold effects and non-linearities in growth and development,
the AEA 2006 Annual Meeting and three anonymous referees for helpful comments and suggestions.
Any errors are solely ours.
© 2006 by Marcos Chamon and Michael Kremer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Economic Transformation, Population Growth and the Long-Run World Income Distribution
Marcos Chamon and Michael Kremer
NBER Working Paper No. 12038
February 2006, Revised September 2008
JEL No. J11,F43,O41
ABSTRACT
We construct and calibrate a model of the world economy in which countries’ opportunities to develop
depend on their trade with advanced economies. Trade opportunities in turn depend on the relative
population of the advanced and developing world. As developing countries become advanced, they
further improve the trade prospects for the remaining developing countries. As long as the population
growth differential between developing and advanced countries is not too large, the rate at which countries
transition to prosperity accelerates over time. However, if population growth differentials are large
relative to the transition rate, the world economy converges to widespread prosperity if and only if
the proportion of the world population in advanced countries is above a critical level. The model suggests
that countries which become more open are more likely to grow, but that increased openness by developing
countries as a whole may lead to only modest increases in growth for developing countries in aggregate.
The rapid rise of China may hurt some developing countries in the short-run, but will open tremendous
opportunities for the remaining developing countries in the long-run.

Marcos Chamon
International Monetary Fund
MCHAMON@imf.org
Michael Kremer
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center M20
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mkremer@fas.harvard.edu

1

Introduction

For the last half century, integration with the world economy has arguably been the
chief route from poverty to wealth. Japan exported cheap goods after World War
II and later moved on to more technologically sophisticated products. When Japan
became rich, Korea, Taiwan Province of China, Hong Kong SAR and Singapore
replaced Japan as low wage exporters, and when these economies moved on to more
sophisticated products, Thailand and Malaysia filled their niche. More recently, China
has become an important exporter of manufactured goods and India is increasingly
moving into services exports. A number of explanations have been advanced for
the link between non-traditional exports and growth, including learning and political
economy eﬀects of trade. This paper does not seek to model the reasons for this link,
but instead, takes it as given and explores its implications for the long-run evolution
of the world income distribution.
We present a model in which countries have an opportunity to develop when they
integrate with the world economy by producing non-traditional exports for advanced
countries. A developing country’s export opportunities are greater the more potential
buyers there are in advanced countries and the fewer potential competitors there are
in developing countries. Thus, as developing countries succeed in becoming advanced
economies, their success will improve the export opportunities for the remaining developing countries, which can lead to accelerating global growth. Once China, for
example, becomes rich, a billion more people will live in a country that imports
labor-intensive goods and a billion fewer in a country that exports them, opening up
opportunities for other countries to fill this niche. Whether the world economy converges to a state of widespread prosperity depends on the extent of barriers to trade,
the rate at which developing countries that are engaging in trade become advanced
economies, migration rates, population growth rates in rich and poor countries, and
potentially on initial conditions. A key factor influencing the long-run evaluation of
the world economy is diﬀerences in population growth rates between countries. If
1

the disparity in population growth rates between developing and advanced countries
is not large relative to the economic transformation and migration rates, then the
proportion of the world population living in advanced countries will increase indefinitely. If the disparity in population growth rates is suﬃciently large, then the
long-term evolution of the world economy will depend on whether or not the share
of the population living in advanced countries (and resulting demand for developing
country labor and migration) is above a critical level necessary for the development
and migration process to dominate the opposing demographic trend. If it is above
(below) that critical level, the proportion of the world population living in advanced
(developing) countries increases indefinitely.
A simple decomposition of trends in world population shows that in the 19th century, the proportion of the world population living in advanced economies grew despite
a slow rate at which developing countries transformed into advanced economies because population growth in advanced countries exceeded that in poor countries. In
the 20th century advances in cheap easy-to-use medical technology, such as vaccines
and antibiotics, disproportionately reduced mortality in the developing world and
this, combined with falling fertility in the advanced world, led to rapid declines in the
share of the world population in advanced countries. Calibration based on the postwar period suggests disparities in population growth rates are large enough that the
proportion of the world population living in poor countries will not decline rapidly. In
fact, in our baseline calibration, the proportion of the world population in advanced
countries is currently below the critical threshold for the world economy to converge
to the favorable steady state. However, if population growth in the developing world
continues to decline faster than in advanced countries (as projected by the United Nations), the system will converge to the favorable steady state, albeit extremely slowly.
An increase in the rate at which poor countries develop disproportionately increases
the speed of convergence, due to the model’s non-linearities. Rapid growth in China
and India would translate into a large increase in the proportion of the world popula-

2

tion in advanced economies, moving that ratio well above its critical threshold. That
would leading to an acceleration of development elsewhere and a rapid convergence
to widespread prosperity (that is, a convergence that takes decades not centuries).
The model also suggests that improvements in policy that reduce the cost of trade
can lead to rapid growth for a particular country, but that the response of world
growth to a similar improvement by all developing countries will be much smaller.
In our model, a developing country will only start exporting to advanced economies
once all the other developing countries with lower costs have already done so. When
a country improves its policy environment by reducing tariﬀs or other barriers to
trade, it advances its place in the "queue" of countries waiting to integrate into
the world economy. But given the limited capacity to absorb all the labor in the
developing world, the speed at which development occurs is itself constrained by the
size of advanced economies (and small improvements in the average trade cost will
only translate into small gains in global growth). This queuing feature might help
explain why growth failed to pick up in many developing countries despite policy
improvements in the past decades (for example, much progress has been made in
trade liberalization and macroeconomic stability). Under the model, even if some
developing countries have policies that are so bad that they would never integrate into
the global economy, the world may still converge to a widespread prosperity steadystate since labor from these "hopeless" countries could be absorbed into the global
economy through migration, as long as there are not too many of these countries.
Our paper is related to previous studies that have analyzed economic growth in
the (very) long-run. Quah (1993) and Kremer, Onatski and Stock (2001) consider
a transition matrix analysis of the world income distribution. Our model departs
from the transition matrix approach in allowing transition probabilities to depend
on the state of the world economy. This can generate more optimistic predictions
of accelerating growth in the world economy, with developing countries potentially
doing better in the future than countries with similar characteristics have done in the

3

past.
The idea that learning externalities from advanced countries can facilitate the development of poorer countries dates back at least to Gerschenkron (1962). Tamura
(1996) presents a model with endogenous choice between fertility and human capital
investment, which addresses some of the same issues studied in this paper, showing
that as rich countries grow they raise the return on human capital, causing human
capital investment, demographic transition, and growth in poor countries. Much of
the novelty of our approach relies on focusing on trade as the conduit for transformation and the limitations on the extent to which the modern global economy can
absorb all the labor in the developing world. Our analysis also sheds new light on a
host of topical issues which likely depend on the relative population in advanced and
developing countries, such as the role of migration, the impact of reforms, aid, and
the broader implications of the emergence of China
Perhaps the most closely related model to ours is that of Lucas (2000), in which
economic growth begins in a stagnant economy with an exogenous probability, but
once it begins, growth is proportional to the diﬀerence between a country’s income
and that of the leading country (which grows at a constant rate). By allowing for an
endogenous take-oﬀ process and diﬀerential population growth, our model can generate much richer dynamics, including multiple steady states. Depending on parameter
values and initial conditions, there may be accelerating global growth or a declining
fraction of the world population living in rich countries . In that latter scenario, a
non-infinitesimal share of developing countries will never be integrated into the global
economy and will remain stagnant forever, which would not occur in Lucas (2000),
even if his setting was extended to allow for population growth diﬀerentials. Our
endogenous take-oﬀ process also provides a framework for analyzing the impact of
diﬀerent channels which depend on the relative size of the rich population in the
world, as described above.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model.

4

Section 3 solves for the evolution of global economy. Section 4 introduces diﬀerences
across countries. Section 5 extends the model to capture terms of trade changes as
the global economy develops. Section 6 calibrates the model, and Section 7 concludes.

2

The Model

Suppose there are two types of countries: advanced and developing. We assume
the world economy consists of a continuum of countries with measure one, and that
countries are similar to other countries of the same type. We later discuss the eﬀects
large countries can have on the evolution of the world economy (which is illustrated in
Section 6). Section 4 introduces diﬀerences in the barriers to trade across developing
countries.

2.1

Production

There are two production technologies: traditional and modern. Labor is the only
input and is inelastically supplied. Advanced and developing countries are equally
productive in the traditional technology, with each unit of labor producing one unit
of the final consumption good. The modern technology includes two tasks: a simple
and a complex one. The complex task produces intermediate input H, while the
simple task produces intermediate input L. Trade in intermediate inputs potentially
allows modern production to be split among countries. For example, the simple input
could be stitching shoes and the complex input could be designing and marketing the
shoes, or the simple input could be automobile assembly and the complicated input
could be manufacturing automobile components. The population of advanced countries consists of high-skill workers, and only those countries can produce intermediate
good H. The population of developing countries consists of low-skill workers. This
polarization of skills is derived as the outcome of an optimal fertility and education
investment decision in Section 2.2.
5

Both types of workers can produce the intermediate good L, which can be produced anywhere, but production in a developing country c involves an additional cost
of δ c units of the final good. This transaction cost can encompass a number of aspects, such as transport costs (for both the good delivered and for the good received
as payment), infrastructure problems, as well as policy-related costs such as tariﬀs,
taxation, enforcement of property-rights and the regulatory environment. We initially
consider the case where diﬀerences in transaction cost between diﬀerent developing
countries are infinitesimal. That is, δ c ≈ δ ∀c. Thus:
Ytraditional = ntraditional,c
α 1−α
Ymodern = AH
⎧ L
⎨ n if c ∈ advanced
H,c
H =
⎩ 0 if c ∈ developing

L = nL,c if c ∈ (advanced, developing)

where 0 < α < 1, ntraditional,c , nH,c and nL.c are the number of workers in country c
engaged in the traditional production and the production of intermediate goods H
and L, respectively. The cost of producing either H or L in an advanced country c is
the wage wA in advanced countries, whereas the cost of producing L in a developing
country is the wage wD in developing countries plus the transaction cost δ. We
assume A > 2(1 + δ) so it is ineﬃcient for workers in advanced countries to work
in the traditional sector or to produce L as long as there are workers in developing
countries in the traditional sector.1
1

The output of one unit of advanced country labor optimally divided between the complex and
simple task is greater or equal to A/2.Thus, A/2 > 1 is a suﬃcient condition for advanced country
workers not to work in the traditional sector. Since A/2 is a lower-bound on wA , and the cost
of importing L is 1 + δ, A/2 > 1 + δ is a suﬃcient condition for importing L to be cheaper than
producing it in an advanced country.

6

2.2

Mortality, Fertility, and Education

We use a simple model of fertility choice (drawing on Galor and Mountford 2006) in
which for certain parameter values, parents in developing countries choose to have
more children of low-skill, whereas parents in advanced countries choose to have fewer
and high-skill ones (so the population in each country remains uniform).
Suppose workers live for two periods. When they are young they only consume
part of their parent’s time endowment. The level of that consumption will determine
their type once adult. When adult, they derive utility from consumption of the final
good and from the future income their children will attain. Their utility is:
U = φ log(Consumption) + (1 − φ) log(γ H wc,H + γ L wc,L )
where Consumption is the consumption of the final good, γ H and γ L are the number
of high- and low-skill children, which for simplicity (and unrealistically) is assumed
to be a continuos variable, and wc,H and wc,L are the wages of workers in the H
and L sectors in country c. The amount of time a parent of skill-level j needs to
spend in order to produce a children of skill-level k is tjk . Under the preferences
above, workers will spend a share φ of their time working in order to buy the final
consumption good, and the remaining 1 − φ raising and educating their children. We
assume that for each child borne from a type j parent in a type i country, μi,j will
die before becoming adults, but after the investment in raising them has been made.
Changes in these parameters over time will prove important when comparing the
19th and 20th Century demographic experience. Given the substitutability between
high- and low-skill children, workers will choose a corner solution for the type of their
children unless wc,H /wc,L = tjH /tjL .2
We assume both H and L parents are equally productive in the production of
L-type children (tHL = tLL ). Producing an H-type children is more costly for both
2
Note that since mortality is given by the parent’s and the country’s type, it will not aﬀect the
quality-quantity trade-oﬀ (as both types of children are equally aﬀected).

7

types of parents, but it takes more time for an L-type parent to produce an H-type
children than it would take for an H-type parent (tHL < tHH < tLH ). Provided:
tHH /tHL < wA,H /wA,L

(1)

tLH /tLL > wD,H /wD,L

(2)

we will be at a corner solution where people only have high-skill children in advanced
countries, and only have low-skill children in developing ones. We assume the parameters are such that these two inequalities hold. One way of ensuring this would
always the case is to assume that H cannot be produced in developing countries regardless of the skill-level of the workers, for example due to institutional constraints,
in which case it would never be worth investing in education in a developing country.
We assume that to be the case. Since parents in both countries spend (1 − φ) of their
time raising children, the number γ D and γ A of surviving children from a parent in
developing and advanced countries is given by:
(1 − φ)
(1 − μD,L )
tLL
(1 − φ)
=
(1 − μA,H )
tHH

γD =
γA

Since tLL < tHH , provided the mortality rates μD,L and μA,H in developing and
advanced countries are suﬃciently similar, we have γ D > γ A . If on the other hand,
mortality was suﬃciently lower in advanced countries than in developing countries,
population growth would be higher in the former (as was indeed the case in the
19th Century). But the development of medical technologies like antibiotics and
vaccination in the 20th Century has allowed steep declines in mortality even at very
low income levels.3
3

For example, Vietnam had a life expectancy of 69 years in 2000 when its income per capita
was $1790 in 1990 International Geary-Khamis dollars. In comparison, the United States had a
life expectancy of 47 years in 1900 when its per capita income was $4091 in 1990 International
Geary-Khamis dollars.

8

In this environment, the gross (natural) population growth rates in a homogeneous
country will be given by γ.We assume μD,L and μA,H are suﬃciently similar, so that
γ D > γ A and (natural) population growth is higher in developing countries. This has
been true since the early 20th century (as shown in Section 6).4
We assume that migration takes place from developing to advanced countries.
Migration flows are restricted by the advanced countries to a proportion i of their
population. For simplicity, we assume that migration does not aﬀect the investment
decisions in education, and that migrants become high-skill upon arrival in an advanced country (which is a reasonable approximation provided migration is relatively
small).

2.3

Transformation

As noted in the introduction for the last fifty years, integration with the world economy has been nearly ubiquitous among those countries that have moved from poverty
to wealth. A number of studies find cross-country evidence of a link between openness and growth (e.g. Frankel and Romer 1999). Negative eﬀects of natural resources
on growth (e.g. Sachs and Warner 2001) suggest that benefits stem from integration through modern sectors. A number of channels can generate a link between
modern sector exports and economic take oﬀ in our model. One potential channel is
the learning externalities from exporting firms (Hausmann and Rodrik 2003). While
several case studies do find very large spillovers from exporting firms (for example,
Rhee and Belot 1990), the econometric evidence is more mixed, with several papers
finding no evidence of spillovers, perhaps because they are so diﬃcult to quantify
and measure (for a comprehensive review of the literature on international technology diﬀusion, please refer to Keller 2004). Greenstone, Hornbeck and Moretti identify
large spillovers when comparing U.S. counties that won a bid for a major plant with
4

Note that this model can also explain changes in fertility through changes in the parameters tLL
and tHH .

9

those that narrowly lost it. A more important channel may be the political economy
implications of trade integration for learning and productivity growth, for example by
weakening forces that resist the adoption of more eﬃcient technologies, as in Parente
and Prescott (1994). The productivity gains stemming from the pressure to survive in competitive international markets can potentially be large, as documented by
Galdón-Sánchez and Schmitz (2002) for the iron ore industry. We neither model nor
take a position on the specific channels through which non-traditional exports trigger
learning and economic transformation. Instead, we take that process as exogenous
and focus on its implications for the evolution of the world economy.
We assume that in each period, probability that a developing country becomes
advanced is equal to p times the share of its population working in the modern
sector. Each country faces an independent realization of this shock. The economic
transformation occurs at the country level and is not internalized in the wages. Thus,
modern sector workers in developing countries must be paid their opportunity cost
in the traditional sector.5 Once a country becomes an advanced economy it remains
one from that point onwards.
It is worth noting that trade could potentially cause developing countries to specialize in sectors with limited learning opportunities, harming their technological
progress vis-a-vis its autarky rate (Young 1991). If specialization in low-skill sectors lowers the skill premia relative to autarky, trade can cause parents in developing
countries to choose to have more and less educated children (Galor and Mountford
2006), leading to a situation in which greater population in the advanced world contributes to keeping the developing world unskilled. Logically, trade could either speed
or slow economic transformation, depending on the particular technologies, involved,
and it is possible that eﬀects diﬀer across industries, countries and time periods. Our
judgment is that for the past fifty years the positive eﬀects of trade have typically
dominated the negative ones. When the model is calibrated in Section 6 we do find
5

A benevolent social planner would like to tax the traditional sector in order to subsidize the
modern one.

10

the countries transitioning were indeed more open. Certainly the rapid rise in global
trade has coincided with improving prospects for the developing world as a whole
(including major countries such as China and India once they have opened their
economies).
If the model were to consider relatively large countries, then the realizations of
the transformation process in these countries would have substantial implications for
the world economy, since they could move sizable shares of the world population
from the developing to the advanced group. The larger the size of the countries the
more stochastic the evolution of the world economy would become. For simplicity,
we assume that the world economy consists of a continuum of countries, so that its
evolution can be, to a close approximation, described by a smooth and deterministic
process.

3

Evolution of the World Population

Given the assumptions of the previous section, it is possible to solve for the evolution of the world income distribution as a function of initial conditions. There are
potentially two stages in the evolution of the world economy: one in which not all
developing countries are integrated into the world economy producing for the modern
sector and one in which they are. We first consider the behavior of the world in the
region in which the share of population in advanced countries is suﬃciently small so
that the entire developing country population cannot work in the modern sector.

3.1

Stage 1: Not all developing countries are integrated into
the world economy.

In this stage there are three groups of countries: advanced countries, developing countries integrated into the world economy, and unintegrated developing countries. Modern sector firms hire developing country workers until the marginal revenue product
11

equals their wage (one if the outside option is the traditional sector) plus the transaction cost δ. In a competitive equilibrium, advanced countries will only demand L
from a developing country once all the developing countries with lower transaction
costs have already joined the modern sector. We continue to focus on the case where
diﬀerences in δ across countries are infinitesimal, and only matter to determine the
order in which countries join the modern sector. Section 4.2 shows that when diﬀerences in δ are large, they slow down diﬀusion of the modern sector and may prevent
it from ever reaching the highest cost countries.
The number of workers from developing countries working in the modern sector
is:
NDM = (A(1 − α)/(1 + δ))1/α NA ,

(3)

where NA is the population in advanced countries. The wage in advanced countries,
determined by the marginal product of their labor, is:
wA = αA1/α ((1 − α)/(1 + δ))

1−α
α

.

(4)

Note that the cost δ aﬀects wA but not wD , since the latter is pinned down by the
reservation wage in the traditional sector. However, the cost δ harms the developing
population by lowering the demand for L and, as a result, slowing down the transformation process (if a worker in an advanced country were to work in the L sector
it would earn 1 + δ). Also note that even though wD = 1, a developing country
that is integrated into the world economy is better-oﬀ than one that is unintegrated,
since the former may become an advanced economy. We assume the relative costs
of education are such that (??) and (??) are satisfied, and tLH /tLL < wA /(1 + δ),
so low-skill parents will have high-skill children the moment their country becomes
advanced. Note that by allowing advanced countries to specialize in the H sector,
free trade will lower their population growth relative to autarky.

12

The world population evolves according to:
NA,t+1 = (γ A + p(A(1 − α)/(1 + δ))1/α + i)NA,t ,
¡
¢
ND,t+1 = γ D ND,t − p(A(1 − α)/(1 + δ))1/α + i NA,t .

(5)
(6)

The proportion of the world population in advanced countries will increase and
the world economy will eventually move to the second stage where all developing
countries are integrated into the world economy and produce in the modern sector if:
(γ A + p(A(1 − α)/(1 + δ))1/α + i) NA,t
NA,t
NA,t+1
=
>
NA,t
1/α
ND,t+1
ND,t
γ D − (p(A(1 − α)/(1 + δ)) + i) ND,t ND,t
This will be the case if:
NA,t
γD − γA
− 1,
>
ND,t
p(A(1 − α)/(1 + δ))1/α + i

(7)

from which follows:
Proposition 1 If NDM < ND , then NA /ND will increase over time if and only if (7)
holds. If NA /ND <

γ D −γ A
P (A(1−α)/(1+δ))1/α +i

− 1, then NA /ND will converge to zero.

Condition (7) becomes less strict the lower γ D , the higher γ A , p, i and A, and
the lower α and δ. If the population growth diﬀerential between developing and
advanced countries is suﬃciently small, the right-hand side of (7) is negative, NA /ND
will always increase, and the world economy will eventually reach the second stage. If
the population growth diﬀerential is large, then the right-hand side of (7) is positive
and NA /ND will only increase if its starting level is suﬃciently high to satisfy this
inequality (at which point the transformation and migration processes will dominate
the demographic one). If NA /ND is less than a threshold, then NA /ND will decline
indefinitely, converging to zero.

13

It’s worth noting that if NA /ND is below the threshold given in (7), then some
countries will remain forever stagnant. In other words, the steady-state is not being
driven by an infinitesimal fraction of developing countries with exploding populations. Development prospects worsen over time not only for any given habitant of
the developing world, but also for any given developing country.
Proposition 2 If NA /ND is non-infinitesimally smaller than the threshold in (7) ,
a non-infinitesimal share of developing countries will never be reached by the modern
sector.
Proof. See appendix.

3.2

Stage 2: All countries are integrated into the world economy.

Once the world economy moves to this stage where all ND workers are in the modern
sector (i.e., NDM = ND ), then:
(γ + i)NA,t + pND,t
(γ + i) + p/(NA,t /ND,t ) NA,t
NA,t+1
= A
= A
ND,t+1
(γ D − p)ND,t − iNA,t
(γ D − p) − iNA,t /ND,t ND,t
and the NA /ND ratio will increase if:
µ

1
i (1 + NA /ND ) + p 1 +
NA /ND

¶

− (γ D − γ A ) > 0

(8)

The expression above is a convex second-degree polynomial in NA /ND . If:
p
p
i + p − 2 ip < γ D − γ A < i + p + 2 ip,

14

(9)

then the roots of the polynomial are complex and the ratio NA /ND will grow without
bounds.6,7 The condition above is satisfied for the empirically relevant parameter
values, as shown in Section 6. Even if (9) does not hold, as long as:

−1/α

(A(1 − α)/(1 + δ))

>

γD − γA − i − p +

q

(γ D − γ A − i − p)2 − 4ip
2i

,

(10)

then the largest real root of (8) is lower than the NA /ND ratio at the beginning of the
second stage, and NA /ND still grows without bounds. Condition (10) is more likely
to hold when γ D − γ A is small vis-a-vis i + p8 . If neither (9) nor (10) hold, then the
NA /ND ratio converges to a steady-state level given by:
q
⎞
2
γ D − γ A − i − p − (γ D − γ A − i − p) − 4ip
⎠.
max ⎝(A(1 − α)/(1 + δ))−1/α ,
2i
⎛

(11)

Thus:
Proposition 3 If NDM = ND , then NA /ND → ∞ if either (9) or (10) hold and
NA /ND converges to (11) otherwise.
Regardless of whether NA /ND grows without bounds or converges to a steady-state
level, once the world economy moves to the second stage where all developing countries
are integrated and produce in the modern sector that will remain the case from that
point onwards (i.e., they will never switch back to the traditional technology).9
6

Note that even though NA /ND grows without bounds, the share of high-skill workers will not
(since some workers in the advanced countries will eventually switch to the L sector as described
below).
7
If NA /ND grows without bounds, eventually its growth will be lower than the one indicated by
(8). For example, at some point ND < iNA (i.e., even if all the remaining population in developing
countries migrates to the advanced ones, they would still account for less than a share i of the latter).
8

Note that the right-hand side is negative when γ D − γ A < i + p, implying NA /ND will grow
without bounds (assuming that (9) does not hold, otherwise it would already grow without bounds
to begin with).
9
If that was not the case, then (7) would not hold, and the world economy would have never
moved to the second stage to begin with. Note that if the world economy had initially started in the

15

Since it this stage all developing country workers are producing in the modern
sector, the value of their labor is no longer pinned down by its opportunity cost in
the traditional sector. Their wages will rise to reflect that scarcity (but developing
country workers will continue to bear the cost δ). As long as workers in advanced
countries remain suﬃciently scarce that they only produce the H good, the wages in
advanced and developing countries are:
wA = Aα(ND /NA )1−α ,

(12)

wD = A(1 − α)/(NA /ND )α − δ,

(13)

which are increasing in the relative scarcity of the respective type of labor.

If

NA /ND continues to increase, developing country labor will become suﬃciently scarce
that advanced country workers will move to the L sector. When wA declines to
(tHH /tHL )(wD + δ), which is reached at NA /ND = (tHL /tHH )α/(1 − α),parents in
advanced countries will stop educating some of their children. That is, their fertility
choice model will move to the internal solution.10 If the high-skill workers are in an
internal solution, this new advanced country low-skill population will be at a corner
where they only have low-skill children. In steady-state, the fertility choice of lowskill workers in advanced countries must be at an internal solution (otherwise their
relative share would increase indefinitely), so in the long-run:
wA,H = (tLH /tLL )wA,L

(14)

wA,L = wD + δ

(15)

second stage, then it would be possible for it to switch to the first one (for example, if the population
growth diﬀerential is suﬃciently large).
10
Note that as parents in advanced countries start having low-skill children, γ A will increase.

16

4

Diﬀerences Across Developing Countries

This section introduces diﬀerences in the transaction cost between developing countries. We initially consider the case where these diﬀerences are infinitesimal, and later
analyze the implications of larger diﬀerences.

4.1

Infinitesimal diﬀerences

The arbitrarily small diﬀerences assumed in the transaction cost δ c will not aﬀect
the evolution of aggregate populations in advanced and developing countries, but will
have strong implications for which developing countries will grow first. Advanced
countries will only import L from the developing countries with the higher transaction
costs once all of the countries with the lower transactions costs have already joined the
modern sector, placing countries in a development "queue." The cost δ c can encompass
variation in transaction costs across developing countries due to policy-related costs,
such as tariﬀs, enforcement of property rights and contracts, distortionary eﬀects of
taxation and regulation, and corruption, among others. An individual country can
benefit greatly from a small decrease in its cost δ c , since its growth depends on the
ordinal rank of δ c (e.g., a small improvement can move it to the front of the queue).
However, a similar improvement by all developing countries would only translate in
a commensurately small improvement for global growth. That is, while infinitesimal
changes in δ c can rearrange the countries’ positions in the development queue, the
speed at which countries graduate from that queue (which is constrained by the
population in advanced countries) will only improve slightly following small changes
in the average δ. This can help explain growth failing to pick-up in the developing
world as a whole despite significant improvements in policy over the last decades (as
documented in Easterly 2001). The model also suggests a non-linear impact of policy
reforms in individual countries, with growth potentially responding dramatically if
the reforms move a country to the front of the queue but not otherwise.

17

These strong threshold eﬀects are partly driven by the simplifying assumptions of
our model. Since countries are identical except for small diﬀerences in their transaction costs, all variation in the order in which they join the modern sector will
inevitably hinge on those small diﬀerences in cost. If the model was extended to
allow the transaction cost to increase with the size of the country’s population working in the modern sector, or diminishing returns in the production of L, we could
have an internal solution where all developing countries join the modern sector to
some extent. If the transaction cost were to decline with the share of the population
employed in the modern sector (for example, if it stems from a fixed cost that gets
increasingly diluted), the threshold eﬀect would become even stronger.

4.2

Large Diﬀerences

If transaction cost diﬀerences across countries are significant, the process of global
integration will slow down as it reaches increasingly more costly developing countries.
Suppose there are two types of developing countries: Low-cost developing countries,
where δ c = δ 0 = δ; and high-cost ones where δ c = δ 1 > δ, but δ 1 < A/2 − 1. The
modern sector will initially hire workers form the low-cost developing countries. As
long as there is an excess supply of workers in these low-cost countries, the world
population in advanced and developing countries will evolve according to (5) and
(6) regardless of how the immigration "quota" is split between the low and highcost developing countries. If (7) holds, the transformation process will dominate
the demographic one, the initial share of the world population living in advanced
countries will increase over time and eventually all low-cost developing countries will
be absorbed by the modern sector. Once that happens, the transformation process
will slow down as the modern sector moves to high-cost developing countries. It is
easy to show that the world population will continue to evolve according to (5) and
(6) but with δ H instead of δ, and the proportion of the world population living in

18

advanced countries will continue to increase provided:
NA
γD − γA
−1
>
ND
p(A(1 − α)/(1 + δ 1 ))1/α + i
If the condition above holds, then the modern sector will eventually spread to all
developing countries. If it does not (and 7 holds), then the proportion of the world
population living in advanced countries will converge to zero. Once the modern sector
reaches the high-cost developing countries, the workers in the low-cost developing
countries will earn a wage premium (their wage will increase from 1 in the initial
stage to 1 + δ 1 − δ, with further increases once all developing country labor has been
integrated into the modern sector).

4.3

Very Large Transaction Costs

It is interesting to consider an extreme case where δ1 > A/2 − 1. This assumption
implies that the high-cost countries will never be integrated into the global economy,
because the advanced economies would rather produce L themselves than transact
with these developing countries. Again, as long as (7) holds, the world economy
will eventually move to a stage where all low-cost developing country labor has been
integrated into the modern sector, and all those low-cost developing countries will
eventually become advanced countries. Since the high-cost developing countries will
never be integrated into the modern sector, in the absence of migration, the share of
the world population living in these countries would grow indefinitely since γ D > γ A .
However, migration from these countries to advanced ones can still compensate for
the natural population growth diﬀerential if NA /ND is suﬃciently large for migration
to overcome the population growth diﬀerential.11 In fact, the long-run equilibrium
will depend entirely on the demographic parameters and the NA /ND ratio at the time
11

These hopeless developing countries are similar to the "ghost countries" in Pritchett (2006).

19

the world economy enters this stage. Provided:
NA /ND > (γ D − γ A − i)/i,

(16)

the global economy will still converge to widespread prosperity. Note that this condition is suﬃcient for the right-hand-side of (8) to be positive (as one would expect,
if the global economy converges to prosperity despite the presence of "hopeless" developing countries, it would still do so in our baseline model where the diﬀerences in
transaction cost are small).

5

Extensions: Aid Flows and Agricultural Commodity Prices

5.1

Aid

A number of additional factors that can aﬀect global development prospects can be
easily introduced in our basic setting. For example, suppose that aid can contribute
to the transformation process. If total aid flows are a proportion a of the advanced
world’s GDP, and each unit spent succeeds in transforming a developing country with
probability pa .In this modified setting, all of the previous equations would hold if we
substitute the terms involving i with i + awA pa .In the initial stage, where not all
developing countries are integrated into the modern sector, wA is constant, given by
(4). In the second stage, where all developing countries have been integrated (or at
least all the "non-hopeless" ones), wA is given by (12) which is a decreasing function
of NA /ND 12 . In both cases, the presence of this additional channel can only help
the global economy, and will increase the range of parameters for which widespread
12

If the world reaches the stage where there are both high- and low-skill workers in advanced
countries, the term awA pa would be based on their average wage.

20

prosperity is achieved.13

5.2

Agricultural Commodity Prices

The recent increase in commodity prices has renewed interest on the eﬀects of an
expanding global economy on the terms of trade of developing countries specializing
in natural resource intensive sectors. While the treatment of the traditional sector in
our model does not allow for any such improvements (since it is a perfect substitute
for the modern good), a simple variant of that basic model can capture such eﬀects
for the case of agricultural commodities.14
Suppose each person must consume at least s units of the traditional good (where
s < φ < 1). Beyond that substance constraint, we continue to assume that the
traditional and modern sector goods are perfect substitutes. We assume that trade
is costless across countries (we can still assume δ > 0 due to non-transportation
related transaction costs, such as poor institutions for protecting property rights).
This subsistence constraint implies:
φ(ND − NDM ) ≥ s(ND + NA )

(17)

where the left-hand-side corresponds to the traditional sector output and the righthand-side to the global subsistence demand.
If NA /ND is suﬃciently small to begin with, (17) will be satisfied with the amount
of developing country labor hired into the modern sector (3) from the baseline model,
and the evolution of the global economy is still described by (5) and (6).
As NA /ND grows, the constraint (17) will eventually bind, which occurs for:
NA
φ−s
=
ND
φ(A(1 − α)/(1 + δ))1/α + s
13

(18)

If one takes a negative view on the role of aid, one could assume the parameter α to be negative,
in which case this additional channel could hurt the long-run dynamics.
14
An analysis of mineral commodites would be complicated by their exhaustible nature.

21

From that point onwards, NDM = max(0, (φ − s)ND − sNA ), and the populations
in the advanced and developing world will evolve according to:
NA,t = (γ A + i)NA,t + p max(0, (φ − s)ND,t − sNA,t )
ND,t = γ D ND,t − iNA,t − p max(0, (φ − s)ND,t − sNA,t )
Since (17) binds, the value of the traditional good is no longer 1.The value of that
output will equal the value of the wage wD that workers can achieve in the modern
sector. As in Section 3.2, the wages of developing country workers in the modern
sector will start increasing to reflect scarcity of their labor. But unlike in the baseline
model, the wages in the traditional sector will now grow in tandem with wD .
Our assumptions imply that the terms of trade for developing countries will only
start improving if NA /ND is suﬃciently large. This assumption is consistent with the
trends (or lack thereof) in commodity prices. For example, despite the large increases
in the recent years, the real price of food commodities in 2008Q2 is 25 percent lower
than its 1960 level.15
The higher returns in the traditional sector will slow down the transformation
process, but will improve the contemporaneous welfare of the developing countries
that remain outside of the modern sector.16
As in Section 3.2, as the global economy grows, workers in the advanced country
will eventually start producing L, and relative wages will converge to (14) and (15).
But in this modified setting, further convergence can occur. If NA /ND continues to
grow, we will reach the point where developing country labor becomes so scarce that
it cannot meet the global subsistence constraint and advanced country workers move
back to the traditional technology (where they are both equally productive), and
15

Based on IFS data deflated by the U.S. GDP deflator.
While this higher wages benefit the lagging developing countries today, they can move the global
economy from an equilibrium where NA /ND rises indefinetely to one where it converges to (18). How
that would be weighted against this higher contemporaneous wages would depend on the discount
factor used.
16

22

wA,L = wD . That occurs when:
NA /ND ≥ (φ − s)/s
These terms of trade eﬀects could weaken if we were to consider productivity gains
in the traditional sector. Even if we introduce productivity growth in both sectors,
and productivity in the traditional sector grows slower than that in the modern sector,
that could remove these terms of trade eﬀects (since they hinge on the subsistence
constraint being binding), at least for some ranges of parameters.

6

A Simple Calibration

To calibrate the model, we first describe the historical evolution of the ratio of advanced to developing country population. Then, using the analytical framework of
Section 2, in which changes in this ratio can be broken down into a transformation
rate, natural population growth diﬀerentials, and migration, we simulate the future
evolution of the world economy. We use parameter values based on the second half of
the 20th Century for the transformation rate, and the most recent years for the demographic parameters (and their projected future values). We also consider a number
of diﬀerent scenarios for these parameters.
We use population and GDP data from Maddison (2003) for 1820—2001 and population and international migration data and projections from the United Nations
Population Division for 1950—2050.
We classify economies as developing or advanced using as a guideline whether
their GDP per capita, measured in 1990 International Geary-Khamis dollar terms (a
PPP based measurement), was higher than one-third of that of the "leading country,"
defined as the United Kingdom for 1820—1900, and the United States afterwards.17
17

Basing the comparison on the income of the leading country as opposed to say the world average
is more suitable to our model and it avoids causing the income threshold to mechanically increase
as more countries develop.

23

Since the model assumes one-way transitions from developing to advanced, we focus
only on economies that permanently cross that threshold (i.e., they remain above it
throughout the end of the sample). Thus, we do not classify as advanced the countries
where income was higher than the threshold at some point but later permanently
declined below it.18 Some judgement calls were required in a few instances. For
example, countries that cross the threshold multiple times but eventually remain
above it are classified based on the initial crossing date, unless the country remained
below the threshold for over three years and the decline was not the result of a
major war,19 in which case the classification is based on the later crossing. Former
communist countries were always considered developing prior to their transition to a
market economy and so are countries whose permanent high income can be attributed
to mineral resources. Table 1 lists the economies classified as advanced and the year
that classification was assigned, and provides additional details on the classification.
Data coverage is reasonably good for advanced countries, but much more limited
for developing ones. The total population in developing economies is constructed as
the diﬀerence between Maddison’s estimates for the world population and the population in advanced economies. Missing observations were log-linearly interpolated.
The NA /ND ratio increased throughout the 19th century even though only Australia,
New Zealand, and Finland joined the advanced economy group, because population
growth in advanced economies was considerably higher than that in developing ones
(see Figures 1 and 2). In the early 20th century population growth in developing
countries increases substantially, at least in part due to the development of health
18

The main countries that experienced prolonged periods above the income threshold and later
declined below it were Argentina and Uruguay, whose high income can largely be attributed to
primary commodities. Another noteworthy case is Czechoslovakia, which had been above the income
threshold since1820 at the time it became a communist country. Hungary and Poland were also above
the income threshold prior to World War II and communism.
19

For example, the following countries classified as advanced declined below the threshold as a
result of World War II: Austria: 1945—48, Finland: 1943—45, France: 1942—45, Germany: 1946—
48, Ireland: 1942—46, Italy: 1943—47, Japan: 1942—59, Netherlands: 1944—45, and Norway: 1944.
Finland also declined below the threshold in 1917—20.

24

technology allowing substantial reduction in mortality at low income levels.20 Following this reversal in the demographic trends, NA /ND gradually declines through
the 20th century, with blips when major transitions occurred (notably Japan in 1932,
and to a smaller extent Spain in 1963, Taiwan Province of China in 1982, and Korea
in 1988). Note that NA /ND declined despite a substantial increase in the number of
advanced economies. An increase in the number of transformations relative to earlier
periods is consistent with the endogenous transformation in our model.
The limited number of transitions in the 19th century and in the first half of
the 20th century, particularly in comparison with those in the second half of the
20th century, suggests some parameters must have changed dramatically. There has
indeed been a large decline in transport costs (O’Rourke and Williamson 2002). That,
combined with an increase in the complexity of supply chains, have likely facilitated
splitting the production into complex and simple tasks in a way that the latter can
be performed in developing countries.21 In terms of our model, it is diﬃcult to
quantify δ, particularly since it can encompass a number of transaction costs beyond
transportation. But its potential role can be illustrated by considering a range of
values. If α = 1/2, δ = 1/2 would lower the developing country labor employed in
the modern sector to 44 percent of its value relative to the case where δ = 0. For
values of δ of 1, 2 and 5, the employment becomes only 25, 11 and 3 percent of the
original share respectively. It is plausible that indeed δ was very high in the 19th
Century (and even today if defined in broad terms), to the point that most of the
trade and learning opportunities was lost (particularly since wage diﬀerentials were
much smaller then than they were in the 20th Century). The share of developing
countries in global manufacturing exports is indeed much higher than it was in the
20

Population growth declined in advanced countries beginning in the early 20th Century, and later
have declined even in developing countries. This is likely due to a number of factors, but rising
investment in education has certainly contributed to this trend.
21
For example, the scope for breaking-up the production of steel or textiles in the 19th Century
across countries is far more limited than the one for breaking-up the production of laptop computers
and auto parts nowadays.

25

19th Century.22
Since transitions from the developing to the advanced economy group are rare,
p(A(1 − α)/(1 + δ))1/α is estimated by averaging over the last 50 years in the sample
(1952—2001) the ratio of the population in the economies that just became advanced
to the total population in advanced economies in that year. That yields an estimated
p(A(1 − α)/(1 + δ))1/α of 0.40%. The average for the 20th century as a whole is 0.37%
(the average for the first half is 0.34% and for the second half is 0.40%).23 As expected,
the countries that did succeed in becoming advanced economies were on average
more open. In the years where transitions occurred, the average share of exports
and imports on GDP was 92 percent for the transitioning country compared with an
average (weighted by GDP) of 38 percent for the remaining developing countries.
Data on population and migration is available for 1950—2005 through the United
Nations Population Division, which also provides forecasts for every fifth year up to
2050.24 Based on this data, we compute the natural population growth rates γ A , γ D
and the migration rate i. Both γ A and γ D have declined over time, but beginning in
the 1990s, the decline in γ D has accelerated and the γ D − γ A gap has substantially
narrowed and is expected to continue to do so, albeit at a slower rate (see Figure 3).
Based on 2000—05, the estimated parameter values are: γ A = .29%, γ D = 1.38% and
i = 0.31%. The i estimate includes only developing to advanced economy migration
(i.e., it excludes migration from one advanced economy to another).
22
Yates (1959) provides historical regional estimates of global manufacturing export shares. Oceania, Latin America, Africa and Asia are grouped together, and accounted for 1.5 percent of manufacturing exports in 1876-80, and 5 percent in 1896-1900. In comparison, the developing countries in
our sample accounted for 9 percent of manufacturing exports in the 1970s, 13 percent in the 1980s,
20 percent in the 1990s, and almost 30 percent by 2005.
23
As indicated in Table 1, the only transition from developing to advanced in the first half of
the 20th century was Japan in 1932. Japan’s income declined below the advanced status threshold
during 1942-1960 as a result of the devastating eﬀects World War II had on its economy. If we had
classified Japan as a developing economy until 1960, the resulting estimate of p(A(1 − α)/(1 + δ))1/α
for the second half of the 20th century would increase to 0.79%. This higher transformation rate
would suggest better prospects for developing countries (and would also suggest that development
has become "easier" from the first to the second half of the 20th century).
24

Taiwan Province of China is excluded from their sample.

26

Based on the demographic parameters above, and p(A(1−α)/(1+δ))1/α = .0.40%,
the right-hand side of (7) is 0.52, which is higher than the current NA /ND ratio of 0.17,
suggesting that the proportion of the world population living in developing countries
would grow indefinitely. This trend can be reversed if the parameters change over
time, lowering the right-hand side of (7), or shocks to NA /ND bring it above that
critical threshold.
Figure 4 plots the evolution of NA /ND excluding China and India under the baseline scenario and under alternative demographic parameters and transformation rates
(we plot that ratio excluding China and India for comparison purposes with alternative scenarios focusing on developments in those two countries later in this section).
If the gap in population growth rates between advanced and developing economies
narrows according to the projections of the UN Population Division, the world economy will eventually converge to the prosperous steady-state (conditions (7) and (9)
would hold). However, that convergence process would be extremely slow and no substantial improvements would take place within a century. As shown in Figure 4, the
long-run dynamics could substantially improve through halving natural population
growth disparities, doubling immigration or doubling the transformation rate. The
transformation rate could potentially change due to improvements in communication
and transportation or policy improvements. The share of exports and imports on
GDP aggregated across the developing countries in our sample has increased from
22 percent in 1960 to 65 percent in 2005. While this is a somewhat crude measure of openness, this trend does suggest increasing opportunities for global economic
integration.
This calibration exercise has considered the world economy as a large collection of
small countries, whose evolution can be approximated by a smooth and deterministic
process. In practice, the transformation of large countries could move sizable shares
of the world population from poverty to prosperity. Perhaps the most optimistic interpretation of the model is one in which rapid growth in China and India is seen as

27

a transition to advanced country status in progress. Holding other parameters constant, if China became an advanced country today the NA /ND ratio would jump to
0.54, moving it just above the critical threshold. Condition (9) would hold under the
baseline parameter values so eventually NA /ND would grow without bounds. If both
China and India became advanced economies, the NA /ND ratio would jump to 1.09.25
Figure 5 plots the eﬀects of China and of China and India instantaneously becoming
advanced economies. In the scenario where both China and India become advanced
countries there is a noticeable acceleration in the rate at which other economies develop. This illustrates one of the key features of our model, whereby the higher the
population in advanced countries the easier it is for the remaining developing countries to integrate in the world economy. Thus, even if China and India are at the front
of the development queue, that could actually benefit other developing countries in
the long-run provided these giants transform suﬃciently rapidly.
An even more optimistic outlook can be obtained if we adjust the transformation
rate to reflect the view that China and India are a transition in progress. For example,
even if China was the only country to transition from developing to advanced in the
next 50 years, that single transition by itself would imply p(A(1 − α)/(1 + δ))1/α =

2.80%, a seven-fold increase relative to our baseline value.26 Such adjustment would
be consistent with the view that a similar transformation to the one going on in
China can take place in other developing regions (i.e. there is nothing inherently
special about China other than perhaps being ahead in the development queue). That
increase in the transformation rate would lead to a dramatic acceleration in global
development, far stronger than when China and India instantly become advanced (and
25

If we update Maddison’s 2001 PPP per capita GDP figures based on per capita GDP growth
at constant local currency prices, in 2006 China’s per capita income was 18.2% of that in the U.S.
while India’s was only 8.5%. Even under the assumption of an 8% per year growth in (PPP) per
capita income in China and India and a 3% per year growth in the U.S., per capita income in China
would only reach 1/3 of the U.S. level in 2019, and in India only in 2035.
26
This value is based on the current ratio of China’s population to that in advanced economies.
Since population growth is higher in China than in the latter, the implied transformation rate would
be even higher if based on their projected future populations.

28

the transformation rate is kept at its baseline value). Figure 5 shows that even under
the more "conservative" assumption that the transformation rate "only" triples, it
would still lead to gains to the rest of the world similar to those achieved when China
and India instantly develop.
If some developing countries are "hopeless" like the high-cost countries discussed
in Section 3.2.2, based on the 2050 projection for the demographic parameter values,
the NA /ND would need to grow past 1.85 in order to ensure a prosperous steady-state.
In the scenarios where both China and India instantaneously become advanced, such
high ratios would be achieved towards the end of the 21st Century, assuming that
the constraint that the transformation process comes to a halt does not become
binding by then. A five-fold increase in the transformation rate (in the absence of
instant development in China and India) could also bring NA /ND past that threshold
towards the end of the 21st Century.
This simple exercise suggests rapid growth in China and India may well be one
of the best hope for the medium- and long-run prospects of the rest of the developing world (unless of course, there is a marked improvement in the latter’s growth
prospects). The growth in China and India should also translate into dramatic terms
of trade improvements to the remaining developing (for example, rising prices for
primary commodities and for labor-intensive goods).

7

Conclusion

This paper presented a simple model of trade and development where the prospects
for developing countries depend on integration with the world economy. The opportunities for integration improve as the population in advanced countries grows. As
developing countries become advanced economies, they no longer compete for export
markets with other developing countries, and instead will import from them. This can
lead to accelerating global development and widespread prosperity if the diﬀerence in

29

population growth rates in advanced and developing countries is small. If that diﬀerence is large, widespread prosperity will hinge on whether or not the current share of
the world population in advanced countries is above a critical threshold necessary for
the transformation and migration processes to dominate the demographic trends.
The model also yields strong non-linearities for growth across countries, where
small diﬀerences in transaction costs associated with trade can have major implications for which developing countries will grow first. Those combined costs, which can
encompass diﬀerent aspects, including policy-related costs, will rank countries ordinally along a queue where they will wait for their chance to join the global economy.
While policy improvements can move an individual country forward in that queue,
the developing country labor that can be absorbed by the global economy is ultimately constrained by the size of the population in advanced countries. As a result,
an individual country’s growth response to a policy improvement can be much larger
than the global growth response to a similar improvement in all developing countries. This can explain why growth has not increased substantially despite dramatic
improvements in the economic policies of several developing countries. These results
also have interesting implications for the growth prospects of lagging developing regions, such as Africa. It is possible that Africa’s prospects will remain limited over
the short- and medium-term if it lies behind China and India in the "development
queue." But Africa’s prospects should improve substantially in the long-run once labor becomes "expensive" in China and India, or if continuing global development
leads to a sustained improvement in their terms of trade.
The non-linearities in the growth process and threshold eﬀects proposed in this
paper suggest that caution should be used when extrapolating the existing empirical
evidence on economic growth into the future. Over short horizons, these results are
likely to exaggerate the developing world-wide benefits of policy improvements, as
some of the observed growth may come at the expense of other developing countries
if the queuing eﬀects described are at play. Over longer horizons, these empirical

30

results are likely to be over-pessimistic, as country characteristics that lead to low
growth today may allow for high growth if and when the global economy reaches
a suﬃciently advanced stage. For example, the same policies that make a country
unattractive to foreign investors today may not discourage them from investing in
the future if that country becomes one of the last places in the world where labor
is still "cheap." But if there are countries whose policies are so bad that they would
never successfully integrate into the global economy, then the conditions required to
ensure widespread prosperity in the long-run become much stricter, since migration
would be the only route to prosperity for the population in these hopeless developing
countries.
The old conventional wisdom was that population growth in developing countries
was a major problem. The new conventional wisdom is that population growth is
rapidly declining and hence not an obstacle to development. Our results highlight the
importance of relative population growth between rich and poor countries. Because
population growth has been declining in the rich world along with the poor world,
this population growth gap is relatively persistent. Its worth noting that in our
model, population growth in developing countries will create negative externalities on
other countries, while population growth and open immigration policies in advanced
countries will create positive externalities for the rest of the world. The model suggests
that the future of the world economy may well be decided by a race between rapid
economic growth in China and India and population growth in the lagging developing
regions.
To end on a more positive note, while there have been relatively few cases of developing countries that became rich (mainly a handful of East Asian and Southern
European countries), one can make a strong case that a number of key developing
countries (in addition to China and India) are on track towards becoming advanced
economies over the next few decades. Global trade continues to grow faster than
world GDP, and improvements in telecommunications and transportation should fur-

31

ther facilitate the integration of developing countries in the global economy, as the
lower these costs the easier it becomes to break-down the production process so that
simpler tasks can be performed in developing countries. If that integration is indeed
constrained by absorption capacity, as in our model, such a confluence of positive
shocks can unleash non-linearities and lead to accelerating global growth at an unprecedented scale.

32

A

Appendix

Proposition 2 If NA /ND is non-infinitesimally smaller than the threshold in (7) ,
a non-infinitesimal share of developing countries will never be reached by the modern
sector.
fD denote the population in the developing world we would observe
Proof. Let N

if there were no transitions nor migration:

eD,t = ND,0 (γ L )t
N

(19)

Let CD,0 denote the initial measure of developing countries, and nf
D the population in
each of those countries. Similarly, let CD,t denote the measure of developing countries
in our model (with transitions and migration) as of date t, and nD the population in

each of those countries. Thus:
eD,t =
N
ND,t =

Z

CD,0

0

Z

CD,t

n
eD,t dc

nD,t dc

0

The population of a developing country in our model is smaller than it would have
been in a world where neither transitions nor migration were not possible (nD,t ≤
n
eD,t )27 . Thus:

ND,t
CD,t
≥
eD,t
CD,0
N

(20)

For simplicity of notation, let p0 =p(A(1 − α)/(1 + δ))1/α . Solving the system (5)
and (6) we obtain:
ND,t

27

NA,0 (1 + p0 )(i + p + γ A )t − ((ND,0 + NA,0 )(1 + p0 ) + ND,0 γ H )γ tD − ND,0 γ 1+t
D
=
0
γD − γA − p − i
(21)

If it were not for migration they would be identical.

33

Substituting (19) and (21) on (20) we obtain:

CD,t
NA,0 (1 + p0 )(i + p + γ A )t − ((ND,0 + NA,0 )(1 + p0 ) + ND,0 γ H )γ tD − ND,0 γ 1+t
D
≥
CD,0
(γ D − γ A − p0 − i)ND,0 (γ D )t
If γ D > γ A + p0 + i:
CD,t
(p0 + i)NA,0 /ND,0
>0
≥1−
t→∞ CD,0
γ D − γ A − p0 − i
lim

The ratio above converges to zero as NA,0 /ND,0 converges to the threshold in (7).
Since NA,0 /ND,0 is non-infinitesimally below that threshold, the share of developing
countries that are never reached by the modern sector is non-infinitesimal.

34

References
[1] Aitken, Brian, Gordon Hanson and Ann Harrison (1997). "Spillovers, foreign
investment, and export behavior." Journal of International Economics 43(1):103132.
[2] Chamon, Marcos and Michael Kremer (2006). "Asian Growth and African Development, " American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 96(2): 400-404
[3] Frankel, Jeﬀrey and David Romer (1999). "Does Trade Cause Growth?" American Economic Review, 89(3):379-3999.
[4] Galor, Oded and David Weil (1996). "The Gender Gap, Fertility and Growth."
American Economic Review, 86(3): 374-387.
[5] Galor, Oded, and Andrew Mountford (2006). "Trade and the Great Divergence:
The Family Connection."American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
96(2): 299-303.
[6] Galor, Oded, and Andrew Mountford (2008). "Trading Population for Productivity: Theory and Evidence", mimeo.
[7] Galdón Sánchez, José and James Schmitz (2002). "Competitive Pressure and
Labor Productivity: World Iron-Ore Markets in the 1980’s." American Economic
Review 92(4): 1222-1235.
[8] Gerschenkron (1962). Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective (Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA).
[9] Greenstone, Michael, Richard Hornbeck and Enrico Moretti (2008). "Identifying
Agglomeration Spillovers: Evidence from Million Dollar Plants" National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Paper 13833.

35

[10] Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman (1991b). Innovation and Growth in the
Global Economy, MIT Press, Cambridge.
[11] Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman (1995). "Technology and Trade," in
Handbook of International Economics, vol. 3, (Gene Grossman and Kenneth
Rogoﬀ, editors). Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., 1995.
[12] Hausmann, Ricardo and Dani Rodrik (2003). "Economic Development as SelfDiscovery." Journal of Development Economics, 72(2): 603-33.
[13] Keller, Wolfgang (2004). "International Technology Diﬀusion." Journal of Economic Literature, 42(3): 752-782.
[14] Kremer, Michael, Alexei Onatski and James Stock (2001). "Searching for Prosperity." Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 55, pp. 275-303.
[15] Lucas, Robert E. (1993). "Making a Miracle." Econometrica, 61(2): 251-272.
[16] Lucas, Robert E. (2000). "Some Macroeconomics for the 21st Century." Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 14: 159-168.
[17] Lucas, Robert E. (2007). "Trade and the Diﬀusion of the Industrial Revolution."
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 13286.
[18] Maddison, Angus (2003). The World Economy: Historical Statistics. Paris and
Washington, D.C.: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
[19] O’Rourke, K. and J. Williamson (2002). "When Did Globalizaiton Begin?" European Review of Economic History, 6(1), pp.23-50.
[20] Parente, Stephen and Edward Prescott (1994). "Barriers to Technology Adoption
and Development." Journal of Political Economy, 102(2): 298-321.
[21] Pritchett, Lant (2006). "Boom Town and Ghost Countries: Geography, Agglomeration, and Population Mobility." Brookings Trade Forum, 2006: 1-42.
36

[22] Quah, Danny (1993). "Empirical cross-section dynamics in economic growth."
European Economic Review, 37: 426-434.
[23] Rhee, Yung Whee and Therese Belot (1990). "Export Catalysts in Low-Income
Countries: a Review of Eleven Success Stories." World Bank Discussion Papers
Number 72.
[24] Sachs, Jeﬀrey and Andrew Warner (2001). "Natural Resources and Economic
Development: The curse of natural resources." European Economic Review, Vol.
45: 827-838.
[25] Tamura, Robert (1996). "From Decay to Growth: A Demographic Transition to
Economic Growth." Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 20: 1237-1262.
[26] Yates, Lamartine (1959). Forty Years of Foreign Trade. (London: George Allen
& Unwin Ltd.)
[27] Young, Alwyn (1991). "Learning by Doing and the Dynamic Eﬀects of International Trade." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(2): 369-405.

37

Table 1: Economies Classified as Advanced and Year Classification Assigned.
Economy
Year
Economy
Year
Austria
Entire sample
Australia
1822
Belgium
Entire sample
New Zealand
1846
Canada
Entire sample
Finland
1869
Denmark
Entire sample
Japan
1932
France
Entire sample
Israel
1955
Germany
Entire sample
Hong Kong SAR
1963
Ireland
Entire sample
Puerto Rico
1963
Italy
Entire sample
Spain
1963
Netherlands
Entire sample
Greece
1965
Norway
Entire sample
Portugal
1970
Sweden
Entire sample
Singapore
1972
Switzerland
Entire sample
Taiwan Province of China 1982
United Kingdom Entire sample
Korea
1988
United States
Entire sample
Czech Republic
1990
Estonia
1990
Slovenia
1990
Mauritius
1992
Chile
1995
Notes: Classification based on methodology described in Section 3 for calibrating the model. Our classification
is different from the standard IMF classification.
Income data from Maddison (2003), covering 1820–2001. Data for Australia and New Zealand available only
every 10 years during 1820–70. Their transition years were estimated by interpolation.
Only countries that crossed the income threshold and remained above it throughout the rest of the sample were
classified as advanced. Advanced countries that crossed the income threshold multiple times were classified
based on the initial crossing date only if the temporary decline lasted 3 years or less (for example, Finland in
1880–82) or can be attributed to a major war: Austria: 1945–48, Finland: 1917–20 and 1943–45, France: 1942–
45, Germany: 1946–48, Ireland: 1942–46, Italy: 1943–47, Japan: 1942–59, Netherlands: 1944–45 and Norway:
1944. The following countries experienced prolonged periods of income above the threshold prior to being
classified as advanced: Chile: 1900 (or earlier)–1942 and 1946–72, Greece: 1820–50(or later) and 1921 (or
earlier)–22, 1925 and 1927–39, Portugal: 1820–55 (or later), 1932–34 and Spain: 1820–1936.
Countries whose continuing high income can clearly be attributed to mineral resources were not classified as
advanced: Kuwait, United Arab Emirates and Trinidad and Tobago, which crossed the threshold in 1950 or
earlier and Equatorial Guinea which crossed it in 2001 (data for the latter may not be reliable).
Income data from communist countries were not considered.
A number of countries were temporarily above the income threshold, but later permanently decline below it.
The main cases were Argentina: 1870 (or earlier)–1984, 1986–87, 1993–94 and 1997–98, and Uruguay: 1870–
1966, 1970–71, 1980–81. Venezuela was above the threshold during 1926–98 (but its high income can be
attributed to oil). Other noteworthy cases are Czechoslovakia which had been above the income threshold since
1820 at the time it became a communist country, and Hungary: 1870 (or earlier)–1913 and 1925–1940.

20
25
30
Number of Advanced Economies

Pop. Advanced/Pop. Developing
.2
.25

.3

35

Figure 1: Ratio of World Population in Advanced and Developing Economies and Number of
Advanced Economies.

Pop. Advanced/Pop. Developing

1800

1850

1900
Year

1950

15

.15

Number of Advanced Economies

2000

Notes: Data from Maddison (2003). Missing observations log-linearly interpolated.

1.5

2

2.5

Figure 2: Population Growth in Advanced and Developing Economies from 1820 to 2000.

.5

1

%

Pop. growth-advanced

0

Pop. growth-developing

1800

1850

1900
year

1950

2000

Notes: Data from Maddison (2003). Plot indicates (geometric) average growth over 5 year period ending in that
year. Missing observations were log-linearly interpolated.

2

2.5

Figure 3: Natural Population Growth and Net Migration from 1950 to 2005 and Projections
for 2005 to 2050.

.5

Gam ma-advanced

0

1

%

1.5

Gamma-developing

Net immigration rate to advanced
1950

1975

2000
year

2025

2050

Notes: Data from the United Nations Population Division. Plot indicates average migration rate and the
(geometric) average growth rate over the 5 year period ending in that year. Solid lines indicate actual values
and dashed lines indicate projections.

Pop. Adv./Pop. Dev. Excluding China and India
.3
.4
.5
.6

Figure 4: Evolution of the Ratio of the World Population in Advanced Economies to the
Population in Developing Economies, Excluding China and India, Under Different
Scenarios:

Nat. Pop. Growth Gap Halves

Transition Rate Doubles
Immigration Rate Doubles
Projected Demographic Changes

.2

Baseline Scenario

2000

2020

2040

year

2060

2080

2100

Notes: All simulations assume the world economy remains in the stage where not all developing countries
produce in the modern sector. The baseline scenario corresponds to demographic parameter values as of 2000–
2005, and the historical transition average based on 1952–2001. Projected demographic changes are available
through 2050 and parameters values for later years are held constant at their projected 2050 level.

Pop. Adv./Pop. Dev. Excluding China and India
.3
.4
.5
.6

Figure 5: Effect of China and India Instantaneously Becoming Advanced Economies on the
Rest of the World.

Transition Rate Triples

China and India Become Advanced

China Becomes Advanced

.2

Baseline Scenario

2000

2020

2040

year

2060

2080

2100

Notes: Plot indicates evolution of the ratio of the world’s population in advanced countries to the population in
developing countries excluding China and India. All simulations assume the world economy remains in the
stage where not all developing countries produce in the modern sector. The baseline scenario corresponds to
demographic parameter values as of 2000–2005, and the historical transition average based on 1952–2001.

