NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TURBULENT FIRMS, TURBULENT WAGES?
Diego Comin
Erica L. Groshen
Bess Rabin
Working Paper 12032
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12032
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2006

We thank Michael Strain for his excellent research assistance. The views expressed in this paper are those
of the individual authors and do not necessarily reflect the position of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
or the Federal Reserve System. Address correspondence to the authors at the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, Microeconomics and Regional Studies, 33 Liberty Street, New York, NY 10045. Email:
Erica.Groshen@ny.frb.org. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Diego Comin, Erica L. Groshen, and Bess Rabin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Turbulent Firms, Turbulent Wages?
Diego Comin, Erica L. Groshen, and Bess Rabin
NBER Working Paper No. 12032
February 2006
JEL No. J3, J5
ABSTRACT
Has greater turbulence among firms fueled rising wage instability in the U.S.? Gottschalk and
Moffitt ([1994]) find that rising earnings instability was responsible for one third to one half of the
rise in wage inequality during the 1980s. These growing transitory fluctuations remain largely
unexplained. To help fill this gap, this paper further documents the recent rise in transitory
fluctuations in compensation and investigates its linkage to the concurrent rise in volatility of firm
performance documented by Comin and Mulani [2005] among others. After examining models that
explain the relationship between firm and wage volatility, we investigate the linkage in three
complementary panel data sets, each with its own virtues and limitations: the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics (detailed information on workers, but no information on employers), COMPUSTAT
(detailed firm information, but only average wage and employment levels about workers), and the
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland's Community Salary Survey (wages and employment for specific
occupations for identified firms). We find complementary support for the hypothesis in all three data
sets. We can rule out straightforward compositional churning as an explanation for the link to firm
performance in high-frequency (over spans of 5 years) wage volatility, although not in more
persistent fluctuations (between successive 5-year averages). We conclude that the rise in firm
turbulence explains about sixty percent of the recent the rise in the high frequency (5-year) volatility
of wages.
Diego Comin
Department of Economics
New York University
269 Mercer Street, 725
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
diego.comin@nyu.edu

Erica L. Groshen
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
erica.groshen@ny.frb.org
Bess Rabin
Watson Wyatt Worldwide

1. Introduction
Has more creative destruction among firms raised wage volatility in the U.S.? Gottschalk
and Moffitt [1994, 2002] called attention to the recent rise in the variation of transitory earnings for
U.S. workers when they estimated that this enhanced volatility accounts for one third to one half of
the rise in wage inequality during the 1980s. 1 What is the source of this new instability in pay?
Despite its importance, little is known about its correlates or origins.2
Most of the related research on the remarkable and well-documented widening of wage
inequality in the U.S. over the past three decades focuses on permanent components of workers’
earnings, particularly the rising returns to education and ability associated with technological change,
trade, and de-unionization.3 However, this emphasis ignores the less-studied contribution of larger
transitory fluctuations. This study helps to fill that gap.
We conjecture that the recently documented increase in firms’ turbulence has led to more
volatile earnings for their employees. Recent work by Comin and Mulani [2005], Cheney et al. [2003]
and Comin and Philippon [2005] finds that the volatility of firm-level performance, whether
measured by the profit-to-sales ratio or the growth rate of sales, employment, or sales per worker,
has experienced a prominent upward trend since at least 1970. They find that the loss of stability at
the firm level is due to heightened creative destruction, stemming from factors including the decline
of regulation, improved capital markets, and more research and development. Hence, the increase in
creative destruction may drive the rise in wage volatility.
Beyond the coincidence of timing, a link between higher firm volatility and the rising
variance of wages is likely on both empirical and theoretical grounds. Empirically, wage differences
among employers for observationally equivalent workers form a substantial part of wage variation
(Groshen [1991a, b], Currie [1992] and Abowd et al. [2001]), providing a margin on which this effect
could operate.
With regard to theory, we present two classes of models with different interpretations of the
nature of the rise in average wage volatility in firms. First, we consider a model where the linkage
1

Later studies such as Cameron and Tracy [1998] support this finding. Recent work by Autor, Katz and Kearney [2005]
also underlines the importance of non-compositional, within-group wage differences in the 1980s and 1990s rise in wage
inequality.
2
Violante [2001] posits that returns to skill within firms have become more volatile as the pace of technological change
has increased.

arises because firms are sorted by skill and are subject to firm-specific shocks that alter their skill
profiles. In this context, an increase in firm turbulence causes more frequent compositional changes
within firms, leading to more volatile average wages. In this case, controls for human capital and
compositional volatility should eliminate the link between firm and wage turbulence. Alternatively, a
wide range of richer wage-setting models predict that compensation of incumbent workers should
be linked to firm performance. If so, wage premia linked to firm performance will become more
variable as firm performance becomes more volatile. Our empirical exercise finds evidence of the
link and then tests the first interpretation of this link against the alternative models (taken as a
group).
This line of reasoning may have important implications for our perception of labor market
institutions. Models of wage setting that predict an association between wages and firm performance
underlie the concept of internal labor markets. Internal labor markets have often been regarded as a
welfare-enhancing institution because they can insulate workers from temporary aggregate
fluctuations and encourage the development of firm-specific skills. On a national level, GDP
volatility has declined dramatically since the early 1980s (McConnell and Perez-Quiroz [2000]).
Ironically, as firm volatility has risen, the same shielding that once protected workers from large
macro fluctuations may now work to allow firms to share their idiosyncratic risk. That is, firms may
now rely on wage or job fluctuations to smooth profitability in a riskier marketplace.
Investigation of this question requires information on both employers and their employees.
As such data are rare, we take a mosaic approach—investigating the relationship in three
complementary panel data sets, each with virtues and limitations. Two of these data sets are well
known: the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID, a household survey with detailed information
on workers) and COMPUSTAT (detailed firm information taken from corporate reports). The
more unusual source is the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland’s Community Salary Survey (CSS),
which reports wages and employment levels for detailed occupations for identified firms. These
latter data allow us to test the relationship between firm and employee compensation volatility most
conclusively.
We begin by examining the PSID. Echoing Gottschalk and Moffitt, but focusing on
continuing workers, we find that wages for U.S. workers who did not change jobs saw rising

3

The variance of the permanent component of earnings across workers has increased due to a higher return to
education, to a higher return to ability, to globalization, and to institutional changes such as de-unionization. See
summaries in Levy and Murnane [1992] and, more recently, Autor, Katz and Kearney [2005].

volatility in their earnings from 1970 to 1993. This rise in transitory variation remains evident when
we expand the sample beyond white men. However, the PSID cannot link a worker’s wage volatility
to the performance of his or her employer.
Next, we explore whether workers’ average pay is more volatile in firms that have
experienced higher turbulence in sales, employment or profits. Using the COMPUSTAT data set for
the period 1950 to 2003, we find that this is the case, even when we control for firm characteristics,
including growth, size, age, or firm-specific fixed effects. Furthermore, this effect is strong; about
half of the rise in average wage variance is due to rising firm volatility. However, this evidence of a
correlation between firm and wage volatility is necessarily circumstantial because a change in average
pay in a firm could reflect reorganization rather than pay changes. That is, if a firm that experienced
severe revenue swings replaced (or laid off) a large part of its workforce, average pay could be
strongly affected even if its continuing workers’ wages were unchanged. While controlling for firm
growth provides partial control for this effect, firms could still up- or down-skill their workforce
substantially without changing size.
To nail down the link between wage and firm volatility, we turn to the Federal Reserve Bank
of Cleveland’s Community Salary Survey (CSS), which tracks wages for detailed occupations in a
sample of firms in Cleveland, Cincinnati, and Pittsburgh. In this survey, we find clear confirmation
that average and occupation-specific wages in firms are more volatile when firm employment is
more volatile. This relationship applies to detailed definitions of occupation and is robust to the
addition of controls for changes in occupational employment levels at that firm. Thus, the linkage is
unlikely to reflect the direct effects of reorganization. Hence, we conclude that increased firm
turbulence has raised the volatility of wages for U.S. workers.
Note that this paper assumes that the direction of causation flows from firm volatility to
earnings volatility, rather than the reverse. We maintain this assumption because the demand for
labor is derived from firms’ product-market demand, rather than the opposite. Absent any change
in employment contracts or the variability of labor supply, rises in wage volatility will reflect
increased demand volatility. We test whether employment contracts now transmit a larger share of
demand shocks to wages and find only mild statistical evidence that they have changed. Labor
supply is typically determined by slow-moving factors such as population growth, immigration, and
education, so we do not think it plausible that a coincidentally more volatile labor supply is the cause
of this phenomenon. To be certain to control for changes in aggregate supply, we add year dummies
and show that the relationship between wage and firm volatility remains unaffected.

Furthermore, the effect of its own workers’ incomes on a firm’s demand is unlikely to be a
major source of fluctuations in sales for two reasons. First, the share of sales to its own workers is
surely negligible. Second, while more volatile wages could raise the volatility of workers’ effort (and
therefore output and sales), this effect is also unlikely to be large. Workers’ effort in efficiency wage
models depends on the wage relative to the market wage. Since firm-specific fixed effects explain a
substantial fraction of the variation in wages (Groshen [1991b]), the size of the transitory
fluctuations we detect are unlikely to substantially alter wages relative to the market. Finally,
efficiency wage premia are more likely to be amplification mechanisms than complete theories of
fluctuations since they do not explain why wages fluctuate in the first place.
In the final empirical section, we examine whether the strength of the phenomenon varies
by occupation, industrial sector, firm size, or over time. The purpose of this exercise is to establish
that the effect is pervasive and to further describe its impact on the labor market and economy in
general. We find that the positive effect of firm volatility on average wage volatility holds for
manufacturing and non-manufacturing firms; for small and large firms; for white-, blue-, and pinkcollar occupations; and before and after 1980.
The structure of this paper is as follows. In Section 2 we present various simple models that
illustrate why firm volatility may affect wage volatility. Section 3 describes the data sets and measures
of volatility. Section 4 documents recent trends in volatility in wages and firm performance in the
PSID and COMPUSTAT. Section 5 presents the empirical analysis of the link between firm
performance and wage volatility. Section 6 discusses the results further, and Section 7 concludes.

2. Models
This section reviews three models of wage determination. The first model, a perfectly
competitive market where firms are sorted by occupation, predicts a relationship between the
volatility of average wages and firm performance when firm-specific shocks alter firms’ skill sets.
The other two models do not rely on compositional changes for their predicted positive relationship.
This difference in predictions permits us to informally test the first model against the other two. Our
analysis, however, does not intend to determine which of the latter two models provides a better
description of the data. Indeed, other models also deliver this result. Our intention, rather, is to
underline the generality of the prediction that a rise in firm volatility is likely to raise wage volatility.

Indeed, since the U.S. labor market is an amalgam of many different submarkets, the link between
firm and wage volatility could well result from different mechanisms in different sectors.
2.1 Perfectly competitive labor markets
We begin by considering a perfectly competitive labor market. Every period t, a continuum
of firms indexed by f experience a productivity shock, Aft, and decide how many workers to hire at
the competitive wage rate, wt, in order to maximize their profits. Without loss of generality, we
suppose that the shock Aft=At*aft, where At is an aggregate shock and aft is an orthogonal firm
1

specific shock such that ∫ a ft

1 /(1−α )

df =1.

0

Each firm has access to the following production function:
α

y ft = A ft l ft , α ∈ (0,1) ,
where yft is the firm’s output and lft is the number of workers it employs. In this context, firm f
demands l ft = (αA ft / wt )1 /(1−α ) units of labor.
To close the model, suppose that there is a fixed aggregate supply of lt workers. Then the
1

equilibrium wage rate is wt = α ( ∫ A1ft/(1−α ) df )1−α l t−(1−α ) = α ( At / lt ) (1−α ) . Substituting back into the
0

firm’s labor demand, it follows that l ft = a 1ft/(1−α ) lt .
Two conclusions follow from these expressions. First, under perfect labor markets, wages
depend only on aggregate conditions. Second, each firm’s employment depends on its specific
shocks.4 As a result, the variance of the average wage paid by the firm is independent of the variance
of firm’s employment.
This benchmark, however, may be seen as a straw man since there is no heterogeneity in the
average wage paid in firms. To extend this model to include wage differences among firms, we focus
on two firms with two types of labor. One firm produces a high-price good and employs highly
skilled labor, while the other produces a low-price good using unskilled labor. Both firms are pricetakers. In the labor market they pay wage rates ws and wu for skilled and unskilled workers,

4

Of course, shocks to aggregate labor supply induce a negative co-movement between wages and employment at the
firm level that could translate into a positive correlation between their variances. This is highly unlikely, however,
because the variance of aggregate labor supply is orders of magnitude smaller than the variance of employment or wages
at the firm level.

respectively. In the goods markets they receive a price ps or pu for a unit of high- or low-price output,
respectively. For simplicity, suppose that there are no aggregate shocks and that firms have access to
the following production function:
α

y f = lx ,
for x={s,u}.
In this context, the number of employees hired by the high- or low-price firm are
respectively l s = (αp s / ws )

1 /(1−α )

and lu = (αpu / wu )

1 /(1−α )

. The average wages paid are ws for the

high-price firm and wl for the low-price firm. Note, therefore, that this sorting of skills among firms
generates firm-level variation in average wages.
To explore the implications for second moments, suppose that the two firms flip the good
they are producing with a Poisson probability λ per instant of time. Then, the time-series variance in
the log of the average firm-level wage is V ( w) = λ (ln( wh / wl )) 2 , while the variance in the number
of employees at the firm level is V (l ) = λ (ln(l s / lu )) 2 .
It follows from these expressions that firms with higher turnover, or more creative
destruction, (i.e., with higher λ) will experience higher volatility in both employment and average
wages. Note, however, that the connection between firm-level performance and average wage
volatility arises only because of changes in the composition of the labor force in the firm, not
because individual workers’ wages became more volatile. If the labor mix used to produce both
types of goods were the same, there would be no variation in the average wage paid in the firm over
time. In other words, under perfectly competitive labor markets there is no connection between
firm-level employment variance and firm-level average wage volatility after controlling for changes
in the composition of employment within firms.
2.2 Relative performance evaluation
The second framework we explore is a version of the Holmstrom [1982] agency model with
multiple agents that face correlated productivity shocks. More specifically, suppose that every firm, f,
employs a continuum of workers indexed by i. Worker i’s output is yi=ei+ai+af, where ei is her effort,
ai is an i.i.d., normally-distributed, zero-mean worker-specific productivity shock, and af is a firm
productivity shock that follows a random walk with normally-distributed innovations. The worker’s
utility is given by U = −e − r ( w−c ( ei )) , where r is the worker’s coefficient of absolute risk aversion, and

c(ei), with c’>0 and c’’>0, is the worker’s monetary equivalent to the cost of exerting effort ei. The
principal determines the compensation scheme offered to the worker and how many workers to hire
every period. He makes these decisions before the realization of shocks. The principal accrues
profits at a rate given by the following expression:

lt

∑(y

j

− w j ) − ltς / ς , with ς >1.

j =1

In this context, the optimal linear5 compensation scheme for worker i depends both on his
output and on the average of the other workers output in the following way: wit = w0 + by i − dy fi ,
where 1>b>d>0, and y fi = ∑ y j /(lt − 1). In general, the optimal loading on the average output of
j ≠i

the rest of the workers is determined by trading off the reduction in noise from making the
compensation orthogonal to aft with the additional noise introduced through the (non-zero) sample
average of the other workers’ idiosyncratic shocks. Because of this second effect, the weight on the
other workers’ average output is smaller than the weight on the worker’s own output (i.e. b>d).6
Substituting

in

the

expressions

for

yi

and

yfi,

it

follows

that

wit = w0 + b(ei + ait + a ft ) − d (∑ e j + a jt + a ft ) /(l t − 1) . In addition, the level of effort exerted by
j ≠i

the workers, e*, is implicitly defined as

b = c ' (e * ) .
As

a

result,

in

the

symmetric

equilibrium,

the

realized

average

wage

is

lt

w t = w0 + (b − d )(e * + ∑ a jt / lt + a ft ) .
j =1

At the beginning of the period, the principal expects to pay an average wage

Et −1 w t = w0 + (b − d )(e * + a ft −1 ) and will hire l ft = ((1 − b + d )(e * + a ft −1 ) − w0 )1 /(ς −1) workers.
A number of interesting conclusions emerge from this model. First, contrary to the perfect
competition baseline, a worker’s wage depends on the firm-specific shock, af. with a one-period lag.
Second, the number of workers employed by the firm also depends on aft-1. Third, it follows that the
time-series variance of both employment and average wage of any firm increases with the time-series
variance of af.. Therefore, the firm-level volatility of employment and of wages are positively
correlated even after controlling for the composition of employment in the firm.7
5

Holmstrom and Milgrom [1987] provide conditions under which this linear schedule is globally optimal.

7

A similar result holds when there is a continuum of workers in the firm but the principal is also risk averse.

2.3 Bilateral monopoly
Next, consider a bilateral monopoly, where wages are determined at the firm level. This
situation may arise for various reasons. For example, unions may have the legal right to approve the
wage offered by the firm or, alternatively, workers may acquire some specific human capital that
makes their marginal product in the firm higher than in the market. In any case, the union and the
firm (Nash) bargain over the wage received by each worker after observing the firm-specific
productivity shock, aft. Then the firm decides how many workers to hire at the agreed rate. The
workers’ outside option is w; we also assume that if there is no agreement in the bargain, then the
firm cannot produce. The firm’s production function is y ft = a ft l ft − l ςft / ς , with ς >1.
In this context, the wage rate paid at firm f is w ft = (a ft + w) / 2 , and firm f hires
l ft = (a ft − w ft )1 /(ς −1) = ((a ft − w) / 2)1 /(ς −1) workers at time t.

In these expressions we see that both wage and employment depend on the firm-specific
shock. Therefore, the variance of firm employment and the variance of the firm’s average wage will
be positively correlated. Note that, unlike the firm model, this correlation should be robust to
controlling for compositional change within the firm.
2.4 Other models
The relative performance evaluation and bilateral monopoly models presented above are a
subset of the many models that predict that greater firm instability raises wage volatility for
incumbent workers. For example, two additional models also deliver this prediction. First, consider a
situation where firms face liquidity constraints that are less binding when sales are high (as in Gertler
and Gilchrist [1994]). As a result, both the wage paid to the average worker and the number of
employees may co-vary with sales, since the relaxation of the borrowing constraints allows the firm
to increase wages and hire more workers. Second, consider a search model similar to Mortensen and
Pissarides [1994] with firm-level shocks. In this context, the insulation induced by the search
frictions may force both workers and firms to accommodate the fluctuations in the value of their
match.8

8

Note that in a standard search framework, that may be the case even in the absence of agency considerations or
hold ups.

All these models demonstrate the generality of the result that firm volatility leads to wage
volatility outside of perfectly competitive labor markets. In addition, the models provide some
useful theoretical benchmarks for interpreting the results that follow.

3. Measures and Data
Before conducting the empirical analysis we discuss the measures of volatility and the data
we use.
3.1 Measures of volatility
Our analysis focuses on the volatility of the following variables:

•

log annual earnings of a worker,

•

log average wage paid in a firm or in an occupation within a firm,

•

log number of employees in a firm, and

•

log sales and profit-to-sales ratio in a firm.

We use the first two to measure wage turbulence, while the others are used to measure firm
turbulence.
We measure the volatility of each variable as the variance over a rolling window of a
specified number of years. This measure removes individual, firm-specific or occupation-firm-cell
averages. Therefore, its evolution over time controls for major compositional biases. Applied to
wages, this time-series variance captures what Gottschalk and Moffitt call the transitory component
of wage inequality—the variance in the deviations of a worker’s log earnings over a given time
interval.
The specification of the length of rolling windows is important for volatility analysis. We
choose a length of ten years in order to maintain comparability with the 9-year windows used by
Gottschalk and Moffitt while also preserving the ability to examine the higher frequency volatility.
Formally, our basic measure of the transitory variance for the log of variable x for cell i in (the
interval centered around) year t is defined as follows:

V10lxit = V [{ln( xiτ )}tt +−54 ] ,
where V[{.}] denotes the variance of the elements in {.}.

The ten-year transitory variance can be decomposed into two “very transitory” variances
and a “persistent” component. The very transitory variance measures the fluctuations in the relevant
variable over 5-year intervals. This high-frequency volatility is the main focus of this paper.
Formally it is defined as:

Vlxit = V [{ln( xiτ )}tt +−22 ]
What we call the “persistent” component of transitory variance captures lower frequency
variation and is computed as the variance of two consecutive non-overlapping five-year averages of
the relevant variable. Formally, it is defined as:
P
Vlxit
= V [ Avg[{ln( xiτ )}tt −−15 ], Avg [{ln( xiτ )}tt +4 ]] ,

where Avg[{.}] denotes the average of the elements in {.}.
Then, the transitory variance over a 10-year period (close to GM) can be decomposed into
the very transitory variances of the two non-overlapping intervals and the persistent variance as
follows:
P
V10lxit≡ V [{ln( xiτ )}tt +−54 ] = 1 / 2(Vlxit −3 + Vlxit +2 ) + Vlxit
.

To aggregate individual variances across individuals or firms in a given year, we compute
either the simple average or the weighted average of the individual measures of volatility. As weights
we use the share of employment or sales in the firm or in the occupation-firm cell in total
employment or sales in the year.
3.2 Data
The three data sources we use are compared in Table 1. The Panel Study of Income
Dynamics (PSID) and COMPUSTAT data sets are well-studied, long-lived panels of individual and
firm-level data. For this reason, we devote more time to describing the Community Salary Survey
(CSS). Note that for each wage series we convert to real wages using the GDP deflator.
The PSID collects annual data for members in a panel of families. As is typical for wage
studies using the PSID, we restrict our sample to heads of households because information on
earnings is most consistent and complete for this group.9 To focus on the effects of firm volatility
on wages for incumbent workers, we also present results for a sample restricted to job-stayers,
workers who have not changed employers over the period. In the PSID, wages are self-reported
9

The head of a household is defined as the husband in a married couple family, a single parent, or an individual who
lives alone.

earnings from the primary job, divided by hours worked. Fringe benefits are not included. PSID
wage data are very noisy; a high incidence of error in self-reported earnings and hours generates
considerable spurious transitory variation. However, there is no reason to think that there is any
trend in this noise.
COMPUSTAT is compiled by Standard & Poor from annual corporate reports of publicly
traded companies, augmented by other sources as needed.

The variables used in this analysis are

annual employment, sales, profits, and wage bill. Employment is the sum of all workers in the firm
including all part-time and seasonal employees, and all employees of both domestic and foreign
consolidated subsidiaries. Our key variable, the wage bill, includes all wage and benefits costs to the
company for all employees.
The annual Community Salary Survey (CSS) was conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland personnel department in order to formulate its yearly salary budget proposals.10 We use
the years 1979 through 1999. The CSS contains wage and employment information from employers
in Cleveland, Cincinnati, and Pittsburgh.
The companies represented are large, stable employers that wanted to be good corporate
citizens or have access to wage information from other local employers.11 The Federal Reserve
Bank’s personnel department offered participation to firms they considered representative of large
employers in each city. The industries included vary widely; the main criterion is that the local
employer had a large number of occupations that match those covered by the survey. Once they
joined, most employers continued to participate for several decades. During the years included here,
the CSS covers an average of 107 employers per year.
Employers judge which of their establishments to include in the survey. Some employers
include all branches in the metropolitan area, while others report wages for a single facility. The
reference unit selected by the employers is consistent over time. We use the terms firm and
employer interchangeably to mean the employing firm, establishment, division, or collection of local
establishments for which the participant reports wages. This ambiguity is not problematic because it
allows participating firms to include all the units for which wage and personnel policies are
administered uniformly.
We use detailed occupational codes to control for human capital. In predicting wages, the
R2s yielded by occupation alone in the CSS are typically two to three times that yielded by the
10
11

Groshen [1996] and Levine et al., [2002] describe the CSS data in more detail.
In return for their participation, surveyed companies received result books for their own use.

demographic, education, and broad (1-digit) occupation controls typically found in household data
such as the Current Population Survey or PSID. Moreover, in the CSS, the returns to working in
occupations that typically require more education have risen in tandem with the economy-wide rise
in the returns to education (Levine et al. [2002]).
The surveyed occupations are office, maintenance, technical, supervisory, and professional
personnel. External markets are well developed for these occupations because they are needed in all
industries. Production jobs, which would be specific to a single industry, are not covered. Many
jobs are further divided into a number of grade levels, reflecting responsibilities and required
experience. Job descriptions for each are quite detailed and at least two paragraphs long.
For the analysis below, the unit of observation is the occupation within the employer, which
we refer to as a “cell”. For each of these occupation-employer cells, we have the log of the mean
wage and the number of workers. The wages reported are the annual salary of each worker in the
cell. Cash bonuses are included as salary, but fringe benefits and any overtime pay are not. For some
of the analysis we also aggregate up to the employer level for all workers in the surveyed occupations.
The CSS covers between 43 and 100 occupations each year; each employer reports wages for
an average of 28 of these. Employers have an average of seven incumbents in each job title.
Employers in the CSS that also list employment in the COMPUSTAT database have a median
employment of 10,250. Roughly a quarter are unionized.
To measure the volatility of wages and employment at the firm level we aggregate over all
observed cells. While this approach omits volatility experienced by non-observed occupations, it
should capture the effect of major firm-wide fluctuations.
The CSS offers a unique window into the structure of wages. Rather than a representative
sample of working individuals, as in the PSID, a salary survey is a census of individuals working in
selected occupations at selected employers. Thus, unlike a household survey, the CSS permits us to
investigate wage variations within and between occupations and employers. However, since the CSS
does not have identifiers for employees, we cannot follow a particular employee's pay over time.
Thus, we observe the path of average wages and employment in firms for narrowly defined skill
levels, rather than individual workers’ careers.

4. Trends in wage and firm volatility

Our first tests of the hypothesis set the stage for the remainder of the study by documenting
the recent rise in wage volatility.
4.1 Individual wage volatility trends in the PSID
This section broadens the evidence on the rise in transitory volatility among individuals’
earnings by extending the time period and the workers covered and by focusing on workers who do
not change jobs. These extensions form the first tests of our hypothesis, which predicts that wage
volatility continued to rise after 1989, and that this trend applies to workers who did not change
employers and is not restricted to white males. For comparability with our other data sets, we also
examine the effects of alternative controls for age and of the application of demographic weights.
We find that the upward trend in transitory earnings volatility is quite robust, particularly to variants
in controls for age and sample definitions.
First we repeat the GM exercise in a way as comparable as possible to our analysis of
COMPUSTAT and the CSS. One adjustment concerns the GM control for age. The effects of age
on earnings are highly non-linear, so changes in the age structure of a workforce could alter the
volatility of wages even if wage-setting regimes remain unchanged. To control for changes in the
age composition of the sample, GM filter the log of earnings with a quartic in age prior to
computing their volatility measures. We explore three filtering schemes to control for worker
attributes. First, we do not remove the age effects at all. Second, similar to GM, we estimate two
quartic regressions, one prior to 1980 and the other for earnings after 1979. Third, we estimate a
different age profile for each year.
An additional effect we consider is the incorporation of demographic weights. Given the
oversampling of poor households and non-random attrition from the program, the PSID sample is
not representative of the U.S. workforce. We correct for these biases by using the demographic
weights provided by the PSID.
Table 2 reports the average volatility of earnings of white male heads of households in two
non-overlapping ten-year periods, 1970-1979 and 1984-1993, for the various age-adjustment and
weighting schemes.12 Specifically, the first two rows report the variance of log real annual transitory
earnings over the two periods. The third row contains the increment in the variance of transitory
earnings, and the fourth and fifth rows report the percent increase computed as the change in the
log of volatility and as the increment divided by the volatility of the first period. For brevity, we
12

The use of demographic weights affects the volatility of earnings for white males because, in addition to varying by
race and gender, they also vary by age.

discuss only the first measure of the percent increment in volatility, although we report both in the
table.
There are three important observations. First, the volatility of transitory earnings of white
males rose substantially over 10-year periods when extended beyond the GM time frame. This rise
of 4.5 to 8 percentage points represents an increase of 33 to 50 percent in the variance of log wages.
Second, the increase is robust to the various age-filtering schemes and to the use of demographic
weights. In particular, omitting the age adjustment does not lead to an upward bias on estimates of
the rise in earnings volatility. Finally, the rise in transitory earnings volatility for white male heads of
household who did not change employers during the period is similar in magnitude to the increase
for the sample that includes job switchers and represents a larger percent increase.
Next, we split the 10-year measures shown in Table 2 into their very transitory and
persistent components (as described in the previous section) to determine their separate influences.
For brevity we restrict our attention to measures aggregated with demographic weights.
The first two rows of Table 3a report the average variance of very transitory earnings in the
two non-overlapping 5 year periods in the intervals 1970-1979 and 1984-1993. The average variance
of very transitory real earnings increased by 3.3 to 4.9 percentage points for white male heads of
households and by about 2.5 percentage points for white male heads of household who did not
change jobs. Table 3b reports the evolution of the variance of persistent earnings between the
periods 1970-1979 and 1984-1993. The increment for all white male heads of household is 2.2 to
3.8 percentage points, while for job-stayers the variance of the persistent component of earnings
increased by 1 to 4.6 percentage points.
Adding these up, we find that both the very transitory and the more persistent component
of earnings changes are important for explaining the increase in the variance of transitory real
earnings. Forty-five to 60 percent of the increase in the variance of transitory real earnings of white
males over 10 year periods is due to the increase in the average variance of very transitory earnings,
with the remainder due to increased in variation of the persistent component of real earnings. For
the subgroup who did not change jobs, the share of transitory earnings variance attributable to the
very transitory earnings variance ranges from 35 to 70 percent.
The GM exercise focuses on white males, in contrast to the COMPUSTAT and CSS data,
which cover firms and occupations with no demographic limitations. Thus, we extend the analysis
of volatility trends to all the race and sex groups in Tables 4a and 4b using the PSID demographic
weights and the annual age adjustment. Results are similar for other variants.

Table 4a shows the evolution of the variance of very transitory real earnings for individual
five-year periods between 1970 and 1993. See Figure 1 for a plot of the evolution of very transitory
earnings volatility for overlapping intervals in the period 1970-1993 for the various demographic
groups. The first two columns of Table 4a show that the increase in the variance of very transitory
real earnings is largely monotonic. For workers who did not change jobs, there was a pause in the
upward trend of transitory earnings volatility during the 80s and the trend resumed during the late
80s and early 90s. Quantitatively, the variance of very transitory earnings rose by 7.1 percentage
points for all white males and by 5.4 percentage points for the subset that did not change jobs.
The third and fourth columns of Table 4a repeat the latter exercise for all heads of
household. Despite differing initial levels of volatility, the evolution of very transitory earnings
volatility for all heads of household is quantitatively and qualitatively similar to the path for white
male heads. Finally, in the last two columns of Table 4a we focus on heads of household that live in
Kentucky, Ohio, or Pennsylvania--the geographic coverage of the CSS data set. Again, the evolution
of the variance of the very transitory earnings in these states is similar to that in the whole sample.
Table 4b reports the evolution of the variance of the persistent component of earnings for
three overlapping period in the same groupings as shown in Table 4a with similar results. The
increase in persistent earnings variance is also monotonic, as seen in Figure 2, which plots the
variance of the persistent component of the log of real earnings for white male heads of household
for the overlapping 10 year intervals in the period 1970-1993.
We conclude that the rise in the volatility of earnings of individuals persisted into the 1990s,
applies to job-stayers and workers other than white males, and is robust to various forms of control
for age and to restriction to the three states covered in the CSS. Furthermore, the very transitory
and more persistent components both play a role in the rise of wage volatility.13
4.2 Firm volatility trends in COMPUSTAT
Have transitory variations in firms’ average wages trended up along with other measures of
firm volatility?

The affirmative answer to this question provides support for the hypothesis

presented in this paper.
Comin and Mulani [2004] and Cheney et al. [2003] find that the sales and employment of the
average firm have become increasingly volatile in the 50 years since the end of WWII, even as the
13

Recent preliminary work by Gottschalk and Moffit supports this view by showing that transitory wage volatility in the
PSID continued to increase through 2002, the lastest year available.

aggregate economy has become more stable. More specifically, for each firm in COMPUSTAT,
Comin and Mulani [2004] compute the variance of the firm’s annual growth rate of real sales or
employment over a rolling window. Then the average firm volatility in a year is computed as the
average of the individual firms’ volatilities in a given year.
The upward trend in firm volatility is robust to weighting the firms’ volatility measures by
their share in total sales or in total employment, to computing the median firm volatility instead of
the average (Comin and Philippon [2005], Cheney et al. [2003]), to removing the effect of age and
size on the firm volatility measure before aggregating it, to including firm-specific fixed or cohort
effects, and to allowing for size and age-specific cohort effects (Comin and Mulani [2004]).14 The
magnitude of the increment in volatility is quite robust to almost all of these variations. The
exception is the weighted firm volatility without controls, which we discuss below.
We start by showing the trends in the volatility (very transitory and persistent) of three
measures of firm performance: log employment, log real sales, and the profit-to-sales ratio, all at the
firm level. We aggregate firm-level volatility measures by computing either the simple mean or the
mean weighted by each firm’s annual employment share. Figure 3 shows the evolution of these
measures of firm-level volatility in the COMPUSTAT sample covering the period 1950-2003. In
addition, Table 5 reports levels of these measures of volatility at the beginning, middle, and end of
the covered period.
Several facts emerge from Figure 3 and Table 5. Between 1950 and the mid-1970s the very
transitory and the persistent variances of employment, real sales, and profits increased only modestly,
if at all. Thus, fluctuations in firm volatility during that time dominated any trend. Since the mid1970s, however, both the very transitory and the persistent variances of firm employment and sales
show a steep upward trend. The unweighted very transitory volatility of employment and sales has
increased by between 9 and 12 percentage points, while the weighted measures have increased by
between 2 and 2.5 percentage points. Persistent volatility measures have also clearly increased. The
unweighted persistent variance of employment and real sales increased by about 11 percentage
points, while the weighted persistent variance increased by between 2.5 and 5 percentage points.
COMPUSTAT’s information on the total wage bill of firms allows us to construct a series of
the average wages paid by firms. Figure 3 and Table 5 track the evolution of the very transitory and
persistent variances of the firm-level average wage in the COMPUSTAT sample. The most striking
14

Comin and Mulani [2004] argue that the robustness of the upward trend in volatility to these variations implies that
the upward trend in firm volatility is not driven by compositional change in the sample of COMPUSTAT firms.

fact about the evolution of the volatility of firms’ average wages is its similarity to the evolution of
the volatility of firm-level employment, sales, and profits. In particular, the very transitory and
persistent variances of firm-level average wage are roughly flat until the early 1970s and trend
upward afterward. The weighted and unweighted very transitory variances have increased by 3 and
11 percentage points, respectively. The weighted and unweighted persistent variances of firm-level
average wages have increased by about 1.5 and 3 percentage points, respectively.
Thus, since 1970 both the variance of individual worker real earnings documented in the
PSID and the variance of the average real wages at the firm level in COMPUSTAT have increased.
Applied to the decomposition of the variance of individual earnings in (1), that means that both the
left-hand side term and the first term on the right-hand side have increased.
4.3 Comparison of trends in firm average wage volatility in COMPUSTAT with
individual wage volatility in the PSID
What fraction of the increase in the variance of individual earnings can be attributed to the
increase in the variance of the average wage paid by firms?
To answer this question, we decompose a worker’s (log) real wage (lwit) as follows:

lwit = lw f ( i ) t + (lw f ( i ) t − lwit ) ,
where lw f ( i ) t denotes the average wage paid in worker i ’s firm. The second term is the individual’s
idiosyncratic wage change within the firm. Individual wage volatility (Vlwit) is equal to:

Vlwit = Vlwf ( i ) t + V( lwf ( i )t −lwit ) + 2Cov(lw f (i ) t , lwit − lw f ( i ) t ),

(1)

where the first term in the right-hand side, Vlwf ( i ) t , is the variance of the average wage volatility at
the firm level and Cov(x,y) denotes the covariance between x and y. Averaging across all the
individuals, the average individual wage volatility is equal to:

∑V

lwit

i

/ N = ∑ Vlwf ( i ) t / N + ∑ V( lwf ( i )t −lwit ) / N ,
i

(2)

i

where the covariance term drops because the two arguments are orthogonal within any given firm.
It follows from (2) that, in order to answer the question posed above, we need to compute
the increment in the volatility of the average wage at the firm level, weighted by firm employment
share. One important issue in this calculation is whether the increment in the average weighted firm
volatility in COMPUSTAT is an accurate estimate of the increment in the average weighted firm
volatility in the U.S. economy.

This is a non-trivial question since COMPUSTAT is comprised mostly of very large firms.
In 2001, 50 percent of U.S. employees worked for firms with 500 employees or more. In the
COMPUSTAT sample, instead, over 99 percent of employees worked in firms with over 500
employees. These large firms represented 50 percent of all firms in our COMPUSTAT sample.
Crucially, as shown in Figures 4A and 4B, firm volatility rose substantially more in small firms. As a
result, the increment in the weighted average firm-level volatility in COMPUSTAT underpredicts
the rise for the US as a whole.
Comin and Mulani [2004] filter the effects of size, age, and a firm-specific constant from the
firm-level measures of volatility in COMPUSTAT. After making these corrections, the resulting
weighted and unweighted series for firm-specific volatility are very similar to the series for the unweighted average firm-level volatility.
This exercise suggests that the evolution of unweighted average firm-volatility in the
COMPUSTAT sample provides a better fit (in magnitude and path) for firm volatility in the US
economy than does the weighted version. Unweighted COMPUSTAT results emphasize the
contribution of smaller firms, compensating for their lack of representation in the COMPUSTAT
sample. Assigning the same weight to the volatility measures of each COMPUSTAT firm yields a
total weight for small firms close to their employment share in the U.S.
For completeness we provide both weighted and unweighted measures in our tables. We
draw on both these estimates by averaging the two. Given our previous discussion, we believe this
to be a conservative estimate of the increment in firm volatility in the US economy.
The two samples overlap between 1970 and 1993. Between 1970 and 1993, the very
transitory variance of real earnings for workers that did not change jobs in the PSID has increased
by 5.6 percentage points, while the persistent variance has increased by 2.1 percentage points (see
Tables 6A and 6B). On an annual basis, the increments of the very transitory and persistent
individual wage volatility have been, respectively, 2.4 and 0.9 tenths of one percentage point.
Between 1970 and 2002, the unweighted very transitory variance of the firm-level average
real wage in COMPUSTAT increased by 10.9 percentage points, while the weighted very transitory
variance increased by 2.8 percentage points. As can be seen in Figure 4, the size of the increments
is sensitive to the end-dates chosen, so we choose a long span in order to smooth over the longest
period of time.15 For comparability, we annualize the increments from each data series in the fourth
15

This strategy is also motivated by very recent analysis conducted by Gottschalk and Moffit that shows that transitory
volatility of individual earnings in the PSID has continued to increase up to 2002, the last available year.

row of Table 6A. The annual increment in the very transitory volatility of the average wage paid in
the firm is 3.4 tenths of one percentage point for the unweighted measure and 9 tenths of one
percentage points for the weighted. Based on our previous discussion, we conservatively attribute
88 percent of the increase in the very transitory variance of individuals earnings in the PSID to the
increase in the variance of the firm-level average wage paid.
We can conduct a similar computation to assess the relevance of the evolution of the
between-firm effects in the increment by 2 percentage points in the persistent variance of
individuals’ earnings in the PSID (see Table 6B). In particular, the unweighted persistent variance
of the firm-level average wage increased by 0.03 percentage points per year between 1970 and 2002,
while the weighted persistent variance increased by 0.11 percentage points per year. These
magnitudes are robust to the variation in the upper margin of the interval. By averaging and
annualizing the weighted and unweighted increments, we find that our preferred point estimate for
the annual increase in the persistent volatility in firm-level average wages is 7 tenths of one
percentage point. This represents 78 percent of the annual average increase in the persistent variance
of log earnings in the PSID between 1970 and 1993. Therefore, the increase in the firm-level
variance of average wages can in principle be an important part of the increase in the persistent
variance of workers’ earnings.
These aggregate time series tests support the hypothesis that a very sizeable portion of the
increase in transitory wage inequality documented by Gottschalk and Moffitt [1994] reflects higher
volatility of the average wage paid in firms. Next, we use panel evidence to evaluate the hypothesis
that this is driven by higher firm instability.
5. Determinants of wage volatility in firms
5.1

Determinants of firm-level average wage volatility—COMPUSTAT results
We start by exploring whether COMPUSTAT firms pay more volatile average wages when

they experience more turbulence. To this end, we estimate the following regression:

Vlwft = α + β Vlxft + γX ft + ε ft ,

(3)

where Vlxft is the very transitory variance of a measure of firm performance (employment, sales of
profits) in firm f between t-2 and t+2, Vlwft is the variance of log (real wages) in firm f during the
same 5 year interval, Xft is a vector of other controls, and εft is a potentially serially-correlated error
term. To obtain an unbiased estimator of the standard errors of the estimates in the presence of

auto-correlated errors, we use the Newey-West estimator with autocorrelation for up to 5 lags.
Regression 3 is run both with and without weighting each observation by their share in total
employment. Table 7 reports estimates for various specifications and weighting schemes.
The first six columns of Table 7 report the coefficients on employment, sales, and profit
rate volatility for the weighted and unweighted regressions. Very transitory volatility of the average
wage paid in the firm rises strongly and significantly with the very transitory firm volatility of these
three variables.
This positive association persists with the addition of several relevant controls, as shown in
columns 5 through 8. First, we follow Comin and Mulani [2004] in recognizing that size may have an
effect on firm volatility. Consistent with their findings, we observe that log employment is negatively
related to the variance of the average wage; large firms show less wage volatility. Second, we also
allow for log wage to have an effect on the volatility of wages. This effect is negative and statistically
significant; high-wage firms have less volatile wages. However, neither of these effects diminishes
the coefficient on firm volatility.
A third addition, the growth rate of employment in the firm during the relevant 5-year
period, controls for compositional changes that affect firm size. Certainly, firms that substantially
change size have altered their workforce in some way. We find that wage volatility is lower in fastgrowing firms. Controlling for this effect, however, does not affect the magnitude or significance of
the association between average wage volatility and employment, sales or profit volatility at the firm
level. The relationship between wage turbulence and firm turbulence is, thus, unaffected by the
more stringent control for compositional change in the workforce.
The upward trend observed in both employment and wage volatility invites us to add time
trends and year fixed effects to show that the positive association between wage and employment
volatility is not driven by a spurious correlation. Table 8 shows that the strength and statistical
significance of this association is unaffected by adding a time trend or time dummies.
Another important concern is whether the positive relation between wage and employment
volatility results from the differences among firms or from changes within firms. If the comovement is driven by between-firm variation, the increase in wage volatility could result from a
change in the composition of the COMPUSTAT sample towards more volatile firms. By contrast, if
the positive estimate of β results from the within-firm co-movement between wage and employment
volatility, changes in the distribution of aggregate employment across firms should not play a major

role in the increase in wage volatility. Then, the increase in turbulence experienced by the median
firm would drive the increase in transitory wage volatility.
To estimate the within-firm association between wage and firm volatility we introduce firmspecific fixed effects in our regression:

Vlwft = α f + δt + βVlxft + γX ft + ε ft

(4)

Remarkably, introducing firm-specific fixed effects does not affect the significance or size of the
association between firm volatility and the volatility of the average wage at the firm level (see Table
9). Thus, we conclude that this association is driven predominantly by within-firm co-movements
between wage and employment volatility.
The effect of employment volatility on the volatility of firms’ average wages is not only
statistically significant but very sizeable. To see this, consider the evolution of employment volatility
at the firm level in Figure 3. In 1952, the average very transitory variance of firm-level employment
was 0.029. In 1970, it was 0.014. In 2002, it was 0.139. Since the coefficient of the variance of
employment in regression (1) is 0.57, the increase in firm volatility accounts for a decline of 0.8
percentage points in the variance of the average wage at the firm level between 1952 and 1970 and
for an increase of 7 percentage points in average wage volatility between 1970 and 2000. This
predicted evolution slightly over-predicts the decline in average wage volatility between 1952 and
1970 (0.8 vs. 0.4 percentage points) and slightly under-predicts the increase in wage volatility over
the last 30 years (7 vs. 11 percentage points). Therefore, firm volatility accounts for a substantial part
of the evolution of very transitory average wage volatility and specifically for its increase in the last
30 years. Note that this finding is not driven in any way by the design of our analysis since we
include time trends in our regressions.
The importance of the effect of firm volatility on employment volatility remains if we focus
on the weighted regressions. The weighted variance of firm-level employment declined by 1
percentage point between 1952 and 1970 and increased by 2.3 percentage points between 1970 and
2002. Given the estimate of β from the weighted regressions, it follows that equations (3 and 4) can
predict a decline in average wage volatility between 1952 and 1970 of 0.7 percentage points (vs. 0.4
in the data) and an increase between 1970 and 2002 of 1.2 percentage points (vs. 2.7 in the data).
Alternatively, we can compare the size of the effect to the rise in transitory volatility
observed in the PSID. The first column of Table 10A reports the increase in very transitory
earnings volatility from the PSID. The other two columns report the increment in the unweighted
and weighted very transitory firm-level volatility of log employment and the predicted increment in

the very transitory volatility of average wage at the firm-level based on our estimates from regression
(4). Firm volatility can account for about one fourth of the annual increment in very transitory
individual earnings volatility using the weighted firm-volatility measure and for the full increase in
wage volatility using the unweighted measure. Averaging between these two estimates as a
conservative adjustment for the few small firms in the COMPUSTAT sample, we estimate that
increased firm volatility may account for about 60 percent of the observed annual increase in the
very transitory volatility of individual earnings.
Of course, the relationship between firm and wage volatility may also operate at lower
frequencies. To explore whether this is true we use the measures of persistent volatility defined
above. Specifically, we run the following regression:
P
P
Vlwft
= α + β Vlempft
+ γX ft + ε ft .

(5)

Table 11 reports the estimates of the parameters in equation (5). In particular, the first two
columns correspond to the case where there are no additional controls; columns 3 and 4 control for
size (measured by log employment), log real average wage, and the growth in the number of
employees in the firm during the 5-year period; columns 5 and 6 add a trend; and columns 7 and 8
add firm-level fixed effects. Our main finding from these regressions is the existence of a significant
positive association between the volatility of the persistent component of employment and the
volatility of the persistent component of the average wage paid in the firm. This association is robust
in size and significance to the various controls. In addition, it predicts a substantial fraction of the
evolution of the volatility of the persistent component of the firm-level average wage. Between 1955
and 1970 the unweighted persistent variance of firm-level average wage declined by 1 percentage
point, while the weighted declined by 1.5 percentage points.
Given the evolution of the persistent variance of firm-level employment, the estimates of
the last two columns in Table 11 imply that, between 1955 and 1970, the unweighted persistent
wage variance should have declined by 0.2 percentage points, while weighted variance should have
been roughly constant. For the period 1970-2000, our econometric model predicts an increase in the
un-weighted persistent variance of firm-level wages of 1.1, out of the actual increase by 3.4
percentage points. For the weighted persistent variance, the model predicts an increase of about 1
percentage point, while, in the data, the increase was of 1.5 percentage points.
Table 10B compares these magnitudes to the observed increase in persistent wage volatility
in the PSID. Based on the observed increments in persistent employment volatility at the firm-level

and on our estimates from regression (5), it follows that firm volatility could account for almost half
of the observed annual increase in the persistent volatility of individual earnings.
Thus, we conclude that firm volatility can potentially account for 50 to 60 percent of the
increases in the very transitory and persistent variances of firm-level average wages. This assumes,
however, that the wage volatility we associate with employment volatility in COMPUSTAT is not
due to compositional changes.
5.2 Determinants of wage volatility—Community Salary Survey results
If we control for compositional changes, do more volatile firms pay more volatile wages? In
the previous section, we controlled for employment growth in the firm and found that changes in
the composition of the firms’ workforce that result in a net change in the number of workers do not
bias our estimate of β. However, firm-level turbulence could lead firms to alter the composition (and
average wage) of their workforce even if they show no trend growth or shrinkage. To determine
whether our estimates are capturing the impact of compositional changes we examine the CSS,
which contains information on firms’ employment and wages at a very disaggregated occupational
level.
5.2.1 Volatility regressions at the firm level—comparison of CSS with COMPUSTAT
We begin by comparing the CSS sample to the COMPUSTAT sample. Table 12 presents
means and standard deviations of the variables of interest for the two data sets. The first row shows
that the mean very transitory variance of wages is much lower in the CSS sample (0.004 versus 0.033
in COMPUSTAT); the CSS over-samples stable occupations in well-established firms. The mean
volatility of log employment in two samples is similar (0.52 versus 0.59 for very transitory variance,
for example). However, the similarity may be deceiving because of mismeasurement in the CSS.
The volatility of firm employment in the CSS is estimated from the occupations surveyed in firms in
a city. Thus, it is a noisier measure of overall firm employment than the COMPUSTAT volatility.
Hence, true employment volatility in these firms is likely to be lower than these measures suggest.
Next, we replicate our COMPUSTAT analysis using the CSS data, regressing firm-level wage
volatility on the firm’s employment volatility. Once again, as in COMPUSTAT, the CSS shows a
robust, statistically significant, positive relationship between a firm’s employment volatility and highand low-frequency wage volatility. The weighted and unweighted results for the very transitory and
persistent components of volatility all appear in Table 13.

We note that estimates of β from COMPUSTAT are approximately between 15 and 25
times larger than those estimated in the CSS (top row of Table 13). This difference does not
invalidate the ability of the CSS to test whether better controls for compositional changes reduce the
size or significance of relationship between wage volatility on firm-performance volatility.
Nevertheless, it is instructive to consider the reasons for such differences in estimates, as they
suggest that the magnitude of the COMPUSTAT estimates of β is more accurate for calculating the
size of the effect under investigation.
The COMPUSTAT sample is much larger, more geographically and industrially
representative, and more comprehensive for each firm; it includes all occupations and
establishments. We suspect that the more restrictive CSS sample produces a lower β estimate
because of mismeasurement, non-linearities in the relationship, and heterogeneity among firms.
First, it is likely that the volatility of firm employment is measured less well in the CSS,
which does not cover all occupations and establishments in firms. This noise in the independent
variable would bias the CSS estimate of β toward zero. If this explanation is true, the highest values
of the independent variable are the most likely to have large errors, so the estimated relationship
should be weaker for high employment volatility values. Indeed, when we estimate a quadratic
model for the CSS and COMPUSTAT in Table 13, we find that the quadratic term is negative for
the CSS, as predicted by this explanation. This is in marked contrast to the positive coefficient
estimated for the quadratic term in the COMPUSTAT sample.
The positive quadratic term in the COMPUSTAT regressions suggests another reason for
the small β in the CSS results; the sample may have a lower β because it is restricted to the range of
volatility where β tends to be low. These long-lived, stable employers were willing to participate for
long periods in local salary survey.
Fortunately, these biases in the CSS coefficient do not interfere with our tests of whether
finer control for compositional effects can reduce or eliminate the positive association between wage
volatility and employment volatility.
5.2.2 Very transitory wage volatility regressions at the occupation level
To control for compositional change more precisely we examine the volatility of average
wages in an occupation-firm cell. Since the occupations in the Cleveland data set are so

disaggregated (with four grades of secretaries, for example), it is hard to argue that changes in their
volatility are driven by a change in the composition of occupations in a particular firm.
The first change we make is replacing the dependent variable (volatility of the firm-wide
mean wage) with the volatility of the firm’s occupation mean wage. Thus, we now measure the
volatility of wages for narrowly defined sets of skills and responsibilities.
On the right-hand side, we can introduce an explicit measure of compositional change, the
employment volatility at the occupation-firm cell level. This term provides a stringent control for
compositional changes at the occupation level in the firm.
More specifically, we run regressions of the following form:

Vlwoft = α + β Vlempft + γX oft + ε oft ,

(6)

where Vlwoft denotes the very transitory variance of the average wage in the cell o-f during the interval
centered around year t and Vlempft represents the very transitory variance of employment in the firm.
Table 14 reports the estimates of the coefficients in this equation. Columns 1 and 2 report
estimates of β for the unweighted and weighted regressions without controls; weights are derived
from the share of employment in the occupation-firm cell. Strikingly, the size of the coefficient on
firm employment volatility is higher when wage volatility is measured at the occupational level than
when it is measured at the firm-level (Table 13, columns 1-2). This runs counter to the effect
expected if compositional effects were driving the observed association at the firm level.
Columns 3 and 4 of Table 14 report the estimates when controlling by log employment, log
real wage and the growth of employment in the cell. None of the controls reduces the estimated size
of the coefficient, even though most have their own independent effects on measured wage volatility.
To test further the robustness of these estimates we introduce fixed effects for year, firm,
and occupation (Table 14, columns 5-8). As in COMPUSTAT, the effect of firm volatility on wage
volatility is almost unaffected (in size or significance) by the introduction of year, firm, and
occupation fixed effects. This implies that the effect of firm volatility on wage volatility at the
occupation-firm level is not the result of any spurious correlation and is driven mostly by the
variation within a firm-occupation cell as opposed to by the variation between cells. This finding
reinforces our premise that firm volatility has induced an important increase in the transitory wage
volatility of the median worker.
Finally, in columns 9 and 10, we add employment volatility at the cell level ( Vlempoft ) as a
strong control for compositional changes. Not surprisingly, such compositional changes raise

measured wage volatility. However, control for such changes does not substantially reduce the
estimates of the magnitude of the link between firm employment volatility and wage volatility.
Our main conclusion is that there is a robust and statistically significant positive relationship
between employment volatility in the firm and wage volatility in the firm-occupation cell. The effect
of firm volatility on wage volatility does not seem to decrease in significance or size when looking at
very narrow occupations within firms or when we control for job volatility at the cell level. This
provides strong evidence against the role of compositional change in the observed relationship
between firm and wage volatility. Hence, it supports the view that firm volatility raises the volatility
of earnings of the average worker in the firm.
5.2.4 Persistent component regressions
We can conduct a similar exploration of the relationship between firm volatility and wage
volatility at lower frequencies in the CSS data set. We use our measures of volatility of the persistent
P
P
components of wages in the firm-occupation cells ( Vlwoft
), of employment in the firm ( Vlempft
), and
P
of employment in the cell ( Vlempoft
). Then, we estimate the following regression
P
P
Vlwft
= α + β Vlempft
+ ρTt + γX ft + ε ft .

(7)

where Tt denotes a set of year fixed effects. The set of controls, Xft, includes log employment, log
average wage, and the persistent volatility, all at the firm-occupation cell. In addition, in all our
regressions we add firm-specific constants, and in some we also include occupation fixed effects.
Table 15 reports the estimates from regression (7). We find a positive effect of persistent
employment variance at the firm-level on the persistent variance of the average wage at the firmoccupation cell. This effect is statistically significant for the unweighted regression, but it becomes
insignificant once the observations are weighted by the share of employment at the cell.
However, in contrast to the results for high frequency variation, the low estimates of β for
persistent volatility in the CSS suggest low economic significance. When comparing the effects
estimated with the CSS data set (Table 15) with the effects estimated in COMPUSTAT (Table 11)
the latter are 18 times larger for the unweighted regressions and 55 times larger for the weighted.
Furthermore, unlike the very transitory volatility regressions, this difference cannot be attributed to
the difference in the standard deviation of the dependent variables since the standard deviation of
the persistent variance of the average wage in COMPUSTAT firms is only twice as large as the
standard deviation of the persistent variance of the wage in the CSS cells.

In addition, inclusion of the cell employment volatility in the regression also reduces the size
and significance of the coefficient on firm volatility, providing more evidence that compositional
changes play a role in the estimated relationship. We conclude that compositional changes are
important in accounting for the relationship between employment and wage volatility at lower
frequencies. This finding suggests that in the medium term, aggregate conditions are more important
than firm-specific shocks for wage changes by firms.
However, the results for very transitory wage volatility suggest that at horizons as long as
five years, firm conditions have an important effect on the wages paid to their workers, even with
stringent controls for compositional changes. This finding provides evidence in favor of models
where agency considerations or hold ups may play an important role in wage determination, at least
in the short run at the firm level.
In the next section we discuss further the robustness of this finding and the role that it may
have played in the higher earnings risk borne by workers.
6. Causality and pervasiveness
Focusing on the results for very transitory volatility, this section discusses whether the
relationship we identify econometrically is causal (from firm turbulence to wage turbulence) and
examines the pervasiveness of the phenomenon. Our results give us little reason to doubt that the
enhanced firm volatility we see caused a rise in wage volatility and, while the phenomenon appears
to hold across the board, we find evidence of some intriguing differences in the strength of the
effect across occupational groups and industrial sectors.
6.1 Causality probes
The two alternatives to the hypothesis advanced here for the correlation between firm and
earnings volatility are reverse causality (higher earnings volatility caused greater firm instability) and
omitted variable bias (another factor raised both sorts of turbulence).
As the introduction notes, it is very unlikely that causation runs from wage to firm volatility
for four reasons. First, labor demand is derived from product demand. Second, the workers in a firm
constitute a negligible share of the total demand they face. Third, pure labor supply fluctuations
operate at lower frequencies and, since they are aggregate, are taken care of by the time dummies.
Interestingly, time dummies do not affect the estimated relationship between firm and wage

volatility. A final more interesting channel by which wage fluctuations may affect firm volatility
comes from efficiency wage theory. According to this theory, fluctuations in the worker’s wage
relative to the market wage may affect the effort exerted by the worker and therefore the firm
performance. However, this channel is unlikely to be important because, given the importance of the
firm-level fixed effects in wages (Groshen [1991b]), the relative position of the firm wages is unlikely
to vary much at the high frequencies studied in this paper.
A second source of concern is omitted variable bias. That is, the positive association found
between firm and earnings volatility could be due to a third omitted variable that is correlated with
both wage and firm volatility and that drives the increase in the volatility of firm performance and
worker’s compensation.
We are unaware of any such omitted influence and many of our probes rule out variants of
this hypothesis, so we consider this scenario unlikely. First, the positive association between firm
and wage volatility is robust to the inclusion of firm and occupation fixed effects. Thus, the
relationship is not driven by omitted variables that are roughly constant for firms or occupations.
This rules out large classes of possible omitted variables, including persistent differences in
compensation schemes across firms that are correlated with their volatility, persistent variation in
compensation schemes across occupations, and persistent cross-sectional variation in the
occupational composition of firms.
Similarly, the robustness of our COMPUSTAT and CSS estimates to the inclusion of year
fixed effects implies that the positive association between firm and wage volatility is not driven by
aggregate or regional shocks that affect simultaneously the volatility of wages and firm performance.
A third type of explanation for the positive association between firm and wage volatility may
be that firms which experience more turbulence also promote and demote workers more frequently;
as a result of this difference in job turnover, wage volatility is higher. This explanation is closely
related to Violante [2002] and to Manovski and Kambourov [2004]. However, this argument faces
the problem that the increase in transitory wage volatility (and its components) in the PSID is the
same for those workers that stayed in the same job and for those that changed jobs during the 5-year
period. 16 Therefore, it seems likely that the main force driving the increase in transitory wage
volatility operates within the occupation.
Further evidence in favor of the role of within-occupation-firm-cell mechanisms in the
increase in transitory wage volatility comes from the regressions using the CSS data set. The average

wage in an occupation-firm cell in the CSS data set can be interpreted as the wage earned by the
representative worker that remained in the job for the relevant period. Therefore, the strong positive
relationship that we find between firm and wage volatility in an occupation-firm cell shows that the
mechanism that drives the positive association between firm volatility and the volatility of transitory
wages operates within firm-occupation cells rather than across them. In our view, this severely
undermines an argument in favor of the role of turnover and the dispersion of wages across
occupations in the increase in the volatility of transitory wages.
Another interesting hypothesis that may constitute an alternative to the one we present in
this paper is that the increase in the volatility of transitory wages is not driven by an increase in firm
volatility but by rising steepness of incentive schemes. We can test whether this mechanism is at
work by allowing for different coefficients on firm volatility before and after 1980 when estimating
regressions (3) and (4) in the COMPUSTAT sample. 17 Table 16 reports the results from these
estimates when the dependent variable is either the variance of very transitory average wage ( Vlwft )
P
or the variance of the persistent component of the average wage at the firm level ( Vlwft
).

For very transitory variance, we observe no significant increase in the effect of firm volatility
on the variance of the average wage. In addition to not being significant, the point estimate of the
increment in the slope is not very large. These conclusions hold both for the weighted and unweighted regressions and are also robust to adding firm-level fixed effects and time trends.
For persistent variance, the point estimate of the increment in the effect of firm volatility on
average wage volatility at the firm-level post-1980 is larger than the pre-1980 effect. Furthermore,
the incremental effect is significant in three of the four combinations, insignificant only for the
weighted regression with firm-level fixed effects and time trends. However, since we suspect that
reorganizations may drive the link between persistent firm and wage volatility in COMPUSTAT, this
result may simply suggest that firms are more apt to reconfigure their workforce after 1980.
Interestingly, the results for the high-frequency variation suggest a new explanation for
firms’ introduction of variable pay schemes during the 1980s and 1990s. Adoption of these schemes
may have been endogenous if firms instituted new practices in order to maintain their previous
degree of risk-sharing in an increasingly risky marketplace. During the less turbulent 1960s and
1970s, risk could be shared without such explicit mechanisms by simply adjusting annual raises.

16
17

That fact was first noted by Gottschalk and Moffit [1994].
Since the CSS starts in 1980, we do not conduct this exercise for these data.

However, as the risk grew, firms adopted more bonus and incentive schemes to allow pay
fluctuations to expand along with firm volatility.
6.2 Differences across types of firms and workers
To further explore the connection between firm and wage volatility, it is useful to split our
samples according to firm and occupation characteristics and allow the effect of firm volatility on
wage volatility to differ across these groups. We conclude this section by considering three such
groupings: (i) small versus large firms, (ii) manufacturing versus non-manufacturing firms, and (iii)
white-, pink- or blue-collar occupations.
Large firms are those with more employees than the median firm in the sample in the year.
Table 17 reports the estimates from adding the small firm dummy interacted with the volatility of
employment to the regressions we have run so far in the COMPUSTAT and CSS data base. In the
first four columns we focus on the volatility of the very transitory components of employment and
average wage at the firm or occupation-firm cell, while columns 5 through 8 focus on the variance
of the persistent components. We do not report the results for all the permutations we have
explored so far, but the estimates reported are representative.
When looking at the variance of very transitory wages, we find that very transitory
employment variance in small firms has a smaller effect on wage volatility than it does in large firms.
This differential effect is typically statistically significant. However, the positive effect of firm
volatility on wage volatility holds both for large and small firms.
The effect of size in the link between firm and wage volatility provides useful information
on the role of liquidity constraints in this relationship. Recall from section 2 that liquidity constraints
may lead the variance of firm-level wages to co-move with firm volatility. If this force is at work, we
would expect that firms that face more binding liquidity constraints should experience a tighter link
between firm variance and wage volatility. Smaller firms are usually regarded as facing more stringent
liquidity constraints than large firms (Gertler and Gilchrist [1994]). But in Table 17 we observe that
the effect of very transitory firm volatility on very transitory average wage volatility is weaker for
smaller firms. This leads us to think that liquidity constraints are not an important force behind the
effect of firm volatility on wage volatility.
At lower frequencies, the effect of firm volatility on wage volatility also varies by firm size
but the sign of the small dummy interaction depends on the sample. In our COMPUSTAT sample
the relationship between the volatility of the persistent component of employment and the

persistent volatility of wages is stronger for large firms, while in the CSS data set, it is stronger for
small firms.
Table 18 explores the effect of the firm’s sector on the relationship between firm and wage
volatility. In particular, we allow for a differential effect of firm volatility for manufacturing firms.
For the very transitory variance, we find that the effect of firm volatility on average wage volatility at
the firm and at the occupation level is smaller for manufacturing than for non-manufacturing firms.
This differential effect is significant. However, we still find that very transitory firm variance has a
positive and significant effect on average wage variance at the firm and occupation level in
manufacturing. For persistent variance, columns 5 through 8 of Table 18 show that the differential
effect for manufacturing firms is not significant.
These findings shed some light on the role of compositional change in the increase in the
transitory variance of wages. One candidate hypothesis is that manufacturing firms do not offer
steep compensation schemes to their workers. If so, a change in the composition of firms away
from manufacturing would lead to an increase in wage volatility. The previous analysis minimizes
the role of such a change in the composition of firms in the increase in the transitory variance of
wages.
We conclude our exploration of the effect of firm volatility on wage volatility by studying
how it varies across occupations. Specifically, we use the CSS sample to classify occupations
according to whether they are white, blue, or pink collar. 18 Table 19 reports the results from
allowing for differential effects of the variance of (log) employment at the firm level for pink- and
blue-collar occupations. For very transitory volatility, we find that the effect is slightly smaller for
pink-collar occupations. When we run the regression weighting by the number of employees in the
occupation-firm cells, we find that the effect of firm volatility on the very transitory volatility of the
average wage in a cell is significant for the three types of occupations. When we do not allow for
cell-weights, this effect is significant for white- and blue-collar jobs, but not for pink-collar
occupations.
These results provide further insight into the mechanism that links firm and wage volatility.
The relationship between white-collar workers and their principals are probably accurately described
by agency models. Blue-collar occupations, by contrast, are the more highly unionized. Therefore, it
is reasonable to think that the wage-setting process in these occupations is similar to the bilateral

monopoly model. The fact that the strongest effects of firm turbulence on wage volatility are on
white- and blue-collar jobs leads us to think that each of these mechanisms is powerful in the
relevant occupations.
Furthermore, the similarity of the effect of firm volatility on wage volatility for white- and
blue-collar occupations minimizes the possibility that the increase in transitory wage volatility
reflects a change in the composition of occupations towards white-collar jobs and away from bluecollar jobs.
This similarity in volatility patterns contrasts sharply with the disparity in wage growth for
blue- and white-collar jobs: average real wages for white-collar workers have risen while blue-collar
wages have stagnated or fallen since the 1970s. Thus, blue-collar workers are likely to be worse off
now than before when we account for this increased risk. While white-collar workers’ wage growth
may compensate for the additional volatility, their real wage gains will overstate their welfare gains.
Finally, for the persistent variance, we find no significant difference in the relationship
between firm and wage volatility across the three occupation types.

7. Conclusion
Our findings suggest that rising high-frequency turbulence among U.S. firms over the past
three decades has raised their workers’ high-frequency wage volatility, increasing wage risks for many
workers. The effect is very strong and may explain about sixty percent of the increase in very
transitory wage variance that workers have experienced in the last thirty years.
Using household panel data in the PSID, GM find that wage volatility has risen substantially
for white male workers. We confirm the robustness of this result, focusing on workers who have
not changed jobs and extending it to all demographic groups. Using firm data from COMPUSTAT,
we find rising volatility of firms’ mean wages that mirrors the rise in volatility of firm performance
and robust evidence that when firms experience more turbulence they pay more volatile wages.
To ensure that the connection between these two volatilities does not reflect the impact of
hiring and firing workers with different skills, we turn to the CSS. Using these linked data, we apply
stringent controls for the impact of composition. The positive impact of high-frequency firm
18

White-collar jobs are highly-paid professional and managerial occupations. Blue-collar jobs are manual, maintenance, security, and
production jobs, traditionally staffed by men. Pink-collar jobs are lower-paid administrative, clerical, and support occupations

turbulence on the volatility of very transitory wage changes lasting five or fewer years is robust to
the introduction of compositional controls.
For high-frequency turbulence, these findings argue against the notion that compositional
changes in skill sets explain the link between firm turbulence and the turbulence of their average
wages. In contrast, application of strong compositional controls suggests that the link between the
more persistent components of employment and firm wage volatility, those changes lasting more
than five years, probably do reflect reorganizations rather than wage changes for ongoing workers.
Our analysis focuses on the impact of this turbulence on wage changes for incumbent
workers, not for workers who have changed jobs. However, there are reasons to think that the
increase in firm turbulence may also increase risk for workers who switch employers. First, firm
turbulence may increase the dispersion of average wages in occupations within a firm or in a given
occupation across firms. Second, because of these two forces, firm turbulence may lead to more job
turnover. We leave the exploration of these hypotheses for future work.
With regard to research, the observed connection between firm and wage volatility has
important implications for our understanding of labor markets. The finding that for horizons of
under five years, firm performance affects wage changes opens the door to the wide array of models
that suggest that firms share short-run risks and rewards with their workers on an ongoing basis.
Finally, from a policy standpoint, these findings highlight a source of increased risk faced by
U.S. workers since the 1980s. As they adjust to the decline of defined-benefit pensions, health
insurance, social safety net programs, and job security, Americans now find their paychecks tied to
increasingly rocky corporate ships. The implications of this heightened risk for financial markets
and for social and economic policy, not to mention families and communities, are still unknown.

traditionally held by women.

References
Abowd, John, Francis Kramarz, David N. Margolis, and Kenneth R. Troske, 2001. “The Relative
Importance of Employer and Employee Effects on Compensation: A Comparison of France
and the United States.” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies.
Abowd, John A. and Thomas Lemieux, 1993. “The Effects of Product Market Competition on
Collective Bargaining Agreements: The Case of Foreign Competition in Canada.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 108: 983-1014.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. 2005. “Rising Wage Inequality: the
Role of Composition and Prices.” MIT unpublished paper.
Cameron, Stephen and Joseph Tracy. 1998. “Earnings Variability in the United States; An
Examination Using Matched-CPS Data.” Unpublished paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New
York: October.
Cheney, Thomas, Xavier Gabaix and Thomas Philippon. 2003. “Firm Volatility.” MIT mimeo.
Comin, Diego and Sunil Mulani,. 2004. “Diverging Trends in Macro and Micro Volatility: Facts,”
Forthcoming Review of Economics and Statistics.
Comin, Diego and Sunil Mulani. 2005. “A Theory of Growth and Volatility at the Aggregate and
Firm Level.” NBER Working Paper 11503, June.
Comin, Diego and Thomas Philippon. 2005. “The Rise in Firm-Level Volatility: Causes and
Consequences.” forthcoming NBER Macroeconomics Annual.
Currie, Janet and Sheena McConnell, 1992. “Firm-Specific Determinants of the Real Wage.” Review
of Economics and Statistics, 74 (2): 297-304.
Gertler, Mark and Simon Gilchrist. 1994. “Monetary Policy, Business Cycles and the Behavior of
Small Manufacturing Firms.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, May, 309-340.
Gottschalk, Peter and Robert Moffit. 2002. "Trends in the Transitory Variance of Earnings in the
U.S." The Economic Journal, 112 (478), C68-C73.
Gottschalk, Peter, and Robert Moffitt. 1994. “The Growth of Earnings Instability in the U.S. Labor
Market.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2: 217-272.
Groshen, Erica L. 1996. “American Employer Salary Surveys and Labor Economics Research:
Issues and Contributions,” Annales d’Economie et de Statistique 41/42: 413-442.
Groshen, Erica L. 1991a. “Five Reasons Why Wages Vary Among Employers.” Industrial Relations
30: 350-381.
Groshen, Erica L. 1991b. “Sources of Intra-Industry Wage Dispersion: How Much Do Employers
Matter?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106: 869-884.

Groshen, Erica L. “Do Wage Differences Among Employers Last?” Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland Working Paper No. 8906, 1989 [revised 1991].
Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M. Murphy and Brooks Pierce. 1993. “Wage Inequality and the Rise in the
Returns to Skill.” Journal of Political Economy 101 (3): 410-442.
Kremer, Michael and Eric Maskin. 1995. “Wage Inequality and Segregation by Skill.” NBER
Working Paper 5718.
Levine, David I., Dale Belman, Gary Charness, Erica L. Groshen, and K.C. O’Shaughnessy. 2002.
How New is the New Employment Contract? Evidence from North American Pay Practices.
WE Upjohn for Employment Research Press: Kalamazoo, MI.
Levy, Frank and Richard J. Murnane. 1992. “U.S. Earnings Levels and Earnings Inequality: A
Review of Recent Trends and Proposed Explanations,” Journal Economic Literature. 30 (3):
1333-1381.
Manovskii, Iourii, and Gueorgui Kambourov. 2004. “Occupational Mobility and Wage Inequality.”
mimeo University of Pennsylvania.
Violante, Gianluca. 2002. “Technological Acceleration, Skill Transferability and the Rise in Residual
Wage Inequality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117: 297-338.

Figure 1: Very transitory volatility of log of real earnings in the PSID
0.16

0.18

0.14

0.16
0.14

0.12

0.12
0.1
0.1
0.08
0.08
0.06
0.06
0.04

0.04

0.02

0.02
0

0
70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

White males

78

79

80

81

82

83

White males empstay

84

85

All

86

87

88

89

All empstay

90

91

92

93

Figure 2: Persistent volatility of log real earnings in the PSID

0.1

0.09

0.08

0.07

0.06

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0
70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

White males

79

80

81

82

White males empstay

83

84
All

85

86

87

All empstay

88

89

90

91

92

93

Figure 3: Evolution of firm-level volatility measures in COMPUSTAT
Very Transitory Variance in COMPUSTAT Firms

Weighted Very Transitory Variance in COMPUSTAT Firms

0.2

0.07

0.006

0.18
0.06

0.16
0.14

0.005

0.05
0.004

0.12
0.04

0.1

0.003

0.08

0.03

0.06

0.002
0.02

0.04
0.02

0.001

0.01
0

0

19
50
19
52
19
54
19
56
19
58
19
60
19
62
19
64
19
66
19
68
19
70
19
72
19
74
19
76
19
78
19
80
19
82
19
84
19
86
19
88
19
90
19
92
19
94
19
96
19
98
20
00

19
50
19
52
19
54
19
56
19
58
19
60
19
62
19
64
19
66
19
68
19
70
19
72
19
74
19
76
19
78
19
80
19
82
19
84
19
86
19
88
19
90
19
92
19
94
19
96
19
98
20
00

0

Employment

Real Sales

Real Average Wage

Profit Rate
Employment

Real Sales

Real Average Wage

Profit Rate (Right Axis)

Weighted Persistent Variance in COMPUSTAT Firms

Persistent Variance in COMPUSTAT Firms
0.12

0.25

0.0018
0.0016

0.1
0.2

0.0014
0.08

0.0012

0.15
0.001
0.06
0.0008

0.1
0.04

0.0006

0.05

0.0004
0.02
0.0002
0

0

19
50
19
52
19
54
19
56
19
58
19
60
19
62
19
64
19
66
19
68
19
70
19
72
19
74
19
76
19
78
19
80
19
82
19
84
19
86
19
88
19
90
19
92
19
94
19
96
19
98
20
00

20
00

19
98

19
96

19
94

19
92

19
90

19
88

19
86

19
84

19
82

19
80

19
78

19
76

19
74

19
72

19
70

19
68

19
66

19
64

19
62

19
60

19
58

19
56

19
54

19
52

19
50

0

Employment

Real Sales

Real Average Wage

Profit Rate
Employment

Real Sales

Real Average Wage

Profit Rate (Right Axis)

Figure 4A: Very transitory volatility of firm-level average wage by firm size,
COMPUSTAT, 1970-2002

0.18
0.16
0.14
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02

< 500 employees

>500 employees

Figure 4B: Persistent volatility of average firm-level wage by firm size,
COMPUSTAT, 1970-2002
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01

19
75
19
76
19
77
19
78
19
79
19
80
19
81
19
82
19
83
19
84
19
85
19
86
19
87
19
88
19
89
19
90
19
91
19
92
19
93
19
94
19
95

0

< 500 employees

> 500 employees

20
00

19
98

19
96

19
94

19
92

19
90

19
88

19
86

19
84

19
82

19
80

19
78

19
76

19
74

19
72

0

Table 1: Description of Data Sources

Years covered
Unit of observation

Panel Study of Income
Dynamics (PSID)
1970 – 1993
Worker (head of household).

Average number of
observations per year
Sample definition

Job stayers: 3,611
All workers: 4,013
Stratified random sample of
families in population drawn in
1968, with attrition since then.

Source of information

Annual interviews with
participating families.

Wage concept

Annual earnings of the worker
in primary job, with no fringe
benefits.

Documentation website

http://psidonline.isr.umich.edu/

COMPUSTAT

1950 – 2003
Firm
3,115
Publicly-held companies, entire
corporation.

Standard and Poor collects and
aggregates data from Securities
and Exchange Commission
annual report forms, other
public information, and contact
with the company.
Total wage bill (including
bonuses and fringe benefits
expenditures) divided by total
employment.
http://www.compustat.com

38

Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland Community Salary
Survey (CSS)
1980 - 1999
Detailed occupation within firm
in a city (employing unit).
Employers: 107
Occupation–firm cells: 3,033
Local employees in surveyed
occupations in firms voluntarily
participating in salary survey
for Cleveland, Cincinnati and
Pittsburgh. Chosen by the
FRB-Clev. as representative of
major employers in the three
cities.
Personnel department records
submitted by participating
employers.

Average annual wage per
worker in surveyed occupation,
including cash bonuses, but not
fringe benefits.
None

Table 2: Earnings volatility for white male heads of household in the PSID, various age adjustment schemes
None

Age adjustment

Gottschalk-Moffitt

No

Demographic weights

Yes

No

Annual
Yes

No

Yes

All

Job stayers

All

Job stayers

All

Job stayers

All

Job stayers

All

Job stayers

All

Job stayers

1970-1979

0.118

0.085

0.104

0.076

0.098

0.060

0.096

0.058

0.131

0.093

0.121

0.088

1984-1993

0.164

0.129

0.175

0.140

0.161

0.119

0.166

0.125

0.189

0.144

0.202

0.157

Increment
Percent change (logs)
Percent change

0.046
33
39

0.044
42
52

0.071
52
68

0.064
62
85

0.063
50
64

0.059
68
98

0.069
54
72

0.067
77
115

0.058
37
44

0.051
44
55

0.081
51
67

0.069
58
79

Notes:
Volatility is measured by the average variance of log of real earnings over the time period specified.
Gottschalk-Moffit age adjustment removes a quartic in age for each 10-year period.
Annual age adjustment allows the coefficients in the age quartic to vary by year.

Table 3a: Very transitory (5-year) earnings volatility for white male heads of household in the PSID,
for various age-adjustment schemes

None

Age adjustment

Gottschalk-Moffitt

Annual

All

Job stayers

All

Job stayers

All

Job stayers

1970-1979 mean

0.070

0.020

0.065

0.018

0.086

0.046

1984-1993 mean

0.103

0.043

0.098

0.043

0.135

0.069

Increment
Percent change (logs)
Percent change

0.033
38
47

0.023
76
114

0.034
42
52

0.025
85
134

0.049
45
56

0.023
41
51

Period

Notes: Volatility is measured by the average variance of log real earnings over five years for the period noted,
using PSID demographic weights. Gottschalk-Moffit age adjustment removes a quartic in age for each 10-year period.
Annual age adjustment allows the coefficients in the age quartic to vary by year.
Table 3b: Persistent earnings volatility for white male heads of household in the PSID,
for various age-adjustment schemes

None

Age adjustment

Gottschalk-Moffitt

Annual

All

Job stayers

All

Job stayers

All

Job stayers

1970-1979

0.035

0.055

0.027

0.038

0.035

0.042

1984-1993

0.073

0.097

0.048

0.048

0.067

0.088

Increment
Percent change (logs)
Percent change

0.038
75
111

0.041
56
75

0.022
60
82

0.011
24
28

0.032
65
92

0.046
73
108

Period

Notes: Volatility is measured by the average variance of log real earnings over five years for the period noted,
using PSID demographic weights. Gottschalk-Moffit age adjustment removes a quartic in age for each 10-year period.
Annual age adjustment allows the coefficients in the age quartic to vary by year.

Table 4a: Very transitory volatility of individual earnings in the PSID

White males

White males
Job stayers

All

All
Job stayers

All KOP**

All KOP**
Job stayers

1970-1974

0.076

0.030

0.091

0.042

0.063

0.037

1975-1979

0.097

0.061

0.114

0.079

0.107

0.090

1980-1984

0.124

0.076

0.127

0.076

0.130

0.072

1984-1988

0.123

0.054

0.138

0.061

0.174

0.079

1989-1993

0.147

0.084

0.170

0.098

0.180

0.064

Increment
Percent change (log)
Percent change

0.071
66
93

0.054
102
178

0.079
62
87

0.056
85
134

0.117
105
186

0.027
55
74

Notes: Volatility is measured by the average variance of log real earnings over five years for the period noted, using PSID
demographic weights, and annual wage adjustments. Job stayers: workers that did not change jobs in the 5 year period.
KOP: workers living in Kentucky, Ohio and Pennsylvania.
Table 4b: Persistent volatility of individual earnings in the PSID

White males

White males
Job stayers

All

All
Job stayers

All KOP**

All KOP**
Job stayers

1970-1979

0.035

0.042

0.048

0.070

0.042

0.057

1980-1989

0.058

0.060

0.062

0.069

0.066

0.078

1984-1993

0.067

0.088

0.069

0.091

0.072

0.091

Increment
Percent Change (logs)
Percent Change

0.032
65
92

0.046
73
108

0.022
37
45

0.020
26
29

0.030
54
71

0.034
47
60

Notes: Volatility is measured by the average variance of log real earnings over five years for the period noted, using PSID
demographic weights, and annual wage adjustments. Job stayers: workers that did not change jobs in the 5 year period.
KOP: workers living in Kentucky, Ohio and Pennsylvania.

Table 5: Evolution of very transitory and persistent volatility of the firm-level variables in COMPUSTAT
Very transitory volatility
Unweighted
Employment Sales

Weighted

Profits/sales

Mean wage

Employment

Sales

Profits/sales

Mean wage

Period
1950-1954

0.0297

0.0431

0.0012

0.0158

0.0200

0.0335

0.0007

0.0122

1970-1974

0.0160

0.0867

0.0060

0.0110

0.0079

0.0344

0.0007

0.0072

1998-2002

0.1392

0.1257

0.1709

0.1204

0.0335

0.0361

0.0034

0.0350

Persistent volatility
Unweighted
Employment Sales

Weighted

Profits/sales

Mean wage

Employment

Sales

Profits/sales

Mean wage

Period
1950-1959

0.0548

0.0970

0.0009

0.0215

0.0221

0.0508

0.0005

0.0247

1970-1979

0.0254

0.0977

0.0028

0.0079

0.0116

0.0515

0.0008

0.0144

1993-2002

0.1433

0.1913

0.0454

0.0429

0.0773

0.0669

0.0014

0.0249

Notes:
Employment, sales and mean wage are taken as logs.
Very transitory volatility is measured by the average variance across firms over five years for the period noted.
Persistent volatility is measured by the average variance across firms between five-year means for the period.
Weighted estimates are weighted by firms' shares of employment in the sample.

Table 6A: Share of the annual increase in very transitory volatility of workers' wages in the PSID
accounted for by increased very transitory volatility in firms' average wages in COMPUSTAT
COMPUSTAT

PSID
Period

Period

Unweighted

Weighted

1970-1974

0.042

1970-1974

0.011

0.007

1989-1993

0.098

1998-2002

0.120

0.035

Increment

0.056

Increment

0.109

0.028

Annual increment

0.24%

0.34%

0.09%

140%

36%

Between-firm share of increase in wage volatility
Conservative estimate of between-firm share of increase in wage volatility

88%

Notes:
The conservative estimate is the average of the weighted and unweighted between-firm shares.
Very transitory volatility is measured by the average variance over five years for the period.
COMPUSTAT weighted estimates are weighted by firms' shares of employment in the sample.
PSID results are from Table 4a, col. 4: all job stayers, annual wage adjustment, demographic weights.
COMPUSTAT results come from Table 5, upper panel, columns 4 and 8.

Table 6B: Share of the annual increase in persistent volatility of workers' wages in the PSID accounted
for by increased persistent volatility in firms' average wages in COMPUSTAT
COMPUSTAT

PSID
Period

Period

Unweighted

Weighted

1970-1979

0.07

1970-1079

0.008

0.014

1984-1993

0.091

1993-2002

0.043

0.025

Increment

0.021

Increment

0.035

0.011

Annual increment

0.09%

0.11%

0.03%

120%

36%

Between-firm share of increase in wage volatility
Conservative estimate of between-firm share of increase in wage volatility

Notes:
The conservative estimate is the average of the weighted and unweighted between-firm shares.
Persistent volatility is measured by the average variance between five-year means.
COMPUSTAT weighted estimates are weighted by firms' shares of employment in the sample.
PSID results are from Table 4b, col. 4: all job stayers, annual wage adjustment, demographic weights.
COMPUSTAT results come from Table 5, lower panel, columns 4 and 8.

78%

Table 7: Relationship between very transitory variance of average wage and employment at the firm level in COMPUSTAT
Dependent Variable: v (log average real wagef)
Independent variables
v ( log employmentf)

1
0.574
(0.065)

2
0.722
(0.131)

v ( log salesf)

3

4

0.220
(0.054)

0.160
(0.02)

v ( profit ratef)

5

0.033
(0.015)

6

7
0.580
(0.065)

8
0.722
(0.124)

9

10

0.219
(0.055)

0.163
(0.022)

0.871
(0.196)

growth employmentf

-0.089
(0.015)
-0.035
(0.010)
-0.003
(0.001)

log real wagef
log employmentf

-0.067
(0.022)
-0.010
(0.007)
-0.002
(0.002)

log real salesf

11

12

0.841
(0.177)
-0.025
(0.018)
-0.019
(0.01)

-0.057
(0.022)
-0.038
(0.014)

-0.037
(0.018)
-0.015
(0.009)

0.03
(0.014)
-0.04
(0.022)
-0.025
(0.013)

-0.002
(0.001)
0.073
(0.003)

-0.006
(0.002)
0.15
(0.039)

-0.001
(0.001)
0.088
(0.03)

constant

0.004
(0.003)

-0.001
(0.003)

0.016
(0.004)

0.007
(0.001)

0.026
(0.002)

0.011
(0.001)

0.130
(0.035)

0.043
(0.029)

-0.004
(0.002)
0.169
(0.045)

No. of obs:
F-stat:
Prob > F:

28,125
77.09
0.0000

28,125
30.38
0.0000

27,906
16.57
0.0000

27,906
60.73
0.0000

27,325
4.55
0.0300

27,325
19.73
0.0000

28,125
41.78
0.0000

28,125
13.51
0.0000

27,906
15.33
0.0000

27,906
16.21
0.0000

27,325
12.24
0.0000

27,325
8.84
0.0000

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Weighted

Notes:
Standard errors (in parentheses) are Newey-West with five lags.
Regressions with employment variance as independent variable are weighted by employment share.
Regressions with sales or profit rate variance as independent variable are weighted by sales share.

Table 8: Relationship between very transitory variance of average wage and employment at the firm level in COMPUSTAT,
with time trends and year fixed effects
Dependent Variable: v (log average real wagef)
Variables

1

2

3

4

5

6

0.571
(0.066)

0.721
(0.132)

0.570
(0.066)

0.719
(0.130)

constant

-1.305
(0.477)

-0.439
(0.355)

0.033
(0.019)

0.053
(0.023)

0.577
(0.065)
-0.089
(0.015)
-0.037
(0.011)
-0.003
(0.001)
-1.542
(0.547)

0.721
(0.125)
-0.066
(0.022)
-0.011
(0.007)
-0.002
(0.002)
-0.330
(0.421)

No. of obs:
F-stat:
Prob > F:

28,125
59.74
0.0000

28,125
18.83
0.0000

28,125
4.74
0.0000

28,125
2.67
0.0000

28,125
44.56
0.0000

28,125
10.98
0.0000

28,125
6.18
0.0000

28,125
2.50
0.0000

No
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No

No
No
Yes

Yes
No
Yes

No
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No

No
No
Yes

Yes
No
Yes

v ( log employmentf)
growth employmentf
log real wagef
log employmentf

Weighted by employment share
Time trend
Year fixed effects

Notes:
Standard errors (in parentheses) are Newey-West with five lags.

7

8

0.575
0.719
(0.065)
(0.123)
-0.092
-0.070
(0.015)
(0.023)
-0.036
-0.010
(0.011)
(0.007)
-0.002805 -0.002391
(0.001)
(0.002)
0.166
0.095
(0.041)
(0.039)

Table 9: Relationship between very transitory variance of average wage and employment at the firm level in COMPUSTAT,
with firm fixed effects
Dependent variable: v (log average real wagef)
Independent variables
v ( log employmentf)

1
0.587
(0.105)

2
0.824
(0.097)

v ( log salesf)

3

4

0.137
(0.038)

0.187
(0.057)

v ( profit ratef)

5

0.075
(0.032)

6

7
0.587
(0.103)

8
0.819
(0.093)

9

10

0.143
(0.037)

0.170
(0.025)

0.88
(0.143)
-0.072
(0.017)
-0.008
(0.023)
-0.009
(0.024)

growth employmentf
log real wagef
log employmentf

-0.067
(0.027)
0.005
(0.007)
0.029
(0.012)

11

12

0.761
(0.125)
-0.037
(0.022)
-0.041
(0.016)

-0.083
(0.034)
-0.016
(0.011)

-0.071
(0.043)
-0.010
(0.004)

0.072
(0.03)
-0.054
(0.022)
-0.037
(0.036)

0.001
(0.002)
0.0003
(0.001)

0
(0.000)
0.001
(0.001)

0
(0.000)
0
(0.001)

constant

0.002
(0.001)

0.003
(0.001)

0.002
(0.001)

0.003
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)

0.000
(0.001)

0.001
(0.001)

0.0005
(0.001)

-0.011
(0.014)
0.001
(0.001)

No. of obs:
F-stat:
Prob > F:

25,053
31.20
0.0000

25,053
71.44
0.0000

24,866
13.23
0.0003

24,866
10.66
0.0011

27,325
5.48
0.0192

27,325
37.69
0.0000

25,053
8.83
0.0000

25,053
25.17
0.0000

24,866
4.75
0.0008

24,866
12.85
0.0000

27,325
2.84
0.0229

27,325
14.36
0.0000

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

log real salesf

Weighted

Notes:
Standard errors (in parentheses) are Newey-West with five lags.
All regressions contain firm fixed effects and a time trend.
Regressions with employment variance as independent variable are weighted by employment share.
Regressions with sales or profit rate variance as independent variable are weighted by sales share.

Table 10A: Summary of the annual increase in very transitory volatility of workers' wages in the PSID
accounted for by predicted increase in very transitory volatility of firms' average wages in COMPUSTAT
COMPUSTAT

PSID
Period

Period

Unweighted

Weighted

1970-74

0.042

1970-74

0.016

0.0078

1989-93

0.098

1998-02

0.139

0.035

0.056

Increment

0.123

0.0272

Increment*coefficient in Table 7 (cols. 7 and 8)

0.070

0.020

Annualized predicted increments

0.22%

0.06%

Increment

Annual
increment

0.24%

Average predicted increment in the
very transitory volatility of workers' wages

0.14%

Share of PSID increment explained
by rise in firm volatility

58%

Notes:
Very transitory volatility is measured by the average variance over five years for the period.
COMPUSTAT weighted estimates are weighted by firms' shares of employment in the sample.
PSID results are from Table 4a, col. 4: all job stayers, annual wage adjustment, demographic weights.
COMPUSTAT results come from Table 5, upper panel, columns 4 and 8.

Table 10B: Summary of the annual increase in persistent volatility of workers' wages in the PSID accounted
for by predicted increase in persistent volatility of firms' average wages in COMPUSTAT
COMPUSTAT

PSID
Period

Period

Unweighted

Weighted

1970-79

0.07

1970-79

0.025

0.0116

1984-93

0.091

1993-2002

0.143

0.077

Increment

0.021

Increment

0.118

0.0654

Increment*coefficient in Table 11 (cols. 7 and 8)

0.013

0.014

Annualized predicted increments

0.04%

0.04%

Annual
increment

0.09%

Average annual predicted increment in the
persistent volatility of workers' wages

0.04%

Share of PSID increment explained
by rise in firm volatility

46%

Notes:
Persistent volatility is measured by the average variance between five-year means.
COMPUSTAT weighted estimates are weighted by firms' shares of employment in the sample.
PSID results are from Table 4b, col. 4: all job stayers, annual wage adjustment, demographic weights.
COMPUSTAT results come from Table 5, lower panel, columns 4 and 8.

Table 11: Relationship between persistent volatility of average wage and employment at the firm level in COMPUSTAT
Dependent variable: variance of persistent component of (log average real wagef)
Independent variables

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

0.112
(0.032)

0.159
(0.059)

cons

0.006
(0.002)

0.007
(0.002)

0.110
(0.032)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.005)
0.010
(0.017)

0.158
(0.059)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.007
(0.004)
0.024
(0.012)

0.109
(0.033)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.002
(0.005)
-0.416
(0.168)

0.157
(0.060)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.007
(0.004)
-0.013
(0.149)

0.109
(0.039)
-0.014
(0.015)
0.009
(0.018)
0.0003
(0.001)

0.216
(0.071)
0.026
(0.015)
0.004
(0.011)
-0.001
(0.0004)

No. of obs:
F-stat:
Prob > F:

17,226
12.33
0.0004

17,226
7.31
0.0069

17,226
10.50
0.0000

17,226
4.12
0.0063

17,226
14.29
0.0000

17,226
3.26
0.0111

15,601
2.75
0.0412

15,601
5.08
0.0016

No
No
No

Yes
No
No

No
No
No

Yes
No
No

No
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No

No
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

v of persistent component ( log employmentf)
log employmentf
log real wagef

Weighted
Time trend
Firm fixed effects

Note:
Standard errors (in parenthesis) are Newey-West with ten lags.
Weighted regressions are weighted by employment share.
Persistent volatility is measured by the average variance between five-year means.

Table 12: Comparison of volatility measures in COMPUSTAT and the CSS

CSS

COMPUSTAT

Very transitory volatility
v ( log avg. real wagef)

v ( log employmentf)

Average

0.004

0.004

0.033

0.016

Std. Dev.

0.006

0.005

0.298

0.213

Average

0.059

0.056

0.052

0.023

Std. Dev.

0.1175

0.101

0.3

0.16

Average

0.006

0.006

0.137

0.013

Std. Dev.

0.011

0.011

0.063

0.04

Average

0.093

0.09

0.066

0.037

Std. Dev.

0.34

0.37

0.216

0.118

Persistent volatility
vp ( log avg. real wagef)

vp ( log employmentf)

Number of observations
Weighted by employment shares

835-851
No

17,235-28,130
Yes

No

Yes

Table 13: Relationship between volatility of average wage and employment at the firm level in the CSS and COMPUSTAT

Data set
Independent variables
v ( log employmentf)

CSS
1
0.020
(0.005)

Compustat

2
0.013
(0.003)

v ( log employmentf)^2

No. of obs:
F-stat:
Prob > F:
Weighted

persistent volatility--vp (log average real wagef)

very transitory volatility--v (log average real wage f )

Dependent variable

CSS

CSS

3
0.216
(0.066)

4
0.258
(0.141)

5
0.037
(0.008)

6
0.042
(0.009)

0.044
(0.006)

0.057
(0.015)

-0.037
(0.013)

-0.058
(0.014)

7
0.0114
(0.007)

8
0.006
(0.005)

835
5.27
0.0003

835
5.43
0.0003

25,053
34.07
0.0000

25,053
27.3
0.0000

835
4.48
0.0005

835
5.7
0.0000

851
11.88
0.0000

851
14.55
0.0000

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Note: Standard errors (in parenthesis) are Newey-West with five lags.
All regressions include firm-level fixed effects and a time trend.
Regressions 7-12 also include the log of employment in the cell and log of average wage as controls.
Regressions 1-6 also control for the growth in employment in the firm during the relevant 5 year period.
Weights are employment shares.

CSS

Compustat
9
0.121
(0.06)

10
0.196
(0.095)

11
0.026
(0.013)

12
0.006
(0.009)

-0.003
(0.017)

0.007
(0.031)

-0.011
(0.005)

0
(0.005)

851
6.39
0.0000

851
6.84
0.0000

No

Yes

15,601 15,601
2.03
5.17
0.0868
0.0004
No

Yes

Table 14: Relationship between very transitory volatility of average wage and employment at the occupation-firm level in the CSS
Dependent Variable: v (log average real wageof)
Independent variables

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

v ( log employmentf)

0.035
(0.010)

0.028
(0.014)

0.036
(0.010)

0.028
(0.014)

0.031
(0.010)

0.022
(0.012)

0.036
(0.011)

0.027
(0.014)

-0.0005
(0.0002)
0.004
(0.016)
-0.002
(0.001)
-0.035
(0.017)

-0.002
(0.0002)
0.004
(0.001)
0.0003
(0.001)
0.010
(0.005)

-0.0004
(0.0004)
0.005
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.001)
0.022
(0.003)

-0.002
(0.0003)
0.001
(0.002)
0.0005
(0.001)
0.007
(0.017)

0.0001
(0.0004)
0.004
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.039
(0.024)

0.031
(0.010)
0.008
(0.002)
0.000
(0.000)
0.002
(0.002)
0.0002
(0.001)
0.020
(0.0168)

0.023
(0.013)
0.004
(0.001)
0.000
(0.000)
0.006
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.051
(0.024)

v ( log employmentof)
log employmentof

cons

0.005
(0.000)

0.003
(0.000)

-0.002
(0.0002)
0.003
(0.001)
0.0006
(0.001)
-0.023
(0.009)

No. of obs:
F-stat:
Prob > F:

15,191
12.38
0.0004

15,191
3.68
0.0500

15,191
39.13
0.0000

15,191
12.42
0.0000

15,191
10.29
0.0000

15,191
12.29
0.0000

15,191
13.53
0.0000

15,191
1.99
0.0929

15,191
8.42
0.0000

15,191
2.32
0.0411

No
No
No
No

Yes
No
No
No

No
No
No
No

Yes
No
No
No

No
Yes
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
No
Yes

No
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

log real wageof
growth employmentof

Weighted
Firm fixed effects
Occupation fixed effects
Year fixed effects

Note: Standard errors (in parenthesis) are Newey-West with five lags.
Weighting are employment shares in occupation-firm cell.

Table 15: Relationship between persistent volatility of wage and employment at the occupation-firm level in CSS,
with firm and occupation-level fixed effects
Dependent variable: variance of persistent component of (log average real wageof)
Independent variables
v of persistent component ( log employmentf)

1

2

3

4

5

6

0.006
(0.003)

0.004
(0.005)

0.006
(0.003)

0.003
(0.004)

-0.002
(0.0003)
0.007
(0.002)
0.001
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.0003)
0.003
(0.001)
0.0003
(0.001)

-0.002
(0.0003)
0.004
(0.005)
0.030
(0.053)

-0.00002
(0.0004)
-0.004
(0.007)
-0.051
(0.066)

0.003
(0.003)
0.007
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.000)
0.003
(0.005)
0.020
(0.052)

-0.001
(0.003)
0.002
(0.001)
-0.0004
(0.0004)
-0.005
(0.007)
-0.052
(0.065)

18,077
10.58
0.0000

18,077
6.94
0.0000

18,077
4.32
0.0000

18,077
2.96
0.0001

18,077
11.23
0.0000

18,077
2.26
0.0600

No
No

Yes
No

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

v of persistent component ( log employmentof)
log employmentof
log real wageof
cons

No. of obs:
F-stat:
Prob > F:
Weighted:
Occupation fixed effects

Note: Standard errors (in parentheses) are Newey-West with ten lags.
All regressions include year and firm fixed effects.

Table 16: Time variation in the relationship between volatility of average wage and employment at the firm level in COMPUSTAT
Dependent variable:
Independent variables
v ( log employmentf)

very transitory--v (log average real wage f )

5

6

7

8

p
v ( log employmentf)

0.023
(0.009)

0.029
(0.018)

0.007
(0.029)

0.084
(0.02)

p
v ( log employmentf)*I(year≥1980)

0.098
(0.031)

0.16
(0.06)

0.11
(0.054)

0.143
(0.085)

v ( log employmentf)*I(year≥1980)

growth employmentf

1
0.422
(0.1)
0.163
(0.11)

2
0.537
(0.117)
0.189
(0.163)

3
0.400
(0.11)
0.193
(0.148)

4
0.554
(0.122)
0.268
(0.161)

persistent--vp (log average real wagef)

-0.086
(0.015)
-0.036
(0.01)
-0.003
(0.001)

-0.064
(0.023)
-0.01
(0.006)
-0.002
(0.001)

-0.07
(0.016)
-0.008
(0.024)
-0.009
(0.024)

-0.063
(0.028)
0.005
(0.006)
0.027
(0.012)

-0.002
(0.005)
-0.001
(0.001)

-0.008
(0.003)
0.001
(0.001)

0.008
(0.017)
-0.015
(0.016)

0.003
(0.011)
0.0255
(0.015)

constant

0.134
(0.035)

0.046
(0.028)

0.001
(0.001)

0.000
(0.001)

-0.017
(0.016)

0.031
(0.01

0.000
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.000)

No. of obs:
F-stat:
Prob > F:

28,125
34.62
0.0000

28,125
13.88
0.0000

25,053
9.27
0.0000

25,053
24.08
0.0000

17,226
7.45
0.0000

17,226
3.92
0.0035

15,601
2.53
0.0000

15,601
7.76
0.0000

No
No
No

Yes
No
No

No
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

No
No
No

Yes
No
No

No
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

log real wagef
log employmentf

Weighted by employment share
Time trend
Firm fixed effects

Note: Standard errors (in parentheses) are Newey-West with five year lags for transitory wages and 10 year for persistent.

Table 17: Firm size variation in relationship between the volatility of average wage and employment at the firm and firm-occupation levels in the CSS
Dependent variable:
Independent variables
v(log employmentf)
v(log employmentf)*I(small firm)

Very transitory firm
v (log average real wage f )
1
2
0.800
0.828
(0.069)
(0.09)
-0.48
-0.504
(0.08)
(0.098)

Very transitory firm-occup.
v (log average real wage of )
3
4
0.049
0.029
(0.016)
(0.016)
-0.033
-0.011
(0.014)
(0.012)

vp(log employmentf)
vp(log employmentf)*I(small firm)
growth employmentf
log real wagef
log employmentf

-0.064
(0.013)
-0.008
(0.02)
-0.009
(0.023)

-0.066
(0.027)
0.004
(0.006)
0.028
(0.012)

constant

0.001
(0.001)

0.001
(0.001)

0
(0.000)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.000)
0.005
(0.017)

No. of obs:
F-stat:
Prob > F:
Weighted by employment share
Occupation fixed effects

25,053
38.23
0.0000
No
No

25,053
37
0.0000
Yes
No

15,191
10.96
0.0000
No
Yes

growth employmentof
log real wageof
log employmentof

Persistent firm
vp (log average real wagef)
5
6

Persistent firm-occupation
vp (log average real wageof)
7
8

0.197
(0.099)
-0.129
(0.102)

0.220
(0.074)
-0.181
(0.079)

0.003
(0.005)
0.004
(0.006)

-0.002
(0.004)
0.009
(0.004)

0.008
(0.016)
-0.010
(0.0145)

0.004
(0.01)
0.026
(0.015)

0.003
(0.005)
-0.001
(0.000)

-0.005
(0.006)
0
(0.000)

-0.001
(0.001)
0.004
(0.002)
0
(0.000)
0.038
(0.023)

0.000
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.000)

0.190
(0.053)

-0.058
(0.065)

15,191
3.63
0.0028
Yes
Yes

15,601
3.54
0.0070
No
No

15,601
4.29
0.0018
Yes
No

18,077
9.2
0.0000
No
Yes

18,077
2.22
0.0645
Yes
Yes

Note: Standard errors (in parentheses) are Newey-West with five-year lags for transitory wages and 10-year lags for persistent volatility.
Time trend and firm fixed effects included in all regressions.

Table 18: Sectoral variation in the relationship between the volatility of average wage and employment at the firm and firm-occupation levels in the CSS

Dependent variable:
Independent variables
v ( log employmentf)
v ( log employmentf)*I(manufacturing)

Very transitory firm
v (log average real wage f )
1
2
0.622
0.838
(0.1)
(0.085)
-0.39
-0.511
(0.11)
(0.106)

Very transitory firm-occup.
v (log average real wage of )
3
4
0.039
0.039
(0.012)
(0.019)
-0.025
-0.042
(0.01)
(0.020)

vp ( log employmentf)
vp ( log employmentf)*I(manufacturing)
growth employmentf
log real wagef
log employmentf

-0.068
(0.016)
-0.009
(0.023)
-0.01
(0.024)

-0.075
(0.024)
0.004
(0.006)
0.026
(0.012)

growth employmentof
log real wageof
log employmentof

0
(0.001)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.000)

-0.001
(0.001)
0.004
(0.002)
0
(0.000)

Persistent firm
vp (log average real wagef)
5
6

Persistent firm-occupation
vp (log average real wageof)
7
8

0.105
(0.046)
0.017
(0.066)

0.135
(0.094)
0.161
(0.099)

0.004
(0.002)
0.0003
(0.009)

0.001
(0.004)
-0.003
(0.005)

0.009
(0.018)
-0.014
(0.0151)

0.002
(0.01)
0.015
(0.010)

0.003
(0.005)
-0.001
(0.000)

-0.005
(0.006)
0
(0.000)

constant

0.001
(0.001)

0.000
(0.001)

0.007
(0.017)

0.040
(0.024)

0.000
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.000)

0.025
(0.052)

-0.058
(0.065)

No. of obs:
F-stat:
Prob > F:

25,053
11.65
0.0000

25,053
36.11
0.0000

15,191
10.9
0.0000

15,191
1.7
0.1300

15,601
3.43
0.0083

15,601
24.91
0.0000

18,077
2.96
0.0185

18,077
0.33
0.8600

No
No

Yes
No

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

No
No

Yes
No

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

Weighted by employment share
Occupation fixed effects

Note: Standard errors (in parentheses) are Newey-West with five-year lags for transitory wages and 10-year lags for persistent volatility.
Time trend and firm fixed effects included in all regressions.

Table 19: Occupation variation in the relationship between volatility of average wage and employment at the firm-occupation level in the CSS

Dependent variable:
Independent variables
v ( log employmentf)
v ( log employmentf)*I(pink collar)
v ( log employmentf)*I(blue collar)

Very transitory firm-occupation
v (log average real wage of )
1
0.026
(0.006)
-0.022
(0.006)
0.000
(0.002)

2
0.015
(0.004)
-0.006
(0.0045)
-0.006
(0.004)

vp ( log employmentf)
vp ( log employmentf)*I(pink collar)
vp ( log employmentf)*I(blue collar)

Persistent firm-occupation
v p (log average real wage of )
3

4

0.005
(0.005)
0
(0.004)
-0.001
(0.008)

-0.003
(0.005)
0.006
(0.002)
-0.0126
(0.008)

0
(0.000)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.000)

0
(0.000)
0.004
(0.002)
0
(0.000)

0.003
(0.005)
-0.001
(0.000)

-0.004
(0.007)
0.000
(0.000)

constant

0.000
(0.016)

0.029
(0.02)

0.025
(0.052)

-0.054
(0.066)

No. of obs:
F-stat:
Prob > F:

11,754
17.24
0.0000

11,754
4.44
0.0002

18,077
2.97
0.0110

18,077
12.99
0.0000

No

Yes

No

Yes

growth employmentf
log real wagef
log employmentf

Weighted by employment share

Note: Standard errors (in parentheses) are Newey-West with five-year lags for transitory wages and 10-year lags for persistent volatility.
All regressions contain firm and occupation fixed effects.

