NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXPORTS AND SLOW ECONOMIC GROWTH
IN THE LOWER SOUTH REGION, 1720-1800
Peter C. Mancall
Joshua L. Rosenbloom
Thomas Weiss
Working Paper 12045
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12045
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2006

The research reported here is part of the NBER’s program on the Development of the American Economy.
This research was funded in part by the National Science Foundation (SBR9808516). An earlier version of
this paper was presented at the Social Science History Association annual meeting, Alexander Humboldt
University, Tubingen University, UC Davis, UCLA, Williams College, and the American Origins Seminar
of the USC-Huntington Early Modern Studies Institute. We thank participants at those venues, as well as
Lou Cain, Stan Engerman, and Carole Shammas for their comments. We thank also the Center for Economic
Studies at the University of Munich for providing Tom Weiss uninterrputed time to work on the paper. We
are also grateful for the research assistance prodvided by Jasonne Grabher O’Brien and Maril Hazlet. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Peter C. Mancall, Joshua L. Rosenbloom, and Thomas Weiss. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Exports and Slow Economic Growth in the Lower South Region, 1720-1800
Peter C. Mancall, Joshua L. Rosenbloom, and Thomas Weiss
NBER Working Paper No. 12045
February 2006
JEL No. N0, N1, N7, O1, O4
ABSTRACT
For the past generation scholars have emphasized that the Lower South was one of the most
economically successful regions of British mainland North America, and perhaps the most
successful. Planters, the primary economic actors, made extensive use of slave labor and created a
successful staple-export sector, which by 1774 produced the highest levels of private wealth per
capita in the colonies. Focusing on the rapid growth of the primary exports of the Lower South in
the colonial period – rice and indigo – most scholars have concluded that standards of living for
colonists in the region must have been rising rapidly. Elsewhere we have argued that the
conventional view of the economy of the Lower South prior to 1800 is mistaken. Rather, per capita
incomes were essentially stagnant from 1720 to 1770, and did not change appreciably between 1770
and 1800. Central to our interpretation is a revised understanding of the behavior of regional exports
that indicates that they were much less important as a stimulus to economic growth than has
heretofore been believed. This paper describes in greater detail our estimation of regional exports,
and documents the reasons why they could not have been a stimulus to intensive growth within the
region.
Peter C. Mancall
University of Southern California
mancall@usc.edu
Joshua Rosenbloom
Department of Economics
University of Kansas
1300 Sunnyside Ave.
Lawrence, KS 66045-2113
and NBER
jrosenbloom@ku.edu

Thomas Weiss
Department of Economics
University of Kansas
1300 Sunnyside Ave.
Lawrence, KS 66045-2113
and NBER
t-weiss@ku.edu

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

2

I. Introduction
For the past generation scholars have emphasized that the Lower South was one of the
most economically successful regions of British mainland North America, and perhaps the most
successful. 1 Planters, the primary economic actors, made extensive use of slave labor and
created a successful staple-export sector, which by 1774 produced the highest levels of private
wealth per capita in the colonies.2 Until recently, however, our knowledge about the economy of
the Lower South did not go much beyond such generalities. Writing in 1985, John McCusker
and Russell Menard decried the lack of knowledge about this region.3 Though subsequent work
by others has broadened our knowledge, these studies continue to pivot on the centrality of
exports as the primary engine of economic growth.4 Even while scholars have acknowledged the
limitations of the “staples thesis” it has nonetheless remained the primary organizing tool in most
work on the eighteenth-century American economy.5
Focusing on the rapid growth of the primary exports of the Lower South in the colonial
period—rice and indigo—most scholars have concluded that standards of living for colonists in
the region must have been rising rapidly. Writing in 1998, for example, Marc Egnal suggested

1

For the colonial period the Lower South is conventionally defined as including what would become the
states of Georgia, North Carolina and South Carolina.
2
It was rivaled in this regard only by the Chesapeake. In both regions, much of the wealth was in the
form of slaves. If measured by nonhuman wealth the differences among regions are reduced
substantially, although not eliminated (Alice Hanson Jones, Wealth of a Nation to Be. New York:
Columbia University Press 1980, 54; Edwin Perkins, The Economy of Colonial America, New York:
Columbia University Press, 1980, 154).
3
John McCusker and Russell Menard, 1985, The Economy of British America, 1607-1789, ch. 8.
4
Peter Coclanis, 1989, Shadow of a Dream, see esp. pp. 73-93; Joyce Chaplin 1993, An Anxious Pursuit,
Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press, esp. chaps. 7 and 8; Marc Egnal 1998, New World
Economies, chap. 1. Egnal discusses a number of factors that contributed to growth, but the key was trade
relations with the mother country.
5
See Egnal, New World Economies, p. 4 on the continued usefulness of the staples thesis, along with a
discussion of its limitations. According to Egnal, the key features of the staples thesis are that “…the
export of primary products was the engine of growth for the colonial economy…[and that] the nature of
these exports shaped the pattern of regional development.” Egnal, New World Economies, 5.

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

3

that per capita incomes in the Lower South increased at an annual average rate of 0.9 percent per
year from 1713 to 1775, implying that per capita incomes grew by more than 70 percent over the
entire period.6 Recently we have argued, however, that the conventional view of the colonies of
the Lower South greatly overstates the rate of economic growth in the region.7 In fact, our
estimates suggest that per capita incomes were essentially stagnant from 1720 to 1770, and did
not change appreciably between 1770 and 1800.
What explains the difference between our estimates and previously published figures?
Central to our interpretation is a revised understanding of the behavior of regional exports that
indicates that they were much less important as a stimulus to economic growth than has
heretofore been believed. But even without that revision, it would be surprising to find that
exports from this slave-plantation based economy led to rapid growth of output per capita. As
McCusker and Menard explained so clearly, when the export staple is a plantation crop it “will
have only a minor impact on local industry or the size of the market.”8 In these instances, the
impact of export growth is restricted almost entirely to increasing aggregate income via a
multiplier effect. Without linkages to further development within the region that could push up
labor productivity, per capita income can increase only if export proceeds rise faster than the
population.9
As we shall show, this did not happen. Previous analysts have been misled by focusing
6

Egnal, New World Economies, 43.
Peter C. Mancall, Joshua L. Rosenbloom and Thomas Weiss, “Conjectural Estimates of Economic
Growth in the Lower South, 1720 to 1800,” in History Matters: Essays on Economic Growth,
Technology, and Demographic Change, ed. By Timothy W. Guinnane, William A. Sundstrom and
Warren C. Whatley (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2004).
8
McCusker and Menard, The Economy of British America, p. 26. Douglass North made the same case
for the South in the period 1790 to 1860, when the region came to depend on the export of cotton. See his
Economic Growth of the U.S. 1790-1860, New York, 1962. See also David Galenson and Russell R.
Menard, “Approaches to the Analysis of Economic Growth in Colonial British America,” Historical
Methods, 1980 vol. 13, esp. pp. 13-15.
9
It is possible that the characteristics of the exporting sectors in other colonial regions were more
conducive to growth via what Galenson and Menard call spread and linkage effects.
7

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

4

on only a subset of the most successful exports; failing to take into account both the slower
growth of other export commodities and the rapid growth of regional population (and its
changing composition), which was linked to the increase in aggregate exports; and ignoring the
place of exports in the context of the broader economy. What follows is based on a much more
comprehensive measure of regional exports set in the context of the entire economy and on
changes in the size and composition of the non-Native American population of the Lower South.
Our result, that the economy of the Lower South experienced growth only in aggregate
output and population but not growth in per capita income, harkens back to the argument put
forth some time ago by Daniel Scott Smith that the distinctive feature of the early American
economy was its rapid extensive growth.10 This view has been out of favor for some time
because the prevailing wisdom had come to accept that there had been growth in output per
capita. That evidence against Smith’s thesis was not firmly based, however, having been arrived
at by assuming that per capita growth in the colonial economy must have been at least as rapid as
that in England, or that GDP grew as rapidly as the most successful exports.
As Daniel Scott Smith argued, the absence of growth in per capita income does not mean
that the economy of the Lower South was stagnant or unsuccessful. Quite the contrary; over the
course of the eighteenth century, the colonies and states of the Lower South experienced rapid
extensive growth in economic activity, as well as in population and land under cultivation. Such
high rates of extensive growth were, in the words of Dan Smith, “extraordinary by any
standard.”11 Moreover, extensive economic growth brought with it an increase in the percentage

10

Smith, “A Malthusian-Frontier Interpretation of United States Demographic History before c. 1815,” in
Urbanization in the Americas: The Background in Comparative Perspective, eds. Woodrow Borah, Jorge
Hardoy and Gilbert A. Stelter, Ottawa: 1980, p. 17
11
Smith, “A Malthusian-Frontier Interpretation of United States Demographic History before c. 1815,” in
Urbanization in the Americas: The Background in Comparative Perspective, eds. Woodrow Borah, Jorge
Hardoy and Gilbert A. Stelter, Ottawa: 1980, p. 17

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

5

of the population under the age of 10, which reduced the share of the population engaged in
production. Under these circumstances, simply maintaining a constant level of per capita income
should be seen as a remarkable achievement.

II. Exports from the Lower South
Exports were crucial to economic success in colonial British North America. That, at
least, is the argument advanced by both historians and economists. Whether one looks at the
literature about the colonies taken as a whole, or for any of the major regions (except New
England), exports loom large as the primary engine of economic growth. According to the
dominant theme found in textbooks as well as scholarly works, enterprising Europeans arrived in
North America and through hard work and abundant land created a prosperous and burgeoning
economy based on the export of agricultural staples. There is an appealing intuition to this
argument. After all, extracting wealth from North America was one of the factors motivating the
English since the age of Queen Elizabeth I. As a result, English and Anglo-American authorities
often kept careful track of exports from the colonies. And, on the face of it, there are grounds to
support the argument: some exports increased rapidly and provided the appearance of economic
growth, while population and aggregate GDP expanded at unprecedented rates.
For the Lower South, scholars have routinely emphasized that exports, primarily of rice
and indigo, drove this region’s economy.12 Though these exports expanded at rapid rates, that
export success did not generate growth of GDP per capita in the region. There are five reasons
for this apparent anomaly. First, not all exports grew as rapidly as rice and indigo. Second, the
methods of production required large increases in the population and labor force and thus
12

See for example, McCusker and Menard, The Economy of British America, 1607-1789, ch. 8, and
citations in footnote 5

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

6

forestalled increases in per capita output. Third, some individuals chose to increase their family
size rather than enjoy all the potential income themselves, thereby hindering improvements in,
and possibly reducing, GDP per person. Fourth, the success of the two staple exports was
confined almost entirely to a limited geographic area and a small part of the region’s population.
Fifth, production and productivity in the domestic sector, which were previously underemphasized, were important determinants of the region’s economic performance.
The central role of exports in prior estimates of the southern economy follows from
scholars’ extensive use of the records of low country planters and those with whom they
organized the regional rice trade. To be sure, exports – especially of rice – grew rapidly and
represented a substantial output. But a comprehensive picture of regional export performance
requires that we look beyond rice and indigo to consider exports of naval stores and deerskins.
Although cotton was the region’s primary export in the nineteenth century, it did not emerge as a
significant contributor to exports until the 1790s. Consequently it is not a factor in economic
growth in the colonial period, but must be considered when measuring economic growth over the
longer period to 1800.
Table 1 summarizes data on the quantity and value of these five items along with
evidence on the value of all other exports for 1768-1772, drawn from the American InspectorGeneral’s ledgers. According to James Shepherd this is “the only complete source for
commodity trade for any years in the colonial period.”13 At the end of the colonial period these
five commodities accounted for 80 percent of the value of regional exports. Table 2 presents
data on the output and growth of each of these commodities over the course of the eighteenth
century. The top panel shows the quantity (three-year averages) of each of the five exports at
13

“Commodity Exports from the British North American Colonies to Overseas Areas, 1768-1772:
Magnitude and Patterns of Trade,” Purdue University, Krannert Graduate School of Industrial
Organization, Paper no. 258 (October 1969), p. 9.

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

7

decadal benchmark dates; the bottom panel summarizes the rates of growth of these exports over
selected periods. In 1712, rice exports topped 3 million pounds, and by 1720 had more than
doubled to 8.1 million pounds and continued to climb, reaching a temporary peak of 34 million
pounds in 1740. That initial period of expansion ended with the start of the international conflict
known as the War of Jenkins Ear, which pitted Britain against Spain in a contest for who would
control shipping from the Caribbean and Central America. This conflict, as well as King
George's War (1744-48), substantially raised shipping and insurance costs and caused a sharp
drop in the net prices received by rice farmers.14. The depressed conditions persisted for most of
the decade, during which planters experimented with other crops, including indigo, which
emerged as an important complement to rice.15 With the return of peace in the late 1740s, rice
prices recovered along with exports. In the early 1760s, rice prices began to increase again, and
exports shot upward in the decade and a half before the Revolution.16 By 1770 exports had
increased to over 70 million pounds. This expansion implies a compound average annual rate of
growth of nearly 5.7 percent from 1712 to 1770.
The upward trajectory of rice exports came to an end with the American Revolution as
substantial conflict in the region led to substantial material losses.17 In 1790, the next year for
14

See See Peter C. Mancall, Joshua Rosenbloom, and Thomas Weiss, “Slave Prices and the Economy of
South Carolina, 1722-1809,” Journal of Economic History, 61 (2001),
15
Because indigo had a much higher value relative to weight than did rice, it could much more easily
bear the higher costs resulting from wartime conditions than could a bulky commodity like rice. But the
volume of exports did not take off until Britain began to offer a bounty for indigo in 1749 making the
crop commercially attractive. Moreover, since it could be grown on lands not suited to rice cultivation,
and its peak labor demands did not coincide with those of rice cultivation, planters could add indigo
without substantially reducing their commitment to rice (Gray 1958, p. 289).
16
R.C. Nash, “South Carolina and the Atlantic Economy in the Late Seventeenth and Eighteenth
Centuries,” Economic History Review 45, (1992), 692; Henry C. Dethlof, “The Colonial Rice Trade,”
Agricultural History 56 (1982) 235. During this export upsurge, planters expanded rice cultivation into
Georgia and the Cape Fear region of North Carolina. Despite that expansion, South Carolina remained by
far the largest producer.
17
Perhaps the most important effect was the reduction in the slave population occasioned by the war.
The conflict interrupted the importation of slaves, and resulted in significant losses to the existing slave

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

8

which we have data, exports were almost 42 million pounds; slightly less than they had been in
1760. Although the quantity of rice exported increased during the 1790s, in 1800 it remained
well below the peak reached during the colonial period.
Indigo production did not begin in earnest until the 1740s, but as Table 2 reveals, during
the next two decades the quantity of indigo exported from the Lower South expanded quite
rapidly. In the 1750s, exports of indigo grew at the astonishing rate of 30 percent per year on
average.
The growth of rice and indigo exports, however, obscures changes that were taking place
in the production of other export commodities. While it is true that rice and indigo became the
most important exports in the lower south in the eighteenth century, the rise of those trades came
at the expense of others. Planters employed the labor under their control to maintain rice
plantations and harvest indigo, which meant they put less labor toward the production of naval
stores, beef and pork, or Indian corn.18 And there was less emphasis on the trade in deerskins,
most of which arrived in colonists’ hands from native suppliers. The much slower growth of
deerskins and naval stores exports can be seen in Table 2.19 Between 1712 and 1770 the export
of deerskins rose at 1.3 percent per year, while naval stores increased at 3.8 percent per year.
population. Although data are imprecise, it is estimated that approximately 25,000 slaves died, ran away,
or were carried off by the British during the war; see Philip D. Morgan, “Black Society in the
Lowcountry, 1760-1810,” in Ira Berlin and Ronald Hoffman, eds., Slavery and Freedom in the Age of the
American Revolution (Charlottesville, 1983) 111, and Lewis C. Gray, History of Agriculture in the
Southern United States to 1860 (Gloucester, Mass., 1958) 596. The devastation caused by the war is
apparent in the low levels of exports in the immediate post-war period. Although exports rose rapidly in
the second half of the 1780s, even at their post-war peak in 1793, Charleston’s exports were well below
the level of the early 1770s. Gray, History of Agriculture, 1020-23
18
Between 1753/54 and 1768-72, the export of Indian corn increased at only 1.25 percent per year, while
the export of beef and pork declined at 0.8 percent per year. The 1753 and 1754 data are from Edmund
Burke, An Account of the European Settlements in America, 6th ed. London, printed for J. Dodsley, 1777
pp. 259-61; those for 1768-72 are from Shepherd and Walton, Shipping, Maritime Trade, Appendix IV,
Tables 2-6, pp.211-227
19
According to Converse Clowse, Economic Beginnings in Colonial South Carolina (Columbia, 1971),
178-79 and 222-23, beef and pork exports began to decline when rice initially rose in importance. .

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

9

The performance of these four items (rice, indigo, deerskins and naval stores) taken
together gives a close approximation to the behavior of total exports over the long term. In
1746-47 these four items comprised 89.3 percent of exports from Charleston, whereas in 176872 they made up 89.7 percent of the region’s exports.20 Table 3 presents our estimates of the real
volume of all exports from the region expressed in 1840 prices at benchmark dates over the
course of the eighteenth century.21 As the evidence in Table 3 makes clear, although total
foreign exports rose at a rather rapid pace —4.27 percent per year between 1720 and 1770 —
this was substantially slower than the growth in rice exports alone.22 The success of rice exports
in the colonial period has given a distorted picture about the role of exports more generally,
suggesting that the economy of the Lower South was more successful than implied by the
behavior of total exports.23

III. Putting Export Performance in Context
While exports were crucial for low country rice planters, an understanding of the impact
of the export sector on the Lower South as a whole must look more broadly across the region,
20

The 1746-47 shares are from Coclanis, Shadow of a Dream, p. 81; the 1768-72 figures are from
Shepherd and Walton, Shipping, Maritime Trade, Appendix IV, Tables 2-6, pp.211-227. If deerskins
were excluded the remaining three items would not proxy the movement of total exports as well. The
share comprised by rice, indigo and naval stores rose from 67.3 to 82.5 percent.
21
To construct an index of real aggregate export performance it is necessary to combine data on physical
quantities of individual exports based on a constant set of prices that abstracts from general changes in the
price level. The details of the derivation of these estimates are provided in the Appendix to this paper.
Nash constructed a similar index, but it was limited to exports from South Carolina and did not include
deerskins. With those his index shows a somewhat higher rate of growth. R.C. Nash, “South Carolina
and the Atlantic Economy in the Late Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries,” Economic History Review
45, (1992).
22
Over the longer period, total exports are pushed up near the end of the period by the cotton boom of the
1790s.
23
Export growth is even slower if one takes into account the quantity of agricultural products shipped to
other colonies. Shipments to other colonies grew at an average annual rate of just 3.2 percent between
1720 and 1770. As a result the combined value of all external shipments in the colonial period grew at a
rate of just 4.1 percent per year.

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

10

taking into account not only other exports, but also the enormous economic activity devoted to
non-export functions. Georgia, North Carolina, and the backcountry of South Carolina--which
are bit players in others’ economic histories—need to be integrated into any assessments of
regional economic patterns. 24
The place to begin is with population. As can be seen in Figure 1, the bulk of the
region’s population in 1700 was concentrated in North Carolina, and though the colony exported
some naval stores it remained largely insulated from foreign trade.25 Georgia was established
only in 1732, and prohibited slavery until 1749. Until it eliminated restrictions on slavery its
population grew relatively slowly, but during the second half of the century it increased more
quickly, expanding to account for about 15 percent of the region’s population.26 Although the
growth of rice exports at the beginning of the eighteenth century contributed to the expansion of
South Carolina’s share of regional population, this figure peaked at 50 percent in 1730 and then
declined.
But even within South Carolina, a declining share of population was engaged in export
production. The growth of rice exports from the Lower South coincided with the rapid
expansion of settlement into the interior regions of South Carolina. For the most part, the
settlement of the backcountry consisted of small independent farmers possessing few if any

24

Although Peter Coclanis, (Shadow of a Dream,. 71-77) focused on the rise and decline of the low
country, he made careful and important distinctions between the impact of trade on that subregion and on
South Carolina as a whole. He thus brought to the fore the need to better understand the economy of the
backcountry, but he did not pursue the implications of the wide variations in economic performance
across subregions for economic growth in the Lower South as a whole.
25
Egnal, New World Economies, 114-117.
26
Although North Carolina was more populous than South Carolina it had far fewer slaves for most of
the eighteenth century. Slaves constituted a majority of South Carolina's population for most of the
eighteenth century. That colony contained 85 percent of the region’s slave population in 1700 and
although the numbers of slaves in Georgia and North Carolina grew more rapidly than those in South
Carolina, at the end of the century it still accounted for 43 percent of the region’s slaves (U.S. Bureau of
the Census 1975, Series A-7, and Z-1 to 19).

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

11

slaves, and producing only small quantities of marketable crops.27 As late as 1770, only 6,000
(8.7 percent) of South Carolina’s 76,000 slaves lived in the backcountry. In contrast, 30,000 (61
percent) of the colony’s 49,066 free inhabitants resided in this region.28
That larger share of the population residing in the backcountry was virtually uninvolved
in the export trade dominated by the low country. From 1768 to 1772 average annual exports per
capita in Carolina's low country averaged £ 3.7 for the entire population, and £ 17.1 for the white
population. The backcountry figure was a mere £ 0.5. 29 Nor does it seem that backcountry
residents were producing food for the plantations since low country slaves were largely selfsufficient.30 Residents of rice plantations also relied on hunting to make up for the fact that
planters did not give them much meat, and they tended their own gardens, growing a variety of
foods, including African foods.31
When compared to the growth of population, the success of the export sector looks
considerably less impressive, as Table 3 makes clear. While exports were growing at 4.27
percent per year between 1720 and 1770, the region's population was increasing at 4.42 percent
per year. Consequently, the real volume of exports per capita was declining on average at 0.15

27

Kaylene Hughes “Populating the Back Country,” (PhD. diss, Florida State University, 1985),119;
George Johnson The Frontier in the Colonial South (Westport, CT, 1997), 40-60; Rachel N. Klein,
Unification of a Slave State (Chapel Hill, 1990) 10-27.
28
Coclanis, Shadow of a Dream, 68. Over the next 20 years, the back country’s share of both free and
slave population increased, the latter having risen by nearly 400 percent, growing to slightly more than
29,000 by 1790 and accounting for 27 percent of the state’s slave population. Klein Unification of a
Slave State, 253. Although this shift of the population set the stage for the ascendance of cotton at the end
of the century, rice planters remained the dominant employer of slaves, and the production of exports was
concentrated on the slave-based plantations. The rapid expansion of cotton cultivation beginning in the
early 1790s accelerated this shift, so that by 1810 close to 44 percent of the state’s slaves were living in
the back country.
29
Coclanis Shadow of a Dream, 75.
30
Philip Morgan, Slave Counterpoint: Black Culture in the Eighteenth-Century Chesapeake and
Lowcountry (Chapel Hill, 1998), 134-143 In the lowcountry, “the discarded parts of Carolina's chief
staple, rice, served as cheap food." Ibid, p. 135. See also Hughes, Populating the Back Country, chap. 6.
31
Morgan, Slave Counterpoint,

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

12

percent per year.32 Moreover, even the success of the rice industry pales when population growth
is taken into account, with the volume of rice exports per capita having risen at only 0.3 percent
per year between 1720 and 1770.33
Rather than serving as an engine of growth, the export sector is better understood as a
source of short-run instability. Exports, especially rice and indigo, rose more rapidly than
population in some decades and no doubt served to propel the region's economy ahead in those
years, but these times were intermingled with periods when exports grew slowly or even
declined. The net result is that over the entire colonial period population grew more rapidly than
exports, and thus exports per capita declined.
There are two reasons why export growth could not keep ahead of population growth.
The production of exports rose rapidly in the Lower South primarily because the labor input had
increased rapidly, and that in turn required an increase in the population. Furthermore, economic
success fueled other demographic changes that made growth in GDP per capita difficult to
achieve. In the lower South of the eighteenth century, the methods of production yielded little in
the way of improvements in agricultural output per worker. 34 Instead, the increase in the volume
of rice and indigo exports was predominantly the direct result of an increase in the amount of
slave labor applied to the cultivation of those products. To some extent, the increased labor input

32

As discussed below, the picture looks slightly different when exports are compared to the free
population alone.
33
The growth of exports was slower after 1770, which resulted in a poorer performance over the longer
period from 1720 to 1800 when total exports per capita declined at 0.6 percent per year. Even rice
exports per capita declined over the longer period, due to a fall in production after 1770.
34
Although the shift in the locus of production from upland areas to the low country and the adoption of
tidal irrigation suggest productivity gains might have occurred in rice farming, we estimate that long term
productivity improvements in the region's farm sector were modest at best, and may have been negative.
The annual rate of advance between 1720 and 1800 fell in a range between minus 0.2 and plus 0.3 percent
per year. See Peter C. Mancall, Joshua Rosenbloom, and Thomas Weiss 2002. “Agricultural Labor
Productivity in the Lower South, 1720-1800,” Explorations in Economic History 39 (2002), 390-424,
Table 2.

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

13

to rice and indigo came from a reduced production of other goods, but to a far greater extent it
required an increase in the slave population. And, because the natural rate of growth in the slave
population was extremely low (although higher than in the Caribbean) the increase in the number
of slave workers was achieved by importing them.35 Indeed, as Figure 2 illustrates, during the
colonial period decadal variations in slave imports into the region closely paralleled changes in
the volume of exports. Although these imported slaves may have been of working age, and thus
did not negatively affect the worker/population ratio, they nevertheless increased the population.
Indeed, even the slave population grew faster than exports.36 Between 1720 and 1770, when the
volume of exports from the Lower South to foreign destinations increased at 4.2 percent per
year, the slave population was rising by 4.8 percent.
Meanwhile, the composition of the free population was changing in ways that reduced the
worker/population ratio. The overall labor force participation rate for the entire colony is a
function of the participation rates for specific population groups and the relative importance of
the different groups. In this economy, slaves had a higher participation rate than free persons,
free males had a higher participation rate than free females, and those aged 10 and over had
higher participation rates than those younger. Initially the colonial population of the Lower
South consisted largely of males of working age. Over time, and in part as a result of economic

35

For comparisons of slave fertility and mortality in British North America with that of other western
slave societies, see Lorena S. Walsh, “African American Colonial Population,” and Stanley Engerman,
“Population History of the Caribbean,” in Michael Haines and Richard Steckel, eds. A Population History
of North America, (Cambridge, Eng., 2000), 198-209, 505-510. For the Lower South, we estimated that in
almost every decade of the eighteenth century slave imports exceeded the increase in the stock of the
slave population. See Peter C. Mancall, Joshua Rosenbloom, and Thomas Weiss, “Slave Prices and the
Economy of South Carolina, 1722-1809,” Journal of Economic History, 61 (2001), Table 2
36
The slave population did grow more slowly than rice exports alone which could imply that there was
some productivity advance in rice production. See Nash, “South Carolina and the Atlantic Economy,”
Table 6, 689; as well as Mancall, Rosenbloom and Weiss “Agricultural Labor Productivity in the Lower
South, 1720-1800,” Table 2. On the other hand, it may simply reflect the reallocation of slave labor into
rice cultivation and out of other, less profitable, activities.

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

14

success in the export trade, the number of women and children increased. More women
migrated to the colonies, and successful farmers and planters married and chose to have more
children.
The trends in the composition of the population that influenced the labor force
participation rate are shown in Figure 3. As can be seen, the slave share of the regional
population increased from 39 percent in 1720 to 43 percent in 1730, but thereafter the share
dipped slightly and recovered, so that by 1774 the share was at the same 43 percent it held in
1730. These changes in the slave share of the population would have helped push up the labor
force participation rate in the 1720s, but not thereafter. The trends in the shares of the other
population groups -- the male share of the free population, the adult share of the male
population, and the adult share of the slave population -- were all downward. That is to say, the
components of the population that were increasing were those with lower participation rates
which resulted in a decline in the average participation rate for the entire colony. As a result of
these demographic shifts the participation rate remained steady at 0.49 between 1720 and 1740,
but declined thereafter to 0.47 in 1774. As a consequence, if there were no increase in labor
productivity, GDP per capita would have declined by 4 percent between 1720 and 1774.37
These demographic shifts could be interpreted as an indication of economic success and
prosperity, but the standard indicators of economic output, which measure the value of goods and
services produced, do not reflect any increased value for this behavior. Indeed, the standard
measure such as GDP per capita could decline as the output was shared with additional family
members.
37

After 1770, all the changes in the composition of the population, especially the decline in the slave
share of the population, worked to reduce the labor force participation rate from 0.47 in 1774 to 0.39 in
1800. With no increase in labor productivity, GDP per capita would have declined by 17 percent in the
last quarter of the century.

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

15

IV. Exports and Production for Domestic Consumption
The focus on the export trade of the low country in the decades prior to the Revolution
also masks what was happening in the rest of the regional economy, where most production was
taking place. Even if the export trade had grown faster than it did, and faster than the population,
its impact would still have been restrained simply because the value of exports abroad amounted
to only 25 percent of the region's total output.38 The dominant part of GDP was production for
the domestic market, which normally comprised around 75 percent of the regional economy, and
most of this was produced in the backcountry.
Although the disparities between the colonies in the Lower South and the subregions
within those colonies have been pointed out by other scholars, their implications for the course of
economic growth have not been pursued in previous discussions of the region’s economic
history. To understand the performance of the entire region requires more than an analysis of
low country rice exports. A more comprehensive assessment demands analysis of all the basic
components of output: firewood, shelter, nonagricultural output and food production.
Given the importance of food, estimates of its value are essential to gauging the size of
the domestic sector. Regrettably there are no time series data on the production of food in the
eighteenth century, but a series can be obtained by estimating the value of food consumed and
making allowance for the import and export of food items. Despite the lack of a widely accepted
time series for food consumption, there is enough information about the diets of colonists and
slaves to permit a reasonable approximation of the likely values of food consumed.
Existing documents provide evidence on the diet or its components, and on the value of
38

John McCusker put the share at 25 to 30 percent for the colonies as a whole; see “Estimating Early
American Gross Domestic Product,” Historical Methods 33 (2000), 155-62 See Table 5 below for our
estimates of GDP for the Lower South and a comparison to foreign exports.

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

16

providing a specified diet for a number of different groups in the population: free settlers,
soldiers, slaves, prisoners, and those needing charity. The evidence can be found in official
colonial records, court cases, committee hearings, travelers’ accounts, plantation records, and
vestry minutes. The records of the Trustees of Georgia, for example, contain well-documented
evidence on the monthly costs of maintaining those persons sent over to the colony and the
standard provisions for maintenance of settlers.39 The specified diet included beef or pork, rice,
peas, flour, beer, molasses, cheese, butter, spice, sugar, vinegar and salt. Moreover, the Trustees
specified different quantities of each for adult males, adult females, children and servants.40 The
colonial records for Georgia and South Carolina also reported expenditures on provisions for
troops, including in some instances provisions for those slaves and Natives who accompanied the
troops.41 That evidence from South Carolina for the period 1734 to 1756 indicates that the real
value of provisions provided to soldiers declined over time.42 Finally, vestry minutes detail

39

Allen D. Candler, ed., The Colonial Records of the State of Georgia, III 407-11. The amounts
expended after the first year or two appear quite high and would suggest that the value of the diet declined
between the 1730s and 1800. We believe that some of the provisions in later years must have been
destined for settlers who had gone over in earlier years, and thus think the initial year’s figure may be a
better approximation of the average value of the diet.
40
We have calculated the value of this diet to equal $31 per adult male in prices of 1840. The diet for
women and children aged 12 and over was calculated to be 83 percent that of a male; that for children
aged seven to twelve was specified be half that for those aged 12 and over; and that for those aged two to
seven was one-third. Apparently no provisions were provided for those under two years of age. (Colonial
Records of Georgia, III, 408-09).
41
See for example the expenditures for Oglethorpe’s siege of St. Augustine (Colonial Records of
Georgia, II, 159-202. Robert Gallman argued that military rations were a reasonable proxy for food
consumption by the colonists; see “The Statistical Approach: Fundamental Concepts Applied to History,”
in G.R. Taylor and L. F. Ellsworth, eds., Approaches to American Economic History (Charlottesville,
1971), 73-78
42
This is true regardless of whether it is valued in South Carolina currency, Pounds Sterling, or Dollars
(in prices of 1840). The figures in dollars and valued in 1840 prices were $32 in 1734 declining to $22 in
1756. It may be that the soldiers were expected to obtain some of their provisions by hunting and fishing,
and perhaps increasingly so over time as suggested by the decline in the allotment after 1736 (Colonial
Records of South Carolina, [hereafter CRSC] Journal of the Commons House of Assembly, vols. 1, 2, 7
and 14).

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

17

evidence on weekly, monthly and annual maintenance for the poor.43
Based on this variety of evidence, a case could be made that the diet of free colonists did
not change much, if at all, over the course of the eighteenth century. To be sure, diets no doubt
fluctuated from one year to another depending on the success of a harvest, or the booms and
busts of the economy. The estimates here allow the value of the diet to increase over time,
taking the most optimistic view implied by the assorted data on the diet, and thus giving an
upward bias to the economic growth that took place.44 Specifically, they are based on the
assumption that the value of an adult colonist's diet rose at an annual average rate of 0.25 percent
from 1720 to 1800. 45
Surviving evidence reveals, not surprisingly, that the value of food consumed by a slave
differed from that of a free colonist, while that of an adult colonist differed from that of a child.
Although information on the slave diet is scarce, making assessments about changes in the diet
over time especially frustrating, it is unlikely there could have been much change in the slave
diet.46 After all, it was not highly varied in the nineteenth century and the quantities of food
43

Vestry minutes are the records of the church parishes. Parishes had the primary responsibility for the
care of the poor and could levy taxes to finance their activities. See Brown (1928) and Watson (1977).
44
Elsewhere we have shown that our estimated rates of growth are not very sensitive to plausible
changes in this and other assumptions underlying the estimates; see Mancall, Rosenbloom, and Weiss.
“Conjectural Estimates of Economic Growth in the Lower South, 1720 to 1800.” If we were to allow the
colonists' diet to increase even more rapidly over time, which would lead to a more rapid growth of GDP
and GDP per capita, then the domestic sector would have been responsible for even more of the growth
that had taken place. If we allowed exports to grow more slowly, the domestic sector would have been
relatively less important, but economic growth would have been slower.
45
This rate is based on a comparison of the value of the diet specified for an adult by the Rules for
Georgia for 1735 ($31) with the figure of $37 we estimated for 1800. This is a very healthy advance in
the value of the diet considering that it does not reflect any increase in the costs of distribution.
Moreover, such an increase is likely too great for all the region’s free inhabitants. The diet specified in
the Rules for Georgia was for those going over as charity cases. Their diet is likely to have been inferior
to the average to be found for colonists residing in the longer established and wealthier colonies of
Carolina. See Colonial Records of Georgia, III, 407-11; and Mancall, Rosenbloom and Weiss, "The
Value of the Diet in the Lower South in the Eighteenth Century," Paper presented at the NBER Summer
Institute, 2002.
46
Morgan argued there were differences in slave diets across regions, and slaves in the low country

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

18

planters provided had to be sufficient to provide the calories and protein necessary to carry out
the arduous work of producing rice or indigo. In the nineteenth century, the value of a slave's
diet equaled about 75 percent that of a free person.47 For the eighteenth century, the data here
assume that the value of the slave’s diet increased from around 50 percent of a colonist's diet in
1700 to 75 percent in 1800, thereby adding another upward bias to the estimated rate of
economic growth.48 With the colonist’s diet increasing over time, this results in a substantial
growth in the slave’s diet of 0.29 percent per year. The estimates here assume continuity in the
diet of free children under the age of 10 at 50 percent of an adult’s diet for the entire century.49
The value of food consumed per capita for the region is a weighted average of the value
consumed by each of these major population groups.50
Food produced for consumption within the region is the dominant component of the
domestic sector, but not the only one. The domestic sector includes as well the value of
produced more food on their own time than did those in the Chesapeake; he does not discuss the
likelihood of changes in the slave diet over time. See Slave Counterpoint, 135-143.
47
The information we have found for the colonial period would put the relative value anywhere between
20 percent and 75 percent CRSC II, Commons Journal, 1739-1741, 493 and CRSC IV, Commons
Journal, 1742-1744, 377. The relative value of 20 percent seems much too low. The figures lying behind
that ratio imply annual values of $46 for a free person and $9 for a slave (in prices of 1840). The value
seems very low for slaves and high for free persons, thus yielding much too low a relative figure for
slaves.
48
We based this beginning year value on Charles Kahn’s estimate for the “least-cost diet with minimum
fat requirements” using the medium price of pork; see Kahn, “A Linear Programming Solution to the
Slave Diet,” in Robert Fogel and Stanley Engerman, eds. (New York, 1992), table 25.5, p. 532). That
estimate equaled approximately 75 percent of the cost of the diet specified by Fogel and Engerman or
Sutch, which in turn was equal to 75 percent of the cost of a free person’s diet. Thus we assumed that the
value of the slave diet in 1800 equaled 75 percent that of a free person, and the value in 1700 equaled 75
percent of that 1800 figure—i.e., 56 percent of a free person’s diet—and that it changed at a constant rate
between those two dates.
49
If instead we had assumed that the child’s diet had equaled 75 percent of an adult’s, food consumption
and production per capita would have been $3 to $4 higher in each year, but growth would have been
about the same.
50
The weights are their respective shares of the population. In order to obtain an estimate of food
production we deduct the value of food imported and add the value of food products shipped to other
colonies. The derivation of these food imports and exports is explained in Mancall, Rosenbloom and
Weiss, “Conjectural Estimates of Economic Growth in the Lower South,” 400.

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

19

firewood produced, the rental value of dwellings, and all nonagricultural industries. Estimates of
output for these various components of the domestic sector are shown in Table 4. Table 5
reports estimates of GDP and GDP per capita for the region and compares them with the value of
foreign exports.

V. Re-interpreting the Economic Performance of the Lower South
The economy of the Lower South expanded greatly between 1720 and 1770, but there
was no long-term upward movement in real GDP per capita. Within the colonial period the
region experienced particular success in the 1720s and 1750s, with GDP per capita rising on
average around one half of a percent per year, but these upward surges were offset by declines in
GDP per capita in other decades. As a result of these offsetting performances, GDP per capita in
1770 was almost identical to that in 1720, and there was very little change up or down over the
major sub periods of 1720-40 and 1740-70.51
The performance, moreover, reveals little consistency between the success of the export
sector and that of the economy as a whole. Agricultural exports to foreign markets rose rapidly
in some decades, but not all, and GDP per capita and even exports per capita did not always
move in the same direction or with the same force. In the 1720s, there appears to have been a
rather strong relationship between export growth and the growth of GDP per capita. In the
1720s, exports grew at 7.4 percent per year, the highest average rate achieved for any decade in
the colonial period, and GDP per capita rose at 0.5 percent per year. In the 1740s, the
relationship seems clear as well, but with unfavorable consequences, as exports declined at 0.4
percent per year and GDP per capita declined at 0.3 percent per year. In the other decades of the
51

Production for the domestic market helped to buoy up the growth of GDP after 1770, but even still, the
GDP per capita figure 1800 was only slightly higher than that for 1720 and below that for 1730.

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

20

colonial period, that is the 1730s, 1750s and 1760s, the relationship is less clear. In the 1730s,
exports increased at the strong rate of 5.1 percent per year, only slightly slower than in the
previous decade, but GDP per capita declined at 0.6 percent per year. In the 1750s, exports
grew, albeit slower than in any decade except the 1740s yet GDP per capita rose at 0.4 percent
per year. In the following decade, exports grew faster than in the 1750s, but GDP per capita
grew much more slowly at only 0.2 percent per year.
These figures reveal that the domestic sector influenced the outcomes. Between 1720
and 1740 when exports abroad surged upward by 6.3 percent per year in the aggregate and 0.8
percent per year on a per capita basis, GDP was held in check by a slower growth of output in
the more dominant domestic sector. Output there rose at an annual rate of only 5.0 percent
because food production grew slowly between 1720 and 1740. Two related phenomena explain
this situation. On the one hand there was less need to produce food because the slave share of
the population had increased, and on average slaves consumed less food. Second, the region
imported more food most likely because landholders devoted more of their holdings to crops for
export. The aggregate import of food rose at 12.5 percent per year, implying a $2 increase in the
per capita value of food imports from other colonies between 1720 and 1740. Some of the
growth of exports abroad was accomplished by shifting resources out of the production of food
for the local market into the production of exports. After 1740 the food-producing sector was
less of a drag on the region’s production, with the per capita value of food production rising in
each decade. Had the export sector been able to maintain the rapid pace of growth achieved in
the 1720s and 1730s, or if it had slowed down less than it did, the region's economic history
might have been much different. But this was not the case. Export growth slowed so much after
1740 that the per capita value of exports declined at a rate of 0.8 percent per year down through

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

21

1770.52 In those circumstances, the region was fortunate to have had the larger food and
firewood sector which plowed ahead steadily and kept GDP per capita from declining.

VI. The Terms of Trade and the Value of Exports
Colonists engaged in trade to obtain goods produced more cheaply abroad. If the terms
of trade improved, the real quantity of imports that could have been obtained would have risen
even if there were no increase in the quantity of the exports.53 But the relative changes in export
and import prices varied over time: the terms of trade improved at times, but worsened at others.
And the changes differed across the colonies both in magnitude and timing.
What can be said about the Lower South? Did the terms of trade for that region improve
for the colonists, and to such an extent that they offset the decline in the quantity of exports per
capita? The price of rice rose substantially in the 1720s and 1730s, but those gains disappeared
when prices dropped during the War of the Austrian Succession in the 1740s. Prices only
returned to their pre-war high after 1760.54 Indigo prices moved opposite to those for rice,
soaring upward in the late 1740s when the crop was first cultivated on a commercial scale, but
declining after 1760. But neither of these export prices can adequately reflect the general
movement of all export prices; changes in the terms of trade must take into account the different
behavior of the various exports.55 By using the wholesale price indexes of South Carolina

52

And, exports per capita declined even faster thereafter. By 1800 the per capita value of exports was
only 60 percent the value achieved in 1720.
53
This was a point stressed by Douglass North in his staple export model, and was a key part of Marc
Egnal’s estimate that exports stimulated colonial economic growth to a rate of 0.5 percent per year.
Douglass North, Economic Growth of the U.S. 1790-1860, (New York, 1962) and “Early National Income
Estimates for the U.S.,” Economic Development and Cultural Change, vol. 9, (1961) 387-96.
Marc Egnal, “ Economic Development,” 199-214.
54
Marc Egnal, “Economic Development,” 209-10
55
Coclanis, Shadow of a Dream, 107-108, shows a more continuous times series of both rice and indigo
prices, and presents a comparison of the index of rice prices and an index of English wholesale

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

22

products prepared by Arthur Cole and George Rogers Taylor, which take into account the prices
of all the major exports, it is possible to calculate an index to represent all exports.56 For the
import price index, wholesale commodity prices in New York and Philadelphia must suffice. 57
Although price data for imports into the Lower South would be preferable, they are not available
for the entire period. The New York and Philadelphia price indexes should be a good proxy
because they represent goods similar to those southern colonists imported. Moreover, while the
prices in Charleston may have differed from those in New York or Philadelphia, changes in the
prices moved similarly.58
The terms of trade varied often and widely, so it is difficult to generalize about the impact
on the colonists (See figures 4A and 4B). Colonists benefited from an improvement in the terms
of trade up through 1738 as the price of rice rose substantially, but those gains were lost over the
next ten years. With the rise in the price of indigo in the late 1740s the terms of trade improved
briefly, but fell for nearly a decade beginning in 1753. The terms of trade improved after the
French and Indian War, but even with that recovery there had been little change over the colonial

commodity prices, which shows that over the period 1722-75, the price of rice rose relative to the price of
English goods, and likewise for indigo prices over the period 1747-75. He did not present the average
increase over the periods, nor did he combine the two export prices to get a combined export price.
56
The indexes are available in Historical Statistics of the United States, Series E92-95, with further
details available in George Rogers Taylor, 1932, “Wholesale Commodity Prices at Charleston, South
Carolina, 1732-1791,” and “Wholesale Commodity Prices at Charleston, South Carolina, 1796-1861,”
Journal of Economic and Business History, vol. IV, pp. 356-77 and 848-76.
57
The Wholesale Commodity Price indexes were from Arthur Cole, Wholesale Commodity Prices in the
United States, 1700-1861, Vol. 1 (Cambridge, Mass., 1938), 124-25 and 148-49. According to Shepherd
and Walton, some of the more important imports, were muscovado sugar, West Indian rum, molasses, and
salt, but the imports into the Lower South that they could identify amounted to between 19 and 33 percent
of all imports in the years from 1768 to 1772. Regrettably there is limited information on the price of
imported manufactured goods, or other items that comprised some portion of imports into the region.
58
For the short time period in which we can compare prices in the different locations, 1784-91, the
Charleston and New York prices moved closely together, both rising from an index value of 78 in 1784
and 1785 to 100 in 1791, while Philadelphia’s index changed very little. Cole, Wholesale Commodity
Prices, 124-25, 148-49 and 153.

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

23

period.59
These terms of trade, however, ignore slave imports, a vital component of the region’s
trade. A substantial portion of the Lower South’s export proceeds was spent on slave imports,
not on goods and services, and such importation has implications for the terms of trade and the
real incomes and standards of living of colonists. The value of slave imports as a percentage of
the value of exports ran between 10 and 31 percent.60 A second time series on the terms of trade
that takes into account the importation of slaves by combining the import price index discussed
above with an index of slave prices is shown in Figure 4B. 61 As shown there, this alternative
version of the terms of trade showed no improvement over the colonial period 1722 to 1773, and
our estimate is that it declined by about 10 percent.62 The worsening in the terms of trade
reflects the fact that the price of slaves rose over the century, especially after 1760.
Although we cannot say reliably what the trend in the terms of trade was over the
colonial period using either of these two measures, it seems clear that there was no noticeable
long term upward movement. In other words, changes in the terms of trade would not alter the
picture shown by the sluggish growth in output per capita.
59

There is so much variation in the series that no regression estimates of the trend is significant. The
1770 value of the terms of trade was roughly 10 percent above the value for 1720, but 12 percent below
that for 1730, and well below the peak of 1.79 found for 1736. The terms improved in the years leading
up to the Revolution, but with the deterioration of trade during and after the Revolution, they fell back
with the result that for the entire period 1720 to 1800, the terms of trade deteriorated by about 10 percent.
60
In the 1740s, when the rice market was severely depressed and there was a prohibitive duty of slave
imports up through 1744, the figure amounted to only 2 percent. See Mancall, Rosenbloom and Weiss,
“Slave Prices,” Tables 1 and 2. These shares are based on the values of slaves and exports expressed in
1840 prices.
61
The weights given to each are based on the import data for 1768-72, which indicate that slave imports
comprised 27.7 percent of all imports into the Lower South. Historical Statistics of the United States,
(1975) Series Z: 287 and 290. An alternative way to treat the impact of slave imports would be calculate
the effect of the terms of trade on only the fraction of export revenues that were spent on merchandise
imports.
62
There is so much variation in the series that no regression estimates of the trend is significant. The
1770 figure was below that for 1722, our earliest observation, by 5 percent and below the 1730 figure by
19 percent. The 3 year average around 1770 was above the 1722 figure by 9 percent, but below the 1730
figure by 9 percent.

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

24

VII. The Standard of Living of the Free Population
The preceding results indicate that the export trade had a small impact on the standard of
living in the Lower South due largely to the growth of the slave population. The importation of
slaves reduced any advantage that might otherwise have arisen from improvements in the terms
of trade and simultaneously increased the denominator in the calculation of GDP per capita for
the entire population. The picture looks somewhat different for the free colonists only.
The average value of exports per free person was substantially higher than that for the
entire population; 80 percent higher in 1740 for example. Since the free population grew slightly
slower than the total population during the period, 1720 to 1770, exports per free person rose
slightly from just under $22 to $23.63 Gross Domestic Product per free person increased only
slightly faster during the colonial period than did that for the entire population.64 For the period
1720 to 1770, GDP per free person rose at 0.14 percent per year versus the negligible 0.03
percent for the entire population.65 (see Tables 5 and 6) Although the growth of income per free
colonist in the Lower South was still sluggish, the colonists of the Lower South were well off.
The average GDP per capita (valued in prices of 1840) amounted to $75 in 1720, rose noticeably
to $85 in 1730 and then fell back to $80 by 1770.66
The free white colonists may also have benefited from bounties provided by England to

63

For the longer period 1720 to 1800, however, the free population grew faster than the total population
with the consequence that exports per free person declined at an average annual rate of 0.7 percent per
year.
64
The amount of GDP flowing to the colonists was estimated by subtracting from total GDP an estimate
of maintenance for the slave population.
65
For the longer period 1720-1800, however, the figure fell at 0.05 percent per year instead of growing at
0.04 percent when the entire population is taken into consideration.
66
The value declined further after the Revolutionary War, with the 1800 figure being below that for
1720. These values are somewhat below those presented by Perkins (1980, p. 154), which he derived by
multiplying average wealth estimates by an assumed wealth/output ratio.

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

25

encourage the importation of items that the British thought they sorely needed. These bounties
were paid to encourage the import of selected items from the colonies. To some extent they were
intended to offset higher costs of transporting items from the colonies than from the continent.
The colonists benefited from the increased demand for their product by English importers who
received these subsidies, but they may also have benefited from some portion of the bounty
being passed on to the colonial producers. Because such a government subsidy is not included in
the 1840 price used to value colonial output, the income flowing to white colonists may not be
fully captured in our measure.67
Two subsidized items were of some importance to colonists of the Lower South: naval
stores and indigo. In the case of naval stores, the British needed an alternate source of supply
when war in Scandinavia and actions by the Stockholm monopoly severely reduced imports of
tar and pitch from the Baltic region. Beginning in 1705 a bounty of £4 per ton on tar and pitch
was provided for imports from the colonies.68 The Act providing for these bounties lapsed in
1725, and "the bounties were discontinued during the four years following 1725," but were
restored with passage of a new Act in 1729.69 The latter provided reduced bounties of £2 4s on
tar and £1 on pitch.70 The bounty for indigo was also established in response to the impact of
war. King George’s War (1739-1748) disrupted both the rice trade of the Lower South and the
British importation of indigo from French colonies. During the War, the colonists experiment
67

We do not know which portion of the bounty, if any, was passed on to the colonists, so our calculations
are made to illustrate the consequences of these bounties in the event that all of it was passed on to the
colonists.
68
Lewis Gray, Agriculture in the Southern United States to 1860, pp 153-56 and Justin Williams,
“English Mercantilism and Carolina Naval Stores, 1705-1776,” Journal of Southern History, vol. 1, 1935,
pp. 173-74. A ton was specified as being eight barrels. Bounties were also provided for turpentine and
rosin at £3 per ton, and for mast, yards and bowsprits at £1, none of which were of much importance.
69
Gray, Southern Agriculture, p. 156; Williams, “English Mercantilism,” pp. 175, 184.
70
For tar that met the specifications of the 1722 act, the bounty would be £ 4. But, there were complaints
about the quality of tar from the colonies, and “London merchants petitioned the Board of Trade in 17679
to drop green tar from the bounty list, ‘there being little or no tar of such quality imported or used in the
Manufactures of this Kingdom.’” Williams, “English Mercantilism,” pp. 184-85)

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

26

with indigo as an alternative export staple, and at the end of the War the British established a
bounty to encourage the development of an alternative supply.71
Although the effectiveness of these bounties in calling forth additional production has not
been fully determined, the colonists nevertheless may have received additional income that is not
included in our estimate of the value of exports produced.72 And, in the case of naval stores, this
was not an inconsiderable amount. In 1706, the initial year of payments, the bounty amounted to
only £554, but rose quickly to reach £10,135 in 1715, nearly tripled the following year, and
peaked at £52,011s in 1718.73 On a per capita basis for the colonies as a whole, these do not
amount to much, running between 3 to 5 pence per white person in all colonies, with a peak of
around 30 pence per person in 1718. The export of naval stores, however, came
disproportionately from the Lower South. In 1768-72 when we have export data for all colonies,
the Lower South accounted for 68 percent of all naval stores exports. Given that this was a
region with a relatively small white population, the bounty per person would have been a more
noticeable amount, reaching as high as £1 Sterling (or $4.44) in 1720 (see Table 5). If the
bounties on naval stores and indigo were fully passed on to the colonists in all years, they would
have given a bigger boost to the colonists’ income early in the period, especially between 1716
and 1725, than near its end. Ironically, the consequence of this would have been to slow the
growth of per capita income.
With or without the bounties, the free colonists in the Lower South were quite well off in
71

According to McCusker and Menard, The Economy of British America, p. 187, the initial bounty of six
pence per lb. was reduced to 4 pence sometime in the 1750 or 1760s, but then restored to six pence in the
early 1770s. Lewis Gray, Agriculture in the Southern United States to 1860, p. 293 says the bounty was
reduced to 4 pence per lb. in the early 1770s.
72
McCusker and Menard are of the opinion that the bounties stimulated the production of naval stores up
through the 1720s, whereas for indigo “the bounty’s impact has been exaggerated.” In the latter’s case,
duties on foreign indigo likely had a more favorable effect. Ibid, pp. 179-80,187.
73
Robert Greenhalgh Albion, Forest and Sea Power, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1829,
Appendix B, p. 418. Over the course of the 70 years of payments, the cost totaled £1,471,719

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

27

the mid-eighteenth century. Indeed, they were as well off as the average American resident was
in the opening decades of the nineteenth century, when GDP per capita for the nation ran around
$66 to $77 up through 1830. Not until 1840, when the value of GDP per capita reached $91 did
the average American surpass the level that had been achieved by these free colonists as early as
1730.74 Of course those nineteenth-century figures pertain to the entire population, including
slaves. When the comparison is made to the free population alone in 1840, the free colonists do
not appear quite as well off. The most pertinent comparison is with the free population in the
South Atlantic region. That region, which includes the District of Columbia and the states of
Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina Georgia and Florida, is not
exactly comparable to the Lower South, but is more similar than the entire nation. Average
income per capita for free persons in that region in 1840 was $96, higher than that for the
colonists, but not by much. 75 That figure suggests that per capita income in the region may have
increased by only around 12 to 20 percent over the preceding century.

VIII. Conclusions
These new estimates of exports, output in the domestic sector, and GDP provide little
support for the view that export success led to intensive economic growth. Any picture of
colonial success that rests on the performance of the export sector alone is likely to misrepresent
the true course of change, at least for the Lower South. This should not be too surprising.
Exports were a relatively small part of the economy. They have received a great deal of attention
74

These figures are all expressed in prices of 1840. See Weiss, “Economic Growth Before 1860,” Table
Stanley Engerman and Robert Fogel, “The Economics of Slavery“ in Stanley Engerman and Robert
Fogel eds., The Reinterpretation of American Economic History, 335. Their figures were reported in
prices of 1860, but they would be the same if expressed in 1840 prices because there was no change in the
GDP price deflator between the two dates. See Robert Gallman, “Gross National Product,” 34, Table A3. The average per capita income for the entire free population in the United States in 1840 was $105,
above that for the free colonists of the Lower South.
75

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

28

because they were a primary reason for the initial English colonization of North America, at the
heart of political debates, and generated quantifiable statistics. Moreover, exports from the south
grew quite rapidly in the aggregate, so that sector would appear to have been dynamic and
capable of generating sustained growth. Population, however, was simply growing quicker.
The emphasis that previous research put on South Carolina, and in particular the low
country's export and economic success, has fostered a misleading view of the performance of the
entire region. The low country was only a portion of the region, and its population became less
numerically significant over the course of the eighteenth century. The economic activity taking
place in Georgia, North Carolina and in the rapidly growing back country of South Carolina
played a large role in shaping the region’s economic performance. The other primary
demographic shift in the region—the growing proportion of the population under age ten—also
has received inadequate attention. Each of these factors suggests that reliance on the adult
population of the low country—the population most responsible for exports—provides an
imperfect picture of the regional economy.
The fact that output per person did not grow much, if at all, over the course of the
eighteenth century should not blind us to the success that was achieved. The colonies of the
Lower South experienced rapid population growth. The number of free persons and slaves grew
at 4.2 percent per year between 1720 and 1800, and the labor force grew slightly slower (3.9
percent per year) as the share of the population comprised of women and children rose. The
combination of a stable or nearly stable per capita figure and rapid population growth means that
gross domestic product in total grew quite rapidly. Real GDP for the non-Indian population
increased at 4.44 percent per year during the colonial period from 1720 to 1770, and 4.27 percent
per year from 1720 through the end of the century.

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

29

The great need for labor in the colonies encouraged both migration and the importation of
slaves over the course of the eighteenth century. It is all too easy, perhaps, to overlook the fact
that the colonial economy was able to absorb the additional labor without experiencing declines
in productivity. This stands in contrast to the inability of so many economies to absorb labor in
the period after World War II, and differs from the experience of much of Europe between 1500
and 1750 when economic advance could occur only when population growth was held in
check.76 The success of the Lower South's economy is in part a tribute to the abundance of land
that enabled colonists to fend off diminishing returns, at least in agriculture, and perhaps in part
to the transfer of land from Natives to newcomers at relatively low costs. Nevertheless, the
existence of that abundant resource is one thing, its apparent efficient use in combination with
labor should not be taken for granted. That the per capita figure did not decline in the face of the
rapid increase in population and labor is a notable accomplishment.
The extensive growth of population and GDP are measures of success. Colonists had
more children because they felt they could afford to and because they believed that their children
would eventually become productive workers.77 Likewise, some colonists imported slaves
because they saw them as productive investments in a land abundant environment. Others
migrated to the region because the economy looked attractive to them. These responses are signs
of a productive economy. Indeed, the fact that the region's economy could forge ahead in the
wake of such population increases attests to its capabilities. For the colonial period itself, there

76

See Robert Allen, “Progress and poverty in early modern Europe,” Economic History Review, LVI
(2003), 406-07.
77
With a rise in income, households can choose to have more goods and more children. If the prices of
goods were relatively high, as they likely were in colonial America, households might have chosen to
substitute children for durable goods. And, some might have chosen to increase the number of children
rather than try provide greater quality for a smaller number. See Richard Easterlin, The Reluctant
Economist, chap. 8, “An Economic Framework for Fertility Analysis,” Cambridge University Press,
2004, for a discussion of these issues.

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

30

was economic success, just not quite as much as previous writers suggested.
The results here do not alter the older view that the economy of the mainland AngloAmerican colonies was a success. Instead, careful attention to the changing demographic
composition and residential patterns of the region reveals that the traditional view was correct to
a large extent, but too narrowly focused. Rather than concentrate on exports, which involved an
increasingly small percentage of the colonial population, scholars need to measure economic
success by considering the entire population, including the vast majority who were not directly
involved in export-oriented occupations. The staples thesis can no longer stand alone as the
primary way to explain this economy. If we are to take seriously the effort to understand and
measure economic performance in the mainland, we need to replace explanations pivoting on
exports with newer, more encompassing models that include a wide range of economic behavior.
One way to launch this new conceptualization of the Anglo-American economy is to pay greater
attention to the entire population, even those whose efforts were never recorded by merchants or
port authorities. Seen from this new angle, slow growth of income per capita is no longer an
anomaly. It is, instead, a reasonable measure of an economy that succeeded despite massive
population growth, a demographic trend that has undermined all too many other societies.

31

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

Table 1
Quantity and Value of the Major Exports from the Lower South, 1768-72

1768
Quantities of Major Exports
Rice (bbls)
137,740
Indigo (lbs.)
517,301
Naval Stores (bbls)
85,388
Deerskins (lbs.)
Cotton (lbs.)
3,300

Value of Major Exports in Pounds Sterling
Rice
322,878
Indigo
78,113
Naval Stores
31,381
Deerskins
Cotton
170
Sum of the Above
432,542
Value of All
Exports from the
Region
Major Export Share

538,000

80.4%

1769

1770

1771

1772

102,833
416,436
91,604
392,739
544

148,831
573,017
76,375
328,832
2,444

204,894
454,207
86,852
438,344
2,615

127,662
758,677
71,882
359,482
1,128

284,216
75,375
32,856
39,838
25
432,310

260,584
103,430
28,860
31,731
105
424,710

282,985
106,285
33,035
42,241
98
464,644

377,001
196,118
32,412
34,563
45
640,139

551,000

534,000

593,000

800,000

78.5%

79.5%

78.4%

80.0%

Sources and Notes:
Shepherd and Walton, 1972, Shipping, Maritime Trade…..Appendix IV, Tables 2-6, pp.211-227
The value of all exports is an independent estimate made by contemporaries, and accepted by Shepherd and
Walton. (See Shepherd and Walton, pp. 93-95). Shepherd and Walton reported the 1769 figure for rice exports to
southern Europe in hundredweight. We converted to barrels by dividing the reported value by the price per barrel
(2.1814 Pounds Sterling) implicit in the Shepherd and Walton figures for rice exports to Great Britain and the West
Indies in 1769. That conversion implies there were 5.25 hundredweight per barrel.

32

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

Table 2
Quantities of Major Exports from the Lower South, 1712-1800
Rice
lbs

Naval
Stores
Barrels

Deerskins

Indigo

Cotton

lbs.

lbs

1000 lbs

Panel A: Three-year Average Benchmark Figures by Year of Production
1712

3,168,625

9,506

179,350

1720

8,060,551

33,505

120,721

1730

19,131,450

30,564

229,244

1740

34,917,672

33,148

219,575

1750

34,123,207

66,594

285,387

28,933

1760

47,080,950

46,407

242,874

389,767

1770

78,227,450

81,500

375,553

595,300

2

----1790

41,911,388

50,188

71,269

488,017

112

1800

45,275,731

37,772

146,227

4,790

18,681

Panel B: Average Annual Rates of Change
By Decade
1712-1720

12.38

17.05

-4.83

1720-1730

9.03

-0.91

6.62

1730-1740

6.20

0.82

-0.43

1740-1750

-0.23

7.23

2.66

1750-1760

3.27

-3.55

-1.60

29.70

1760-1770

5.21

5.79

4.45

4.33

1790-1800

0.78

-2.80

7.45

-37.02

66.76

By Sub-period
1720-1740

7.61

-0.05

3.04

1740-1770

2.73

3.04

1.81

7.49

1770-1800

-1.81

-2.53

-3.10

-14.85

35.49

Over the Long Term
1712-1770

5.68

3.77

1.28

1720-1770

4.65

1.79

2.30

1720-1800

2.18

0.15

0.24

Notes and Sources: See the Appendix to this paper
The rate of growth for indigo shown for the period 1740-70 covers only the period from 1746, the first year
of production.

33

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

Table 3
Foreign Exports from the Lower South, 1720-1800

1720
1730
1740
1750
1760
1770
1780
1790
1800

Population
(1,000s)
39.7
60.0
112.9
143.2
209.8
345.8
516.2
762.4
1091.4

Agricultural Exports
($1,000s)
540.90
1,104.40
1,823.60
1,758.30
2,652.70
4,367.90
(NA)
3,867.20
9,510.20

$ Per capita
13.64
18.41
16.15
12.28
12.65
12.63
(NA)
5.07
8.71

Average Annual Rates of Change
By decade
1720-1730
1730-1740
1740-1750
1750-1760
1760-1770
1790-1800

4.22
6.53
2.41
3.89
5.12
3.65

7.40
5.14
-0.36
4.20
5.11
9.42

3.04
-1.30
-2.70
0.30
-0.02
5.56

By Sub-period
1720-1740
1740-1770
1770-1800

5.36
3.80
3.91

6.27
2.95
2.63

0.85
-0.82
-1.23

Over the Long Term
1720-1770
1720-1800

4.42
4.23

4.27
3.65

-0.15
-0.56

Notes: Exports to foreign destinations are three-year averages valued in 1840 prices. See Appendix to this paper for
details regarding the estimation..

34

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

Table 4
Output of the Domestic Sector of the Lower South, 1720-1800
Year

Food Consumed

Food
Imported

1720
1730
1740
1750
1760
1770

900,112
1,358,163
2,610,737
3,412,969
5,115,313
8,588,774

29,977
101,417
316,694
330,577
448,192
359,567

1800

30,184,719

1,145,964

By Decade
1720-1730
1730-1740
1740-1750
1750-1760
1760-1770
By Sub-period
1720-1740
1740-1770
1770-1800
Over the Long Term
1720-1770
1720-1800

Firewood

Shelter

870,135
1,256,746
2,294,043
3,082,391
4,667,121
8,229,207

163,263
247,544
464,242
803,642
1,203,615
1,986,491

91,275
134,749
268,655
349,983
521,275
888,289

29,038,755

6,658,683

3,758,473

Food Produced

Non Agric.
Output
480,527
701,709
1,244,090
1,563,137
2,376,259
3,941,888
13,767,211

Domestic Sector
Output
1,605,200
2,340,748
4,271,030
5,799,154
8,768,270
15,045,875
53,223,122

Average Annual Rates of Change
4.20
6.75
2.72
4.13

12.96
12.06
0.43
3.09

3.74
6.20
3.00
4.24

4.25
6.49
5.64
4.12

3.97
7.14
2.68
4.06

5.32

-2.18

5.84

5.14

5.47

5.47
4.05

12.51
0.42

4.97
4.35

5.36
4.97

5.55
4.07

4.28

3.94

4.29

4.11

4.93

4.61
4.49

5.09
4.66

4.60
4.48

5.12
4.74

4.66
4.76

3.86
5.89
2.31
4.28
5.19

3.84
6.20
3.11
4.22
5.55

4.87
3.92
4.26

5.01
4.29
4.30

4.29
4.28

4.58
4.47

Notes and Sources:
Estimates are described in Mancall, Rosenbloom and Weiss, “Conjectural Estimates of Economic Growth in the Lower South, 1720 to 1800,” in
History Matters: Economics Growth Technology, and Demographic Change, and Timothy Guinnane, William Sundstrom, and Warren Whatley,
eds. Stanford University Press 2004, pp. 389-424.

35

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

Table 5:
GDP, GDP per Capita, and Foreign Exports
of the Lower South, 1720-1800
GDP
(narrowly
defined)
2,247,403
3,571,884
6,305,971
7,723,909
11,804,613
19,901,062

1720
1730
1740
1750
1760
1770
1780
1790
1800
By Decade
1720-1730
1730-1740
1740-1750
1750-1760
1760-1770
By Sub-period
1720-1740
1740-1770
1770-1800
Over the Long Term
1720-1770
1720-1800

64,370,772

Agricultural
Exports
($1,000s)
540.9
1,104.4
1,823.6
1,758.3
2,652.7
4,367.9
(NA)
3,867.2
9,510.2

Exports Abroad
as a Percentage
of GDP
24.0
30.9
28.8
22.6
22.4
21.9
(NA)
(NA)
14.8

GDP Per Capita
(narrowly
defined)
56.66
59.53
55.84
53.94
56.28
57.55
(NA)
(NA)
58.98

Average Annual Rates of Change
4.74
5.85
2.05
4.33
5.36

7.40
5.14
-0.36
4.20
5.11

0.50
-0.64
-0.34
0.42
0.22

5.29

6.27
2.95
2.63

- 0.07

4.27
3.65

0.03

3.91
3.99
4.46
4.28

0.10
0.08

0.05

Notes and Sources to Table 5:
GDP is the sum of output in the Domestic and Export sectors, where the latter includes shipments to other
North American colonies. The estimates of exports abroad are from Table 3 above. The estimates of output in the
domestic sector are from Table 4.
GDP as measured here is narrowly defined to exclude land clearing and the value of home manufactures. If
it were more broadly defined to include those items, growth would be slower because both of those items were of
greater importance early on in the period. All figures are real dollars expressed in terms of 1840 prices. These
estimates are similar in concept to the earlier conjectures made for the early nineteenth century in that the scope of
coverage is consistent as regards the extent to which marketed and non-marketed output is measured. See Paul
David, “The Growth of Real Product in the United States Before 1840: New Evidence, Controlled Conjectures,”
Journal of Economic History 27 (1967), 151-197; Thomas Weiss, “U.S. Labor Force Estimates and Economic
Growth, 1800-1860,” in Robert Gallman and John Wallis, eds., American Economic Growth and Standards of
Living before the Civil War (Chicago, 1992), 19-75; Weiss, “Economic Growth Before 1860: Revised Conjectures,”
in Weiss and Donald Schaefer, eds., American Economic Development in Historical Perspective (Stanford, 1994),
11-27
These GDP figures are not the usual measure of the market value of goods and services produced in any
given year as compiled by the Department of Commerce today. Portions of the domestic sector’s output in each
year were estimated by extrapolating backward in time a base year value for 1800 that reflected a greater degree of
market orientation than existed in 1720. In effect, they measure the value of the colonies’ output as though the same

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

36

fraction were marketed in each year as prevailed in 1800. This makes sense when trying to gauge the output and
standard of living of people whose economy may have been largely non-market oriented, but as a result the figures
are conceptually different from the standard national income accounting measures wherein GDP is confined for the
most part to market transactions. In that scheme, GDP can increase with an increase in the extent to which output
passes through markets, even when there is no increase in production. The present estimates minimize growth from
that source. It may be that some of the divergence between the present estimates of growth in output per capita and
those of previous researchers reflects the differences in concept. That is, the higher rates of growth estimated by
others may reflect the increased output that is going through market channels rather than an increase in production.
This, however, is only speculation, as other researchers have not made clear how much, if any, of their estimates
reflect increased output versus increased market orientation. Of course, as Farley Grubb (“The circulating medium
of exchange in colonial Pennsylvania, 1729-1775,” Explorations in Economic History 41 (2004), 353) has argued,
the increase in the marketed versus non-marketed activity can mean an increase in welfare per capita.

37

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

Table 6
Exports, Bounties and Income per Colonist by Source
White
Population
Year
1720
1730
1740
1750
1760
1770
1780
1790
1800

By Decade

1720-1730
1730-1740
1740-1750
1750-1760
1760-1770
By Sub-period
1720-1740
1740-1770
1770-1800
Over the Long Term
1720-1770
1720-1800

24,795
34,000
62,781
82,384
119,628
190,216
305,873
521,859
738,961

Exports to
Foreign
Destinations

Residual
GDP (excl.
exports)

Residual
GDP plus
Exports

21.81
32.48
29.05
21.34
22.17
22.96

53.58
52.77
50.44
52.03
55.05
57.85

75.39
85.26
79.49
73.37
77.23
80.81

12.87

59.29

72.16

Bounty on
Indigo

Bounty on
Naval
Stores

Residual GDP
plus exports
and bounties

0.03
0.39
0.18

4.72
0.88
0.83
0.82
0.45
0.52

80.11
86.14
80.32
74.22
78.07
81.51
72.16

Average Annual Rates of Change
3.21
6.32
2.75
3.80
4.75

4.06
-1.11
-3.04
0.38
0.35

-0.15
-0.45
0.31
0.57
0.50

1.24
-0.70
-0.80
0.51
0.45

-15.41
-0.66
-0.12
-5.76
1.31

0.73
-0.70
-0.79
0.51
0.43

4.75
3.76
4.63

1.44
-0.78
-1.91

-0.30
0.46
0.08

0.26
0.06
-0.38

-8.33
-1.57

0.01
0.05
-0.41

4.16
4.33

0.10
-0.66

0.15
0.13

0.14
-0.05

-4.33

0.03
-0.13

27.86
-7.19

Sources: See Tables 4 and 5, the text and the appendix. All figures, except population, are expressed in
U.S. dollars at prices of 1840.
Residual GDP was calculated by subtracting a maintenance allowance for slaves from the
estimated value of GDP and also deducting the value of exports to foreign destinations. The maintenance
allowance was equal to the value of the slave diet underlying the estimates of GDP, which increased over
time from a value of $25.42 in 1720 to $29.11 in 1770, plus an allowance for housing, firewood and all
other items. The value of these three items varied slightly over time, and averaged $7.80 for the period
1720 to 1770.
The bounties were estimated by multiplying the quantities exported of indigo, and of naval stores
(tar, green tar, pitch and turpentine), by the specified bounty per unit. The indigo bounty rate is from
McCusker and Menard, The Economy of British America, p. 187. The initial bounty of six pence per lb.
was reduced to 4 pence sometime in the 1750 or 1760s, but then restored to six pence in the early 1770s.
Lewis Gray, Agriculture in the Southern United States to 1860, p. 293 says the bounty was reduced to 4
pence per lb. in the early 1770s. The naval stores bounty rate is from Lewis Gray, Agriculture in the
Southern United States to 1860, pp. 153-56. A ton was specified as being eight barrels. Bounties were
also provided for turpentine and rosin at £3 per ton, and for mast, yards and bowsprits at £1, none of
which were of much importance to the Lower South.

38

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

FIGURE 1
Distribution of the Population in the Lower South,
1700-1800

Share
100%

80%

GA

60%

SC

40%

NC

20%

0%
1700

1710

1715

1720

1730

1740

1745

1750

1760

1770

1774

1780

1783

1790

1793

1800
Year

Source: Historical Statistics (Series Z:1-19).

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

39

Figure 2: Slave Imports as a Function of Change in Export Value by Decade, 1720-1770

Sources: Slave imports from Philip D. Morgan, “Black Society in the Lowcountry, 1760-1810,” in Ira Berlin and Ronald Hoffman, eds, Slavery and Freedom in
the Age of the American Revolution (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 1983), p. 87; and Philip D. Morgan, Slave Counterpoint: Black Culture in the
Eighteenth-Century Chesapeake and Low Country (Chapel Hill and London: University of North Carolina Press, 1998), p. 59. Export values are from the
appendix.

40

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

Figure 3
Composition of the Population of the Lower South, 1720-1800
Shares
0.900
0.800

10+ share of slave population

0.700

10+ share of free males

0.600

Male Share

0.500
0.400
0.300

Slave Share

0.200
0.100
1720

1730

1740

1750

1760

1770

1774

1780

1783

1790

1793

1800
Year

41

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

Figure 4A
Ratio of Export Prices to Import Prices for Charleston, 1720-1775
Index (1797-1801=100)
2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

72
17

67
17

62
17

57
17

52
17

47
17

42
17

37
17

32
17

27
17

22
17

Source: See discussion in text. The trend line is for illustrative purposes only

Year

42

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

Figure 4B
Ratio of Export Prices to Import Prices for Charleston, 1722-1773
(with slave prices included in the import price index)
Index (1797-1801=100)
1.900
1.700
1.500
1.300
1.100
0.900
0.700
0.500

73
17

70
17

67
17

64
17

61
17

58
17

55
17

52
17

49
17

46
17

43
17

40
17

37
17

34
17

31
17

28
17

25
17

22
17

Year

Source: See discussion in text. The trend line is for illustrative purposes only.

Exports-Slow Growth Colonial

43

Estimates of Exports from the Lower South, 1710-1803
Appendix to: Exports and Slow Economic Growth

Peter C. Mancall
University of Southern California
Joshua L. Rosenbloom
University of Kansas and National Bureau of Economic Research
Thomas Weiss
University of Kansas and National Bureau of Economic Research
February 15, 2006

This research was funded in part by the National Science Foundation (SBR9808516).

1

Although the historical record for the colonial period is more complete as regards exports
than other things, it nevertheless is not fully complete, nor is it complete enough for our
purposes. A complete record would cover all exports from each colony or colonial region, not
only one or two major staple exports, and cover exports to all destinations, not just Great Britain
or England, which is readily available. And, it would distinguish exports produced in the region
from re-exports of goods produced elsewhere. In order to estimate GDP for the region, we had
to construct the series on domestically-produced exports shipped to all destinations.
The series we produced is shown in Tables 1 and 2. In Table 1 we present benchmark
estimates of the real value of all domestically-produced exports to all destinations, as well as the
per capita values of those exports and the average rates of change. We have shown the real value
of exports under two different dating schemes. We have shown the export figures by year of
export, which is the more common or traditional dating scheme. We have also shown the value
of exports by year of production, because we are ultimately interested in estimating the region's
production. Thus we have shifted the estimated values of exports backwards one year in order to
have a series that is more closely aligned with the time of production than with the time of
export. Table 2 shows the annual values of these variables. The derivation of this series on the
real value of all exports to all destinations is explained below and laid out in Tables 3 through
12.

Derivation of the Series on Domestically Produced Exports
We constructed the estimates in parts. First we established a benchmark figure for 1770
based on the estimates of Shepherd and Walton.1 We then extended that figure backward to
1710 and forward to 1803. The former extension was done using an index of the volume of the
four most important exports. The latter extension was done in two parts: we first linked the 1770
benchmark figure with data for 1790-92 using the method set out by Shepherd and Walton

1

James Shepherd and Gary Walton, 1972. Shipping, Maritime Trade and the Economic Development of
Colonial North America. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. We use the 1770 date as a reference
point, but in fact the evidence taken from Shepherd and Walton is for the five year period 1768-72.

2

(1976) and then extrapolated the 1790-92 data to 1803 using a volume index of the eight most
important exports.2

Benchmark Figures for exports of 1768-72 (production years 1767-71)
The estimates for 1768-72 were calculated from the evidence assembled by James
Shepherd and Gary Walton from the "American Inspector-General's Ledgers."3 Shepherd
describes this as "The only complete source for commodity trade for any years in the colonial
period."4 Shepherd and Walton presented the total value of exports in Pounds Sterling from each
colony of the Lower South, as well as the quantities and the Sterling values of many selected
commodities that were exported from each of those colonies in each year 1768-1772 (1972,
Appendix IV, Tables 2-6).
We wanted a series valued in constant prices in order to gauge the growth of real output
produced for export. And, we wanted the series valued in prices of 1840 so that it could be
combined with other estimates of real output for the region and then linked to estimates of real
GDP for the nineteenth century. We used 1840 prices to value the quantities of the eight most
important exports reported by Shepherd and Walton in each of the five years, and inflated that
figure to obtain the value of all exports in 1840 prices. The 8 items and their 1840 prices are
shown in Table 3. These 8 items comprised an average of 85 percent of the current price value
of all exports from the region for the period 1768-72, with the percentage having remained fairly
constant over the period (see Table 4, col. 3). The value of the 8 items in1840 prices (Table 4,
col.4) was divided by those current price shares to obtain the value of all exports from the region
in 1840 prices (Table 4, col. 5).

2

James Shepherd and Gary Walton, 1976. "Economic Change after the American Revolution:
Pre- and Post-War Comparisons of Maritime Shipping and Trade," Explorations in Economic
History, 13 pp. 397-422. We have used a terminal date of 1803 so that we could link to an
established figure for domestically produced exports (Timothy Pitkin, A Statistical View of the
Commerce of the United States. New York: Augustus M. Kelley Publishers (Pitkin, 1816 [reprinted
1967] ).
3

These records are catalogued in the Public Record Office as Customs 16/1.
James Shepherd, “Commodity Exports from the British North American Colonies to Overseas Areas,
1768-1772: Magnitudes and Patterns of Trade,” Institute for Research in the Behavioral, Economic, and
Management Sciences, Purdue University, 1969, Paper No. 258, p. 9.
4

3

We have also shown in Table 4 alternative estimates of the exports valued in 1840 prices
in each of these five years. We derived these by converting the current price values from
Sterling to dollars at the exchange rate of $4.44, and then deflating to obtain the values in 1840
prices.5 In the first instance we deflated by a David-Solar-McCusker Price Index (the DavidSolar-McCusker Price Index) which on a base of 1840 had a three-year average value of 92.6 in
1770. In the second case we used Cole's data to construct an export price index for the Lower
South, which on a base of 1840 had a three-year average value of 161.7 in 1770. As can be seen
in Table 4, these alternative values differ noticeably from the figures we calculated using 1840
prices, and differ noticeably from each other, and demonstrate the difficulties of attempting to
put a precise value on real exports.
It is worth pointing out that the estimated growth in our export series before or after this
period will not be affected by our choice of benchmark figures, even though the benchmark
figures differ widely across these series. In our time series estimates, growth before and after
1768-72 is based on the behavior of volume indexes constructed independently of the benchmark
figures.

Exports Before and After the Benchmark Period
We extended our benchmark estimates backward in time to produce an annual series
running back to 1710. We extended the series forward in time as well, but the annual series is
confined to the period 1790 to 1803. In both cases we estimated the value of domestically
produced exports by using a volume index of change in the region's exports. A volume index is
a real index of exports in which quantities of the individual exports are weighted by a constant
set of prices and summed. The index measures the change in that weighted sum. Our index for
1790-1803 is based on the same eight major exports that were used to construct the benchmark
figures for 1767-71; our index for the period before 1767 is based on four of those major exports.

5

The Sterling values are from Shepherd and Walton, 1972. The $4.44 figure used to convert to dollars
was the official exchange rate.

4

The issue is how to weight these available data in order to best approximate the behavior of total
exports.

Exports in the Pre-1767 period
In the colonial period there were four major items exported internationally from the
Lower South: rice, naval stores, deerskins and indigo. The quantity exported of each of the first
three of these was available for most years back through 1712.6 Indigo was not produced until
1746, but an annual series could be compiled from then on.
Export quantities for rice, naval stores, and indigo were taken from Historical Statistics
of the United States (U.S. Census Bureau ,1975). The rice figures (series Z: 481) purport to
show total exports from ports in South Carolina and Georgia so provide the coverage we were
seeking.
For naval stores (series Z: 500 through 503) report exports from Charleston, and thus
cover exports from South Carolina, one of the two major sources in the region. Those data for
some years cover only a few months so we inflated each of those to full years assuming that the
exports in each month were proportionate to the months for which data are available. Annual
exports from the other major producing colony, North Carolina, are not available, but exports
were reported at selected dates. Shepherd and Walton provide figures of exports to overseas
destinations for 1768-1772, all of which went to Great Britain. Roy Merrens reports figures of
exports to all destinations for those years, including other North American colonies.7 A
comparison of the two figures indicates that for the 5 years, exports overseas accounted for 66

6

We did have to fill in a few gaps in the data in order to avoid spurious fluctuations. These are
explained in the text.
7
Roy Merrens, Colonial North Carolina, Table 3

5

percent of the total. Exports of naval stores were also available for 1720 and 1752.8 Given that
the chief interest of the Burkes was on the trade between the colonies and England, (see vol. 1,
preface) it is likely that all 84,012 barrels reported were shipped overseas. But in order not to
minimize the growth of naval stores exports we assumed that the total included exports to other
colonies, and applied the same percentage (66 percent) as calculated for 1768-72. We made the
same assumption for the 1720 figures.
We interpolated between 1720 and 1752, and also between 1752 and 1770, to obtain
annual figures for other years. Because North Carolina made up such a large portion of total
naval stores exports -- averaging 58 percent for 1768-72 -- we used changes in the value of
bounties paid on American naval stores.9 Because North Carolina’s export of naval stores
increased faster over time than did that of all colonies, we also used changes in the ratio of North
Carolina’s exports to the bounties paid. The ratio could be calculated for the benchmark years of
1720, 1752 and 1768-72 (5 year average), and then was assumed to increase at a constant rate
between benchmark dates. The estimated exports of naval stores from North Carolina in the
intervening years is thus the product of the interpolated ratio and the reported value of bounties
paid to all colonies. This procedure yielded the result that North Carolina’s share of all bounties
fell from around 60 percent in 1768-72 to only 7 percent in the years 1720-22. We assumed that
the share remained constant at 7 percent back to 1706 -- the first year in which bounties were
paid -- and calculated the amount of bounty paid to North Carolina. Dividing that amount by

8

Colonial Records of North Carolina, vol. II, p. 396, as reported in Lewis Gray, 1958. History of
Agriculture in the Southern United States to 1860. Gloucester, MA: Peter Smith. (reprint edition). p. ;
Edmund and William Burke, An Account of the European Settlements in America, 6th ed., printed for J.
Dodsley, 1777, vol. 2, p. 261.
9
R. G. Albion, 1926, Forest and Sea Power, Cambridge, MA., Appendix B

6

the bounty per barrel yielded the estimate of naval stores exported from the colony in each
year.10
The data for indigo (series Z 433 and Z 434) cover both South Carolina and Georgia for
1753-1770 but only South Carolina for the remaining years. In order to complete the volume
index we compiled a new series on deerskin exports, combining the evidence available from
several sources for South Carolina and Georgia.11
Most of the reported export data appear to reflect exports between the fall of one calendar
year, and the fall of the next year (e.g., November 1, 1734 to October 31, 1735). This “export
year” reflects sales of the crop harvested in the fall of the calendar year on which it begins.
Historical Statistics (U.S. Census Bureau 1975) generally attributes exports to the year from
which most of the data come (in the example, exports would be listed as 1735; but correspond to
the crop grown and harvested in 1734). Gray (1958) generally adopts a “crop year” dating
scheme, so he would list the exports as being for 1734.12 The choice is in some sense arbitrary,
but it needs to be consistent. We have adopted a “crop year” dating scheme, which means that
we have changed the dates of all the data from Historical Statistics to be one year earlier than in
the source.
In Table 5 we have presented benchmark figures on the quantities of these major exports
that underlie our volume indexes, along with the rates of growth of each of those. As can be
seen, rice exports grew quite rapidly from 1712 onward, and quite rapidly in almost every
decade. Only in the 1740s did rice exports decline and only in one other decade, the 1750s, was
the average rate of growth below 5.0 percent. Exports received a substantial boost in the 1750s
by the growth of indigo production, but the other major items that were exported over the entire
10

This is the same thing as assuming that the ratio of NC’s exports per bounty remained constant at the
1720 value
11
Those estimates are described in a working paper “Estimates of Deerskins Exports from the Lower
South, 1700-1800” mimeo, University of Kansas.
12
Clowse did likewise in reporting exports for Charleston. (1981, pp. 57-58, Table B-21).

7

period did not fare so well. Over the longer term, naval stores rose on average at only 0.55
percent per year between 1712 and 1770, while deerskins increased at 1.3 percent per year over
that same period. Although rice was the dominant export in value terms (see Table 6), naval
stores and deerskin exports were not unimportant, especially so in the earlier decades of the
century. Thus, the increase in the real value of exports over the period 1720-70 was held in
check by these slower growing items, and the average rate of growth for total exports in constant
prices must have been less than the 4.65 percent shown by rice alone.
We considered a number of alternative weights to use in order to construct a volume
index for the years before 1767 based on these four exports. These weights, which are based on
the composition of exports in selected years, are summarized in Table 6. We also show there the
implicit shares of each export yielded by valuing the export quantities by the prices of 1840. The
volume indexes that we have calculated based on various weighting schemes are summarized in
Table 7
The first series shown in Table 7 is that derived by weighting the quantities of each
export by its price in 1840 (prices are shown in Table 3) and is the series we have used to
extrapolate the benchmark figures back to 1712.13 As can be seen, this index yields the highest
rates of growth for the region over the colonial period, as well as the highest in most decades and
subperiods.14 This index shows a decline in real exports during the 1740s, a result which
captures the impact of the decline in rice exports before the favorable effect of increased indigo
exports takes hold. That decline or slowing down is captured as well in most of the other
indexes. The rate of growth shown by our volume index between 1720 and 1770 is consistent
with the fact that real exports in total must have grown more slowly than the quantity of rice
exported. The latter rose at 4.6 percent per year between 1720 and 1770, our volume index
implies that total exports grew at 4.25 percent per year over that same period. Indeed, the rates
of growth implied by this index seem consistent with the rate of growth of rice exported in each
subperiod. In all subperiods the total grew somewhat slower than rice exports with three
exceptions: in the 1740s when total exports declined somewhat more rapidly than rice, in the
13

The series on naval stores exports terminates in 1712 so we have used that date as the terminal date for
the extrapolated volume index series. We have extended the index to 1710 based on the export of only
rice and deerskins. By excluding naval stores, or any substitute export, we think the growth in the volume
index between 1710 and 1712 is overstated.

8

1750s, and between 1740 and 1770. In these last two cases the growth of total exports was
pushed up by the increased production of indigo.
The other series shown in Table 7 are also based on the exports of the same three or four
major items used in our volume index, but with different weights given to each export in the
various series. The first two alternative indexes are based on valuing the major exports in terms
of hundredweights (cwts.) of rice. To construct such an index, the exports of the other
products—deerskins, indigo and naval stores—were converted to their equivalent in rice using a
fixed set of relative prices. Nash (1992, p. 699) calculated such an index for South Carolina
based on three exports rice, naval stores, and indigo. The series labeled Extended Nash Index
was constructed by us to broaden Nash’s index to cover exports from the other colonies in the
region and to include deerskin exports. Nash (1992, p. 699) calculated the relative prices of rice,
naval stores, and indigo for the pre-1773 period. For rice he used the average price for 1733-74,
for indigo prices the average price for 1747-74, and for naval stores he used a weighted index of
prices of pitch, tar and turpentine averaged for 1733-74. Unfortunately price data for deerskins
are very limited, and we used the average price of deerskin exports for the 1767-71 period.15
Although we did not find many prices of deerskins, those we did find, with the exception of a
price quoted in the correspondence of Henry Laurens, were higher than the price for 1769-72 and
thus would have given a greater weight to deerskins in the index. A greater weight may have
been appropriate, but because deerskins were among the slower growing exports we did not want
to assign too high a weight to them and thereby bias downward the growth of the volume index.
Thus we chose the relatively lower average price for 1769-72 to give a lower weight to deerskins
in the index. The prices are:
Rice = 6s. 10d. per cwt = 1 volume unit
Indigo = 3s 7d. per lb = 0.52 volume unit
Naval Stores = 6s. 10.75d. per barrel = 1.01 volume unit
Deerskins = 1s. 11.5d per lb = 0.29 volume units

14

The series based on Nash's index grew faster at times and over the full period 1720 to 1770, but his
index pertains to only South Carolina, not the entire region.
15
This price was the average value of a lb. of deerskin exports for 1769-72 calculated from the data
reported by Shepherd and Walton (1972, Appendix IV).

9

The Extended Nash Index is based on the quantities of four exports back to 1746, but
only three exports from 1746 back to 1712. The index value for 1746 based on the four exports
was extrapolated back to 1712 based on the change in the index for three items.
The other alternative indexes are based on the relative importance of each of the four
major exports in 1767-71 and 1747-48. The relative importance varied depending on whether
the items were valued in current prices or in constant prices of 1840. Moreover, in each of the
series based on the 1767-71 share weights we produced two variations, one without reweighting
before 1746, the other with reweighting in order to adjust for the fact that indigo was not
produced before 1746.
Another check on our series is to gauge the growth of real exports in the colonial period
by deflating the value of exports in current prices. This, however, can only be done for a few
sub-periods because the current price data are available for only a few years. Moreover, the
price data available are not ideally suited to the task of deflating exports. One of those, the price
of rice covers only one export; the other the David-Solar-McCusker Price Index is a more
general consumer price index, not an index of producers prices. Nevertheless, these deflated
values can give an approximation of the likely rate of increase in the real value of exports. As
can be seen in Table 8, exports deflated by the David-Solar-McCusker index increased between
1712 and 1747 at an annual average rate of 5.7 percent, between 1747 and 1770 at an annual rate
of 4.3, and for the longer period 1712 to 1770 the average rate of growth was 5.1 percent per
year.16 Use of the other indices gives different results. For the period 1747-70, when deflated by
the price of rice, the real value of exports rose at only 3.2 percent per year, whereas deflated by
the Cole index, the rate of growth was 3.7 percent per year. Although these estimates are
imperfect and limited in scope, they do provide some perspective for assessing the growth
measured by using export quantities. The rate of growth in our volume index corresponding to
the years for which we have been able to calculate deflated values are shown in the last column
of the table. As can be seen our estimates show faster growth than all three of the deflated series
in the period 1747-70. For the longer time period, 1701-70, our index shows somewhat slower
growth than the series deflated by the David-Solar-McCusker Price Index, but the difference is
not great.

10

Exports in the Post-1770 Period
We extrapolated the 1767-71 benchmark data forward in two stages. We first linked the
benchmark data to 1790-92, and then extrapolated that figure forward to 1803 based on a volume
index of change in the most important exports.
There is not enough data available to construct an annual export series running from 1772
to 1791. Instead we have made an estimate for 1790, 1791 and 1792 following the method laid
out by Shepherd and Walton (1976, 397-422). They estimated the increase in real exports
between 1768-72 and 1791-92 by valuing the quantities of the most important exports in constant
prices. For the 13 colonies and states they calculated such an increase in two ways; using on the
one hand the prices of 1768-72 in pounds Sterling, and on the other hand the average price for
1791-92 in dollars. The choice of price weights did not matter. The increase in real exports for
the selected commodities was 37 percent.17 Those selected commodities comprised 88 percent
of the current price value of all exports in 1768-72, and 86 percent in 1791-92.
Their estimates by region were not presented in comparable detail. They were calculated
by deflating the reported current price values by the Paasche price index implicit in the
calculations for the 13 colonies and states. For the Lower South they showed a growth of real
exports between 1768-72 to 1791-92 of only 5.6 percent. Rather than accept this estimate, we
made more detailed calculations of the sort they had made for the colonies as a whole. These
calculations are shown in Table 9, with the dating shifted backward one year. We obtained
somewhat different results from those of Shepherd and Walton, but not greatly so and the result
depends on the choice of price weights. If we use the Sterling prices of 1767-71 we find that real
exports rose by 9 percent between 1767-71 and 1790. If we use the prices of 1791 as the
weights, the real value of exports declined by 1.0 percent between those dates. 18

16

The 1701 figure covers only exports to England, not to all destinations, so probably understates the
total volume of exports. As a result, rates of growth between 1701 and other years are probably upper
bounds.
17
The increase was 37.1 percent using the Sterling prices of 1768-72 and 37 percent using the prices of
1791-92. (Shepherd and Walton, 1976, p. 412 fn. 24).
18
If we use the average export value for 1790-92 the increase from the average value for 1768-72 was 20
percent. Using the average values the increase was 11 percent.

11

We have chosen to use the estimates based on the prices of 1767-71 to link the colonial
export series with the post-1790 period, and thus impute some growth in the real value of
exports. Although foreign trade was subject to much disruption after the Revolutionary War,
Gordon Bjork concluded from his examination of the period that "there was a modest increase in
exports between the pre- and post- revolutionary period."19 He was commenting on the colonies
as a whole, not the Lower South, but the calculations made by Shepherd and Walton indicated
that some small increase in exports had taken place for the region. The index shown in Table 9
for the 8 items was used to extrapolate to 1790, 1791 and 1792 the 1767-71 value of all exports
(expressed in 1840 prices). Those values are shown in the last column in Table 9.
Estimates for 1790 to 1803
Although export statistics are available for the years after 1790, the reported values are in
current prices and include re-exports. We do not know exactly how large re-exports were for
any region, but for the nation they were quite large from 1793-1806, and varied in importance
from year to year. And, over time, inflation contributed noticeably to the increase in the value of
exports. Because our goal is to estimate real output in the Lower South, we wanted a series on
only domestically-produced agricultural exports in constant prices, so we needed to eliminate the
influences of inflation and re-exports. An indication of the extent to which these two phenomena
influenced the value of exports from the Lower South, and the increase in the value over time,
can be seen from a glance at the trade statistics shown in Table 10A. There we show the extent
to which the increase in the nominal value of all exports from the region between 1790 and 1801
can be accounted for by the growth of the 8 major exports known to have been produced in the
region. The portion unaccounted for – labeled “share not identified’ – is an approximation of the
value of re-exports of items not produced within the region. As can be seen, that share varied
widely over the decade, and amounted to as much as 53 percent of the total value of the region’s
exports in 1796.
Between 1790 and 1800, the nominal value of exports from the Lower South soared from
$3.6 million to $13.6 million. There was of course a cotton boom, but this can account for only a
fraction of the increase. Cotton exports valued in current prices rose from virtually nil ($47
19

Bjork, 1964, p. 560. He did point out that the increase in exports was far below the rapid increase in
population, and he was commenting on the colonies as a whole, not the Lower South specifically

12

thousand in 1790) to $4.4 million in 1800. Rice, which had been the region's chief export, did
not fare so well; the nominal value of rice exported increased by only $408 thousand between
1790 and 1800. In other words, the two major agricultural exports of the region can account for
only around 40 percent of the increase in the region's total exports expressed in nominal prices.
The remaining major exports cannot explain the increase. Indeed, as a group the value of
these other exports declined slightly; pulled down for the most part by the fall in indigo exports.
In other words, a very large increase in total exports, more than $6 million or about 60 percent of
the increase, remains unexplained by the growth of the 8 most important regional products.
It is possible that other regional products not among these eight, such as wheat and flour,
might account for some of the increase, but more likely most of the increase was due to an
upsurge in the re-export of items, such as coffee and sugar, that were not produced in the region.
The national figures suggest this was the case. For the nation, the nominal value of exports rose
from $20.2 million in 1790 to $70.8 million in 1800, about the same percentage increase as took
place in the Lower South. Re-exports, which were recorded for the nation, rose by $38.8 million
accounting for about three-fourths of the total increase. Domestically produced exports rose by
only $11.8 million.20
Because our interest is in the value of real exports produced in the region, it was
necessary that we take account of the two phenomena of inflation and re-exports. We first
attempted to do this by using the available published statistics. We deducted an estimate of the
value of re-exports from the reported value of all exports for the region in order to obtain a figure
representing the value of agricultural exports produced in the region. We then adjusted those
current values of domestically-produced exports for price changes in order to obtain the real
values. The results are shown in Table11.
The current value of exports shown there is net of our estimate of re-exports from the
region. We derived re-exports from the region as the sum of estimates for each of three states
(GA, NC, and SC), adjusting each state's series for the value of re-exports likely to have been
included in the reported totals. For 1791 through 1802, the reported export figures combined the
20

There is some question as to the whether the value of re-exports was $39 or $49 million in 1800, and
thus whether the value of domestically produced exports, which was obtained by subtraction of the reexports from the total value of exports, was $31.7 or $21.7. North (1961, p. 221) reported re-exports as
the larger figure, whereas the figure is reported as $39 million in Historical Statistics, (Series U-192).

13

value of domestically-produced exports and re-exports. Beginning in 1803, the values of the two
types of exports were reported separately by state. We used the relative shares for 1803-1810 for
each state to distribute the totals reported for each state in the earlier years. For Georgia and
North Carolina, domestically-produced exports comprised 99 or 100 percent of total exports in
every year after 1803, so we assumed all exports in each of these states for the years 1791-1802
were produced domestically. The domestically-produced share of exports in South Carolina was
less than 100 percent in each year and varied over the period 1803-10. The share dropped
between 1803 and 1805-07 and then rose. We extrapolated the domestic share for South
Carolina back to 1791 based on the change in the domestically produced share for the United
States and an assumed ratio of South Carolina's share to that for the United States. In order to
bias upward the 1800 figure for the Lower South - and thus bias upward the rate of growth that
had taken place before 1800 - we used the higher average ratio found for the subperiod 1805-07
rather than the average for the longer term 1803-10. For 1790 we had to resort to an alternative
method of estimation because even the total export figures by state were unavailable; only
national figures were reported but they did provide the breakdown between domestically
produced exports and re-exports. We estimated the value of domestically produced exports for
the region as 18 percent of the figure reported for the United States; this percentage being the
average for the years 1791-96. 21
These net values were then deflated by several available, but imperfect, price indexes to
obtain estimates of the real value of exports produced in the region. The results using three
different price series as deflators are shown in Table 11. All the deflated series show substantial
increases over the decade of the 1790s, with the average annual rates of growth ranging from
6.97 to 12.18 percent per year.
The Taylor-Cole Export Price Index is conceptually the more appropriate deflator as it
measures changes in prices of the chief exports from the region. For the period after 1796 the
price index includes all South Carolina’s export staples except deerskins, while before 1791 it
covers the four chief export staples: rice, deerskins, naval stores and indigo. The real value
series based on that deflator may be the best of the three, but there are several shortcomings. The
Doug Irwin (2002, p.36) argues that the lower value of re-exports is the correct one as the Treasury
Report of 1837 shows the $39 million figure.
21
In all these estimates we have assumed that all the domestically-produced exports from the Lower
South were agricultural products.

14

most important flaw is that the index constructed for the period 1796 to 1812 gives cotton a
weight of 65 percent. This large a weight may be suitable for much of the period, but not for the
1790s when cotton was only beginning its rise to prominence. As was seen in Table 7, and again
in Table 10, at the beginning of the 1790s cotton accounted for at most 2 percent of the region's
exports. Its share rose substantially thereafter, but even at the end of the decade its share was not
above 50 percent, well below the 65 percent weight in the Taylor-Cole Index. Another
shortcoming is that there is no coverage between 1791 and 1796, and the index for the post-1796
rests on a different base year than that for the period before 1791.22 We have linked the two
series based on the change in the price of rice between 1791 and 1796 in order to put them on the
same base year in both periods. Given that the Taylor-Cole Index gives such a large weight to
cotton, interpolating by changes in the price of rice may not be ideal, but it seemed the only
practical alternative.23 Although imperfect, the series deflated by the Cole index gives some
measure of the likely increases in the real value of domestically produced exports. Given the
extremely high weight given to cotton, this series most likely gives an upwardly biased measure
of growth in the region's exports during the 1790s.
We also estimated the real value of domestically produced exports in the 1790s by
applying the same method that was used to link 1767-71 with 1790-92. That is, we first derived
an index of change in the volume of the 8 most important exports and then extrapolated the
benchmark figure for 1791 (expressed in prices of 1840) on the change in that index.
This too does not lend itself to unequivocal results because of the wide variation in the
behavior of the chief exports and the large changes in their relative importance over time. As
was seen in Table 10B, the pattern of increase or decrease was not uniform among the chief
exports. The quantity of cotton surged while the quantity of rice declined substantially between
1790 and 1800. The quantity of naval stores, which had fallen off substantially between 1770
and1790, remained fairly constant during the 1790s. The quantity of deerskins, which had
declined precipitously between 1770 and 1790, rose substantially during the 1790s although at
the end of the century the quantity exported was still well below the 1768-72 average. The
quantity of wood products, both boards as well as staves and headings, remained roughly
constant during the 1790s, while tobacco which had increased noticeably between 1770 and 1790
22

A minor problem is that the index for the period before 1791 includes corn.

15

declined during the 1790s. Indigo exports fell throughout. Based on these conflicting patterns,
one cannot say with much confidence that real exports in total increased or decreased over the
closing decade of the century.
It should also be pointed out that the quantity figures for the region's export of naval
stores, boards, staves and headings, and tobacco in the years after 1792 were estimated by
assuming that the region’s share of the U.S. exports of those products equaled the share for 1791
and 1792. The consequence of this is that the behavior of these exports is heavily influenced by
what was happening in the other regions that exported these products. The behavior of exports
from those other regions may not represent well the growth in the exports from the Lower South.
This is perhaps most obvious in the case of tobacco for which the Lower South was a minor
exporter, but it may be true for naval stores and wood products as well.24
Despite these shortcomings, we weighted the quantities of these 8 exports by prices to
obtain an index of the change in the volume of the 8 exports combined that took place between
1791 and 1800. In fact, we constructed two indexes: one in which the quantities were weighted
by prices at the beginning of the period (1791 prices) and a second using prices from the end of
the period. The two estimates are shown in Table 12.
The two index series behave very similarly, especially up to 1798. They diverge
somewhat after that point, with the index weighted by 1791 prices rising more rapidly.
Nevertheless, for the entire decade the two indexes give fairly similar results. Real exports
increased substantially between 1791 and 1800, by 106 percent when weighted by 1791 prices
and by 83 percent when weighted by prices of 1800. The average annual rates of change
between 1790 and 1800 were 9.1 and 7.7 percent. These rates are also very similar to those
obtained by deflating the estimated current price value of domestically produced exports by
either the David-Solar-McCusker Price Index or North's Export Price Index (see Table 11), but
are below the rate of change implied when the current price figures were deflated by Cole's
Export Price Index. Based on these comparisons, the Cole-deflated series appears to be an
outlier, and we think this is for the reason we stated earlier that it simply gives too great a weight
to cotton during this decade.
23

For the period 1796 to 1803, changes in the price of the two commodities were substantially different;
the price of rice rose by about 26 percent while the price of cotton fell by 52 percent.
24
The Lower South accounted for only 13 percent of the nation’s export of tobacco in 1791 and 92,
whereas it accounted for 31 percent of the wood products and 39 percent of the naval stores.

16

We have used the index based on the 1791 prices to extrapolate the real value of all
exports expressed in prices of 1840. Those estimates are also shown in Table 12. We also show
there the per capita value of exports expressed in prices of 1840. The per capita figures held
quite steady until 1798, then increased sharply.

17

Sources
Albion, R.G., 1926. Forests and Seapower, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press.
Bezanson, Anne, Robert Gray and Miriam Hussey, 1937. Wholesale Prices in Philadelphia, 1784-1861.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Bruchey, Stuart. 1967. Cotton and the Growth of the American Economy: 1790-1860, Sources and
Readings. New York: Harcourt, Brace & World.
Burke, Edmund and William, An Account of the European Settlements in America, 6th ed., 1777. London:
printed for J. Dodsley
Clowse, Converse, 1981. Measuring Charleston's Overseas Commerce: Statistics from the Port's Naval
List. Washington, DC: University Press of America
Coclanis, Peter A. 1989. The Shadow of a Dream: Economic Life and Death in the South Carolina Low
Country, 1670-1920. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cole, Arthur Harrison. 1938a. Wholesale Commodity Prices in the United States, 1700-1861.
Cambridge, MA; Harvard University Press.
Cole, Arthur Harrison. 1938b. Wholesale Commodity Prices in the United States, 1700-1861: Statistical
Supplement, Actual Wholesale Prices of Various Commodities. Cambridge, MA; Harvard University
Press.
Davis, Lance and Jonathan Hughes, 1960. "A Dollar Sterling Exchange, 1803-1895," Economic History
Review, 13, pp. 52-78
Gray, Lewis Cecil. 1958. History of Agriculture in the Southern United States to 1860. Gloucester, MA:
Peter Smith. (reprint edition).

Mancall, Peter C., Joshua L. Rosenbloom, and Thomas Weiss. 2002. “Estimates of Deerskin
Exports from the Lower South.” Photocopy, University of Kansas.
McCusker, John J. How Much is That in Real Money? A Historical Price Index for Use as a Deflator of
Money Values in the Economy of the United States. Worcester, MA: American Antiquarian Society,
1992.
McCusker, John J. 1999? How Much is That in Real Money? A Historical Price Index for Use as a
Deflator of Money Values in the Economy of the United States. Worcester, MA: American Antiquarian
Society
McCusker, John J. and Russell R. Menard. The Economy of British America, 1607-1789. Chapel Hill
and London: University of North Carolina Press for the Institute of Early American History and Culture,
1985.
Merrens, Harry Roy, Colonial North Carolina in the Eighteenth Century, Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press.

18

Nash, R. C. 1992. “South Carolina and the Atlantic Economy in the Late Seventeenth and Eighteenth
Centuries.” Economic History Review 44, 4, pp. 677-702.
North, Douglass. 1961 The Economic Growth of the United States, 1790-1860, New York: Prentice Hall.
Pitkin, Timothy. 1816 [reprinted 1967] A Statistical View of the Commerce of the United States. New
York: Augustus M. Kelley Publishers
Report of the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States, vol. III, 1837, pp. 627-679.
Rossiter, W.A. ed. 1909 A Century of Population Growth, Baltimore: Genealogical Publishing Company.

Shepherd, James F. “Commodity Exports from the British North American Colonies to Overseas
Areas, 1768-1772: Magnitudes and Patterns of Trade,” Institute for Research in the Behavioral,
Economic, and Management Sciences, Purdue University, 1969, Paper No. 258.
Shepherd, James and Gary Walton, 1972. Shipping, Maritime Trade and the Economic Development of
Colonial North America. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Shepherd, James and Gary Walton, 1976. "Economic Change after the American Revolution: Pre- and
Post-War Comparisons of Maritime Shipping and Trade," Explorations in Economic History, 13 pp. 397422.
New American State Papers, Commerce and Navigation. - Various volumes
U.S. Congress, House Documents, "Domestic Exports, 1789-1883," 48th Congress, 1st Sess., 1884,
House Misc. Doc. No. 49, part 2 (compiled by G. H. Evans)
U.S. Labor Statistics Bureau, Wholesale Prices 1890-1923; Bulletin No. 367, Appendix F, Wholesale
Prices in the U.S., 1801-1840. 1925 (L 2.3: 367)

19

Table 1
Benchmark Estimates of the Real Value of Domestically-Produced Exports from the Lower South, in 1840 Prices
Population of the
Attributed to the Year of Production
Attributed to the Year in which Exported
Lower South
Annual Value Per Capita Three-Year
Per Capita
Annual Value of Per Capita Three-Year
Per Capita
(colonists and
Exports
Value Average Values
of Exports
Value Average Values
Value
Value
slaves)

Benchmark values
1710
1720
1730
1740
1750
1760
1770
1780
1790
1800

Annual Values
121,878
4.69
501,486 12.64
1,201,512 20.03
1,976,590 17.50
1,691,743 11.82
3,086,058 14.71
4,369,062 12.63
4,557,450
9,576,713

Average Annual Rates of Change
1720-30
9.13
1730-40
5.10
1740-50
-1.54
1750-60
6.20
1760-70
3.54
1790-1800
7.71
By Sub-Period
1720-40
7.10
1740-70
2.68
1770-1800
2.65
Over the Long Term
1720-1770
4.42
1720-1800
3.76

5.98
8.77

Three Year Average Values
199,509
7.47
540,879
13.60
1,104,445
18.31
1,823,638
16.48
1,758,314
12.21
2,652,693
12.61
4,367,879
12.71
3,867,239
5.03
9,510,205
8.70

Three Year Average Values
26,003
39,663
60,000
112,936
143,184
209,760
345,819

469,930
1,057,817
2,199,092
1,459,722
2,368,345
4,375,343

762,417
1,091,394

1,818,252
8,359,874

11.85
17.63
19.47
10.19
11.29
12.65
2.38
7.66

446,687
1,040,001
1,964,338
1,491,341
2,619,366
4,260,925
3,187,851
8,148,786

11.24
17.14
17.59
10.37
12.41
12.38
4.08
7.44

4.71
-1.34
-3.85
2.22
-1.51

7.40
5.14
-0.36
4.20
5.11

3.02
-1.05
-2.95
0.32
0.08

4.23
6.53
2.40
3.89
5.13

8.45
7.59
-4.02
4.96
6.33

4.05
1.00
-6.27
1.03
1.14

8.82
6.57
-2.72
5.79
4.99

4.31
0.26
-5.15
1.81
-0.02

3.91

9.42

5.6

3.65

16.481

12.38

9.84

6.2

1.64
-1.08

6.27
2.95
2.63

0.96
-0.86
-1.26

5.37
3.80
3.90

8.02
2.32
2.18

2.52
-1.43

7.69
2.61
2.18

2.26
-1.16
-1.68

0.00
-0.46

4.27
3.65

-0.14
-0.56

4.43
4.23

4.56
3.66

0.13
-0.54

4.61
3.70

0.19
-0.51

20

Table 2
Annual Estimates of the Real Value of Domestically-Produced Exports from the Lower South
(in 1840 prices)
Attributed to the Year of Production

Annual Value Per Capita Three-Year
Value Average Values
of Exports
1710
1711
1712
1713
1714
1715
1716
1717
1718
1719
1720
1721
1722
1723
1724
1725
1726
1727
1728
1729
1730
1731
1732
1733
1734
1735
1736
1737
1738
1739
1740
1741
1742
1743
1744
1745
1746
1747
1748
1749
1750
1751

121,878
277,140
304,382
266,991
260,987
307,976
314,515
338,527
368,645
469,930
501,486
651,222
656,350
658,381
675,854
761,553
780,681
748,107
860,672
1,057,817
1,201,512
1,054,007
1,356,092
978,667
1,300,780
1,379,433
1,224,502
1,025,509
1,717,334
2,199,092
1,976,590
1,295,233
1,982,678
2,141,345
1,713,774
1,610,289
1,607,178
1,561,891
1,322,560
1,459,722
1,691,743
2,123,479

4.69
10.25
10.82
9.12
8.55
9.68
9.48
9.77
10.18
12.40
12.64
15.77
15.26
14.69
14.47
15.65
15.39
14.15
15.61
18.39
20.03
16.52
20.00
13.49
16.76
16.69
13.84
10.92
17.16
20.70
17.50
11.22
16.81
17.76
13.90
12.76
12.45
11.81
9.77
10.52
11.82
14.28

199,509
234,467
282,838
277,453
278,651
294,492
320,339
340,562
392,367
446,687
540,879
603,020
655,318
663,528
698,596
739,363
763,447
796,487
888,866
1,040,001
1,104,445
1,203,870
1,129,588
1,211,846
1,219,627
1,301,571
1,209,814
1,322,448
1,647,311
1,964,338
1,823,638
1,751,501
1,806,419
1,945,933
1,821,803
1,643,747
1,593,119
1,497,210
1,448,058
1,491,341
1,758,314
1,695,478

Per Capita
Value
7.47
8.59
10.06
9.50
9.12
9.24
9.64
9.81
10.78
11.74
13.60
14.56
15.24
14.81
14.94
15.17
15.06
15.05
16.05
18.01
18.31
18.85
16.67
16.75
15.65
15.76
13.82
13.97
16.26
18.45
16.48
15.18
15.27
16.16
14.81
13.04
12.34
11.34
10.70
10.70
12.21
11.44

21

Population of the
Lower South
(colonists and Annual Value by
Year of Export
slaves)
26,003
27,037
28,130
29,286
30,512
31,812
33,193
34,661
36,223
37,887
39,663
41,304
43,021
44,818
46,698
48,667
50,728
52,887
55,148
57,517
60,000
63,788
67,818
72,562
77,632
82,632
88,453
93,949
100,099
106,233
112,936
115,389
117,935
120,576
123,319
126,167
129,126
132,201
135,399
138,724
143,184
148,665

121,878
277,140
304,382
266,991
260,987
307,976
314,515
338,527
368,645
469,930
501,486
651,222
656,350
658,381
675,854
761,553
780,681
748,107
860,672
1,057,817
1,201,512
1,054,007
1,356,092
978,667
1,300,780
1,379,433
1,224,502
1,025,509
1,717,334
2,199,092
1,976,590
1,295,233
1,982,678
2,141,345
1,713,774
1,610,289
1,607,178
1,561,891
1,322,560
1,459,722
1,691,743

1752
1753
1754
1755
1756
1757
1758
1759
1760
1761
1762
1763
1764
1765
1766
1767
1768
1769
1770
1771
1772
1773
1774
1775
1776
1789
1790
1791
1792
1793
1794
1795
1796
1797
1798
1799
1800
1801
1802

1,271,213
2,517,878
3,149,450
2,495,034
2,733,848
2,612,939
2,403,697
2,368,345
3,086,058
2,503,678
3,487,769
3,374,881
3,563,429
3,122,350
3,511,703
3,908,526
4,038,370
4,375,343
4,369,062
4,359,232
4,348,323
4,102,437

1,818,252
4,557,450
5,226,014
5,132,654
5,006,295
5,697,105
6,003,413
4,914,175
6,400,662
6,509,771
8,359,874
9,576,713
10,594,028
14,266,148

8.23
15.71
18.91
14.42
15.21
13.99
12.38
11.74
14.71
11.37
15.09
13.91
13.98
11.66
12.47
13.20
12.97
13.36
12.63
12.14
11.66
10.58
-

5.98
6.63
6.30
5.94
6.52
6.63
5.24
6.58
6.44
7.96
8.77
9.35
12.13

1,970,857
2,312,847
2,720,787
2,792,777
2,613,940
2,583,495
2,461,660
2,619,366
2,652,693
3,025,835
3,122,109
3,475,360
3,353,554
3,399,161
3,514,193
3,819,533
4,107,413
4,260,925
4,367,879
4,358,872
4,269,997
4,225,380

3,867,239
4,972,039
5,121,654
5,278,685
5,568,938
5,538,231
5,772,750
5,941,536
7,090,102
8,148,786
9,510,205
11,478,963
12,430,088

12.74
14.28
16.35
16.18
14.54
13.86
12.70
12.95
12.61
13.73
13.46
14.33
13.18
12.70
12.44
12.88
13.18
12.99
12.71
12.14
11.46
11.12

5.03
6.30
6.29
6.25
6.36
6.13
6.15
6.09
6.99
7.73
8.70
10.09
10.74

22

154,374
160,322
166,521
172,984
179,724
186,756
194,095
201,757
209,760
220,140
231,102
242,684
254,925
267,868
281,558
296,044
311,378
327,616
345,819
359,064
372,970
387,589
402,979
419,211
436,360

762,417
788,101
815,087
843,471
873,357
904,859
938,100
973,218
1,010,360
1,049,693
1,091,394
1,132,867
1,175,916

2,123,479
1,271,213
2,517,878
3,149,450
2,495,034
2,733,848
2,612,939
2,403,697
2,368,345
3,086,058
2,503,678
3,487,769
3,374,881
3,563,429
3,122,350
3,511,703
3,908,526
4,038,370
4,375,343
4,369,062
4,359,232
4,348,323
4,102,437

1,818,252
4,557,450
5,226,014
5,132,654
5,006,295
5,697,105
6,003,413
4,914,175
6,400,662
6,509,771
8,359,874
9,576,713
10,594,028

Notes to Tables 1 and 2:
The derivation of the export series is explained in the accompanying text and tables.
The population of the Lower South includes that in Georgia, North Carolina, South Carolina and
Tennessee. The benchmark figures for the free and slave population for 1700 to 1780 are from Historical
Statistics (Series Z:1-19). The Black population includes both slaves and free negroes. John McCusker
and Russell Menard made slight revisions to the figures for 1710, 1720 and 1740 (Table 8.1, p. 173), but
did not report the white and black populations separately for each colony. Their figures, as well as those
shown in Historical Statistics, differ slightly from the figures reported by Wood for some of these years.
The 1790 figures are from the U.S. Census of 1800, as shown in Rossiter 1909. The figures were
taken from an electronic file provided by Michael Haines. The 1800 white and slave population figures
are those underlying Weiss's (1992) labor force estimates, and came originally from the U.S. Census of
1800.

23

Table 3
Prices of the Major Export Items of the Lower South at Selected Dates
1767-71 Avg. Price
Export

Units

Pounds
Sterling

US
dollars

Rice

per lb.

0.004

$ 0.02

Indigo

per lb.

0.211

$ 0.94

Naval Stores

per bbl

0.453

Deerskins

per lb

Cotton

1791
Implicit
Export
Prices
$

0.027

1791

1800

1840

Average
Price for
1839-41

Prices from A.H. Cole
$ 0.03

$ 0.036

$ 0.033

$ 0.037

$ 1.15

$ 1.05

$ 0.580

$ 1.530

$ 1.443

$ 2.01

$ 2.00

$ 1.92

$ 2.79

$ 2.12

$ 2.12

0.098

$ 0.44

$ 0.50

$ 0.50

$ 0.41

$ 0.47

$ 0.46

per lb.

0.043

$ 0.19

$ 0.25

$ 0.44

$ 0.27

$ 0.08

$ 0.10

Boards

per M feet

2.928

$ 13.00

$ 6.00

$13.32

$11.14

$29.17

$ 29.42

Staves

per M

3.240

$ 14.39

$12.72

$14.24

$22.76

$21.09

$ 21.03

Tobacco

per cwt

0.913

$ 4.06

$ 3.67

$ 3.47

$ 4.729

$ 9.50

$ 9.58

Notes and source to Table 3:
1767-71: Shepherd and Walton, (1972) Appendix IV, Tables 2 to 7. The Shepherd-Walton figures
pertain to 1768-72. We have shifted the dating back a year to better represent the year in which the
exports were produced.
1791 Implicit Export Price: New American State Papers, vol. 2, 200-02. and U.S. Congress, (1884)
"Domestic Exports," Table 2.
1791 and 1800: Arthur H. Cole, 1938, Statistical Supplement. The prices for rice, indigo and cotton are 3
year averages.
1840: All prices except those for indigo and deerskins are from Arthur H. Cole, 1938, Statistical
Supplement. The prices of rice, naval stores, boards, staves and headings, and tobacco are the average of
the monthly prices reported for the year 1840. The cotton price is the average for 1839-41, which was
higher than the price for 1840. For indigo we used the average value per pound for indigo exports in
1840 (U.S. Congress, 1884, p. 37) rather than the price reported by Cole which referred to the price of
Venezuelan indigo in New Orleans. The price of deerskins for 1840 was derived from data in Anne
Bezanson, Robert Gray, and Miriam Hussey, (1937) Wholesale Prices in Philadelphia, 1784-1861.
Philadelphia: U. of Pennsylvania Press. We extrapolated the 1791 implicit export price to other years
based on the change in their index of prices in Philadelphia.

24

Table 4
Alternative Estimates of Exports in Constant Prices by Year of Production, 1767-1771

Current Price Value of Exports
Estimates Based on
in Pounds Sterling
Prices of 1840
8 Exports'
Value of 8
Share of
Major Total value
Total value of
Total
Value of 8
Exports of Exports
Exports
Exports Major Exports
col. 2

col. 3

col. 4

col. 5

Current Price
Value of
Exports in
Dollars

Deflated by David-SolarMcCusker Price Index
(3 year average values)
Index
Value

457,563
465,250
450,920
511,770
688,812

538,000
551,000
534,000
593,000
800,000

85.0%
84.4%
84.4%
86.3%
86.1%

col. 6

col. 7

$ 3,324,158
$ 3,409,894
$ 3,694,625
$ 3,770,582
$ 3,753,364

$
$
$
$
$

3,908,526
4,038,370
4,375,343
4,369,062
4,359,232

$ 2,388,720
$ 2,446,440
$ 2,370,960
$ 2,632,920
$ 3,552,000

89.10
90.71
92.63
97.76
98.08

Average: 1767-71

514,863

603,200

85.4%

$ 3,590,525

$

4,210,107

$ 2,678,208

93.7

2,850,530

170.0

1,566,934

51%

49%

1%

13%

49%

10%

35%

20%

24%

12%

col. 8

Deflated by Cole's Price
Index
(3 year average values)
Index
Value

1767
1768
1769
1770
1771

Percentage
Increase 1767-71

col. 1

Estimates Obtained by Deflation

$
$
$
$
$

2,680,866
2,697,135
2,559,652
2,693,348
3,621,647

col. 9

159.1
158.6
161.7
179.2
191.4

col. 10

$
$
$
$
$

1,501,494
1,542,918
1,465,898
1,468,928
1,855,433

Notes and source to Table 4:
Cols. 1 and 2: Shepherd and Walton, 1972, Appendix IV, Tables 2-6; Historical Statistics, Series E92 and 95.
Col. 3 equals col. 1 divided by col. 2
Col. 4: equals the quantities of the eight most important regional exports: rice, indigo, naval stores, deerskins, cotton, boards, staves and headings, and
tobacco valued in prices of 1840. The quantities are from Shepherd and Walton (1972, Appendix IV, Tables 2-6); the prices are shown in Table 3 above.
Col. 5: The total value of exports in 1840 prices equals those in col. 4 divided by the shares shown in col. 3.
Col. 6: The current price value of all exports in dollars equals the Pound Sterling values in col. 2 converted at the official exchange rate of $4.44
established by the revenue act of July 31, 1789 (Davis and Hughes, 1960, p. 54)
Col. 7: This is a composite index constructed by McCusker, (1999) "How Much is That in Real Money," Table A-1. McCusker extended the BradyDavid-Solar Consumer Price Index (backward to 1720 based on Bezanson's index of Philadelphia commodity prices. Whereas the original index used 1860 as
the base year, we have shifted the index to a base year of 1840. We have used three year average valuea of the index for deflation.
Col. 9: This is an index of Charleston's export prices, prepared by George Rogers Taylor (Historical Statistics, Series E: 92-95). We have used three
year average values of the index for deflation.
The figures in cols. 8 and 10 were obtained by deflating the figures in col. 6 by the price indices in cols. 7 and 9 respectively..

25

Table 5
Quantities of Major Exports from the Lower South, 1712-1770
Rice
Naval Stores Deerskins
Indigo
lbs
Barrels
lbs.
lbs
Three Year Average Benchmark values
9,506
1712
3,168,625
33,505
1720
8,060,551
30,564
1730
19,131,450
33,148
1740
34,917,672
1747
25,797,547
66,594
1750
34,123,207
46,407
1760
47,080,950
81,500
1770
78,227,450

179,350
120,721
229,244
219,575
352,526
285,387
242,874
375,553

Average Rates of Change
1712-47
6.17
1747-70
4.94
1712-1770
5.68

4.34
2.92
3.77

1.95
0.28
1.28

1720-40
1740-70
1720-1770

7.61
2.73
4.65

-0.05
3.04
1.79

3.04
1.81
2.30

1720-30
1730-40
1740-50
1750-60
1760-70

9.03
6.20
-0.23
3.27
5.21

-0.91
0.82
7.23
-3.55
5.79

6.62
-0.43
2.66
-1.60
4.45

112,933
28,933
389,767
595,300

7.49

29.70
4.33

Notes and Sources to Table 5
Naval Stores: The total is the sum of estimates of exports from South Carolina and from North Carolina.
The South Carolina exports for 1712-1724 are from Clowse, 1981, p.65. We estimated the values for
1713-16 by interpolating between the reported values for 1712 and 1717. For 1724-1777 Census Bureau
(1975, series Z 500, 501, 503). The reported data for some years covered only a few months. We have
inflated each of these to full years assuming that the exports in each month were proportionate to the
months for which data are available.
The exports of naval stores from North Carolina were reported for only a few selected dates.
Shepherd and Walton provide figures of exports to overseas destinations for 1768-1772, all of which went
to Great Britain. Exports of naval stores were also available for 1720 (Colonial Records of North
Carolina, vol. II, p. 396 as reported in Lewis Gray, 1958. History of Agriculture in the Southern United
States to 1860. Gloucester, MA: Peter Smith. (reprint edition). p. and for 1752 (Edmund and William
Burke, An Account of the European Settlements in America, 6th ed., printed for J. Dodsley, 1777, vol. 2, p.
261. As described in the accompanying text, we interpolated between 1720 and 1752, and also between
1752 and 1770, to obtain annual figures for other years. We then shifted these export estimates backward
a year to attribute them to the year of production, and combined them with the exports from Charleston
(displaced to the year of production) to arrive at the total for the Lower South.
Rice: 1710-1773, U.S. Census Bureau (1975, series Z 481), which shows total exports from ports in
South Carolina and Georgia; after 1782, export data are for Charleston only, and we inflated these using
the ratio of South Carolina and Georgia to Charleston exports that prevailed from 1768 to 1773 (1.23) to
inflate Charleston exports to their regional level. Data for 1782-1788 are from U.S. Census Bureau

26

(1975, series Z 483). The reported data for 1713 to 1774 and 1783-89 were shifted back a year to
represent the crop year (i.e. the year of production), a method espoused by Clowse, 1981, pp. 57-58,
Table B-21.
Indigo: 1746-1787, U.S. Census Bureau (1975, series Z 433 and Z 434). For 1753-1770 data for Georgia
are available. For the remaining years the data are for South Carolina alone. For 1789-1800 data are
from Gray (1958, p. 1024). The reported data for all years were shifted back a year to reflect the crop
year. Gray reports quantities in chests or casks, both of which were assumed to weigh 350 pounds.
Deerskin: Exports were compiled by us. See Mancall, Rosenbloom, and Weiss, 2002 "Estimates of
Deerskin Exports from the Lower South, 1700-1800," mimeo University of Kansas.

27

Table 6
Export Shares at Various Dates and Valued in Different Prices
Naval
Stores
Rice
Deerskins
Indigo

Cotton

Shares in 1747-48
valued in SC Currency

61.1%

2.4%

24.9%

11.6%

0.0%

valued in 1767-71 prices

63.3%

22.5%

6.6%

7.6%

0.02%

in 1791 prices

65.3%

21.1%

6.2%

7.4%

0.02%

in 1840 prices

74.7%

5.5%

2.9%

16.9%

0.01%

valued in 1767-71 prices

59.3%

33.7%

4.4%

1.6%

1.1%

in 1791 prices

61.3%

31.9%

4.1%

1.5%

1.2%

in 1840 prices

69.9%

3.6%

0.6%

25.5%

0.4%

Average Shares 1767-71

Average Share 1791-92

Average Share in 1800 valued in 1840 prices
3-year avg.: 1799-1801

47.5%

3.0%

1.6%

0.2%

47.7%

5-year avg.: 1798-1802

45.4%

2.7%

1.5%

0.3%

50.0%

3.5%

1.1%

14.0%

16.8%

Average Share, 1790-1800
in 1840 prices

64.6%

Shares Implicit in the Series based on 1840 prices
1712

50.2%

9.6%

40.3%

1720

67.6%

18.5%

13.9%

1730

78.6%

8.2%

13.2%

1740

86.1%

5.9%

8.0%

1747

69.8%

7.4%

13.4%

1750

78.6%

9.6%

9.4%

2.3%

1760

71.6%

4.6%

5.4%

18.5%

1770

73.2%

4.9%

4.9%

17.0%

9.5%

Shares with cotton included
1770

73.3%

4.9%

4.9%

16.9%

0.01%

1790

68.4%

5.3%

1.6%

24.1%

0.59%

1800
Average Share,
1712-73

41.2%

2.2%

1.9%

0.1%

54.60%

69.7%

11.8%

12.1%

14.9%

Notes and Sources for Table 6:
The 1747-48 figures are from Coclanis, 1989, p. 81. Those for 1767-71 are from Shepherd and Walton,
1972, Appendix IV, Tables 2-6. The 1791-92 current price figures for the region equal the quantities (New
American State Papers, Commerce and Navigation, vol. 1, pp. 163ff) times prices (Table 3 above). The values in
1840 prices were calculated by weighting the quantities of each export by prices shown in Table 3. See Tables 4
and 8 for the sources of the quantity data.

28

Table 7
Alternative Estimates of Volume Indexes of Exports from the Lower South, 1712-1770
Nash's
Based on Index for Extended Based on 1767-71 shares Based on 1767-71 shares
1840 Prices
in current price
in 1840 prices
Nash Index
SC
With
With
reweighting
reweighting
Benchmark values: Three Year Averages
1712
0.065
0.089
0.067
0.071
0.045
0.052
1720
0.124
100.1
0.145
0.163
0.173
0.102
0.119
1730
0.253
177.6
0.282
0.258
0.273
0.208
0.244
1740
0.417
322.8
0.441
0.385
0.408
0.354
0.413
1747
0.343
0.391
0.375
0.375
0.326
0.326
1750
0.402
351.6
0.395
0.476
0.476
0.381
0.381
1760
0.607
659.0
0.660
0.581
0.581
0.619
0.619
1770
0.993
960.0
1.052
0.963
0.963
1.010
1.010

Based on
1747-48
shares

0.138
0.150
0.306
0.429
0.433
0.442
0.602
0.971

Average Rates of Change Between Benchmark Values
1712-1747
1747-70
1712-1770

4.88
4.73
4.82

6.48

4.32
4.40
4.35

5.04
4.18
4.70

4.87
4.18
4.60

5.85
5.04
5.53

5.38
5.04
5.25

3.31
3.58
3.42

1720-40
1740-70
1720-1770

6.27
2.93
4.25

6.03
3.70
4.62

5.73
2.94
4.05

4.39
3.10
3.62

4.39
2.90
3.50

6.43
3.56
4.70

6.43
3.02
4.37

5.40
2.76
3.81

1720-30
1730-40
1740-50
1750-60
1760-70

7.40
5.14
-0.36
4.20
5.04

5.90
6.16
0.86
6.48
3.83

6.88
4.59
-1.11
5.28
4.77

4.69
4.09
2.14
2.01
5.19

4.69
4.09
1.55
2.01
5.19

7.43
5.43
0.76
4.97
5.02

7.43
5.43
-0.80
4.97
5.02

7.40
3.44
0.29
3.13
4.91

29

Notes and Sources to Table 7:
A
the rate of change shown for the Nash Index for 1712-47 is for the period 1710-50.
See the text for a discussion of how the various indices were calculated. We have used 1712 as the terminal date for the extrapolated volume
index series because the series on naval stores exports terminates in 1712. We could extend the index to 1710 based on the export of only rice and
deerskins, but with the exclusion of naval stores or any substitute export, the growth in the volume index between 1710 and 1712 would be greatly
overstated.

30

Table 8
Real Value of Exports Estimated by Deflating Current Price Values, Selected Dates
Value of
Exports in
Current
Prices

Value of
Exports in
Current
Prices

£ Sterling
US$s
Three Year Average Benchmark values
1712
24,905
110,578
1747
161,365
716,461
1770
559,333
2,483,440
Average Rates of Change
1712-47
5.48
1747-70
5.55
1712-1770
5.51

5.48
5.55
5.51

Price of
Rice
(cents per
lb.)

1.04
1.73

2.26

Price Deflators
David-SolarMcCusker
Cole's
Index
Export
(1840=100)
Price Index

Real Value of Exports
Deflated by
Deflated
David-SolarDeflated
by Price of
McCusker
by Cole's
Rice
Index
Index

Based on our
Volume Index
(3 yr. avg.)

3 Yr. Avg..

(Prices of 1790)

1840 prices

74.0
69.9
92.6

-0.16
1.23
0.39

107.1
161.7

1,693,918
3,512,900

1.81

3.22

157,499
1,080,328
2,826,723

5.66
4.27
5.10

762,619
1,750,848

3.68

282,838
1,497,210
4,367,879

4.88
4.77
4.83

___________________________________________________________________________
Notes and Source to Table 8:
The value of exports in dollars equals the Sterling values converted at $4.44 per £.
The value of exports in Sterling for 1701 is the three year average for 1700-02 taken from the 'official series' (Historical Statistics, Series
Z: 223 That series was valued in prices of 1700-02, so the values for these particular years should thus be close to current price values.
The value of exports in Sterling for 1747 is from Coclanis, 1989, p. 107.
The prices of rice are from Cole (1938a, p. 154) converted at the exchange rate of $4.44 per £
The composite index was constructed by McCusker, (1999) "How Much is That in Real Money," Table A-1. McCusker extended the
Brady-David-Solar Consumer Price Index (backward to 1720 based on Bezanson's index of Philadelphia commodity prices. Whereas the original
index used 1860 as the base year, we have shifted the index to a base year of 1840. We have used three-year average values of the index for
deflation.
Cole's Export Price Index is that for Charleston's export prices, prepared by George Rogers Taylor (Historical Statistics, Series E: 92-95).
We have used three-year average values of the index for deflation

31

Table 9
Estimate of the Value of the Major Exports from the Lower South
in Constant Prices in 1767-71 and 1790-92.
-------------Major Export Items -----------Naval
Rice
Indigo
Stores
Deerskins Cotton
Boards
Real Exports valued in prices of 1768-72 in Pounds Sterling
1767-71 Avg.

308,228

109,330

31,878

37,077

87

17,140

Value of Real
Staves and
Index of
Sum of
Exports in
Headings Tobacco Eight Items Real Exports Prices of 1840
1768-72 = 100
8,733

10,621

523,114

100

4,210,107

1790

239,593

116,008

16,787

4,563

8,202

39,104

10,722

130,625

566,273

108

4,557,450

1791

269,454

157,936

21,344

13,696

5,899

37,592

11,892

130,680

649,343

124

5,226,014

1792

280,972

175,524

16,854

11,355

20,541

46,981

11,542

73,301

637,743

122

5,132,654

1790-92 Avg.

263,339

149,823

18,328

9,871

11,547

41,226

11,385

111,535

617,786

118

4,972,039

502

77,975

38,373

35,519

2,721,069

100

4,210,107

Real Exports valued in prices of 1791
1767-71 Avg.

1,676,608

543,384

164,607

190,312

1790

1,303,270

576,573

86,682

23,419

47,250

177,895

47,112

436,856

2,699,057

99

4,176,049

1791

1,465,695

784,964

110,211

70,297

33,983

171,017

52,255

437,039

3,125,459

115

4,835,790

1792

1,528,348

872,377

87,030

58,285

118,340

213,730

50,716

245,144

3,173,969

117

4,910,845

1790-92 Avg.

1,432,438

744,638

94,641

50,667

66,524

187,547

50,028

373,013

2,999,495

110

4,640,895

Percentage Increase between 1767-71 and 1790
1767-71 prices

-22%

6%

-47%

-88%

9311%

128%

23%

1130%

8%

8%

8%

1791 prices

-22%

6%

-47%

-88%

9311%

128%

23%

1130%

-1%

-1%

-1%

Percentage Increase between 1767-71 and 1790-92 avg.
1768-72 prices

-15%

37%

-43%

-73%

13151%

141%

30%

950%

18%

18%

18%

1791 prices

-15%

37%

-43%

-73%

13151%

141%

30%

950%

10%

10%

10%

32

Notes and Sources to Table 9:
The values of the individual exports are the products of the quantities (Tables 8 below and Shepherd and Walton, (1972) Appendix IV, Tables
2 to 7) times the prices of 1768-72 or 1791 (Table 3 above).
The Index of Real Exports is the index of the sum of the 8 items with 1767-71 set as the bas year.
The value of exports in 1840 prices for 1767-71 comes from Table 4. The value in other years equals that base year value times the index for
each year. The sum of the eight items in Pounds Sterling for 1767-71 shown in this table differs slightly from the figure shown in Table 4 because
the latter is the average of the five annual totals.

33

Table 10 A
Estimate of the Value of the Major Exports from the Lower South in Current Prices, 1767-71 and 1789-1803
-------------- Major Export Items ------------

1767-71 Avg.

Rice

Indigo

Naval
Stores

Deerskins

Cotton

Boards

Staves and
Headings

1,368,532

485,424

141,540

164,624

387

76,102

38,775

Total Exports
from the Lower Value of
Sum of South, incl. Re- Exports Not Share Not
Tobacco Eight Items
Identified Identified
exports

47,156

2,322,628

2,678,208

355,580

13%

1789

143,341

97,104

80,542

14,068

3,000

150,486

77,928

643,844

1,210,314

NA

1790

1,478,710

581,911

153,360

24,574

47,250

163,071

44,321

497,653

2,990,851

3,582,928

592,077

17%

1791

1,465,695

784,964

110,211

70,297

33,983

171,017

52,255

437,039

3,125,459

3,709,066

583,607

16%

1792

1,650,322

1,008,080

78,619

58,285

156,178

148,912

54,484

222,697

3,377,576

3,415,256

37,680

1%

1793

1,630,144

537,078

62,808

60,840

496,946

104,426

45,414

367,595

3,305,251

4,078,236

772,985

19%

1794

1,222,108

510,466

113,200

60,953

1,840,815

143,782

63,155

333,841

4,288,320

4,453,327

165,007

4%

1795

1,989,413

378,244

120,844

48,169

3,196,775

220,266

87,389

455,356

6,496,456

7,186,639

690,183

10%

1796

2,274,874

97,086

118,143

50,390

1,096,171

119,406

98,597

477,632

4,332,299

9,241,694

4,909,395

53%

1797

1,192,194

59,393

115,972

99,936

2,102,677

148,797

86,877

647,835

4,453,680

7,690,326

3,236,646

42%

1798

840,803

15,414

133,557

129,306

2,499,672

252,592

91,951

1,134,909

5,098,204

8,493,837

3,395,633

40%

1799

888,320

3,953

75,575

49,361

4,755,000

240,179

51,530

791,125

6,855,042

10,611,695

3,756,653

35%

1800

1,887,395

2,013

118,597

55,462

4,425,813

194,419

101,379

657,320

7,442,398

13,607,577

6,165,179

45%

1801

2,033,579

3,230

94,803

62,614

5,811,731

219,520

79,937

521,437

8,826,851

16,964,298

8,137,447

48%

1802

1,645,115

0

284,348

106,996

5,822,089

213,718

83,834

560,261

8,716,361

13,153,706

4,437,345

34%

1803

2,150,894

240

222,094

151,382

5,006,418

195,203

77,335

656,039

8,459,604

11,134,597

2,674,993

24%

(34,763)

30,888

4,378,563

31,348

57,058

-23%

126%

9267%

19%

129%

Changes between 1790 and 1800
Values

408,685

Percentage

28%

(579,899)
-100%

159,667
32%

4,451,547
149%

10,024,649
280%

5,573,102
941%

Notes and Sources to Table 10A
The values of the individual exports equal the product of the quantities and prices shown in Table 10B. Total exports from the Lower South including reexports are from Pitkin, (1816, reprinted 1967) Table I, pp. 51-54. The value of exports not identified equals the total minus the sum of the 8 items.

34

Table 10 B
Quantities and Prices of the Major Exports from the Lower South, 1767-71 and 1789 to 1803
Rice

Naval
Stores

Indigo

Deerskins

Cotton

Staves and
Headings

Boards

Tobacco

Quantities of Exports
1767-71
Average.

72,545,556

543,928

85,554

379,849

2,008

5,854

2,695

11,628

1789

5,923,180

101,150

48,229

26,758

12,000

11,392

4,361

158,582

1790

56,391,495

577,150

45,053

46,742

189,000

13,356

3,309

143,010

1791

63,419,490

785,750

57,282

140,307

135,930

12,839

3,670

143,070

1792

66,130,427

873,250

45,234

116,332

473,360

16,046

3,562

80,251

1793

60,826,279

636,650

30,700

121,433

1,529,910

8,567

3,234

102,847

1794

45,096,248

753,900

52,274

124,840

5,899,440

9,927

3,595

81,728

1795

55,415,402

425,950

54,434

106,763

5,648,975

13,128

4,144

92,394

1796

54,684,465

171,500

45,485

97,978

3,447,080

10,532

4,441

77,868

1797

52,289,190

96,121

34,481

168,869

8,377,200

12,770

3,363

91,791

1798

48,045,872

19,838

46,277

305,626

8,388,160

13,804

4,074

128,609

1799

45,554,863

6,892

38,358

152,033

15,388,350

16,772

2,321

105,329

1800

49,023,258

3,400

42,483

136,099

17,774,350

17,455

4,455

138,901

1801

41,249,072

4,079

32,475

150,549

22,880,832

19,709

3,571

104,045

1802

42,290,867

0

59,344

253,606

33,460,284

19,306

4,228

115,518

1803

40,506,484

221

57,799

358,813

30,341,928

18,520

4,147

111,571

Current Prices of Exports
1767-71:

0.0042

£ Sterling
1767-71:
US Dollars. $

0.019

0.2010
$

0.892

0.3726
$

1.654

0.0976
$

0.433

$

0.0434

2.9279

0.193

$ 13.00

3.2402
$

14.39

0.9134
$

4.06

1789

$

0.024

$

0.960

$

1.670

$

0.53

$

0.250

$ 13.210

$ 17.870

$

4.060

1790

$

0.026

$

1.01

$

3.40

$

0.53

$

0.250

$ 12.21

$

$

3.48

13.39

1791

$

0.023

$

1.00

$

1.92

$

0.50

$

0.250

$ 13.32

$

14.24

$

3.05

1792

$

0.025

$

1.15

$

1.74

$

0.50

$

0.330

$

$

15.30

$

2.78

9.28

1793

$

0.027

$

0.84

$

2.05

$

0.50

$

0.325

$ 12.19

$

14.04

$

3.57

1794

$

0.027

$

0.68

$

2.17

$

0.49

$

0.312

$ 14.48

$

17.57

$

4.08

1795

$

0.036

$

0.89

$

2.22

$

0.45

$

0.566

$ 16.78

$

21.09

$

4.93

1796

$

0.042

$

0.57

$

2.60

$

0.51

$

0.318

$ 11.34

$

22.20

$

6.13

1797

$

0.023

$

0.62

$

3.36

$

0.59

$

0.251

$ 11.65

$

25.83

$

7.06

1798

$

0.018

$

0.78

$

2.89

$

0.42

$

0.298

$ 18.30

$

22.57

$

8.82

1799

$

0.020

$

0.57

$

1.97

$

0.32

$

0.309

$ 14.32

$

22.20

$

7.51

1800

$

0.039

$

0.59

$

2.79

$

0.41

$

0.249

$ 11.14

$

22.76

$

4.73

1801

$

0.049

$

0.79

$

2.92

$

0.42

$

0.254

$ 11.14

$

22.39

$

5.01

1802

$

0.039

$

0.82

$

4.79

$

0.42

$

0.174

$

11.07

$

19.83

$

4.85

1803

$

0.053

$

1.09

$

3.84

$

0.42

$

0.165

$ 10.54

$

18.65

$

5.88

35

Notes and Sources to Table 10 B:
The data for 1767-71, both price and quantity, are the values reported by Shepherd and Walton for
1768-72. (1972, Appendix IV, Tables 2 to 7). The reported data were shifted back a year to reflect the
crop year. The Sterling values were converted at $4.44 per pound Sterling.
Rice: For 1789-1800 we used quantity data from Gray (1958, vol. 2, pp. 1020-23, Table 37). For 1801 to
1803 we extrapolated the 1800 figure forward on the basis of the change in rice exports for the U.S. taken
from Holmes, 1912, pp. 5-7. The Lower South's share of U.S. exports implicit in this calculation is 86
percent, about equal to the 87.5 percent share for 1791-92 based on tierces exported (New American State
Papers, Commerce and Navigation, vol. 1 pp. 163ff.
Indigo:. 1789-1800, from Gray (1958, p. 1024). Gray reports quantities in chests or casks, both of which
were assumed to amount to 350 pounds.
Deerskin: Exports were compiled by us. See Mancall, Rosenbloom, and Weiss, 2002 "Estimates of
Deerskin Exports from the Lower South, 1700-1800," mimeo University of Kansas.
Cotton: Bruchey (1967, Table 3-A). Lower South exports were estimated based on total US exports and
the share of the Lower South in total US production. According to Bruchey, in 1791 the Lower South
accounted for 100 percent of cotton production. By 1801 this figure had fallen to 85 percent. We
interpolated linearly between these figures to get the shares for other years.
Naval Stores, Boards, Staves and Headings and Tobacco: The quantity figures shown as being
produced in 1790 and 1791 are the export figures for 1791 and 1792 (New American State Papers,
Commerce and Navigation, vol. 1, pp. 163ff). The figures for other years were estimated based on
changes in U.S. exports of each item. The U.S. figures are from U.S Congress, 1884, Table NO. 2, pp.
16-23.
The quantities reported in the sources were shifted back one year to better represent the crop or
production year. This is a method espoused by Clowse, 1981, pp. 57-58, Table B-21.
The price data are from Cole, 1938, except for deerskin prices. In any year for which Cole did not
report a price for Charleston, we estimated a price by extrapolating the nearest Charleston price by the
change in the Philadelphia price for that same export item. The deerskin price for 1791 is the price
implicit in the exports of deerskins for that year (New American State Papers, vol. 2, p. ). The deerskin
price in other years was estimated by extrapolating the 1791 figure on the change in the Bezanson price
index for deerskins in Philadelphia. (Bezanson, et al, 1937).

36

Table 11

Real Value of Exports from the Lower South, 1790-1800
Estimated by Deflating the Current Price Values
Real Value of Exports
Deflated by

------ Price Deflator---------Dollar Value of David-SolarCole's
North's
McCusker Export Price Export Price
Exports in
Current Prices Price Index
Index
Index
(1840=100)
(1790=100)

Cole's
David-SolarNorth's
McCusker Export Price Export Price
Price Index
Index
Index
(prices of 1840)
(1790 prices)

Three Year Average Benchmark values
1790

3,582,928

105.8

189.3

100.0

3,386,510

1,892,725

3,582,928

1800

10,255,397

145.2

171.6

145.9

7,062,946

5,976,339

7,029,059

3.22

-0.98

3.85

7.63

Average Rates of Change
1790-1800

11.09

12.18

6.97

__________________________________________________________________________________

Notes and Sources for Table 11:

See text for a discussion of how the current dollar value of exports produced in the region were obtained.
The David-Solar-McCusker Price Index was constructed by McCusker, (1999) "How Much is That in Real
Money," Table A-1. McCusker extended the Brady-David-Solar Consumer Price Index backward to 1720 based on
Bezanson's index of Philadelphia commodity prices. Whereas the original index used 1860 as the base year, we
have shifted the index to a base year of 1840.
Cole's Export Price Index is that for Charleston's export prices, prepared by George Rogers Taylor (Historical
Statistics, Series E: 92-95).
North's Export Price Index taken from North (1961, Table C-III, p. 221).

37

Table 12
Estimate of the Value of the Major Exports from the Lower South in Constant Prices, 1789-1801

Rice

Naval
Stores

Indigo

Deerskins

Cotton

Boards

Staves and
Headings

Total Exports, Per Capita
Value of
Index of Real Excl. Reexports,
Exports in
Sum of Eight Exports:
Tobacco
Items
1791=100 in 1840 Prices 1840 prices

Estimates Using Prices of 1791
1789

136,891

101,049

92,792

13,406

3,000

151,740

62,088

484,425

1,045,391

33

1,747,975

$

2.39

1790

1,303,270

576,573

86,682

23,419

47,250

177,895

47,112

436,856

2,699,057

86

4,557,450

$

5.98

1791

1,465,695

784,964

110,211

70,297

33,983

171,017

52,255

437,039

3,125,459

100

5,226,014

$

6.63

1792

1,528,348

872,377

87,030

58,285

118,340

213,730

50,716

245,144

3,173,969

102

5,132,654

$

6.30

1793

1,405,763

636,013

59,067

60,840

382,478

114,110

46,052

314,168

3,018,491

97

5,047,154

$

5.98

1794

1,042,224

753,146

100,576

62,547

1,474,860

132,225

51,191

249,655

3,866,424

124

6,464,965

$

7.40

1795

1,280,712

425,524

104,731

53,491

1,412,244

174,860

58,995

282,239

3,792,796

121

6,341,853

$

7.01

1796

1,263,819

171,329

87,513

49,089

861,770

140,291

63,234

237,865

2,874,910

92

4,807,075

$

5.12

1797

1,208,461

96,025

66,342

84,607

2,094,300

170,098

47,882

280,395

4,048,110

130

6,768,758

$

6.95

1798

1,110,393

19,818

89,038

153,125

2,097,040

183,871

58,004

392,864

4,104,154

131

6,862,467

$

6.79

1799

1,052,824

6,885

73,801

76,172

3,847,088

223,399

33,048

321,750

5,634,966

180

9,422,106

$

8.98

1800

1,132,982

3,397

81,737

68,189

4,443,588

232,504

63,432

424,303

6,450,130

206

10,785,125

$

9.88

1801

953,312

4,075

62,481

75,428

5,720,208

262,522

50,843

317,828

7,446,697

238

12,451,463

$

10.97

1802

977,389

0

114,178

127,062

8,365,071

257,157

60,191

352,874

10,253,923

328

17,145,365

$

14.54

1803

936,150

221

111,205

179,772

7,585,482

246,689

59,038

340,819

9,459,376

303

15,816,820

$

12.90

38

Table 12 continued

Rice

Naval
Stores

Indigo

Deerskins

Cotton

Total Exports Per Capita
Index of Real incl. ReValue of
Sum of
Staves and
Exports:
exports, in
Exports in
Headings Tobacco Eight Items 1791=100 1840 Prices 1840 prices

Boards

Estimates Using Prices of 1800
1789

228,042

59,881

134,638

10,904

2,988

126,884

99,231

750,459

1,413,027

35

1,818,252

$

2.49

1790

2,171,073

341,673

125,772

19,048

47,061

148,755

75,296

676,766

3,605,444

89

4,557,450

$

5.98

1791

2,441,650

465,164

159,911

57,176

33,847

143,003

83,515

677,050

4,061,318

100

5,226,014

$

6.63

1792

2,546,021

516,964

126,277

47,406

117,867

178,720

81,057

379,772

3,994,083

98

5,132,654

$

6.30

1793

2,341,812

376,897

85,704

49,485

380,948

95,418

73,601

486,702

3,890,567

96

5,006,295

$

5.93

1794

1,736,206

446,309

145,931

50,873

1,468,961

110,566

81,814

386,759

4,427,420

109

5,697,105

$

6.52

1795

2,133,493

252,162

151,961

43,507

1,406,595

146,217

94,288

437,238

4,665,462

115

6,003,413

$

6.63

1796

2,105,352

101,528

126,979

39,927

858,323

117,311

101,062

368,495

3,818,977

94

4,914,175

$

5.24

1797

2,013,134

56,904

96,260

68,816

2,085,923

142,235

76,526

434,381

4,974,178

122

6,400,662

$

6.58

1798

1,849,766

11,744

129,191

124,546

2,088,652

153,752

92,705

608,616

5,058,970

125

6,509,771

$

6.44

1799

1,753,862

4,080

107,082

61,955

3,831,699

186,806

52,818

498,448

6,496,750

160

8,359,874

$

7.96

1800

1,887,395

2,013

118,597

55,462

4,425,813

194,419

101,379

657,320

7,442,398

183

9,576,713

$

8.77

1801

1,588,089

2,415

90,658

61,350

5,697,327

219,520

81,258

492,372

8,232,989

203

10,594,028

$

9.34

1802

1,628,198

0

165,668

103,347

8,331,611

215,033

96,199

546,664

11,086,722

273

14,266,148

$

12.09

1803

1,559,500

131

161,354

146,220

7,555,140

206,280

94,357

527,988

10,250,970

252

13,190,720

$

10.76

Average Annual Rate of Change, 1790-1800
Using Prices of
1791

-1.39

-40.16

-0.59

11.28

57.52

2.71

3.02

-0.29

9.10

9.10

9.00

5.16

Using Prices of
1800

-1.39

-40.16

-0.59

11.28

57.52

2.71

3.02

-0.29

7.52

7.52

7.71

3.91

39

Notes and Sources for Table 12:
The values of the individual exports equal the quantities times the prices (see Table 10B for data). Total exports valued in 1840 prices for 179092 are from Table 9 above. Total exports valued in 1840 prices for subsequent years equal the 1791 value times the index of real exports.

40

