                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                WHO ADJUSTS AND WHEN?
                         ON THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF REFORMS

                                             Alberto Alesina
                                             Silvia Ardagna
                                            Francesco Trebbi

                                         Working Paper 12049
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12049


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2006




Alesina delivered the 2005 Mundell Fleming lecture based upon this paper. For comments we are grateful
to participants at the IMF research conference and in particular to Paola Giuliano, Alessandro Prati, Ragu
Rajan and Guido Tabellini. For excellent research assistance we thank Anthony Nibblett. Alesina is grateful
to the NSF for a grant through the NBER. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Alberto Alesina, Silvia Ardagna, and Francesco Trebbi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Who Adjusts and When? On the Political Economy of Reforms
Alberto Alesina, Silvia Ardagna, and Francesco Trebbi
NBER Working Paper No. 12049
February 2006
JEL No. G0, H0

                                           ABSTRACT

Why do countries delay stabilizations of large and increasing budget deficits and inflation? And what

explains the timing of reforms? We use the war of attrition model as a guidance for our empirical

study on a vast sample of countries. We find that stabilizations are more likely to occur when time

of crisis occur, at the beginning of term of office of a new government, in countries with "strong"

governments (i.e. presidential systems and unified governments with a large majority of the party

in office), and when the executive faces less constraints. The role of external inducements like IMF

programs has at best a weak effect, but problem of reverse causality are possible.

Alberto Alesina
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
aalesina@harvard.edu

Silvia Ardagna
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
sardagna@fas.harvard.edu

Francesco Trebbi
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
trebbi@fas.harvard.edu
1       Introduction
Why do certain countries implement economic reforms relatively promptly and swiftly, while others delay
them, letting significant economic costs accumulate? This issue puzzles economists and policy makers and
it is part of an even broader question, namely why certain societies follow for even long periods of time
policies that are clearly costly and unsustainable. In many ways this is the key issue at core of what political
economics is all about.1
     The subject of the “political economy of reform” has received much attention.2 With the term “reform”
one generally means a major change in policy which goes beyond day to day policy management. One can
think of two types of reforms: stabilizations and structural changes. A stabilization is normally interpreted
as a major fiscal adjustment which reduces significantly a large budget deficit and/or stops a large infla-
tion. Often but not always large inflations and large deficits go together, especially in developing countries.
Structural reforms are liberalization of goods markets, changes in the regulatory environment, labor market
reforms, trade liberalizations.3
     Some of the reasons why reforms are delayed apply to both types of reforms but in this paper we focus
upon stabilizations in both OECD and developing countries. We consider the model of “war of attrition”
applied to delayed reforms by Alesina and Drazen (1991)4 and derive from it a series of empirical implications
that encompass and nest many of the hypotheses tested in the empirical literature on this topic. We show
how the war of attrition model can be a useful tool to guide the empirical analysis on the political economy
of stabilizations. In fact the war of attrition model has two advantages: it allows the organization in a
coherent framework of many empirical hypotheses investigated in the literature and oﬀers some more; but
also it explains why sometimes the evidence may be murky. We do not present any novel theoretical result;
the contribution of the paper is empirical.
     The key assumption of this model is that the political conflict over what type of stabilization to implement,
in particular on the distribution of costs of the adjustment, leads to delays. A stabilization occurs when
one of the competing groups can impose its desired policies on the other(s) which have exhausted their
ability to resist the undesired stabilization. The nature of political institutions influences the distribution
of political “power” between competing social groups, and this is the connection between the model and
testable implications on institutional variables we investigate in this paper.
     First of all, the war of attrition model is consistent with the “crisis hypothesis”, namely with the idea that
it is easier to stabilize more decisively in times of crisis than in times of more “moderate” economic problems.
    1 See   Drazen (2000) and Persson and Tabellini (2000) for two excellent broad treatments of this field.
    2 Several  influential contributions are in the volume edited by Wilimanson (1994). Tommasi and Velasco (1996), Rodrik
(1996), and Drazen (2000) have also provided useful surveys of this literature.
   3 For a recent discussion of the political economy of structural reforms in the labour and product markets see Boeri (2004).

A “special” branch of the literature on reforms analyzes specifically the issue of post communist transformations, but by now,
ex communist countries are more and more similar to any other country, therefore a special treatment of them does not seem
necessary any longer; see for instance Shleifer and Treismann (2000).
   4 For extensions see Drazen and Grilli (1993), Casella and Eichengreen (1996), Laban and Sturzenegger (1994), and Hsieh

(2001).




                                                              2
We find support for this hypothesis, both for inflation and budget deficits. In addition, and perhaps more
interestingly, we examine under which political conditions a crisis is more likely to lead to a stabilization. As
predicted by the war of attrition model we find that stabilizations are more likely to happen when a crisis
occur with a “strong” government, that, presumably, can overrule political opposition to policy changes.
For instance, stabilizations are more successful and easier to come by in presidential systems, in those where
the executive faces fewer institutional veto points, in periods of unified government in which the same party
holds the executive and the legislature and when the majority of the ruling party (or parties) is large. We
also find that a stabilization is more likely to occur immediately after an election, presumably when the
a new government enjoys a mandate and it is also far from new elections. External inducements, like the
presence of IMF conditionality programs, has at best a moderate eﬀect, even though problems of reverse
causality abounds here. Results on stabilizations of budget deficits and inflation are relatively similar but we
also find some small diﬀerences which we discuss. We should make clear that these results do not imply that
certain types of government are inherently superior to others: the ability to stabilize is only one the features
that a society may require in a government, but there are certainly others like fairness, responsiveness to
changes in society’s preferences, checks and balances etc. Spolaore (2004) and Aghion, Alesina and Trebbi
(2004) for instance have recently discussed this kind of trade-oﬀ in a context related to that of the present
paper.
     The paper is organized as follow. In section 2 we describe the war of attrition model of delayed stabiliza-
tions and we derive several empirical implications from it. In section 3 we review existing evidence on these
empirical implications. In section 4 we present our data set and the methodology of our tests. In section 5
we test various implications of the war of attrition model on budget deficits. In section 6 we consider similar
evidence on inflation. The last section concludes.



2      Delayed stabilizations: the war of attrition model

2.1         The structure of the model
The model considers an economy that after a negative permanent shock (not explained by the model itself)
is on an unstable fiscal path; imagine a permanent fall in tax revenues for given tax rates or a permanent
increase in spending. Consider, in particular, an economy running a budget deficit financed in parts with
foreign borrowing and by printing money, i.e. by the inflation tax which is especially distortionary.5
     A stabilization is defined as an increase in revenues (or a cut in spending, but for sake of exposition we
will talk of increasing revenues and hold spending constant) so that the debt stops growing and inflation
disappears; thus the budget is balanced with a non inflation tax, say an income tax, (which is assumed to be
less distortionary than inflation) and there is no more external borrowing. The government continues to pay
interests on the accumulated debt, no default is allowed. In this economy a social planner would stabilize
    5 For   the generic war of attrition model see Bliss and Nalebuﬀ (1984). The adaptation to a monetary and fiscal stabilization
problem is by Alesina and Drazen (1991). Drazen (2000) oﬀers a simplified exposition of this model.




                                                                  3
immediately since delaying a stabilization is costly for two reasons: it accumulates the distortionary costs of
inflation, and increases the interest burden for the government since external debt is accumulating.6
    Delays in the stabilization emerge from political conflict between two diﬀerent groups in this society
(there could be N groups, but let’s focus on the simpler case). These could be social groups and could be
represented by diﬀerent political parties. Each group acts as a single agent and there is no analysis of their
internal organization. The groups disagree on how to allocate the cost of the stabilization; each group would
like to charge to the other a large fraction of the additional taxes need to stabilize the budget. By assumption
one of the groups has to pay more than half of the costs of stabilization, say a share α with 1/2 < α ≤ 1
and α is a given parameter.7 The question is which group will accept to pay a fraction α of the cost of the
stabilization. Each group has a veto power on the stabilization.
    The two groups are uncertain about the other group’s evaluation of the costs; that is each group knows
how costly it is for it to wait but does not how costly it is for the other group to delay the stabilization.8 The
essence of the war of attrition is the following: the passage of time will reveal which of the two groups is the
weakest, i.e. it has the highest costs of waiting. In each instant each group chooses to wait if the marginal
cost of waiting is lower than the marginal benefit of waiting. The marginal cost is given by the cost of not
having the stabilization for another instant, that is of living in an unstable economy for another instant. The
marginal benefit is given by the probability that in the next instant the opponent group concedes multiplied
by the diﬀerence in lifetime utility of the winner group (which pays a fraction (1−α) < 1/2 of the stabilization
costs) and the utility of the looser (which pays a fraction α > 1/2).9 The game ends when for one of the
groups the marginal benefit becomes less than the marginal cost, and this will occur sooner for the group
with the higher cost of waiting. So in the end the weaker group (i.e. the one that suﬀers more from the
delays) will concede. But resolution is in general not immediate because the passage of time is needed to
reveal which of the group is the weakest. Delaying a stabilization is costly for society as a whole and it is
Pareto inferior to immediate stabilization, but it is individually rational for each of the two groups to wait,
because of the potential benefits of being the winner rather than the looser.


2.2       Expected delays: comparative statics and testable implications
Stabilization is in general delayed.10 It is not only if α = 1/2; in fact if there is no gain in winning or
loosing, hence, there is no gain in waiting and both groups would “concede” immediately. Also, there would
be immediate stabilization with full knowledge of costs: the weakest group would know that in the end it
   6 As   Drazen and Grilli (1993) point out one actually does not even need accumulation of debt as long as the inflation tax is
more disotrtionary than the income tax.
  7 See Hsieh (2000) for an extension of the model on this point.
  8 More precisely, a cost parameter is drawn from the same well behaved distribution; one group knows its own parameter

and knows that the other group parameter is drawn by the same distribution.
  9 It is straightforward to compute the lifetime utility of the two groups (winner and loser) because the model assumes that

no more crisis will occur and the economy will be in the stable equilibrium forever.
  1 0 More precisely the expected time of a stabilization is positive, that is a stabilization does not occur immediately. It would

occur immediately if one group had the maximum possible realization of the cost parameter. Also the analysis focuses on
symmetric equilibria.



                                                                 4
would be the loser; therefore, it may as well concede immediately and save itself the costs of delays.
   Thus an unresolved political conflict in which the groups agree to share half and half and some uncertainty
about relative costs are necessary and suﬃcient conditions to generate delays. So what makes a stabilization
happen?
   1) The passage of time. At some point for one of the two groups it becomes too costly to wait and
it concedes, i.e.: it accepts to pay the fraction α of the costs. In a symmetric equilibrium this moment
coincides with the one in which one group realizes that it has a higher cost of waiting than its opponent.
Note that nothing observable may have occurred in that instant, simply the passage of time has resolved
the uncertainty about the relative strength (i.e. the relative marginal cost of waiting) of the two groups.
The longer the period of instability of the economy, the more likely it is to observe a stabilization. However,
there could be a countervailing eﬀect: in certain cases, societies may develop institutions that reduce the
cost of the economic instability. Think for instance of indexation to reduce the costs of inflation.
   2) Crises can generate reforms. A crisis, namely a turn for the worst of the economy, may anticipate
the reforms precisely because the relative costs of waiting and fighting the war tilt in favor of concession.
This is more likely to be the case if the crisis makes one group particularly weak so that it brings it to a
quick concession since this group soon realizes to be the weakest of the two. Drazen and Grilli (1993) show
that for this reason a crisis can be welfare improving. In fact it reduces welfare directly by worsening the
economic situation, but it leads to an earlier stabilization, reducing the waste of the costs of waiting. If the
second eﬀect dominates on the first one, a crisis can lead to an increase in aggregate benefits.
   3) The nature of political institutions. In addition to the economic costs of the pre-stabilization
economy, one may also think that there are political costs of delays. These are the costs of blocking the other
group’s attempt to impose a stabilization favorable to itself; where blocking can occur with lobbying or active
political participation (e.g. strikes). This interpretation of the costs makes especially clear the connection
with institutional characteristics of the country. In political systems where the executive has strong powers
and cannot be blocked by the opposition easily, the opposition that does not hold the executive faces high
costs of “fighting the war of attrition”. On the contrary, costs are lower if the executive can easily be kept
in check. Imagine a situation where one group solidly holds control of policymaking, and it is very costly
or impossible for the opponent to eﬀectively exercise a veto power. Then, a stabilization would occur very
soon (if not immediately) because the group which holds power would impose it on the other. Therefore,
political systems that make it diﬃcult for the opposition to veto a policy should see earlier stabilizations. So,
for example, stabilizations should occur sooner in presidential systems with a powerful executive. However,
these same systems, precisely because of the uneven distribution of political power and lack of veto power
may generate very uneven distribution of costs of the stabilization. Spolaore (2004) analyzes the trade-oﬀ
between early stabilizations and uneven distributions of costs in a related context.
   4) Political consolidations and elections. A stabilization may be more likely to occur after a political
consolidation in which one of the two groups becomes more powerful and makes it impossible (or too costly)
for the opponent to veto a stabilization program. A political consolidation may be the result of an election
in which either a weak pre-existing government gains strength, or it is replaced by another one with a


                                                       5
strong majority or mandate. Thus, stabilizations may be more likely immediately after an election, precisely
because it may reveal which group is the strongest. As a result, in the election one group may give up the
fight and concede. On the contrary, right before an election the uncertainty about who is stronger may not
be about to be resolved so both groups have an incentive to hold on.
    5) External inducements. The nature of the war of attrition and, therefore, the timing of stabiliza-
tions may be aﬀected by external factors. For example, a binding agreement with an international lending
organization like the IMF may increase the costs of delaying the adjustment, making the resolution of the
war occur sooner. On the other hand, an agreement with the IMF that provides more resources to the
country and it is not binding in terms of committing the country to any particular set of polices may delay
the stabilization, because, in practice, it reduces the cost of delay by providing easier access to borrowing.
Similar considerations apply to foreign aid. Certain type of foreign aid, if disbursed in ways that makes
all fighting groups better oﬀ, may delay stabilization by making life easier, a point made by Casella and
Eichengreen (1996). However, certain types of foreign aid may make one group stronger and resolve the war
of attrition sooner. In many ways this is the reverse argument of the crisis hypothesis discussed above.
    Before turning to our empirical tests on some of these hypotheses, we briefly review the existing empirical
literature that relates to these arguments.



3     The empirical evidence: review and new tests

3.1        Review of the existing literature
The only paper we are aware of that is explicitly testing the “war of attrition” model of stabilizations is
Hamman and Prati (2002) on inflation. However, many other authors have obtained results more or less
directly related to the empirical implications listed above.
    1) The passage of time.                 An indirect eﬀect of this implication is that a stabilization may occur
after several failures even when nothing observable has changed, except, precisely the passage of time.
Interestingly this may complicate the test of other hypotheses based on the fact that certain occurrences
generate adjustments. Alesina and Drazen (1991) oﬀer a few examples of successful stabilizations that
occurred a few years after identical attempts had failed and no change seems to have occurred in the
                                                             11
meantime except, precisely the passage of time.                   Hamman and Prati (2002) in their study of stabilizations
of high inflation (defined as higher than 40 per cent per year) do not find that the passage of time increases
the probability of a stabilization. They argue, correctly in our view, that this may be due to the existence of
institutions like indexation that may reduce the costs of inflation and therefore prolong the war of attrition.
    2) Crisis can generate reforms. Tommasi and Velasco (1996) go as far as saying that this hypothesis
is part of the “conventional wisdom”.12 This is perhaps a bit premature given the diﬃculty of testing the
hypothesis that crises generate reforms for obvious reasons of reverse causality. Without a crisis, there would
be no need for stabilization. Hence, we could not observe the latter. The authors testing for this hypothesis
 1 1 See   also Alesina (1988) for a discussion of several historical cases of debt reduction in line with the war of attrition model.
 1 2 See   also Nelson (1990) and Williamson (1994).


                                                                    6
are of course aware of this problem and do their best at addressing it; in particular see Bruno and Easterly
(1996) and Drazen and Easterly (2001). The latter use the concept of “ranking reversal”. They consider
countries in the worst decile in terms of a certain variable, say inflation or budget deficits, and they test
whether the “worst” countries move up in the ranking when they stabilize. They suggest that the crisis
hypothesis holds: the worst is your ranking before the stabilization, the higher is your ranking after it. They
find evidence of crises inducing ranking reversal for inflation and the black market premium on exchange
rates, but they fail to find evidence on budget deficits and growth. Hamman and Prati (2002) also oﬀer strong
supporting evidence of the crisis hypothesis on inflation. They show that the higher is the rate of inflation
before the stabilization, the higher the chance that the stabilization will succeed. Perotti (1999) looks at
deficit reduction policies in OECD countries and finds that more successful fiscal stabilizations are those
that occur in “bad times”, i.e. those when the public debt is high and growing fast. Alesina and Ardagna
(1998) also present some evidence consistent with this hypothesis. Incidentally, since the accumulation of
public debt requires time, this is also an indirect test that the passage of time increases the probability of
a successful fiscal stabilization. Finally, several specific episodes seem to support the crisis hypothesis, and
that explains its popularity. For instance the Italian fiscal adjustment of 1992 which was delayed for many
years of mounting deficits, appears vastly motivated by the crisis of that year (exclusion of Italy from the
fixed exchange rate area, and risk of default).
    A related point concerns the fact that adjustments in bad times may actually bring about an immediate
benefit on the economy; this is the case of “expansionary adjustments”. Evidence that in time of crisis
stabilizations can be expansionary even on impact can be found in Easterly (1996) on inflation and Perotti
(1999) on budget deficits in OECD countries.13
    3) The nature of political institutions. The issue of how diﬀerent political institutions aﬀect eco-
nomic outcomes has received much attention; Persson and Tabellini (2003) oﬀer the broadest and most
comprehensive empirical treatment of the subject even though they do not directly address the issue of
stabilizations per se. For our purposes, a few of their results are particularly relevant. One is that they
find that presidential systems have lower deficits and smaller size of governments. Also in OECD countries
parliamentary systems have larger deficits than majoritarian systems, a result also found by Milesi Ferretti,
Perotti and Rostagno (2002) using diﬀerent definitions of proportionality. This is related to earlier findings
(Grilli Masciandaro and Tabellini (1990) and Roubini and Sachs (1989)) that in OECD countries coalition
governments have larger budget deficits.
    More directly related to stabilizations are the result by Hamman and Prati (2002). They find that the
larger the number of institutional constraints on the executive the more delayed and less successful are
inflation stabilizations.14 Veiga (2000) shows that an index of government fragmentation is a good predictor
of the delay of inflation stabilizations. Also Alesina Perotti and Tavares (1998) show that in OECD countries
coalition governments are less likely to implement successful fiscal stabilizations.
  1 3 For   a related literature on expansionary fiscal adjustments see Giavazzi and Pagano (1990), Alesina Perotti and Tavares
(1998), Giavazzi et.al. (2005).
  1 4 With specific reference to Latin America, Lora (1998) finds inconclusive evidence on this point.




                                                                7
    Note that this does not mean that certain types of governments are “better” than others. Government
that stabilize more easily may create other costs for the economy.15 Also governments that stabilize sooner
may be those which are also more able to impose a very uneven distribution of the costs of stabilization.
    4) Political consolidations and elections. The idea that adjustments are implemented at the be-
ginning of an electoral cycle is consistent with two non mutually exclusive assumptions. One is the idea
of political consolidations in a war of attrition model, the other is the political business cycles hypothesis.
Especially relevant for our purposes here is the recent literature on political budget cycles which investi-
gates if budget deficits increase before elections. This literature is rather large and we cannot review it
carefully here.16 Recent results by Akhmed and Zhuravskaya (2004), Brender and Drazen (2005a) and Shi
and Svensson (2006) suggest that political budget cycles are present in some democracies but not in others:
they are common in new democracies and in those with less freedom of the press. If deficits tend to increase
in election years, obviously this implies that fiscal stabilizations do not occur at that time. But, as these
papers show, political budget cycles are less widespread than common perceptions of them. Interestingly,
Peltzman (1992) on US states, Alesina, Perotti and Tavares (1998) on OECD countries, and Bender and
Drazen (2005b) on a vast sample of both developing and developed ones find that pre-electoral deficits do
not help the incumbent to be reelected. Hamman and Prati (2002) show that inflation stabilizations are
more likely to occur immediately after a change of leadership, a result consistent with the implications of
the war of attrition model. Note, however, that an electoral result that increases the majority advantage of
an old leader may have the same eﬀect in the war of attrition model, because it could also be a political
consolidation.
    5) External inducements. Many types of external (i.e. foreign to the country in crisis) factors can
influence the timing of stabilizations. One of these is foreign aid. As we discussed above foreign aid can make
the adoption of stabilization policies more or less likely depending on how it is disbursed. The empirical
literature on the eﬀect of foreign aid and its eﬀect in creating incentives for good policy is vast and very
politically charged. One of the reasons for the debate is the problem of reverse causality: foreign aid should
go to countries in trouble, so a correlation of bad policies and delayed stabilizations with foreign aid can
have diﬀerent causal interpretations. A recent pessimistic view about the eﬀects of foreign aid is in Easterly
(2006) who also provide a good assessment of the literature. It is fair to say that the evidence that foreign
aid has provided good incentive to adopt good policy is mixed at the very best.
    A related question is whether or not IMF assisted programs (IMF conditionality) help. A relative upbeat
assessment is in Gosh et al. (2005) but this as well is a literature very charged with debates, somewhat
similar in nature to those related to foreign aid and with similar problem of direction of causality. Barro
and Lee (2002) provide a critical view on the role of the IMF as promoter of successful macroeconomic
policies. Easterly (2006) argue that IMF and World Bank adjustment loans have failed to provide the
correct incentives for countries to implement long lasting and successful polices.17 Informal observations
  1 5 For   instance Persson and Tabellini (2003) suggest that presidential systems follow more procyclical fiscal policies.
  1 6 For   a broad discussion of the literature on political business cycles see Alesina Roubini and Cohen (1997) and Drazen
(2000).
  1 7 IMF conditionality may work better if the country feels like it "owns" the program, i.e. it is not imposed on it. For a recent




                                                                 8
suggest that the inducement to being admitted in the European Monetary System created incentives for
certain countries (especially Italy and Greece) to reduce quickly their mounting budget deficits.


3.2     New tests
What do we add to this rich literature? First we revisit many of the point addressed above in a large sample
of countries on both deficits and inflation and on both OECD and developing countries in a unified and
coherent way. Second, we present new tests. In particular we investigate the interaction between the crisis
and other features of the polity and the economy. That is: a crisis can generate adjustments, but what
makes a crisis more likely to do so? How large has to be a crisis to generate a stabilization? What types of
governments react more quickly to a crisis? and when relative to the electoral cycle? Can external factors
aﬀect the timing? How do crisis interact with external inducements?
    Thus the key parameter of interest for us will be the interaction term between an indicator of crisis and
some institutional variable or some other indicator that we use to test the implications of the war of attrition
model as sketched above.


4     Data and methodology

4.1     Data
This section describes the data we employ in the empirical analysis. We use yearly data on a large sample
of developed and developing countries covering a maximum time span from 1960 to 2003. We use data on
total government deficit as a share of GDP and inflation (computed from the consumer price index) from the
International Monetary Fund’s International Financial Statistics (IFS) database.18 Data on macroeconomic
variables (the real per capita GDP and the ratio of exports plus imports to GDP) are from the Penn World
Table 6.1 database, while data on financial development are from the World Bank database on Financial
Development and Structure19 and data on IMF programs have been provided to us directly by the IMF.
Finally, the Database of Political Institutions (DPI) of the World Bank, compiled by Beck, Clarke, Groﬀ,
Keefer, and Walsh (2001) and updated in 2004, contains all the political variables employed in the analysis,
except for our measure of institutional constraints on the executive which comes from the data set of political
institutions Polity IV. Table A1 in the appendix summarizes definitions and sources of the political variables
we use in the paper.20
    On the basis of the (pooled) empirical density of the deficit/GDP ratios and inflation levels we define a
variable CRISIS, a dummy taking value 1 if the country is currently in crisis (of fiscal or monetary nature,
discussion of the political economy of IMF conditionality and its relationship with domestic politics see Drazen (2002).
  1 8 Deficit over GDP for country i at time t is computed by redefining surpluses, variable series 80...ZF. The consumer price

index series are the variable series 64...ZF. We also checked our results employing the GDP deflator from series 99BIPZF to
compute the inflation rate for country i at time t. Results are robust.
  1 9 The database is available on line at http://www.worldbank.org/research/projects/finstructure/database.htm.
  2 0 We also refer the reader to the original source book of the DPI database for more information on the variables. It can be

found at http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTRES/Resources/DPI2004_variable-definitions.pdf


                                                              9
the relevant definition varying depending on the lhs of interest), 0 otherwise. A fiscal crisis for a country
corresponds to a deficit/GDP ratio above the 75th percentile of the deficit/GDP ratio empirical density
(equal to 4.75%), and, similarly, an inflation crisis corresponds to inflation levels above the empirical 75th
percentile (equal to 14.05%). To avoid that our results are driven by outliers, we have replaced the values
in the first and in the ninety-nine percentiles of the empirical distributions of the deficit/GDP ratio and of
inflation in the data with their closest values. We have extensively checked (and confirm) that the evidence
we show is not unduly sensitive to the particular values chosen to replace extremely high and low values in
the data, nor to the choice of the threshold we use to define a crisis.
   With regard to form of government, we isolate presidential systems from alternative systems. In partic-
ular, we redefine the discrete variable SY ST EM in the DPI database into a presidential system indicator
(P RES) taking value 1 if direct presidential, 0 if either the president is elected by the assembly or parliamen-
tary. This definition corresponds to a rough approximation of the structure of checks and balances within a
political system and pivots around the separation of powers among the executive body (the president) and
legislative body (the parliament). A measure of the structure of the electoral law is given by the variable
P ROP , taking value 1 if the electoral rule for the Lower House is a form of proportional representation and
0 otherwise (that is, all forms of plurality voting). The eﬀective control of the legislative body by the ruling
executive is summarized by the indicator variable U N IF IED taking value 1 if the party of the executive
controls the absolute majority of the legislative; 0 otherwise. We capture the political orientation of the ex-
ecutive with the indicator LEF T equal to 1 if the executive belongs to a party of the left and 0 if right-wing
or centrist. The electoral dummies that indicate if in a given year legislative or presidential elections are held
are LEGELEC and EXELEC, respectively. We employ these variables in our analysis of political cycles
together with another discrete variable, Y RCU RN T , counting the number of years left in the current term.
Finally, the variable EXECON ST measures the institutional constraints on the executive. This indicator
ranges from 1 to 7 and is increasing in the number of executive constraints.
   Table 1 presents some interesting summary statistics on the frequency of crises in diﬀerent political
systems. Column 1 shows that deficit crises are distributed fairly uniformly amongst political systems,
the relative frequency of occurrence being around 0.3 for all of the categories. Thus deficits crises do not
occur especially often in a particular system or another. In the case of inflation (column 2) there is a bit
more variation. Presidential systems have the highest frequency of inflation crises (0.37). This is mostly
driven by the experience of Latin America where many countries have presidential regimes and this has been
traditionally a high inflation region. We return on issues specific to Latin America below. Table 2 shows the
average deficit (column 1) and the average inflation (column 3) during crises. Column 2 and 4 report the
average response the year after a country enters a crisis. Let’s consider budget deficits first. The response in
presidential systems is about twice as large as the one in parliamentary systems. Unified government react
twice as much as divided governments; majoritarian systems react more than parliamentary systems. In
executive election years the deficit reduction is much smaller than in non executive election years. In the
case of inflation similar results holds with one interesting exception: in proportional electoral systems the
reaction is stronger than in majoritarian systems. Much of this impressionistic and preliminary evidence


                                                       10
is consistent with the implication of the war of attrition model. We now turn to a more careful statistical
analysis of the data.


4.2     Empirical model: adjustments and political institutions
We now describe our empirical strategy. For country i at time t let us define the outcome of interest yit ,
where y is either the deficit/GDP ratio or inflation. Consider an horizon of interest for a stabilization of s
periods, s > 0. In the empirical implementation we typically restrict our attention to four years s = 1, ..., 4.
The change in yi over the period [t, t + s] is defined as ∆s yit = yi,t+s − yit . The variable ∆s yit is the
regressand, determined by the following empirical model:
                                                         1 Ps
                                      ∆s yit    = β0 + β1      P OLi,t+k + β 2 CRISISit +                                          (1)
                                                         s k=1
                                                                  1 P  s
                                                  +β 3 CRISISit ∗        P OLi,t+k + ui,t+s
                                                                  s k=1
                                CRISISit        = I [ECDF (yit ) > τ ]                                                             (2)
                                           τ    = 0.75
                                          uit   = δ t + λi + εit .                                                                 (3)

In (1) we indicate the political variable of interest as P OLi,t (averaged over [t, t + s]) and we define the
crisis indicator as CRISISit , setting it equal to 1 in the fourth quartile of the (pooled) empirical cumulative
function of y, as indicated in (2). The specification is completed by a two-way error component (3), accounting
for country-level and year fixed eﬀects. We estimate our model defined by equations (1)-(3) by OLS and we
correct the standard errors for heteroschedasticity.
    Notice that in presence of highly persistent political covariates, such as form of government (P RES) or
                                              P
                                              s
electoral rule (P ROP ), the average level 1s   P OLi,t+k over the adjustment horizon considered is practically
                                                      k=1
constant with respect to t. In the instance of P OLit constant over time, β 1 is not identified in (1). The
parameter β 2 in (1) captures the crisis hypothesis, that is the size of the adjustment ∆s yit should depend
negatively on the presence of the crisis. This implies β 2 < 0. The parameter β 3 on the interaction between
the crisis dummy and P OL indicates an increase or a reduction of the marginal impact of the crisis on
the size of the adjustment (again, a negative coeﬃcient indicating a larger adjustment), depending on the
specific political feature considered. Diﬀerent predictions are associated to diﬀerent political institutions and
we analyze them in Sections 5.1 and 5.2.


4.3     Empirical model: extensions
Consistency in the estimation of the vector of parameters of interest (β 2, β 3 ) is achieved under the assumption
that the process generating the idiosyncratic error component εit is uncorrelated within and across countries
to the covariates set, ruling out bias due to omission of relevant variables.21 A straightforward check in
 2 1 This   is an issue particularly pressing for the cross-sectional empirical literature on the eﬀects of political institutions. See
the discussion in Persson and Tabellini (2003) and in Acemoglu (2005). Clearly misspecification of the interaction term is


                                                                   11
this direction is to include time-varying covariates, Xit , to the specification. We include in X the natural
log of real per capita GDP, trade volume measured by the ratio of exports plus imports to GDP, and the
value of credits by financial intermediaries to the private sector divided by GDP. The latter variable is one
of the measures of depth of financial markets used by Levine et al. (2000). All variables included in X are
measured at time t.
    Moreover, we also control for time-invariant covariates by expanding (1) with an appropriate set of
interactions. In particular, we checked that our results are not driven by the Latin American countries and
we allow the coeﬃcients to vary across developed and developing countries.
    A final extension of (1) consists of relaxing the condition on the definition of crisis. First, we change the
value of τ in equation (2)). Second, we estimate:
                                           1 Ps                                Ps P OL
                                                                                      i,t+k
                      ∆s yit = β 0 + β 1         P OLi,t+k + β 2 yit + β 3 yit              + ui,t+s                        (4)
                                           s k=1                               k=1   s
as robustness check for all specifications in which we use (1). Results of extended versions of our benchmark
models on fiscal and inflation stabilizations are discussed in Sections 5.3 and Section 6, respectively.


5     Empirical results: Budget deficits
In the Tables that follow we present results on budget deficits in Panel A and on inflation in Panel B. We
focus first on deficits, thus on Panel A of these Tables; in many cases results on inflation are very similar
to those on budget deficits. In section 6 we highlight instances in which the results are diﬀerent, comparing
Panel A and Panel B of these Tables.


5.1     Political systems
This section reports the estimates of specification (1) for form of government (P OL = P RES), executive
constraints (P OL = EXECON ST ), unified government (P OL = U N IF IED), and electoral rule (P OL =
P ROP ), when the variable of interest yit is the deficit/GDP ratio. The crisis hypothesis implies β 2 < 0.
We also investigate whether stronger governments adjust more swiftly and aggressively when they are in a
crisis. We "proxy" strength of governments with presidential systems, where the absence of the assembly’s
confidence motion insulates the president from legislative control, or whenever the executive relies on a
strong majority in the legislature. Stronger executives have more flexibility of policy implementation, since
they face a lower number of veto players (for instance, low EXECON ST ), and have higher capacity of
shifting the costs of reform onto their opponents. Hence, we expect β 3 < 0 when considering the interactions
involving P RES and CRISIS and U N IF IED and CRISIS. Symmetrically, we expect EXECON ST and
CRISIS to have a positive interaction β 3 > 0.
    The results support these hypotheses. Panel A of Tables 3, 4, and 5 show the baseline regression (1) for
s = 1 in column (1). The coeﬃcient β 2 is estimated at −0.015, −0.04, and −0.016 for P RES, EXECON ST ,
possible in this panel, but by focusing on the orthogonal components across time and countries, the likelihood of our results to
be solely driven by omitted variable bias is smaller than in the cross-section.


                                                               12
and U N IF IED respectively (with corresponding t-statistics of −6.54, −8.78 and −6.85). The estimates
of β 3 are −0.019 in Table 3 (with a t-statistic of −5.23), 0.004 in Table 4 (with a t-statistic of 5.01), and
−0.011 in Table 5 (with a t-statistic of −3.25). Given the dichotomous nature of the regressors CRISIS,
P RES, and U N IF IED, the estimated coeﬃcients relative to these variables and the interaction terms also
correspond to incremental eﬀects. For example, in Table 3, Panel A, β 2 = −0.015 and β 3 = −0.019 indicate
an average deficit cut of 1.5 percentage points of GDP in times of crises that gets more than doubled (the
deficit/GDP ratio decreases by an additional 1.9 percentage points of GDP) in presidential systems. For
s = 2, 3, 4 the variable CRISIS tends to induce reductions in deficits up to around 4 percentage points of
GDP. The estimates of β 3 remain negative and significant in Table 3 (P OL = P RES), but do not increase
in absolute terms as s increases.
   In Table 4 the measure of executive constraints (P OL = EXECON ST ) has a positive and significant
multiplicative eﬀect on the CRISIS dummy at every s. Moreover, the coeﬃcient β 1 is positive and significant
at s = 2, 3, 4.22 Thus, less constrained government adjust more substantially and this is consistent with our
results of Table 3.
   In Table 5, we investigate the role of the political variable U N IF IED that measures if the party of the
executive controls the absolute majority of the legislative. The interaction term β 3 loses rapidly significance
and assumes the opposite (wrong) sign after 3 periods. This is countered by a progressive reduction in the
coeﬃcient β 1 , which becomes significant and negative at s = 2, 3, 4. This seems to suggest that, irrespective
of being in a crisis, fiscal adjustments are larger in countries with executives commanding absolute majorities.
   Finally, Table 6 reports the results on P ROP. Estimates of β 2 are in line with those of Tables 3, 4,
and 5. Concerning β 3 , since majoritarian systems tend to oﬀer larger majority premia than proportional
representation, P ROP systems should present lower attitude to stabilize. This would imply β 3 > 0 when
considering the interactions involving P ROP . However, the eﬀective seat composition of the assembly
and not the formal rule for assignment of the seats should matter in approximating the executive’s strength.
Therefore it is not surprising that we find weaker results than using the indicator U N IF IED. The estimated
β 3 is positive (and insignificant) for s = 1, 2, becoming negative and significant at s = 4.
   In summary, this section has provided strong evidence, both statistically and economically, that crises
lead to more swift and more drastic adjustments with "stronger" governments, namely when the executive
has fewer constraints, the government is unified and in presidential systems.


5.2        Elections, timing, and partisan orientation
This section reports the estimates of specification (1) for the number of years left in current term for the
executive (P OL = Y RCU RN T ), the timing of legislative elections (P OL = LEGELEC), and the political
orientation of the ruling government (P OL = LEF T ). Executive elections are not reported but discussed.
   The war of attrition model implies that a stabilization should be more likely to occur after a political
consolidation, namely when one group gains political control. On the contrary, right before an election the
 2 2 In   this instance it is sensible to discuss the role of β 1 , since EXECONST presents substantially higher within-country
variation than P RES.


                                                               13
political uncertainty about the relative power of the competing groups may be at a maximum, or in any case
about to be resolved. Thus, it is worth waiting in the hope of winning the election! However, it is diﬃcult
to distinguish this implication of the war of attrition model from a more traditional one of opportunistic
fiscal behavior, namely the idea that governments do no reduce deficits close to elections for fear of losing
them. As we discussed above, there is indeed some evidence that budget deficits tend to increase right before
elections, but not in every country and all the time: political budget cycles (i.e. electorally induced deficits)
are not the rule, and are not especially rewarding at the polls. Being as it may, Table 7 presents results
confirming the hypothesis that stabilizations are more likely to occur at the beginning of a term of oﬃce, i.e.
away from future elections. In columns 1-3, we verify that the number of years left in current term tends to
increase the size of the adjustment (hence the negative eﬀect) measured as change in deficit/GDP one year
after the crisis (i.e. s = 1). The estimated coeﬃcient β 1 is −0.002 in columns (1) and (2) and −0.001 in
column (3) with a t-statistic of −3.22, −3.16, and −1.99 respectively.
   Estimates of β 2 are in line with those of Tables 3-6, indicating a statistical significant reduction of the
LHS variable of at least 1.6 percent. The sign of β 3 shows that the response to crisis immediately after
elections is amplified, but the coeﬃcient is not statistically significant and it is small. In columns 4-6, we
consider the eﬀect of legislative elections in a specification of form (1) with s = 1. Fiscal adjustments are
smaller in years of legislative elections but not significantly so. Only when the interaction term is excluded
the coeﬃcient β 1 is significant at the 10 percent confidence level. Similar (but equally insignificant) results
holds for executive elections.
   We conclude this section by focusing on the partisan orientation of the executive. In Panel A of Table 8
we find that for s = 2, 3, 4 governments on the left cut budget deficits more, but they do not do so in times
of crisis. This evidence, which however as we discuss below is not extremely robust to specification checks,
is consistent with the one in Ardagna (2004) who shows that in developed countries left-wing governments
are more likely to implement fiscal stabilizations associated with a persistent reduction of the debt-to-
GDP ratio. One possible explanation for this evidence is that left-wing governments face less resistance to
reform than right-wing ones: for example, unions or pensioners, groups that in many countries influence the
implementation of governments’ economic policies, can be more willing to oﬀer their support to left-wing
governments and allow them to cut government spending and/or increase tax rates.


5.3    Extensions and Sensitivity
We now report robustness checks of several types for the benchmark model defined by equations (1) - (3).
Specifically: i) we add time-varying controls to the rhs of equation (1); ii) we add time-invarying interactions;
iii) we experiment with diﬀerent values of τ in equation (2); iv) we estimate equation (4), where the discrete
dummy variable CRISIS is replaced by the level of deficit over GDP, a continuous regressor, v) we allow
for non-linearities in equation (4), and vi) we investigate whether the reduction of the deficit/GDP ratio
is increasing in its initial level in a non-linear way. We consider each type of robustness checks separately
for both our analysis of political systems and that of electoral timing. Results are not shown but they are



                                                       14
available upon request.
   With respect to points i), ii) and iii) all results presented in Tables 3-8 are robust to the respective
changes in specification. More specifically, to control for omitted variables, we begin by including among the
regressors the natural log of real per capita GDP, the ratio of exports plus imports to GDP, and the value
of credits by financial intermediaries to the private sector divided by GDP, all dated at time t. The first two
additional regressors are the controls used by Persson and Tabellini (2003); the value of credits by financial
intermediaries to the private sector divided by GDP is one of the indicators of financial development used
by Levine et al. (2000). Our results are virtually unchanged.
   Second, we let the coeﬃcients β 1 , β 2 , and β 3 diﬀer for Latin American countries and other countries
in the sample and for developed and developing countries. In general, we do not find evidence that one
particular group of countries drives the results presented so far.
   Third, we reestimate regressions in Tables 3-8 using two alternative definitions of CRISIS to check
that our results do not hinge on the particular threshold used to identify periods of large budget deficit.
Specifically, we consider the cases in which a fiscal crisis for a country corresponds to a deficit/GDP ratio
above the 60th or 90th percentile of the deficit/GDP ratio empirical density (equal respectively to 3.11%
and 7.95%). Interestingly and consistently with the crisis hypothesis, we find that the size and significance
of the coeﬃcients β 2 , and β 3 are increasing in the value of the deficit/GDP ratio above which a country is
experiencing a fiscal crisis.
   Fourth, we estimate equation (4), where the dichotomous CRISIS dummy is replaced by the initial
level of deficit/GDP. With respect to P RES and EXECON ST we find that signs and significance of the
parameter vector (β 2, β 3 ) concord to those in Tables 3 and 4. Relative to Table 5 and the role of a unified
government (U N IF IED = 1), the corresponding continuous models report more statistically significant
eﬀects of the expected sign. The same is also true when comparing proportional representation systems in
the continuous model. Here positive estimates of β 3 (for the interaction between the initial deficit ratio and
P ROP ) are significant at least at the 10% level for s = 1, 2, but become insignificant for s = 3, 4 and change
sign for s = 4. The results on distance from elections are robust. Regarding the political ideology of the
executive, instead, we find that the results in Table 8 for LEF T are not particularly robust. Only for s = 4
we report a significant, negative, but quantitatively small eﬀect of LEF T (β 1 = −0.008).
   Fifth, we also allow for non-linear eﬀects in the continuos specification in (4) by estimating spline regres-
sions that allow the coeﬃcients β 2 and β 3 to diﬀer for values of the deficit/GDP ratio below/above the 75th
percentile of the deficit/GDP ratio empirical density (equal respectively to 4.75%). We find some evidence
of a statistically significant incremental eﬀect from the interaction of the deficit and political variables when
the deficit/GDP ratio is greater than 4.75%, confirming our previous results that diﬀerences in the form of
governments become particularly important when the country is in times of crisis.
   Finally, we investigate whether the reduction of the deficit/GDP ratio increases non-linearly in its initial
level by estimating spline regressions of the change of the deficit/GDP ratio on its lagged value and allowing
the coeﬃcient to diﬀer for values of the deficit/GDP ratio above the 50th, 75th, 90th, 95th percentile of
the deficit/GDP ratio empirical density (equal respectively to 2.27%, 4.75%, 7.9%, 10.6%). As expected,


                                                       15
the coeﬃcient of the lagged deficit/GDP ratio is negative and statistically significant at any time horizon,
implying that the decrease in the budget deficit is increasing in the initial value of the deficit/GDP ratio.
Moreover, we find evidence of a statistical significant incremental eﬀect for values of the initial level of the
deficit/GDP larger than 10.6%. Note that results in Drazen and Easterly (2001) support the “crisis-induces-
reforms hypothesis” for the inflation rate and the black market premium, but not for the budget deficit. Our
estimates, instead, suggest that governments are able to sharply cut the budget deficit when the latter has
reached extreme high values.


5.4    IMF conditionality
We now investigate if agreements with the IMF play any role in budget deficit stabilizations. We reestimate
the benchmark model in (1) - (3) but the variable P OL now captures countries’ participation to IMF
programs. We measures countries’ participation with three diﬀerent variables: i) a dummy variable equal to
1 in every year in which a country is under an IMF agreement for at least 6 months and 0 otherwise; ii) a
dummy variable equal to 1 in the year in which the country signs a new loan agreement with the IMF and
0 otherwise; iii) a variable measuring for each year the number of months the country is in an agreement
with the IMF. We follow Barro and Lee (2002) and focus only on short and medium-term IMF programs,
i.e.: the Stand-by-Arrangements (SBA) and the Extended Fund Facility (EFF) programs.
   In Panel A of Table 9 we report the results using the first of the three variables just described. We do not
find consistent evidence that participation to an IMF program induces reductions of budget deficits. The
coeﬃcients β 1 and β 3 are statistically significant at the 5% level only for s = 4. The signs of the coeﬃcients
imply that participation to an IMF program is associated with increases in budget deficit ( β 1 > 0), but, in
periods of crisis, governments reduce the deficit and the decrease is larger in countries that are under an IMF
agreement (β 2 < 0, β 3 < 0). This evidence is, however, only suggestive. Given the possible endogeneity of
the variables used to measure participation to IMF programs, we would have to follow an approach similar
to the one in Barro and Lee (2002) to properly estimate the eﬀect of IMF programs. While this is beyond the
scope of this project (mainly because of lack of yearly data for valid instruments), nevertheless we run some
IV regressions. We instrument the IMF program dummy and its interaction with the variable CRISIS with
first or second lags of these same variables. When we do so, the qualitative nature of the results does not
change, but the size and significance of the coeﬃcients do. Specifically, both β 1 and β 3 increase in absolute
value and the coeﬃcients are now statistically significant at s = 3 and in one case also at s = 2. Finally,
when we measure countries’ participation with the other two variables, results (not shown but available upon
request) are along the same line. The evidence on the eﬀect of IMF programs on budget deficit stabilizations
is not clear-cut and, if anything, our estimates indicate an eﬀect only a few years after the country has
experienced a budget deficit crisis (i.e.: for s = 3, 4). These results are consistent with the analysis of Gosh
et al. (2005) which shows that IMF targets for deficit reductions of countries under IMF agreements are often
and substantially missed. In particular many countries seem to be unable to control spending as required
by IMF target agreements.



                                                      16
6     Empirical results: Inflation
This section focuses on adjustments of inflation rates. We follow a structure analogous to Section 5 and
estimates of the benchmark model defined by equations (1) - (3) are in Panel B of Tables 3-9. In what
follows, we mostly highlight the diﬀerences from the results on budget deficit.
    Political systems seem to play an important role for inflation stabilizations. In Panel B of Table 3
for s = 1 the estimated β 2 = −0.037 and β 3 = −0.079 are significant at 1 percent confidence level. The
additional reduction due to the form of government more than doubles the crisis coeﬃcient, indicating a very
substantial reduction in inflation rates for presidential countries facing an inflationary crisis. The estimates
for s = 2, 3, 4 are quantitatively higher and remain statistically significant.
    The same results are confirmed for the measure of executive constraints EXECON ST, in Table 4, where
the estimates are again quantitatively substantial, β 2 = 0.0018 and β 3 = 0.0052. Table 5 reports the results
for U N IF IED. Having a unified government produces an extra reduction of the inflation rate between 3.8
and 6.4 percentage points in times of crisis. These results are robust to controlling for initial value of (log)
real per capita GDP, trade volume, the measure of depth of financial markets, interaction for Latin America
and to the additional specification eﬀect we described in section 5.3. The results of Table 6 investigating the
role of P OL = P ROP for inflation adjustments are more puzzling. We find evidence that in times of crisis
proportional systems reduce inflation more at all s = 1, 2, 3, 4. This seems contrary to the intuition behind
the war of attrition model and to previous results concerning the control of the parliament (U N IF IED = 1).
However, when controlling for our set of additional regressors (i.e. the natural log of real per capita GDP,
the ratio of exports plus imports to GDP, and the value of credits by financial intermediaries to the private
sector divided by GDP), significance at s = 1, 2 is lost.
    In Table 7’s Panel B we find no evidence of election timing. There is no direct eﬀect or interaction eﬀect
with CRISIS of the number of years left in current term or the legislative election year dummy. Indeed,
the signs of the coeﬃcients are the opposite of those for the budget deficit and generally not significant.
Particularly, the coeﬃcient β 1 = 0.003 in column (3) is only borderline significant and has the “wrong” sign
in Table 7 and becomes significant in specification (4). Regarding the political ideology of the executive, Table
8 and results from the specification (4) indicate no statistically significant diﬀerence in LEF T . Inflation
stabilizations do not seem related in any way to the ideological aﬃliation of the executive.
    Panel B of Table 9 presents results concerning inflationary crises and IMF program participation. The
main diﬀerence between fiscal and inflationary crisis is that IMF programs appear to be more eﬀective in
curbing inflation in times of crisis. At s = 2, 3, 4 the impact of the interaction term between CRISIS and
IM F P ROGR is negative, statistically significant and quantitatively sizeable, ranging from −13 percent at
s = 2 to −21.1 percent at s = 3.




                                                       17
7     Conclusions
The war of attrition model does reasonably well as a guidance for empirical test of the timing of stabilization.
In this paper we have presented evidence broadly consistent with this model on both inflation and budget
deficits for a large sample of countries. Rather than the reviewing one more time our results, we conclude
by discussing potential extensions.
    In this paper we did not address the question of what causes a crisis. In ongoing research we are looking at
the joint determination of a crisis and the subsequent stabilization by making the event of a crisis endogenous
to politico-economic factors. Second, an important aspect of the war of attrition model is that the costs of the
stabilization are distributed unevenly; we did not consider this issue, namely the distributional consequences
of stabilizations. For example certain types of governments may implement stabilizations more quickly than
others but may chose more unfair distribution of costs. Third, we need to push forward the discussion of
external inducements to stabilizations, a topic that we addressed only imperfectly in this paper. As argued
above this is an issue in which problems of reverse causality abound, and one needs to think carefully how to
resolve this. Also we looked only at IMF conditionality, one could consider also foreign aid in the same spirit
and test more precisely the implications of the war of attrition model regarding when foreign aid can be
(counter)productive for stabilizations. Fourth, one could analyze diﬀerent types of policy reforms, those that
we labeled structural, like labor market reforms, trade liberalizations, deregulation etc. The war of attrition
model may be useful for these reforms as well, even though in these cases unlike inflation or budget deficits,
the sense of urgency and crisis may be smaller. While an hyperinflation or an exploding budget deficit cannot
last for too long, trade restrictions can be in place for a long time, creating costly distortions but not a deep
crisis. Finally, we have considered institutions as predetermined in this paper, but institutions (i.e.: forms of
governments for instance) may be endogenous to the same type of socio-economic conflict that causes crisis
and determines stabilizations. This is a point raised in related literature by Aghion, Alesina, and Trebbi
(2004), Trebbi, Aghion, and Alesina (2005) and Alesina and Glaeser (2004). This point also relates to the
"normative" question about institutional choice. We have argued above that certain types of institutions
may stabilize more promptly than others. But this does not mean that these institutions are "superior".
There can be (and in fact there probably is) a trade-oﬀ between promptness in stabilization eﬀorts and
other desirable features, like attention to inequality, control of executive power, checks and balances. From
a normative standpoint the choice of institutions requires a maximization over this trade-oﬀ.




                                                       18
References
 [1] Acemoglu, Daron (2005) “Constitutions, Politics and Economics: A Review Essay on Persson and
    Tabellini’s. The Economic Eﬀect of Constitutions”. NBER Working Paper n. 11235.

 [2] Aghion, Philippe, Alberto Alesina, and Francesco Trebbi (2004) “Endogenous Political Institutions”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, May, 565- 612.

 [3] Akhmed Akhmedov and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya (2004) “Opportunistic Political Cycles; Test in a Young
    Democracy Setting” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 1301- 38.

 [4] Alesina Alberto (1988) “The End of Large Public Debts” in F. Giavazzi and L. Spaventa (eds.), High
    Public Debt: The Italian Experience, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

 [5] Alesina, Alberto and Silvia Ardagna (1998) “Tales of Fiscal Adjustments,” Economic Policy, 27, 487—
    546.

 [6] Alesina, Alberto and Allan Drazen (1991) “Why are Stabilizations Delayed?,” American Economic
    Review, 81, 1170-1188.

 [7] Alesina, Alberto and Edward Glaeser (2004) Fighting Poverty in the US and Europe: A World of
    Diﬀerence (Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK).

 [8] Alesina, Alberto and Howard Rosenthal (1995) Partisan Politics, Divided Government, and the Economy
    (Cambridge University press, Cambridge, UK).

 [9] Alesina, Alberto, Roberto Perotti, and José Tavares (1998) “The Political Economy of Fiscal Adjust-
    ments,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2 (Spring).

[10] Alesina, Alberto, Nouriel Roubini and Gerald Cohen (1997) Political Cycles and the Macroeconomy
    MIT Press Cambridge Mass.

[11] Ardagna Silvia (2004), “Fiscal Stabilizations: When Do They Work and Why”, European Economic
    Review, vol. 48, No. 5, October 2004, pp. 1047-1074.

[12] Barro, Robert J. and Jong-Wha Lee (2002) "IMF Programs: Who Is Chosen and What Are the Eﬀects?",
    NBER Working Paper n. 8951.

[13] Beck, Thorsten, George Clarke, Alberto Groﬀ, Philip Keefer, and Patrick Walsh, (2001). “New Tools in
    Comparative Political Economy: The Database of Political Institutions,” World Bank Economic Review,
    15:1, 165-176.

[14] Bliss Christopher and Barry Nalebuﬀ (1984) : Dragon Slaying and Ballroom Dancing: The Private
    Supply of Public Goods” Journal of Public Economics, 25, 1-12.




                                                   19
[15] Brender Adi and Allan Drazen (2005a) “Political Budget Cycles in New versus Established Democracies”
    Journal of Monetary Economics, 87, 2187-2205

[16] Brender Ardi and Allan Drazen (2005b) "How do Budget Deficits and Economic Growth Aﬀect Elec-
    tions? Evidence from a large Cross Section of Countries" NBER working Paper 11862

[17] Bruno Michael and William Easterly (1996) “Inflation’s Children: Tales of Crisis That Beget Reforms”
    American Economic Review, papers and Proceedings, 213-17

[18] Boeri, Tito (2004) “Reforming Labour and Product Markets: Lessons from Two Decades of Experiences
    in Europe”, IMF Working Paper

[19] Casella, Alessandra and Barry Eichengreen (1996) “Can Foreign Aid Accelerate Stabilization?,” Eco-
    nomic Journal 106: 605-619.

[20] Drazen Allan (2002): “Conditionality and Ownership in IMF Lending: A Political Economy Approach”
    unpublished

[21] Drazen, Allan (2000), Political Economy in Macroeconomics, (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
    Press).

[22] Drazen, Allan, and Vittorio Grilli (1993). “The benefits of crisis for economic reform," American Eco-
    nomic Review 83(3), 598—607.

[23] Drazen, Allan and William Easterly (2001) “Do Crises Induce Reform? Simple Empirical Tests of
    Conventional Wisdom,” Economics and Politics, 13:2, 129-158.

[24] Easterly, William (2006) The White Man’s Burden Penguin, New York ,forthcoming

[25] Easterly William (1996) “When is Stabilization Expansionary?” Economic Policy, Fall 67-106.

[26] Giavazzi Francesco and Marco Pagano (1990) “Can Severe Fiscal Contractions be Expansionary?”
    NBER Macroeconomics Annual, MIT

[27] Giavazzi Francesco, Tullio Jappelli, Marco Pagano and Marina Benedetti (2005) “Searching for Non
    Monotonic Eﬀects of Fiscal Policy: New Evidence” NBER Working Paper.

[28] Ghosh A., C. Chirstofides, J. Kim, L. Papi, U. Ramakrishan, A. Thomas, and J. Zalduendo (2005) The
    design of IMF Supported Programs, International Monetary Fund, Washington DC.

[29] Grilli Vittorio, Donato Masciandaro and Guido Tabellini (1990) “Political and Monetary Institutions
    and Public Finance Policies in the Industrial Countries” Economic Policy, 13, 341-92.

[30] Hamman, A. Javier and Alessandro Prati (2002) “Why Do many Stabilizations fail? The importance
    of Luck, Timing and Political Institution” IMF Working Paper n. 02/228.

[31] Hsieh, Chang-Tai (2000) “Bargaining over Reform,” European Economic Review, 44: 1659-1676.

                                                    20
[32] Laban R. and Federico Sturzenegger (1994) “Distributional Conflicts, Financial Adaptation and Delayed
    Stabilizations” Economics and Politics, 6, 257-56.

[33] Levine R., Loayza N., and B. Thorsten, (2000), “Financial Intermediation and Growth”, Journal of
    Monetary Economics, n.46, pp. 31-77.

[34] Milesi-Ferretti Gian Maria, Roberto Perotti, and Massimo Rostagno (2002) “Electoral Systems And
    Public Spending”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 117(2), 609-657.

[35] Nelson Jane (eds.) (1990) Economic Crisis and Political Choice Princeton , Princeton University Press.

[36] Perotti Roberto (1999) “Fiscal Policy When Things are Going Badly” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    111, 1399-436.

[37] Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2000) Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy (MIT
    Press, Cambridge, MA).

[38] Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2003) The Economics Eﬀects of Constitutions (MIT Press, Cam-
    bridge, MA).

[39] Rodrik Dani (1996) “Understanding Economic Policy Reforms” Journal of Economic Literature 34,
    9-41.

[40] Rogoﬀ, Kenneth and Anne Sibert (1988) “Elections and Macroeconomic Policy Cycles,” Review of
    Economic Studies, 55, 1-16.

[41] Roubini Nouriel and Jeﬀrey Sachs (1989) “Political and Economic Determinants of Budgets Deficits in
    the Industrial Democracies” European Economic Review, 33, 903-38.

[42] Peltzam Sam (1992) “Voters as Fiscal Conservatives” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 327-61.

[43] Shleifer Andrei and Daniel Treisman (2000) Without A Map, MIT Press Cambridge Mass.

[44] Shi, Min and Jakob Svensson (2006), “Political Budget Cycles: Do They Diﬀer Across Countries and
    Why?” Journal of Public Economics, forthcoming.

[45] Spolaore Enrico (2004) “Adjustment in Diﬀerent Government Systems” Economics and Politics

[46] Tommasi Mariano and Andres Velasco (1996) “Where are we in the Political Economy of Reforms?”
    Journal of Policy Reforms, 1, 187-238

[47] Trebbi, Francesco, Philippe Aghion, and Alberto Alesina (2005) “Choosing Electoral Rules: Theory
    and Evidence from US Cities,” mimeo, Harvard University.

[48] Veiga Francisco Jose’ (2000) “Delays of Inflation Stabilizations” Economics and Politics, 12, 275-96

[49] Williamson Jeﬀrey (1994) ed. The Political Economy of Economic Reform Institute for International
    Economics, Washington DC.


                                                    21
Table 1: Relative Frequency of Crises and Reforms

                                                                          (1)                                   (3)
                                                                     Deficit Crises                      Inflation Crises

Presidential systems                                                     0.29                                 0.37
Parliamentary systems                                                    0.30                                 0.20
Proportional systems                                                     0.26                                 0.30
Majoritarian systems                                                     0.30                                 0.18
Unified governments                                                      0.28                                 0.32
Divided governments                                                      0.29                                 0.24
Left governments                                                         0.34                                 0.28
Right + Center governments                                               0.26                                 0.30
Legislative elections years                                              0.33                                 0.27
No legislative elect. Years                                              0.29                                 0.29
Executive elections years                                                0.28                                 0.36
No executive elect. years                                                0.30                                 0.28

Notes: Deficit Crises=country-years observations in which the deficit/GDP ratio is equal or above 4.75%. 4.75% is the value of the
75th percentile of the deficit/GDP ratio empirical density. Inflation Crises=country-years observations in which inflation is equal
or above 14.05%. 14.05% is the value of the 75th percentile of the inflation empirical density. Presidential/Parliamentary systems:
indicator variable PRES=1/0. Proportional/Majoritarian systems: indicator variable PROP=1/0. Unified/Divided governments:
indicator variable UNIFIED=1/0. Left/Right+Center governments: indicator variable LEFT=1/0. Legislative elections years/No
legislative elect years: indicator variable LEGELEC=1/0. Executive elections years/No executive elect. years: indicator variable
EXELEC= 1/0. See also Table A1 in the appendix.




                                                                22
Table 2: Politics, Deficit and Inflation Crises– average values

                                                 Crises                                     Crises
                                      (1)                     (2)                  (3)                  (4)
                                  Deficit/GDP             ΔDeficit/GDP          Inflation            ΔInflation


Presidential systems                  6.63                    -1.82              45.61                  -7.06
                                     (0.25)                  (0.24)              (2.50)                (1.67)
Parliamentary systems                 7.73                    -0.69              38.29                  -2.12
                                     (0.21)                  (0.17)              (3.01)                (2.25)
Proportional systems                  8.04                    -0.81              49.21                  -7.43
                                     (0.25)                  (0.20)              (3.08)                (1.99)
Majoritarian systems                  6.07                    -1.30              27.86                  -4.80
                                     (0.25)                  (0.25)              (2.87)                (2.98)
Unified governments                   7.04                    -1.40              40.24                  -6.39
                                     (0.25)                  (0.25)              (2.57)                (2.05)
Divided governments                   7.73                   -0.78               47.92                  -3.76
                                     (0.23)                  (0.16)              (3.59)                (2.00)
Left governments                      8.02                    -0.85              45.42                  -3.28
                                     (0.30)                  (0.24)              (3.75)                (2.83)
Right + Center governments            7.56                    -0.96              51.32                  -4.77
                                     (0.27)                  (0.22)              (3.78)                (2.10)
Legislative elections years           7.62                    -0.92              42.53                  -3.42
                                     (0.34)                  (0.29)              (4.24)                (2.81)
No legislative elect. years           7.04                    -1.36              43.41                  -6.00
                                     (0.18)                  (0.17)              (2.20)                (1.53)
Executive elections years             8.22                    -0.17              50.65                  -3.59
                                     (0.61)                  (0.61)              (6.87)                (3.01)
No executive elect. years             7.08                    -1.35              42.23                  -5.70
                                     (0.17)                  (0.15)              (2.01)                (1.47)

Notes: Crises=country-years observations in which the deficit/GDP ratio (inflation rate) is equal or above 4.75% (14.05%). 4.75%
(14.05%) is the value of the 75th percentile of the deficit/GDP ratio (inflation rate) empirical density. Presidential/Parliamentary
systems: indicator variable PRES=1/0. Proportional/Majoritarian systems: indicator variable PROP=1/0. Unified/Divided
governments: indicator variable UNIFIED=1/0. Left/Right+Center governments: indicator variable LEFT=1/0. Legislative
elections years/No legislative elect years: indicator variable LEGELEC=1/0. Executive elections years/No executive elect. years:
indicator variable EXELEC= 1/0. See also Table A1 in the appendix. Standard errors of the mean in parenthesis.




                                                                  23
Table 3: Stabilizations, Crises and Form of Governments

Panel A                                         (1)                      (2)                    (3)                    (4)

                                         Δ(Deficit/GDP)          Δ(Deficit/GDP)          Δ(Deficit/GDP)          Δ(Deficit/GDP)
                                        1 year after crisis     2 years after crisis    3 year after crises     4 year after crisis


CRISIS                                        -0.015                    -0.026                -0.032                  -0.040
                                            (-6.54)***                (-9.38)***           (-10.74)***             (-12.15)***
Crisis*PRES                                   -0.019                    -0.018                -0.018                  -0.013
                                            (-5.23)***                (-4.08)***            (-3.85)***              (-2.52)**
N. of observations                             2323                      2213                  2103                    1993

Panel B                                         (1)                      (2)                    (3)                    (4)

                                           Δ(Inflation)            Δ(Inflation)            Δ(Inflation)            Δ(Inflation)
                                        1 year after crisis     2 years after crisis    3 year after crises     4 year after crisis


CRISIS                                         -0.037                   -0.067                -0.086                  -0.110
                                             (-2.24)**                (-2.94)***            (-3.43)***              (-4.15)***
CRISIS*PRES                                    -0.079                   -0.114                -0.141                  -0.137
                                            (-3.11)***                (-3.30)***            (-3.59)***              (-3.40)***
N. of observations                              2622                     2503                  2387                    2273

Notes: In Panel A, Crises=country-years observations in which the deficit/GDP ratio is equal or above 4.75% (i.e. the value of the
75th percentile of the deficit/GDP ratio empirical density). In Panel B, Crises=country-years observations in which inflation is
equal or above 14.05% (i.e. the value of the 75th percentile of the inflation empirical density). PRES=1 if direct presidential; 0 if
either the president is elected by the assembly or parliamentary. Country fixed effects and year dummies are always included in the
estimation. T-statistics corrected for heterosckedasticity in parenthesis. *** (**) [*] = 1% (5%) [10%] significance level.




                                                                 24
Table 4: Stabilizations, Crises and Constraints on the Executive

Panel A                                        (1)                     (2)                   (3)                     (4)

                                         Δ(Deficit/GDP)        Δ(Deficit/GDP)          Δ(Deficit/GDP)          Δ(Deficit/GDP)
                                        1 year after crisis   2 years after crisis    3 year after crises     4 year after crisis


CRISIS                                       -0.0413                  -0.0463               -0.0548                -0.0568
                                           (-8.78)***               (-8.40)***            (-8.76)***             (-8.89)***
EXECONST                                      0.0001                   0.0013                0.0023                0.0032
                                              (0.24)                  (1.92)*             (3.11)***              (3.99)***
CRISIS*EXECONST                               0.0039                   0.0028               0.0030                 0.0022
                                           (5.01)***                (3.06)***             (2.86)***               (2.09)**
N. of observations                             2674                     2546                  2423                  2301

Panel B                                        (1)                     (2)                   (3)                     (4)

                                           Δ(Inflation)          Δ(Inflation)            Δ(Inflation)            Δ(Inflation)
                                        1 year after crisis   2 years after crisis    3 year after crises     4 year after crisis


CRISIS                                       -0.1017                  -0.1594               -0.1569                -0.1701
                                           (-3.65)***               (-4.45)***            (-3.69)***             (-3.54)***
EXECONST                                      0.0018                   0.0030                0.0057                0.0059
                                              (0.62)                   (0.72)                (1.06)                 (0.91)
CRISIS*EXECONST                               0.0052                   0.0089               0.0044                 0.0033
                                              (0.94)                   (1.22)                (0.53)                 (0.36)
N. of observations                             2949                     2812                  2680                   2549

Notes: In Panel A, Crises=country-years observations in which the deficit/GDP ratio is equal or above 4.75% (i.e. the value of the
75th percentile of the deficit/GDP ratio empirical density). In Panel B, Crises=country-years observations in which inflation is
equal or above 14.05% (i.e. the value of the 75th percentile of the inflation empirical density). EXECONST: institutional
constraints on the executive; ∈ [1,7] and increasing in the number of executive constraints. Country fixed effects and year
dummies are always included in the estimation. T-statistics corrected for heterosckedasticity in parenthesis. *** (**) [*] = 1%
(5%) [10%] significance level.




                                                               25
Table 5: Stabilizations, Crises and Control of the Legislative Body

Panel A                                        (1)                      (2)                    (3)                     (4)

                                         Δ(Deficit/GDP)         Δ(Deficit/GDP)          Δ(Deficit/GDP)          Δ(Deficit/GDP)
                                        1 year after crisis    2 years after crisis    3 year after crises     4 year after crisis


CRISIS                                        -0.016                    -0.029               -0.040                  -0.047
                                           (-6.85)***                (-9.24)***           (-10.95)***             (-11.52)***
UNIFIED                                      -0.0001                    -0.005               -0.011                  -0.013
                                             (-0.22)                  (-1.99)**            (-3.49)***              (-3.81)***
CRISIS*UNIFIED                                -0.011                    -0.006                0.003                   0.005
                                           (-3.25)***                   (-1.39)              (0.69)                  (0.88)
N. of observations                             2032                      1909                 1791                    1677

Panel B                                        (1)                      (2)                    (3)                     (4)

                                           Δ(Inflation)           Δ(Inflation)            Δ(Inflation)            Δ(Inflation)
                                        1 year after crisis    2 years after crisis    3 year after crises     4 year after crisis


CRISIS                                        -0.052                   -0.094                -0.139                   -0.180
                                           (-2.87)***                (-3.78)***            (-4.83)***              (-5.87)***
UNIFIED                                       -0.012                   -0.021                -0.032                   -0.043
                                              (-1.12)                  (-1.43)              (-1.70)*                (-1.97)**
CRISIS*UNIFIED                                -0.050                   -0.064                -0.064                   -0.038
                                            (-2.15)**                 (-1.95)*              (-1.73)*                 (-0.95)
N. of observations                             2294                     2164                  2038                     1919

Notes: In Panel A, Crises=country-years observations in which the deficit/GDP ratio is equal or above 4.75% (i.e. the value of the
75th percentile of the deficit/GDP ratio empirical density). In Panel B, Crises=country-years observations in which inflation is
equal or above 14.05% (i.e. the value of the 75th percentile of the inflation empirical density). UNIFIED=1 if the party of the
executive controls the absolute majority of the legislative; 0 otherwise. Country fixed effects and year dummies are always
included in the estimation. T-statistics corrected for heterosckedasticity in parenthesis. *** (**) [*] = 1% (5%) [10%] significance
level.




                                                                26
Table 6: Stabilizations, Crises and Electoral Rules

Panel A                                         (1)                      (2)                    (3)                     (4)

                                          Δ(Deficit/GDP)         Δ(Deficit/GDP)           Δ(Deficit/GDP)          Δ(Deficit/GDP)
                                         1 year after crisis    2 years after crisis     3 year after crises     4 year after crisis


CRISIS                                        -0.023                    -0.034                -0.031                  -0.030
                                            (-6.90)***                (-7.96)***            (-7.46)***              (-7.64)***
CRISIS*PROP                                    0.007                     0.005                -0.006                  -0.018
                                              (1.60)                    (1.01)                (-1.11)               (-3.10)***
N. of observations                             1707                      1600                  1496                    1394

Panel B                                         (1)                      (2)                    (3)                     (4)

                                            Δ(Inflation)           Δ(Inflation)             Δ(Inflation)            Δ(Inflation)
                                         1 year after crisis    2 years after crisis     3 year after crises     4 year after crisis


CRISIS                                         -0.044                    -0.093               -0.124                  -0.119
                                              (-1.75)*                (-4.62)***            (-6.18)***              (-6.09)***
CRISIS*PROP                                    -0.066                    -0.074               -0.091                  -0.116
                                              (-1.82)*                 (-2.31)**            (-2.65)***              (-3.30)***
N. of observations                              1958                      1840                 1725                    1615

Notes: In Panel A, Crises=country-years observations in which the deficit/GDP ratio is equal or above 4.75% (i.e. the value of the
75th percentile of the deficit/GDP ratio empirical density). In Panel B, Crises=country-years observations in which inflation is
equal or above 14.05% (i.e. the value of the 75th percentile of the inflation empirical density). PROP=1 if the electoral rule for the
Lower House is a form of proportional representation; 0 otherwise. Country fixed effects and year dummies are always included in
the estimation. T-statistics corrected for heterosckedasticity in parenthesis. *** (**) [*] = 1% (5%) [10%] significance level.




                                                                 27
Table 7: Stabilizations, Crises and Political Business Cycles

Panel A                            (1)            (2)               (3)                (4)  (5)            (6)
                          Δ(Deficit/GDP) Δ(Deficit/GDP) Δ(Deficit/GDP) Δ(Deficit/GDP) Δ(Deficit/GDP) Δ(Deficit/GDP)
                            1 year after   1 year after   1 year after   1 year after   1 year after   1 year after
                               crisis         crisis         crisis         crisis         crisis         crisis


POL                       -0.002           -0.002            -0.001           0.002             0.003            0.001
                          (-3.22)***       (-3.16)***        (-1.99)**        (1.26)            (1.77)*          (0.92)
CRISIS                                     -0.020            -0.016                             -0.026           -0.026
                                           (-8.92)***        (-5.25)***                         (-12.27)***      (-11.47)***
CRISIS*POL                                                   -0.002                                              0.004
                                                             (-1.49)                                             (1.03)
N. of observations        1898             1898              1898             2331              2331             2331

Panel B                            (1)            (2)               (3)                (4)            (5)               (6)
                            Δ Inflation       Δ Inflation      Δ Inflation       Δ Inflation      Δ Inflation       Δ Inflation
                            1 year after      1 year after     1 year after      1 year after     1 year after      1 year after
                               crisis            crisis           crisis            crisis           crisis            crisis


POL                       0.001            0.0001            0.003            0.005             0.005            -0.002
                          (0.18)           (0.001)           (1.87)*          (0.51)            (0.51)           (-0.53)
CRISIS                                     -0.088            -0.070                             -0.087           -0.092
                                           (-6.42)***        (-3.27)***                         (-7.35)***       (-6.51)***
CRISIS*POL                                                   -0.009                                              0.024
                                                             (-0.94)                                             (0.77)
N. of observations        2168             2168              2168             2627              2627             2627

Notes: In Panel A, Crises=country-years observations in which the deficit/GDP ratio is equal or above 4.75% (i.e. the value of the
75th percentile of the deficit/GDP ratio empirical density). In Panel B, Crises=country-years observations in which inflation is
equal or above 14.05% (i.e. the value of the 75th percentile of the inflation empirical density). Pol = YRCURNT in columns 1-3.
Pol = LEGELEC in columns 4 – 6. YRCURNT = number of years left in the current term. LEGELEC=1 if in a given year
legislative elections are held; 0 otherwise. Country fixed effects and year dummies are always included in the estimation. T-
statistics corrected for heterosckedasticity in parenthesis. *** (**) [*] = 1% (5%) [10%] significance level.




                                                               28
Table 8: Stabilizations, Crises and Governments’ Political Orientation

Panel A                                        (1)                      (2)                    (3)                     (4)

                                         Δ(Deficit/GDP)         Δ(Deficit/GDP)          Δ(Deficit/GDP)          Δ(Deficit/GDP)
                                        1 year after crisis    2 years after crisis    3 year after crises     4 year after crisis


CRISIS                                        -0.020                    -0.028                -0.037                 -0.042
                                           (-6.91)***                (-7.65)***            (-9.15)***             (-10.15)***
LEFT                                          -0.001                    -0.005                -0.008                 -0.011
                                             (-0.35)                  (-1.78)*              (-2.21)**              (-2.60)***
CRISIS*LEFT                                  -0.0001                   -0.0001                0.0001                 -0.002
                                             (-0.08)                   (-0.01)                (0.04)                 (-0.38)
N. of observations                             1509                      1401                  1301                   1208

Panel B                                        (1)                      (2)                    (3)                     (4)

                                           Δ(Inflation)           Δ(Inflation)            Δ(Inflation)            Δ(Inflation)
                                        1 year after crisis    2 years after crisis    3 year after crises     4 year after crisis


CRISIS                                       -0.081                    -0.159                -0.216                  -0.230
                                           (-3.24)***                (-4.51)***            (-5.61)***              (-5.60)***
LEFT                                         -0.001                    -0.004                -0.019                  -0.027
                                             (-0.12)                   (-0.23)               (-1.01)                 (-1.10)
CRISIS*LEFT                                   0.005                     0.045                 0.051                   0.008
                                             (0.10)                    (0.68)                (0.73)                  (0.11)
N. of observations                            1686                      1571                  1464                    1365

Notes: In Panel A, Crises=country-years observations in which the deficit/GDP ratio is equal or above 4.75% (i.e. the value of the
75th percentile of the deficit/GDP ratio empirical density). In Panel B, Crises=country-years observations in which inflation is
equal or above 14.05% (i.e. the value of the 75th percentile of the inflation empirical density). LEFT=1 if the executive belongs to
a party of the left; 0 if right-wing or centrist. Country fixed effects and year dummies are always included in the estimation. T-
statistics corrected for heterosckedasticity in parenthesis. *** (**) [*] = 1% (5%) [10%] significance level.




                                                                29
Table 9: Stabilizations, Crises and IMF Programs

Panel A                                        (1)                      (2)                    (3)                     (4)

                                         Δ(Deficit/GDP)         Δ(Deficit/GDP)          Δ(Deficit/GDP)          Δ(Deficit/GDP)
                                        1 year after crisis    2 years after crisis    3 year after crises     4 year after crisis


CRISIS                                        -0.023                  -0.033                 -0.039                   -0.043
                                           (-11.85)***             (-14.18)***            (-15.40)***             (-16.11)***
IMFPROGR                                     -0.0001                  -0.001                  0.003                    0.009
                                              (-0.02)                 (-0.31)                (0.66)                 (2.02)**
CRISIS*IMFPROGR                               -0.006                  -0.002                 -0.008                   -0.020
                                              (-1.49)                 (-0.41)                (-1.20)                (-2.41)**
N. of observations                             3192                    3076                   2963                     2852

Panel B                                        (1)                      (2)                    (3)                     (4)

                                           Δ(Inflation)           Δ(Inflation)            Δ(Inflation)            Δ(Inflation)
                                        1 year after crisis    2 years after crisis    3 year after crises     4 year after crisis


CRISIS                                       -0.067                     -0.099               -0.110                   -0.129
                                           (-5.18)***                (-5.42)***            (-4.99)***              (-5.09)***
IMFPROGR                                      0.013                      0.021                0.030                    0.027
                                             (1.14)                     (1.03)               (1.18)                   (0.94)
CRISIS*IMFPROGR                              -0.052                     -0.130               -0.211                   -0.201
                                             (-1.54)                  (-2.32)**            (-2.97)***               (-2.50)**
N. of observations                            3562                       3442                 3325                     3210

Notes: In Panel A, Crises=country-years observations in which the deficit/GDP ratio is equal or above 4.75% (the value of the 75th
percentile of the deficit/GDP ratio empirical density). In Panel B, Crises=country-years observations in which inflation is equal or
above 14.05% (the value of the 75th percentile of the inflation empirical density). Country fixed effects and year dummies are
always included in the estimation. T-statistics corrected for heterosckedasticity in parenthesis. *** (**) [*] significant at the 1%
(5%) [10%] level.




                                                                30
Table A1: Political variables definition

                                                                                          Variable name in source
Variable             Definition                           Source
                                                                                          database


                     Number of executive
                     constraints; ranges from 1 (min
EXECONST                                                  Polity IV, 2005                 XCONST
                     constraint) to 7 (max
                     constraint).

                     1 if in a given year executive       Database of Political
EXELEC                                                                                    EXELEC
                     elections are held.                  Institutions 2004. World Bank


                     1 if the executive belongs to a
                                                          Database of Political
LEFT                 party of the left and 0 if right-                                    EXECRLC
                                                          Institutions 2004. World Bank
                     wing or centrist.


                     1 if in a given year legislative     Database of Political
LEGELEC                                                                                   LEGELEC
                     elections are held.                  Institutions 2004. World Bank

                     1 if direct presidential, 0 if
                     either the president is elected by   Database of Political
PRES                                                                                      SYSTEM
                     the assembly or parliamentary        Institutions 2004. World Bank
                     system.
                     1 if the electoral rule for the
                     Lower House is a form of             Database of Political
PROP                                                                                      PR
                     proportional representation and      Institutions 2004. World Bank
                     0 otherwise.

                     1 if the party of the executive
                                                          Database of Political
UNIFIED              controls the absolute majority                                       ALLHOUSE
                                                          Institutions 2004. World Bank
                     of the legislative; 0 otherwise.


                     Number of years left in the          Database of Political
YRCURNT                                                                                   YRCURNT
                     current term for the executive.      Institutions 2004. World Bank




                                                              31
